

Overview of the year
This short overview of the year's work covers the whole range of BGS's activities, touching on particular projects that exemplify the work as a whole: full descriptions of these and much else follow the overview
Environment
The geoscience map is one of the most important tools for environmental planning in Britain and elsewhere.
The onshore surveys core programme, which began in 1990/91, consists primarily of a 15-year mapping programme in which 1:50 000 geological map sheets for the whole of Great Britain will be made available to the public by 2005.
There are 122 sheets to be resurveyed, divided into three categories of survey detail.
Sheets are allocated to the appropriate category by a scoring mechanism based on such criteria as date and scale of last survey, reliability of existing map, resource potential, and environmental significance.
Many of the map-sheets will be accompanied by memoirs.
In addition to the mapping programme, the three-dimensional structure of the Upper Palaeozoic basins is to  be mapped seismically, using deep reflection data geologically calibrated by borehole and outcrop information to produce depth contour, isopach and other maps.
The Northumberland and Solway basins and some contiguous areas are the subject of the first study, which was completed this year.
Onshore surveys include much work with very practical applications.
BGS geologists have made a systematic reconnaissance survey of the solid geology of an area around Dounreay as part of a nuclear-waste-repository study, commissioned by UK Nirex Ltd.
The outcome will be a geological map at 1:50 000 of the area around Dounreay accompanied by a report.
The preparation of thematic maps of particular areas continues to be an important activity.
In North Wales, the important Wrexham applied geological mapping project (funded jointly by BGS and DOE) has been completed.
The thematic maps were computer generated, using information brought together from a number of databases and processed through a Geographic Information System with methods that were specially developed during the project.
The maps were then colour printed.
Other such thematic surveys completed during the year included the DOE-funded Falkirk project, the results of which were presented at a one day seminar for planning officials, where the practical value of the 36 thematic maps produced was demonstrated.
For the Stoke-on-Trent area twelve high-quality coloured thematic maps display solid and drift geology, as well as the full range of geoenvironmental constraints that affect urban planning and redevelopment.
Other thematic-map projects are in progress in various parts of the country.
Providing information and advice about the likelihood, possible consequences and prevention of mining subsidence is part of BGS's remit.
In Northern Ireland (where BGS runs the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland as an agency service for the Department of Economic Development), following the catastrophic collapse in 1990 of the disused Tennant Salt Mine at Carrickfergus, Co.
Antrim, a review of the stability of the remaining abandoned salt mines in Northern Ireland has been started.
Nationwide surveys in the 15-year mapping programme continue to throw light on the geology of the United Kingdom.
In the Highlands of Scotland, where the Monadhliath project is in progress, the regional stratigraphical relationship within and between the Precambrian metasedimentary rocks of the Appin and Grampian groups in the Glen Roy district has been clarified.
Work on the drift deposits of the Livingston and Falkirk areas in central Scotland indicate that sea-levels have risen and fallen repeatedly during the last 13 000 years.
These raised marine deposits point to possible consequences of a global rise in sea level resulting from climatic change.
For instance, landfill sites engineered into raised marine deposits could become waterlogged if groundwater levels rose with the rise in sea level: the resulting pollution of groundwater could be severe.
Lower Palaeozoic sediments and volcanics are being studied in the multidisciplinary Lake District project in the course of mapping several 1:50 000 sheets Stratigraphical interpretations of the Eycott and Borrowdale Volcanic groups have confirmed that their evolutional histories are similar, and support the reinterpretation of biostratigraphical evidence in favour of their coeval eruption.
Mapping of the eruptive products, done jointly with the University of Liverpool, suggests that more than one original caldera may have contributed to the volcanic assemblage.
BGS and the Geological Survey of Ireland are collaborating on the compilation of a new tectonic map of Great Britain, Ireland and the surrounding seas.
BGS's remit covers not only land areas, but also the designated waters round the United Kingdom.
In the Offshore Surveys core programme, the last few sheets of the 1:250 000 reconnaissance geological map series are being printed and published.
The summary map series at 1:1000 000 is also nearing completion.
Work is now well advanced on the regional reports that describe the geology shown on the offshore maps.
These reports are analogous with the popular British Regional Geology guides to onshore geology, and the first of the series to be published,The geology of the Moray Firth , has been well received.
Looking north-west from Stirling Castle, one sees different types of land use.
A report with a set of thematic maps, such as the one prepared for the Stirling area, is valuable to planners, enabling them to take proper account of the geological background.
The importance of the environmentally fragile coastal zone has been recognised for some time, and in response to growing concern for coastal environments under pressure, a new group has been set up in BGS to draw on the experience of land and marine geologists, sedimentologists and coastal engineers The geology of a strip round the  coast of the United Kingdom, which in places extends several kilometres offshore, is largely unexplored.
The new group is to map this area, and practical applications of the work will be to provide information for coastal planning and engineering, to identify marine aggregate resources, and to be able to give advice on the siting of outfalls, and of cable and pipeline routes.
Of all geophysical phenomena, those that most attract public interest are earthquakes and the earth's magnetism.
BGS is active in both fields at all times, for accumulating data is an important task even when nothing spectacular is happening.
However, 5 April 1990 was noteworthy enough: an earthquake of magnitude 5.1, one of the largest in Britain this century, near Bishop's Castle in Shropshire was felt from Ayrshire to Cornwall and Kent to Dublin.
There was only minor damage to property, however, and no loss of life.
This was a rare opportunity to study the attenuation of strong seismic waves and thereby improve seismic hazard assessment.
Further information came from a nationwide questionnaire on the effects of the shaking.
Worldwide, two devastating earthquakes dominated the news.
On 20 June 1990 a magnitude 7.6 earthquake in north-west Iran caused the deaths of 50 000 people; injury to 100 000, and left 400 000 homeless.
On 16 July a magnitude 7.8 earthquake in the Philippines killed 1600 people, caused serious disruption to communications and affected the whole country's economy.
Both earthquakes, like the Bishop's Castle earthquake, were recorded on BGS's network of seismographs.
BGS's geomagnetic observatories record variations in the earth's magnetic field and make forecasts of the likely onset of significant disturbances.
BGS issues daily geomagnetic activity forecasts, making use of the most recent information on solar activity, and operates a real-time geomagnetic disturbance monitoring service for commercial customers, among them the European Space Agency, which has commissioned BGS to produce long- and short-term forecasts of solar and geomagnetic activity.
Geophysical work in the core programme has been focused on interpreting existing datasets, particularly so as to pick up evidence of underlying structural controls and increase our three dimensional understanding of the crust.
Computer software for interactive display and interpretation of data continues to be developed, and geological mapping projects have been supported.
Shaded-relief images were generated and structural trends from Belgian aeromagnetic data were defined in a contract for the Belgian Geological Survey.
Other collaborative work includes a study of trends in the concealed basement of eastern England.
New colour and grey-tone images have resolved arcuate lineaments into separate south-east and east-south-east components, showing that the boundary of the Midlands Microcraton is more irregular than previously supposed.
These trends predate the Upper Palaeozoic cover and support the view that Lower Carboniferous sedimentation was controlled by the reactivation of structural discontinuities in the underlying basement.
Engineering geophysics  techniques are used in mapping disturbed ground, which is an important aspect of the onshore survey programme, particularly in urban areas.
Geophysical methods have been used to detect abandoned near-surface coal workings on the line of a new trunk road in Leicestershire, and shafts of old copper mines at the site of a new water-treatment plant in Cornwall.
Engineering geophysics also supports hydrogeological studies, landfill and pollution assessments, mineral exploration and local geological studies.
Earth-science techniques applicable to archaeology have been successfully publicised during the year.
As a result, geophysical surveys have been made of saltern mounds on the Lincolnshire coast, terrace gravels near the Trent containing evidence of Roman settlement, and a deserted medieval village under threat from road improvements in Leicestershire.
A bathymetric survey of Finlaggan Loch, Islay, for the National Museum of Scotland, combined with investigations by a BGS diving team elucidated the complex form and history of the loch and the area around the settlement, and located a submerged causeway.
Data from the Geochemical Survey Programme have highlighted important environmental features.
For example, the geochemistry of certain lithologies in the East Grampians is such that soils developed on them are inadequately buffered against acid rain — a potential threat to freshwater fisheries in the area.
High levels of uranium over granites such as Cairngorm and Mount Battock argue against using the granites in the interior of buildings on account of the risk of radon gas emanation.
However, the widely-used local building stone from Rubislaw Quarry is located in the Aberdeen granite, which has a lower uranium content than the other granites and so emits less radon.
The collapse of the Tennant Salt Mine, Carrickfergus, Co.
Antrim, manifests itself at the surface as a roughly circular depression with a much deeper hole in one part of the area.
The latest of the GSP's Regional Geochemistry series,Regional geochemistry of the East Grampians area , is to appear in a new format, in which the regional geochemistry of about 30 elements is displayed in colourful and striking digital imagery.
BGS's network of seismographs now extends from Shetland to the Channel Islands.
There are many practical applications for analytical geochemistry.
UK Nirex Ltd is making site investigations and safety-assessments at Dounreay in connection with the possible construction of an underground repository for low- and intermediate-level radioactive waste.
The repository would make extensive use of cement and concrete as ‘engineered’ barriers.
BGS is making geochemical tests on material from two deep boreholes at Dounreay, and investigating potential interactions between the alkali-rich cementitious material used in the construction of the repository and the saturated groundwater that would bathe it.
BGS's analytical laboratories undertake many thousands of analyses by a wide range of techniques.
The new inductively coupled plasma mass-spectrometry laboratory is a leading exponent of the application of this powerful analytical technique to geological materials.
Coupling the ICP mass spectrometer to a new high-power Nd:YAG laser microprobe offers the exciting prospect of obtaining much greater information on the composition of fluid inclusions.
Research at two sites in Scotland has shown that plants and microorganisms can concentrate metals from the environment by biosorption processes.
Plant roots in peats and estuarine sediments concentrate uranium in cell walls, and filamentous bacteria associated with near-surface altered vein hydrocarbons have been found to contain uranium and other metals.
It seems that bioaccumulation by microorganisms of uranium and other metals could be a relatively modern feature.
Public awareness of the hazard caused by the accumulation of elevated levels of radon in buildings continues to grow.
With its long experience of research in radio-geochemistry BGS is well placed to make radon surveys and provide related radio-metric services.
Radon-potential maps have been supplied on contract, and radon distribution maps for areas in Derbyshire and Devon are being produced in collaboration with the National Radiological Protection Board.
The results show that the geological map alone cannot be used to predict radon hazard: soil-gas surveys must also be made.
High-precision and high-resolution geochemical mapping have been developed to a very high standard by BGS.
Data from such mapping are increasingly applied to the evaluation of environmental and epidemiological problems concerned with human and animal health.
Methods developed in earlier studies have now been adapted to the urban environment to enable environmental factors and epidemiological patterns to be compared with natural background geochemistry and with the environmental contamination of soil, water and air from industrialisation and urbanisation.
BGS's approach to urban geochemistry is both flexible and multidisciplinary, and can be oriented both towards the solution of specific problems and to large-scale systematic surveys in support of programmes for urban improvement, industrial and urban renewal, and planning.
The quality of groundwater can be affected by farming practices such as intensive agriculture, which has led to widespread increases in nitrate concentrations in groundwater.
As soluble nitrate travels very slowly down from the surface into aquifers, present changes in water quality stem from changes in land use many years ago.
Experiments to throw light on the processes at work must themselves be long-term.
A project of this sort that BGS is running on behalf of the National Rivers Authority in the Chalk of East Anglia suggests that the quantity of nitrate being leached from the surface is falling as a result of better farming practice.
With current interest in afforestation it is timely to consider how afforestation might affect groundwater.
Investigations show that replacing arable land with woodland would probably reduce the amount of nitrate leached to groundwater, but perhaps by less than was expected, since  natural forest processes themselves release nitrate into the ground.
Another effect of trees is that they appear to concentrate pollutants from the atmosphere.
Studies by BGS have shown that increased concentrations of sulphate in pore waters beneath trees, though mostly of little consequence, can in some circumstances result in metals such as aluminium being leached into shallow groundwater, which could have potentially serious consequences where these waters are used for drinking.
Industrial chemicals such as volatile organochlorine compounds can also find their way into groundwater, with serious implications for its quality.
BGS has been working on this problem for many years, and this year enlarged the scope of its studies to include a site where such a solvent had been detected in a production borehole.
The investigation showed that the pollution probably derived from an engineering works that closed some 15 years ago.
After the devastating explosions at Loscoe in Derbyshire and at Abbeystead in Lancashire, BGS has been contracted to review of the nature, origins, occurrences and hazards of methane in the context of the construction industry in the United Kingdom and produce a guidance document of wide appeal.
In the course of this study, our understanding of methane formation and transport (particularly methane in groundwater), as well as our ability to model its movement mechanisms, have all been found lacking in some important way.
Further study is clearly warranted.
Resources
A report on the sand and gravel resources of the country around Strachan and Auchenblae, published during the year, completes a programme of six such surveys of sand and gravel resources undertaken in Grampian Region over the last 15 years.
The work has been commissioned and largely funded by the Department of the Environment on behalf of the Scottish Development Department, and provides an assessment of the future supply of sand and gravel to the building and construction industries as well as geological input to land-use and physical planning.
Mineralogical and fluid-inclusion studies of the stratabound manganese mineralisation at the margin of the New Red Sandstone basin in the Exeter area have shown that these ores were deposited from basinal brines rich in calcium chloride.
Fluorite-barite and base- and precious-metals mineral deposits elsewhere in south-west England are now known to have been deposited from such brines.
Right An anaerobic flow-through cell on a drilling site at Dounreay is being removed from the mud circulation line for measurement of acidity, redox potential, temperature and dissolved oxygen.
The occurrence of fuller's earth in Cretaceous strata from Wiltshire to Yorkshire has been studied.
A range of down-hole and ground geophysical techniques have been applied to determine whether fuller's earth  is present, with some success in all areas, refining our knowledge of the extent of known occurrences of fuller's earth.
To the north-west of Nuneaton, multidisciplinary resurveys coupled with detailed work in quarries around Hartshill and Stockingford have shown that the so-called Boundary Fault that separates the Precambrian and Lower Cambrian successions from the overlying Triassic rocks is in reality an unconformity, thus indicating that hard-rock resources in the area are significantly greater than hitherto supposed.
Following the Department of Energy's announcement of a Frontier Licensing Round offshore of north-west Scotland, PGGOS staff compiled and produced a report and data package for sale to the hydrocarbons industry.
The package included new interpretations and maps derived from BGS open-file archives and provided a geological framework to help companies to plan surveys and prepare bids.
Plans to investigate the United Kingdom designated waters around the Rockall Trough and Plateau are now well advanced.
A preliminary desk study to establish a basic structural and stratigraphic framework has been made, a work programme has been designed, a consortium from the oil industry with BGS to support the work is being established, and detailed objectives are being finalised.
The proposal is for an integrated geophysical and geological survey of the Rockall Trough and broader aspects of the United Kingdom sector of the Rockall continental margin.
Exploration of this area has been greatly hindered by the presence of lower Tertiary volcanics, for on seismic profiles these largely obscure the underlying geology of the basin.
However, it looks as though the volcanic sequence is thin or absent on part of the western margin of the Rockall Trough, where there is known to be a block faulted margin structure.
The services of BGS's Marine Operations Group continued to be in demand by civil-engineering and mineral-extraction firms, and by the hydrocarbons and power industries.
The work was not exclusively from the United Kingdom: two engineers from BGS visited Guangzhou (Canton) to train Chinese personnel in the use of sea-bed vibrocoring equipment provided to the Marine Division of the Geological Survey of China under the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Oil company-funded research on Jurassic and Palaeocene hydrocarbon reservoir sequences has shown that stratigraphic variation in heavy-mineral provenance is a firm mineralogical basis for correlating sandstones and sets important constraints on possible locations of source areas, sediment-transport pathways and evolution of depositional systems.
Underpinning research has continued on a number of topics.
Among these is the major BGS-led joint European study of the southern North Sea Quaternary succession.
The work has shown that from the late Neogene to the mid Pleistocene a huge delta system developed in the southern North Sea basin.
The sediments were derived initially from Baltic rivers and later mainly from the Rhine, Meuse, Scheldt systems with minor contributions from British rivers.
Biostratigraphic research provides essential stratigraphic support for many core activities both onshore and offshore.
Current advances in graptolite biostratigraphy are leading to the recognition of further subdivisions in the Ordovician and Silurian which provide an accurate calibration for parallel work on acritarchs and chitinozoa.
In the course of the Geochemical Survey Programme, the validity of arsenic data for North Wales as a pathfinder for the detection of precious metal mineralisation and of potential natural and anthropogenic environmental hazards has been assessed.
The multielement regional geochemical dataset, which covers a large part of the country, pointed to several areas of potential mineralisation, hitherto unknown, including three areas in Scotland in which particulate gold is associated with pathfinder elements, and gold is associated with arsenic in altered metasediments.
As in previous years, mineral exploration in the Mineral Reconnaissance Programme was mainly for gold The results of seven multidisciplinary surveys published during the year included important new indications of mineralisation.
MRP work in the Ochil Hills has shown the widespread occurrence of alluvial gold.
It is believed that there may be a more fertile source elsewhere in the area, a possibility being investigated by a private company.
Exploration for platinum mineralisation associated with basic and ultrabasic rocks in the Huntly area of Aberdeenshire has revealed enhanced levels of platinum and locally of gold.
To aid mineral exploration, a new geochemical relational database has been designed that will be powerful and flexible in use and comprehensive in content.
The database is proving to be a powerful tool during the initial stages of mineral exploration programmes, and database products have been purchased by public- and private-sector organisations.
In response to a commission from the Department of Trade and Industry to prepare a guide designed to assist companies exploring for minerals in Great Britain,Mineral exploration for metalliferous and related minerals in Britain: a guide was published during the year.
It summarises geological knowledge of metalliferous mineralisation, reviews current and past exploration, and describes its administrative and legal framework.
About a third of the public water supplies in Britain come from groundwater; in the south and east of England the proportion is locally much greater.
Anything that threatens the abundance or the quality of these supplies is therefore very serious.
Normally groundwater supplies are of high quality and need little treatment, but the source of groundwater is rainfall that percolates through the soil, where it can dissolve substances, man-made or natural, beneficial or deleterious, present in the soil.
BGS investigates all the factors that can influence both abundance and quality of groundwater.
BGS has studied the hydrogeology of Jersey in response to the island government's increasing difficulties in meeting demands for water, and has collaborated in a project to develop a simple and reliable technique for estimating groundwater recharge in the Sahel.
The continuing spell of dry weather in much of eastern Britain has caused recharge to groundwater in the winter of 1990/91 to be much less than normal, and groundwater levels are greatly depressed in consequence, particularly in the Chalk of East Anglia.
The public has become more aware of the importance of groundwater, and use of BGS's enquiry service has increased.
Mineral exploration for metalliferous and related minerals in Britain: a guide was commissioned by the Department of Trade and industry to assist companies exploring for minerals in Great Britain.
Information resources at BGS
BGS receives many requests for site-specific information and for access to reference collections or data held in the archives.
Increasing use of digital data has led to the introduction of a licensing system to regulate their use by external parties and protect copyright — both NERC's own copyright and that of the owners of the data, for BGS does not have proprietary rights to all the data it holds.
Additional ancillary services such as data interpretation, preparation of customised products, and materials handling for logging and treatment of borehole core were being sought as a spin-off from regular project work.
In support of these services, additional resources have been provided for collection management, especially the development of digital indexes to reference material.
A database holding information about all BGS's large scale National Grid series maps was completed, and a project to clear backlogs of registrations and data input for borehole logs, with the intention of providing a flexible computer-indexing facility, has been started.
LIBERTAS software for full computer management of the library's resources was also introduced, and the first modules, dealing with catalogues, were completed they make possible fast retrieval of information on published literature.
Work recommenced on the processing of outstanding acquisitions of maps from overseas territories, particularly the collections of sheets from Middle Eastern and east European countries, in which particular interest has been shown.
For BGS's own products an enhanced new-releases document continued to serve the customer and was issued free every two months to interested parties.
Important milestones have been reached in two long term key information activities described in previous annual reports.
In the first, the foundations of a BGS information systems strategy have been put in place.
In the second, successful production of applied geological maps with a Geographic Information System have been produced successfully: this is an essential step towards the digital geological spatial model.
In the course of completing the resurvey of the Coventry district, a comprehensive borehole and shaft database has been built up for the Nuneaton-Bedworth area by way of experiment.
In consequence, thematic maps can be produced when required, as well as a more advanced three dimensional depiction of geological structure.
Marketing
The market survey and business-development consultancy undertaken by Price Waterhouse had a considerable effect on BGS as a whole, and has enabled BGS marketing arrangements to be appropriately formalised.
BGS has to be ready at all times to supply the wants of the market for geoscience and to be aware of potential sources of income, marketing efforts, public relations and promotional activities will be focused more on the commercial sector.
Nevertheless, it is the responsibility of every member of staff to be prepared to market BGS's services, products and expertise as the opportunity arises.
A highlight of the year was the renaming of the Keyworth site: it is now the Kingsley Dunham Centre, as described in the Director's introduction (p. 1).
Later in the year, the Kingsley Dunham Centre was visited by the Council of NERC and by the members of the Associated Board for the Research Councils (ABRC).
Encouraging visitors is an efficient way of making BGS more widely known.
The number of visitors, both from this country and abroad, has increased.
Among these, BGS welcomes parties from all types of educational institutions, and provides lectures, demonstrations and half day courses as required.
In addition, BGS staff continue to bring BGS to public notice by making scientific and technical presentations at seminars, workshops and conferences, supported by exhibition and promotional materials.
Left During the year members of NERC Council and the Advisory Board for the Research Councils visited BGS at Keyworth, and also toured the campus.
Here they are shown some of the paper archives in the National Geosciences Data Centre.
Training
In the enhanced programme of training, three new courses were added to the core of formal courses.
This and the replication in Murchison House, Edinburgh, of courses given at Keyworth led to a substantial  increase in staff attendance.
Preparations were made towards the end of the year for the formation of a full-time Training Group to coordinate all aspects of training needs in BGS.
These included a training needs analysis by NERC/SERC Joint Training Services.
Right This interpretation of a wireline log of a borehole in Indonesia was made by means of GS computer software funded by ODA.
There were twelve training attachments for foreign nationals who have been recommended by the British Council.
They included colleagues from Egypt, India, Jordan, Kenya and Malaysia, who were trained in photogeology and remote sensing; mineral sciences; mineral separation; evaluation of clay minerals; petrology and mineralogy of gemstones; book, map and desk-top  publication; production of a minerals year book; and geological cartography.
The international dimension
More than a hundred BGS staff worked around 40 countries during the year on country specific and regional programmes.
In the country specific programmes, an important part of the work is training and strengthening counterpart organisations, linked to geological survey, mineral and energy resource investigations.
Staff are also seconded to fill established posts in geological survey departments in the developing nations of the Commonwealth.
The regional programmes are research-oriented, increasingly emphasising environmental protection.
Direct contract work was undertaken during the year in Fiji, Hong Kong, Jordan and Laos.
Bids were prepared for commercial work in the Falkland Islands and Laos.
The examples that follow are typical of the sort of work that BGS undertakes overseas, both in scope and in direction.
The size and duration of projects varies.
Often a successful project is followed by another, building the foundation of the first.
In Kenya, for instance, in the second phase of the Exploration for Geothermal Energy Project, a series of maps at 1:50 000 in the northern Rift Valley was completed, along with draft reports on the geology and geothermal activity for each.
Following the decision to extend the project, two trachyte-basalt shield volcanoes in a remote and inhospitable area of the northern rift were surveyed.
BGS work in Colombia consists of a large mineral exploration project, the Pacific Coast Precious Metals Project, which was completed during the year.
During the four years of the project the BGS work established the provenance of the widespread placer gold deposits of the Pacific Coastal Littoral.
In the Solomon Islands, BGS geologists worked on the final phase of a six year mapping and mineral-exploration programme.
The greater part of Santa Isabel has been confirmed as an uplifted marginal portion of the Ontong Java Plateau, an elevated area of anomalously thick oceanic crust, here overlain by pelagic limestones and andesitic volcaniclastic sediments derived from an adjacent island arc.
At present exploration companies are much interested in the nickeliferous laterites that overlie the serpentinites on Santa Isabel, and geochemical work has revealed a number of nickel and other metal anomalies that warrant further attention.
In Hong Kong, BGS has a consultancy with the local Geotechnical Control Office, in the course of which the fieldwork for the mapping programme was completed on schedule: all outstanding maps and memoirs will be published during 1991.
A series of geological maps covering the buried marble area of north-west New Territories was published.
BGS staff also worked on the ambitious Port and Airport Development programme.
Large areas of land will be reclaimed to accommodate major developments including a new international airport, and offshore sand and gravel deposits are being sought as a source of fill material.
The Asian Development Bank awarded a consultancy to BGS to draw up a new Mineral Exploration and Development Plan for the government of the Lao PDR.
The main aims of the project were to formulate the course to be followed by the government to assess the worth of mineral resources of the Lao PDR and to provide an action plan for generating hard currency from minerals within a constantly evolving and highly competitive world economy.
The Lao PDR has good metalliferous mineral potential for profitable commodities of the first importance in world markets, as well as for gems and industrial minerals.
A project on the thermal history of petroliferous basins in parts of the Far East was supervised on behalf of the ODA.
A PC-based sediment-decompaction and three-dimensional geothermal modelling package was developed to predict present day subsurface temperatures and to model the thermal history of two sedimentary basins in the Far East.
In south east Zimbabwe, Landsat Thematic Mapper imagery and aerial photographs are being used in a study aimed at improving the success rate of boreholes and dug wells for rural water supply, with collaboration from hydrogeologists and engineering geophysicists.
Weathered rock debris is underlain by crystalline granite-greenstone basement rocks, and rainfall is low.
The satellite data have been processed to enhance subtle variations in vegetation density which in this sort of terrain often correlate with the availability of ground moisture.
The imagery is being used in the preparation of a hydrogeological map of the region.
Follow up geophysical work has been done at selected sites to assess what water resources are actually present.
BGS staff on secondment prepared detailed geological maps of a reclamation area in the New Territories of Hong Kong and delineated the portion underlain by cavernous marble, the presence of which could affect development of the area.
The survey showed that the marble underlies less of the area than had been supposed.
Thematic maps and onshore surveys
The reorganisation that took effect from the beginning of 1991 brought together all the Land Survey groups, Regional Geophysics, and a new group, Tectonics and Databases, formed by merging Land Survey database staff in Keyworth and Edinburgh and the old Deep Geology Unit.
For the first time staff concerned with mapping and interpreting crustal structure in the third dimension have come together in a single division, Thematic Maps and Onshore Surveys (TMOS).
With the reorganisation came a readjustment of the Land Survey regional boundaries.
For the purpose of managing the mapping programme the country is now divided into six regions.
However, physically to move the records in line with this boundary reorganisation would have been a formidable and costly task, so enquiries continue to be dealt with under the old district boundaries.
Enquirers wanting information about the Northumberland coalfield, for example, continue to deal with the Newcastle office even though mapping in that area is managed from Keyworth.
All the existing regional offices (at Exeter, Aberystwyth and Newcastle) remain, but most staff are based in Keyworth and Edinburgh.
The work for the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland, which is wholly commissioned by the Department of Economic Development, is carried out from Belfast.
The division is responsible for the conduct of the Onshore Surveys Core programme.
This consists primarily of a 15-year mapping programme which began in 1990/91.
The aim is to have 1:50 000 geological map sheets for the whole of Great Britain available to the public by 2005.
There are three categories of 1:50 000 sheets in the programme: sheets requiring full resurvey; sheets that can be updated by partial revision; and sheets that will be produced as provisional editions by desk compilation alone.
The 122 sheets to be resurveyed have been selected by a scoring mechanism based on such criteria as date and scale of last survey, reliability of existing map, resource potential, and level of user need.
About a third of these sheets will be surveyed by rapid mapping techniques; the rest will be covered by detailed resurvey at 1:10 000.
The 80 sheets that require partial revision, are primarily those for which the quality of survey of part of the sheet is known to be so unreliable that that part needs to be resurveyed to bring the whole sheet up to standard.
The third category, 98 sheets, are mostly in the Highlands of Scotland: they scored low in comparison with the sheets chosen for full or part resurvey.
They will be compiled from diverse sources both within and outside BGS, and published as provisional sheets.
In devising the programme an attempt was made to keep a good geographical spread of activity and to maintain expertise throughout the geological column and on  all major rock types.
Memoirs will accompany many of the sheets.
There will be no memoirs for some of the part-revised sheets: instead short explanations of the geology will be printed on the maps.
Provisional maps will have no accompanying descriptive text.
In addition to the mapping programme, an important part of the Core programme is a study of the three-dimensional structure of the Upper Palaeozoic basins.
TMOS plans to map each such basin seismically in turn, using deep reflection data, geologically calibrated by borehole and outcrop information, to produce depth-contour, isopach and other maps.
The Northumberland and Solway basins and some contiguous areas are the subject of the first study, which was completed this year.
Now that the Regional Geophysics Group is part of TMOS, the opportunity has come to redesign parts of the Geophysics Core programme to integrate it more effectively with other activities.
A start has been made on this process.
Less commissioned research was carried out in TMOS than in previous years, mainly because DOE let no new applied geological mapping contracts during the year, while several such contracts came to an end.
The Highlands and Islands
In the Monadhliath project, fieldwork has been completed on the Glen Roy and Fortrose sheets, but continued in a further four sheet areas within the project.
On the Glen Roy (63W) sheet, the regional stratigraphical relationship within and between the Precambrian metasedimentary rocks of the Appin and Grampian groups has been clarified.
The Grampian Group, in which primary facies changes are concomitant with abrupt changes of thickness, is overstepped by pelites with quartzite wedges at the base of the Appin Group.
The tectonothermal history of the metasedimentary rocks of both groups is of progressive deformation during a regional metamorphism.
Major refolded folds and ductile shear zones were generated as temperatures and pressures increased from about 200°C at 3 kilobars to about 550°C at 7 kilobars.
Further studies along the mylonite zone south-east of the Great Glen Fault Zone (first described in the 1989/90 Annual Report) indicate that the mylonites occur in a complex zone that includes lithological units of uncertain stratigraphical affinity.
Six mineral zones have been delineated in the thermal aureole formed by the post-tectonic Strath Ossian Igneous Complex.
An isobaric temperature difference of about 300°C has been estimated across the width of the aureole, with a maximum temperature of about 650°C at about 3 kilobars adjacent to the contact of the granodiorite intrusion.
With the completion of the revision mapping of the Tomatin (74W) sheet, the field survey of the late-Caledonian Monadhliath granitic pluton, which is the westernmost member of the East Grampian batholith, has been finished.
The emplacement of the pluton, which was in a number of phases, and the significance of late-stage to post-consolidation hydrothermal activity, are now more fully understood.
Complementary geochemical studies are under way.
Revision mapping of the area south of the Slochd summit has revealed a complex tectonothermal history within the psammitic and semipelitic gneisses of the Central Highland Migmatite Complex; it can be shown that the metagabbro bodies, described in the 1989/90 Annual Report, were emplaced at a distinct tectonostratigraphical level in the metasedimentary sequence.
Following completion of the drift mapping in the Fortrose (84W) sheet, BGS staff coordinated and contributed to an interdisciplinary field meeting run by the Quaternary Research Association, in which the participants examined the drift deposits of the sheet area.
A field guide to the Quaternary deposits has been completed; it includes descriptions of important interglacial deposits found during the survey.
Lochnagar (1155 m) is here seen from Craig Nordie [NO 235 944].
The Lochnagar Complex is a Caledonian 'Newer Granite' intruding Dalradian metasediments and metavolcanics.
The metasediments underlie the low ground in the left of the picture.
The foreground hills are formed from a series of small intrusions that were precursors of the main granite, which forms the higher ground of Lochnagar.
The summit peaks are leucocratic microgranite, the final magmatic pulse of the intrusion.
In the East Grampian project, a considerable amount of time has been devoted to map compilation, incorporating university work with the results of the field surveys.
In the Fealar-Glen Tilt area of the Ben Macdui (64E) sheet, a complex structural and stratigraphical history has been elucidated in the Appin Group metasedimentary rocks.
A major late north-north-west thrust episode has been identified, possibly associated with movements on the Boundary Slide in adjacent areas.
In lower Glen Esk and Glen Lethnot on the Aboyne (66W) sheet, downward-facing early structures are exposed here and there, implying that the area lies chief y on the lower inverted limb of a large nappe structure (perhaps the Tay nappe).
The boundary between the Southern Highland and Argyll groups has been mapped in detail, the work being facilitated by the presence of two marker lithologies, a kyanite-magnetite schist and a green mica (? phengite) quartzite.
Faults trending north-west to west-north-west with brecciated, altered and partly mineralised zones displace the mapped stratigraphical boundaries.
On the Ballater (65E) sheet, survey of the Lochnagar-Glen Gairn granites and diorites has continued.
In upper Glen Cova, the complex boundary of the Juanjorge Diorite is locally controlled by jointing and small faults.
The later Lochnagar Al granite intrudes the margin of the diorite, probably as a series of concentric sheets, and discrete sinuous lenses of diorite are enclosed in the granite outcrop.
Major and trace element analyses of 30 granite, granodiorite and diorite samples from the Lochnagar and Glen Gairn granites show that the two complexes are geochemically closely related, with continuous igneous fractionation trends.
Analysis of the  hornblendes in the Lochnagar complex suggests that the body was emplaced at a depth of between 4 and 7.5 kilometres.
Space domain iterative modelling of the regional gravity and aeromagnetic data in the East Grampians suggests that the major Younger Basic bodies and post-tectonic granites extend to maximum depths of about 4 and 8 kilometres respectively.
Additional gravity data indicate that the overall excess mass of the Huntly 7 basic intrusion is small, the intrusion possibly extending to a depth of no more than 2 kilometres.
The Boganclogh basic intrusion, with a gravity anomaly of about 46 milligals, may extend to depths of about S kilometres.
The geophysical models of the East Grampian Younger Basic intrusions imply they were not part of a single large layered basic/ultrabasic intrusive sheet.
The publication in 1990 of a report on the sand and gravel resources of the country around Strachan and Auchenblae completes a programme of six such surveys undertaken in the Grampian Region over the last 15 years.
The resource surveys have comprised detailed mapping followed by the drilling of about 350 boreholes and 300 trial pits, augmented latterly by geophysical resistivity soundings.
The results are published in six Mineral Assessment reports, which include 12 resource maps at 1:25 000, covering 1987 square kilometres.
The work has been commissioned and largely funded by the Department of the Environment on behalf of the Scottish Development Department.
The results of the surveys provide geological input to land-use and physical planning, and help in preventing unnecessary sterilisation of resources, reducing possible conflict between development and conservation, and providing an assessment of the future supply of sand and gravel to the building and construction industries.
As part of a nuclear waste repository study, commissioned by UK Nirex Ltd, a team of seven BGS geologists made a systematic reconnaissance survey of the solid geology of an area around Dounreay covering 300 square kilometres.
The area is underlain by Moine metasedimentary rocks with intrusions and Devonian sedimentary cover.
Preliminary maps at 1:25 000 were supplied to AEA Technology in March 1 99 1.
These maps will be finalised and compiled into a map at 1:50 000 that will cover the surrounding 300 square kilometres as well: this map will be accompanied by a report on the geology.
Central and Southern Scotland and Cumbria
In central Scotland the work programme was divided between systematic resurveys and the production of thematic geological maps of coalfield areas for planning authorities.
The thematic map work, accounting for about a third of staff effort, was commissioned by the Department of the Environment (DOE).
Above Norites, slightly uralitised, in the southern part of the Morvern-Cabrach intrusion, show layering dipping north at about 30°.
The layers are of alternating more felsic and more mafic material around 5–10 centimetres thick.
The layering is disrupted by small scale displacement along fault planes.
During the year the resurvey of the Hamilton (23W) sheet was completed.
Work continued on the Falkirk (31E) and Livingston (32W) sheets in those parts of the sheet areas not covered by DOE funded projects.
Both areas include extensive abandoned mine workings for coal and, locally, oil-shale.
Much of the revision work has therefore concentrated on analysis of available mining and drilling records.
Below Marginal glaciofluvial terraces and out-wash fans were formed during the decay of late-Devensian ice within the valley of the River Findhorn, Nairnshire.
Mounds of englacially and sub-glacially deposited sand and gravel (middle ground, right) mark the position of a stillstand during the retreat of the ice.
The Falkirk project, funded by DOE, was completed during the year and includes thirty-six thematic maps at 1:10 000 depicting geological topics relevant to land-use planning, with an accompanying report.
The results were presented at a one day  seminar for planning officials, where the practical value of such thematic maps was demonstrated.
A similar project for the Stirling area is almost complete: computer-processed thematic maps at 1:25 000 are nearly ready to be printed.
The Livingston project is in progress.
One of the more interesting aspects of the Livingston and Falkirk areas is the drift deposits.
Both lodgement/deformation and melt-out tills have been identified: they reflect different environments of deposition [see illustration on preceding page ].
The distribution of raised marine sediments and associated well-marked shorelines reveal that sea-levels have risen and fallen repeatedly during the last 13 000 years.
Immediately after the ice sheet finally retreated, the relative sea level was more than 40 metres above OD.
It had fallen 50 metres by 10 500 years ago, and had risen to 10 m above OD 4000 years later, when much of the well-known Carse clay was deposited.
It then fell by stages to its present level.
These raised marine deposits focus attention on the problems that might occur if climatic change were to lead to a global rise in sea level.
For instance, landfill sites engineered into raised marine deposits could become waterlogged as groundwater levels rose with the rise in sea level: the resulting pollution of groundwater could be severe.
The cyclic siliciclastic sedimentary sequence between the Top Hosie Limestone and the Johnstone Shell Bed continues to be studied in order to classify the palaeoenvironment of the Central Coalfield.
Trends in sequence thickness, sediment-dispersal patterns and lithofacies distribution are being determined from borehole data, and sedimentological analyses of surface exposures are being made.
Geological mapping of the well-exposed coastal sections of south-west Scotland has been completed; the tectonic, biostratigraphical and lithostratigraphical correlations established within the greywackesiltstone-shale (turbidite) sequences now provide the essential framework for the mapping of less well-exposed areas inland.
The back arc/foreland-basin model developed as a result of the work is being increasingly used to constrain regional geotectonic models of the collisional history of the Iapetus Suture Zone, presently being investigated in collaboration with the Newfoundland Geological Survey.
Recent investigations of the Ordovician-Silurian boundary have delineated a high-strain zone up to 9 kilometres wide.
The mylonitic fabrics developed within the zone indicate ductile deformation, and the kinematic indicators provide evidence for both dextral and sinistral shear.
The macro- and microscopic relationships of this fabric with the regional penetrative cleavage and post-tectonic intrusions suggest that the shear zone was generated towards the end of the deformation of the Southern Uplands.
Preliminary evaluation of the newly available regional geochemical data from stream-sediment samples in the Southern Uplands shows a striking correlation between chemical abundances and the distribution of the discrete lithostratigraphical turbidite formations, the granite plutons and the mafic and ultramafic rocks of the Ballantrae Complex.
As well as providing a control on the extrapolation of geological boundaries, the cryptic compositional variations between the turbidite units should provide new insights into the different provenances that contributed material for the sedimentary infill.
Evaluation of the regional gravity and aeromagnetic data is providing a fresh perspective on models of the mid-to lower crustal levels of the Southern Uplands.
The collage of discrete crustal units suggested by the models will help to constrain the geometry and kinematics of the pre- and post-collisional history of the Laurentian continental margin.
Thick tabular beds of Triassic St Bees Sandstone at South Head, St Bees, Cumbria, are composed of plane-laminated and low-angle and trough-laminated fine grained sandstone in ascending sequence, truncated by planar erosion surfaces.
The bedding is cut by a set of conjugate minor normal faults striking east-west that indicate that there has been vertical shortening and/or north-south extension in the plane of the bedding.
In the Lake District, mapping of the Lower Palaeozoic strata on the Cockermouth (23) sheet has been completed and fieldwork on the Ambleside (38) sheet is at an advanced stage.
Structural studies of the shales and greywackes of the Skiddaw Group have refined the understanding of the deformational history: the early episode of major slump folding identified previously now appears to have been followed by a period of upright folding that has been subsequently modified by south-directed thrusting.
Stratigraphical interpretations of the Eycott and Borrowdale Volcanic groups have confirmed that they have similar evolutional histories and support the reinterpretation of biostratigraphical evidence in favour of their coeval eruption.
Detailed geochemical profiling of the lava sequences has revealed a complex history of eruption from magma chambers which, although linked in the same geotectonic setting, had individual development paths within the crust.
Mapping of the eruptive products, a joint study with the University of Liverpool, further suggests that more than one original caldera may have contributed to the volcanic assemblage.
Volcanotectonic faults that controlled the eruption pattern may also have influenced the subsequent fault control of the West Cumbrian Permo-Carboniferous basins.
Investigations funded by UK Nirex Ltd in the Sellafield area have accelerated progress on finalising the resurvey of the Maryport (22) and Gosforth (37) sheets.
The results of these investigations are being integrated with new geophysical data to produce a three-dimensional geological model of the area.
The geological maps, and thematic maps at 1:25 000 designed  to meet anticipated future requirements of the continuing geological investigations, are being digitally produced.
In the West Cumbria project, funded by DOE, evaluation of existing geological records and mine plans has enabled solid and drift maps of the Coal Measures and Lower Carboniferous sequences to be compiled at 1:10 000 and 1:25 000 in more detail than was possible during the previous survey almost 60 years ago.
Thematic maps illustrating aspects of particular importance for land use planning and development, such as ground stability, location of material resources, and distribution of made and disturbed ground, are in preparation.
The cored boreholes through the poorly exposed Jurassic outlier west of Carlisle have been studied in cooperation with British Gypsum Ltd.
The Penarth Group (late Triassic), proved for the first time in this area, is succeeded conformably by the Lias Group, comprising rocks of latest Triassic and early Jurassic age (Hettangian and early Sinemurian).
This new borehole information necessitates revision of the map of the Jurassic outlier, last surveyed in the 1920s.
North-eastern England and Midlands
Multidisciplinary resurveys in this district are mainly directed towards producing geological and thematic maps and modern databases around or near urban or coalfield areas.
Where thematic maps of urban areas are commissioned, these projects are jointly funded by BGS and the Department of the Environment (DOE), but if rural areas only are resurveyed, the projects are funded by the BGS core programme.
The joint-funded project around Stoke-on-Trent was completed during the year: 12 high-quality coloured thematic maps were produced  at 1:25 000.
The maps display solid and drift geology, as well as the full range of geoenvironmental constraints that affect urban planning and redevelopment, such as bulk mineral extraction and undermining.
The results were publicised during a two day exhibition at Keele University in November 1990: the event, which included displays of the thematic maps and archival material, was promoted jointly by BGS, the North Staffordshire branch of the Geologists' Association and the Institution of Geologists.
Mapping was later extended into the Barlaston area, in order to complete the resurvey of the Stoke (123) 1:50 000 sheet.
In the joint-funded West Birmingham project, geological mapping at 1:10 000 has resulted in a new synthesis of sedimentation and structural evolution in the southern part of the Pennine Basin.
Collaborative research with the University of London on exceptionally well-preserved conifers from volcaniclastic sediments in the Etruria Formation of Westphalian C age, has been the subject of external publications and has featured on BBC Radio 4's Natural History Programme.
Ten 1:10 000 geological maps have been completed and the preparation of a full suite of thematic maps and a final report for the project is well advanced.
TMOS staff continue to collaborate closely with the Engineering Geology and Geophysics Group to produce a comprehensive engineering geology database for the West Birmingham area, and with Digital Cartography and Information Systems to evaluate computer-generated coloured geological and thematic maps.
The field resurvey and analysis of geotechnical data for the joint-funded Leeds project was completed during the year.
Compilation of geological maps at 1:10 000 and thematic maps at 1:25 000 is now in progress.
Left A fifth-order residual gravity map has been enhanced by the removal of the regional field to accentuate short wavelength anomalies.
The Bulkington low reflects a thick sub-Triassic Upper Carboniferous sequence.
Drilling by BGS has confirmed the presence of concealed Coal Measures, probably in a faulted trough, in the west of the Hinckley Basin.
Following completion of the joint-funded thematic mapping project around Coventry, multidisciplinary geological, geophysical and biostratigraphical investigations have been continued as part of the Core programme, in order to complete the resurvey of the 1:50 000 Coventry (169) sheet.
A concealed Carboniferous sequence beneath the Triassic east of the Nuneaton inlier, interpreted from enhancement of the residual gravity data, has been proved by drilling.
The sequence is probably preserved in a fault-bounded trough in an area long thought to comprise only Triassic strata resting on Cambrian or earlier basement.
A comprehensive borehole and shaft database has been built up for the Nuneaton-Bedworth area, by way of experiment, so that thematic maps can be produced when required, as well as a more advanced three-dimensional depiction of geological structure.
To the north-west of Nuneaton, similar multidisciplinary resurveys coupled with detailed work in the active and disused quarries of the Hartshill-Stockingford area have shown that the so-called Boundary Fault separating the Precambrian and Lower Cambrian successions from the Triassic rocks is an unconformity, thus indicating that hard-rock resources are significantly greater than hitherto supposed.
Below Spheroidally weathered jointed Precambrian volcanic rocks are unconformably overlain by red breccio-conglomerates of the Cambrian Hartshill Sandstone Formation at the Boons Quarry SSSI, Hartshill, Nuneaton.
The white line marks the unconformity.
The resurvey of the Lancaster (59) sheet made good progress, and stratigraphical drilling proved mid-to late Namurian strata beneath thick drift deposits south of Lancaster.
In the north-west of the sheet, where Dinantian rocks had been thought likely to underlie the thick drift sequence, further drilling proved the previously unsuspected presence of a Permo-Triassic basin.
A marine shelly fauna of Alportian age has been collected near Bentham from the poorly known upper part of the Namurian succession.
About 30 metres of marine ripple-laminated siltstones represent the highstand  deposits of the Homoceras undulatum Marine Band (H&sub2bi).
By comparison, the band is less than 5 metres thick in the sediment-starved centre of the basin to the south.
Work started on the resurvey of the Newbiggin (10) 1:50 000 sheet as the first phase of the Tyne-Alston project to revise the geological map of the Northumberland Basin.
The revision of this coalfield area relies heavily on computerised systems for data analysis, developed during the survey of the adjacent Morpeth-Bedlington-Ashington district, a thematic mapping project jointly funded with DOE, which was completed last year.
All the 1:10 000 maps for the Worcester (199) sheet were completed, and line compilation of the 1:50 000 map is well advanced.
Good progress was made with writing the sheet memoir.
Seismic stratigraphical study of the Worcester Basin has revealed that growth faulting was important during the accumulation of the Permo-Triassic sequence.
In palynostratigraphical studies, the Arden Sandstone Formation has yielded miospores of Tuvalian age (late Carnian, late Triassic: about 222 million years), and Rhaetian (late Triassic: about 210–205 million years) palynomorphs have been recovered from the Penarth Group.
Final drafts of memoirs for Thirsk (52), Harrogate (62) and Goole/Doncaster (79/88) were completed and approved for publication.
Final editing of a technical report on the Telford 1:25 000 sheet, which includes the Coalbrookdale coalfield, is in progress.
North-eastern England and the Midlands contain most of the exposed coalfields in England, and there is always a large number of enquiries on matters relating to coal.
Advice on the detailed contents of BGS archives relating to proposed coal extraction continued to be provided to British Coal, under post-Lofthouse arrangements.
Other contract work included the construction of geological sections through a waste-disposal site, the specialist examination of cores from boreholes drilled for a major construction project, and advice on road improvements.
Eastern England
Geological surveying continued in the Lincolnshire Basin (Grantham sheet), the East Anglian seaboard (Saxmundham sheet) and the Chiltern Hills (Hitchin sheet).
Systematic mapping at 1:10 000 north of Grantham (sheet 127) on the Lincolnshire Limestone outcrop demonstrated intraformational breaks that may be attributable to channel infilling and bioherm development.
A borehole 203 metres deep was drilled at Copper Hill, Ancaster, to establish a stratigraphical standard for strata lying between the Lincolnshire Limestone and the Lower Lias.
It provided continuous core for analysis and integration with downhole geophysical logs.
Preliminary examinations reveal an anomalously thick representative of the Grantham Formation, presumably occupying a channel that cut out the Northampton Sand ironstone and the top mudstone beds of the Upper Lias.
In east Suffolk, in the Saxmundham (sheet 191) district, marine Crag sands associated with beach shingle, referable to the Westleton Beds, have been mapped beneath a till, akin to the Lowestoft Till, in cliff sections and inland between Sizewell and Dunwich.
Farther west, this till is associated with chalk-rich pods or channelfills of glaciofluvial sands and gravels.
Tenuous representatives of the Kesgrave Formation and, lower in the valley sides, mixed glacially derived and marine sands have also been differentiated.
Between Redgrave and Marlesford in Suffolk, the structure of the Chalk basement, its relation to the Crag basins and the continuity of aquifers in the Plio-Pleistocene sequence are being investigated by resistivity and gravimetric techniques and by boreholes for Suffolk Water plc.
Improved understanding of the detailed lithostratigraphy of the Chalk of the Hitchin (221) sheet has resulted from field mapping, examination of quarry sections and interpretation of geophysical logs from water wells.
Extensive remnants of Clay-with-flints cap the Chalk dip slope below the level of the regional till sheet, and apron-like deposits of periglacial sands and gravels, resembling those formerly described as Taele gravels in the Saffron Walden district, have been outlined on the scarp face north-east of Baldock.
The courses of four major drift-filled valley systems incised up to 100 m into the Chalk have been defined beneath the till.
On the crest of the Chalk escarpment between Therfield, Reed and Barkway, large rafts of chalk have been mapped on the ground after reference to aerial photographs: they were emplaced as a result of glaciotectonic action during the Anglian glaciation.
The effects on the groundwater regimes of the shape, size and nature of the infilling materials in buried valleys on the Chalk dip slope are being investigated on behalf of NRA Anglian.
A geological survey in the vicinity of Buckingham (sheet 219) was undertaken for Buckinghamshire County Council to assist in formulating their plan for sand and gravel extraction in the county.
The survey added greatly to our knowledge of the glacial deposits, which were laid down close to the southern limit of ice advance during the Anglian Stage.
They are dominated by a complex of chalk-rich till with many bodies of sand and gravel.
At the base there is a locally derived ground moraine that may be a remnant glacial deposit of much greater antiquity.
North-east of Buckingham, laminated silts and clays proved to considerable depth by boreholes may indicate the site of a preglacial ice-dammed lake.
As part of the Fuller's Earth Resource Study, an extensive database incorporating more than 300 borehole logs has been augmented by information from 25 specially commissioned boreholes which sampled more than 800 metres of potentially fuller's-earth-bearing Cretaceous strata stretching from Wiltshire to Speeton in Yorkshire.
Near Speeton, the upper part of the Speeton Clay was found to contain thin seams of volcanic ash that, in rocks of about the same age in southern England, have been concentrated into commercially attractive occurrences of fuller's earth.
Clay-mineral characterisation and biostratigraphical studies are continuing.
A range of down-hole and ground geophysical techniques have been applied to determine whether fuller's earth is present, with some success in all areas.
In general the investigations have served mainly to refine knowledge of the extent of known occurrences.
An anticline is associated with a thrust surface cutting Middle Llandovery sandstones at Hendre Quarry, near Llanilar, Dyfed.
Sigmoidal quartz veins have developed in the foot-wall of the thrust.
The Rhayader (179) 1:50 000 geological map includes a number of inset maps at 1:250 000 displaying particular features, including left stratigraphic sections through the Caban Conglomerate Formation and the enveloping lithostratigraphy, and middle a structural and metamorphic map of the district.
Wales
The first phase of the multidisciplinary central Wales rapid mapping project, which includes the geological survey of the Llanilar (178) sheet and the preparation of maps at 1:25 000, was completed.
The associated Rhayader (179) sheet has been compiled; it has an inset of contoured illite crystallinity values, which show the variation in metamorphic grade of the mudrocks across the area.
[see illustration overleaf ]The stratigraphical framework of the project has been controlled by detailed collection and identification of graptolite faunas, resulting in the formulation of subzones within the turriculatus Zone of the Llandovery.
This has allowed facies and structural modelling of the turbidite systems in the Llanilar district.
Computer analysis of the regional gravity and aeromagnetic data has confirmed the presence of a major basement structure beneath the Lower Palaeozoic basin sediments.
The structural database has been interfaced with commercially available software and used to generate cleavage-transection maps.
Provenance work on the turbidite sandstones has indicated at least two sources for heavy minerals.
Collaborative studies with the NERC Isotope Geosciences Laboratory have continued, and include research into the age of cleavage formation in mudrocks using rubidium/strontium whole-rock isochrons and the genesis of the sulphide veins using stable- and lead-isotope techniques.
A detailed study of the acritarch assemblages within the Llandovery sedimentary rocks has enabled an improved biozonation scheme to be established.
White mica (illite) crystallinity surveys yielded contoured maps of metamorphic grade for the Lower Palaeozoic strata.
All of this research is aimed at understanding the evolution of the Welsh Lower Palaeozoic basin, which has an important bearing on the tectonic evolution of the whole of Great Britain.
Bird Rock, an anticlinal feature with Ordovician acid volcanic rocks, stands alongside the deeply drift-filled Dysynni Valley, with Cadair Idris in the background.
Survey of the Cadair Idris (149) sheet neared completion.
Although the area is best known for its superb Ordovician basic pillow lavas, the rock sequence also spans a large part of the history of the Lower Palaeozoic Welsh Basin.
Most of the sequence is middle Cambrian to lower Silurian age.
Shallow-water Cambrian sedimentation was followed by lower Ordovician bimodal volcanism (Aran Volcanic Group) and upper Ordovician lower Silurian basin sedimentation.
After Cambrian times, most of the sediments were derived from within the Welsh Basin.
Input from the shelf regions, for example the Midland Craton and Anglesey, was significant only during low sea level stands (Arenig and late Ashgill).
There are Tertiary sediments beneath the  superficial glacial and more recent marine deposits along the shore around Tonfanau.
Fossil-bearing sandy limestone boulders within the local glacial till prove that Jurassic strata have cropped out offshore.
The borehole core shows part of a condensed interval in the Inferior Oolite of the Purse Caundle Borehole on the area of the Shaftesbury (313) sheet.
Glauconitic limestone is dark green and phosphatic limestone is buff and there are belemnite fragments and a prominent vertical burrow.
The section of core is about 300 millimetres long.
The Montgomery (165) sheet in the Welsh Borders was completed by work on the marine Ludlow sequence and overlying fluviatile Přídolí mudstones and sandstones.
The Přídolí beds form two outliers separated by the structurally complex zone of the Clun Forest disturbance.
The biostratigraphy of the graptolite and shelly faunas of the Silurian rocks of the whole sheet has been appraised.
Within the Silurian, faunal and facies changes can be related to the transition from shelf environments in the east to the basin margin in the west.
A special 1:25 000 map of the Shelve inlier of Precambrian to Ordovician rocks was almost ready for publication at the end of the year.
Survey of the Flint (108) sheet, building on the applied geological mapping of Deeside, continued; only a small northern part of the Clwydian Hills and part of the Vale of Clwyd remain to be investigated.
Immediately to the south, the Wrexham applied geological mapping project (funded jointly by BGS and DOE) has been completed.
Two engineering geology reports were produced: one on computing techniques and the other on geology and land-use planning, containing ten thematic maps.
The applied maps were computer generated and then colour printed, using information from a number of databases processed through a Geographic Information System New computer methods were developed during the project to enable these various databases, which included digitised geological linework and mine plans, raster-scanned topography and computer-coded borehole and geotechnical data, to be used in this way.
South-western England
Mapping of the Shaftesbury (313) sheet, which is the first phase of the 3 phase Wessex Basin project, was completed in 1990.
Stratigraphical and sedimentological data provided by the Purse Caundle Borehole include a section through the depocentre of the Inferior Oolite basin in northern Dorset, where a thick muddy peloidal limestone sequence (formerly regarded as oolitic) contrasts with thin ferruginous limestones of the same age on the Dorset coast.
The borehole proved an important condensed interval as well as a thick sequence of sandy limestones, the sand content of which may have been eroded from fault scarps nearby.
The Knackers Hole and Combe Throop boreholes were drilled to establish local standard litho- and biostratigraphical sequences for part of the Upper Jurassic and part of the Middle Jurassic respectively.
Work on the subsurface using seismic data has resulted in depth-converted or two-way-travel-time contoured maps for the tops of Variscan, White Lias, Inferior Oolite, Cornbrash and Corallian strata.
Lithostratigraphical mapping of the Chalk has been extended onto the Dorchester (328) sheet.
This confirms the sequence established on the Shaftesbury sheet with, in addition, the recognition of an eighth member, the Portsdown Chalk of mucronata Zone age.
The dip slopes and scarps formed by the Chalk members are generally clearly recognisable on aerial photographs; some are prominent enough to be identified on Landsat images.
A combination of micro- and macropalaeontology has enabled these lithostratigraphical units to be reliably placed within a chronostratigraphical framework.
The mapping of these units has enabled a pattern of faulting to be recognised in the Upper Chalk outcrop that may have a bearing on its properties as an aquifer.
Completion of the mapping on the Trevose Head (335) sheet in Cornwall permitted an appreciation of the sedimentary features of the predominant Trevose Slate Formation (Eifelian-Frasnian) and its significance in the evolution of the Trevone Basin.
The slate is some 4 kilometres thick, and comprises submillimetric two-laminae couplets of fine siltstone and silty mudstone.
They are interpreted as hemipelagic sediments rather than turbidite flows as previously proposed: there was periodic terrigenous input into still or nearly still water.
Subordinate slumped beds and fine-grained turbidites indicate that intermittent instability accompanied rapid subsidence and fill.
The Plymouth Limestone is also of Eifelian-Frasnian age, and in the south Devon area, where it is about 200 metres thick, a major stromatoporoid reef has been documented.
Pre-reef progradational/aggradational sequences and fore- and back-reef facies have been identified.
Bedded intra-reef facies are represented by infilled surge channels between reef buttresses.
The contrasting features of basin-and-rise facies displayed by the Trevose Slate and the Plymouth Limestone vividly illustrate the continuation in the marine setting of tectonic activity that had been established in the terrestrial Lower Devonian succession.
Metallogenesis studies in south Devon have identified the role of basinal brines as mineralising  agents, and rubidium/strontium isotope studies have established a Triassic age for the widespread lead-zinc-silver 'crosscourse' mineralisation.
Trace-element and samarium-neodymium isotope data for south Devon have enabled three sources of basaltic magma to be recognised.
The Start metabasic schists are mid oceanic-ridge-basalt type, derived from depleted mantle magmas.
The lower Devonian metabasalts are also MORB-like, but show evidence of crustal contamination.
Metabasalts in the Middle and Upper Devonian and Lower Carboniferous were derived from more fertile oceanic-island-basalt type sources in the mantle.
Mapping on the Exeter (325) sheet, as part of the Lyme Bay to Bristol Channel project, was concentrated on the Permian New Red Sandstone (NRS) of the Crediton Trough, and in the mainly Carboniferous Culm shales, sandstones, cherts and dolerites south-west of Exeter, which are overlain unconformably by basal NRS volcanic rocks and breccias.
In the Crediton area the NRS can be divided into two groups: older breccias and sandstones, largely of local derivation, with interbedded basic lavas and ashes; and younger breccias and sandstones with much acid igneous debris.
Geochemical analyses of acid-igneous clasts from the Permian breccias have provided new information about the emplacement and unroofing of the postkinematic Cornubian granite batholith.
Palynological studies of the lower part of the NRS have continued, following the discovery of late Permian pollen at Exeter (last year's Report , p 10).
Further indications of a late Permian age (about 260 to 250 million years) for beds overlying the Exeter volcanics are given by sparse pollen assemblages recovered from boreholes in Exeter, and from localities in the Crediton area.
Re-examination of volcanic rocks within the NRS shows that they fall into two groups: alkali-olivine basalts of within-plate type, and calcalkali lamprophyres.
All have undergone intensive lateritic alteration.
Electron microprobe element maps show the distribution and quantity of alkali feldspar in the fine-grained groundmass of the altered basalts.
Ovoid plagioclase and quartz xenocrysts have a hybrid character, but their origin is still obscure.
Goniatites collected from turbidites of the Upper Carboniferous (Namurian) Crackington Formation of the Exeter area indicate that the bulk of these turbidites are of post-Alportian age.
No fauna of pre-Chokierian age has yet been discovered, and it is possible that the early Namurian succession is condensed in the district.
Ground magnetic surveys were continued in the Exeter district to investigate anomalies seen on aeromagnetic contour plots.
A strong anomaly near Broadclyst is probably caused by the northern edge of a concealed southward-dipping lava sheet.
Investigation of the stratabound manganese mineralisation at the margin of the NRS basin has involved mineralogical and fluid-inclusion studies.
These ores were deposited from basinal brines rich in calcium chloride.
Such brines are now recognised as important mineralising agents for base and precious metals and for fluorite-baryte mineral deposits elsewhere in south west England.
Northern Ireland
BGS continued to provide the scientific staff to the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland on an agency basis for the Department of Economic Development (DED).
The staff of GSNI also coordinate BGS's hydrogeological input to landfill proposals submitted to the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of the Environment (NI).
GSNI continued to monitor mineral exploration proposals and to supervise work being executed under the Mineral Development Act (Northern Ireland) 1969 and the Petroleum (Production) Act (Northern Ireland) 1964, but at a reduced level.
The programme of geological resurvey previously agreed with DED was maintained.
On the Draperstown (26) sheet, mapping of the Dalradian Glenelly Formation (Southern Highland Group) was completed.
The formation consists predominantly of quartz-feldspar-mica psammites and semipelites, and the succession contains minor concordant epidiorite bodies that are mappable.
Deformation is complex: there are at least two early phases of deformation.
Structures associated with these early phases are coplanar with the dominant regional foliation, which strikes ENE–WNW and dips to the north.
A later deformation can be recognised.
It is represented by small-scale open folds that trend NNW–SSE and plunge to the north.
Strata believed to be equivalent to the Upper Palaeozoic Altagoan and Iniscarn Sandstone formations of the adjacent Cookstown (27) sheet were mapped in the vicinity of Draperstown.
These are predominantly coarse-grained red-beds comprising conglomerates and coarse sandstones, but some beds of grey mudstone and siltstone have also been noted.
Contacts with the adjacent Dalradian metasedimentary rocks and Ordovician volcanic, rocks are in part tectonic.
The pebble in the conglomerates and sandstones are predominantly of local provenance, and the overall character of these rocks indicates sediment deposition close to source.
A wide range of morainic and fluvioglacial features were formed during the decay and retreat of the Quaternary ice sheet and the valley glaciers in the South Sperrin area.
A number of kame terraces and transverse moraines in the Glenelly valley indicate that the ice decayed westwards along the valley, then southwards across the col that separates the Glenelly and Moyola valleys.
Large volumes of glacial meltwater poured eastwards onto the extensive plains to the west of Draperstown, and red and blue stone-free mud and silt were deposited in what were probably extensive marginal lakes in late glacial times.
The groundmass mineralogy of lateritised Permian volcanics from Devon cannot be determined by optical petrography but is clearly shown by chemical mapping with an automated electron microprobe.
The map for calcium (250 × 250 micrometres) shows zoned plagioclase (violet), clinopyroxene blue) and calcite (yellow).
The map for potassium shows pot-ash feldspar both in the fine groundmass and as overgrowths on plagioclase.
Quartz fills many of the interstices and is shown in yellow on the map for silicon.
Image processing techniques can be used to add the components together to form a composite image of the rock and to measure the proportions of the various minerals.
On the Omagh (33) sheet, mapping is nearing  completion and this year's work has further marked the importance of the area in understanding the geological evolution of Northern Ireland during the Carboniferous and Permian periods.
Mapping the south-eastern boundary of the Lack inlier confirmed that the contact between the Dalradian metamorphic rocks and the Carboniferous Greenan Sandstone varies from a high angle reverse fault to a northward-dipping thrust.
Major displacement of late Hercynian age has produced tectonic lozenges of silicified sandstones interleaved in places with black graphitic schists.
During the Carboniferous, nonmarine sedimentary basins formed adjacent to dextral strike-slip faults trending NE–SW in both late Viséan and Westphalian B times.
The basin formation was associated with contemporaneous acid volcanism.
Regional uplift in the late Carboniferous is an expression of the importance of transpression associated with south-eastward-directed thrusting.
The NNW–SSE orientation of early Permian nonmarine sedimentary basins reflects a changing tectonic style that may be related to the early opening of the north Atlantic.
Work on developing a computerised database compatible with the BGS borehole database and the GIS network being set up by Ordnance Survey of Northern Ireland continued.
Following the catastrophic collapse of the disused Tennant Salt Mine at Carrickfergus, Co.
Antrim, on 17 October 1990, a review of the stability of the of the remaining abandoned salt mines in Northern Ireland is under way.
Tectonics and database
Staff of the Tectonics and Database Group (bringing together the former Deep Geology Group and the Land Survey database staff) continued to provide much specialist input to the multidisciplinary mapping projects that are a major part of the BGS Core programme.
Group-led projects included the subsurface mapping of the Northumberland, Solway and northern Stainmore basins as the first phase of a rolling programme of overview studies of the Upper Palaeozoic basins of the United Kingdom.
The Permo-Triassic sedimentary rocks of the Solway Basin conceal a major NNE-trending syncline containing a thick succession of Upper Palaeozoic (? late Devonian to late Carboniferous) sedimentary rocks; it is likely that the Coal Measures strata of this syncline are contiguous (beneath younger cover rocks) with those of the Canonbie and West Cumberland coalfields.
Seismic mapping results, incorporating borehole and outcrop data, demonstrate the asymmetric graben structure of the Northumberland Trough and its development during? late Devonian and Carboniferous times.
Interpretation of the database suggests the presence of a northward-dipping Caledonian thrust or shear zone lying beneath the faulted southern margin of the Northumberland Trough.
The compilation of a new tectonic map of Great Britain, Ireland and the surrounding seas began; BGS and the Geological Survey of Ireland are collaborating.
The map, to be published at 1:1.5 000 000, will bring together large amounts of new tectonic data, including results from deep seismic reflection profiling.
Eight unconformity-bounded Palaeozoic stratigraphical units are depicted on the main map, plus several Precambrian tectonostratigraphical packages.
Other major tectonic features are shown, including large-scale syndepositional faults and orogenic structures such as thrust and reverse faults, and folds.
Inferred deep crustal structures will be illustrated  by representative long cross sections.
Smaller-scale inset maps will provide information on metamorphic grade of orogenic terrains and the structure of Phanerozoic sedimentary basins.
The map is being produced digitally and will be available both digitally on disk and on paper.
The database staff in Edinburgh and Keyworth were brought together under one management structure in late 1990.
Through provision of computer databases, hardware, software and training, the new database section has enabled many geologists to use computers to assist them in their work.
Projects using the expertise within the group have included the Falkirk and Stirling environmental geological mapping projects, the East Grampian project and the DOE sponsored West Birmingham and Fuller's Earth projects.
Databases have continued to grow: the Land Survey borehole database now contains about half a million lithological records from just over 90 000 boreholes, and the structural database contains data from more than 11 000 sites.
The initial design phase for a database to hold a lexicon of stratigraphical terms is almost complete.
This database will eventually hold information on all the stratigraphical units (and their interrelationships) that are shown on BGS maps.
The employment of a sandwich student has enabled the development of a database of information about Nottingham's caves and a system for monitoring the progress of 1:10 000 and 1:50 000 geological mapping.
Staff from the group have played a large part in the Logica data architecture and 1:10K digital mapping consultancies, and have worked with staff from other divisions to start developing a BGS wide approach to digital databases.
A preliminary strategy for the improved management of both digital and non-digital data in the group has been produced and is now being assessed.
Investigations into speech recognition have been successfully completed.
A Dragon-Dictate system was evaluated; the results showed that speech recognition was suitable in circumstances where a keyboard could not easily be used, but was not yet sufficiently reliable to replace keyboard entry.
The Tectonics and Database Group has supervised a project on the thermal history of petroliferous basins in parts of the Far East on behalf of the ODA.
A PC-based system has been devised for the prediction of subsurface present-day and palaeotemperatures in sedimentary basins.
Phase 1 of this project was completed with the development of the BGS sediment decompaction and three-dimensional geothermal modelling package HOTPOT.
HOTPOT has been used to model the thermal history of two basins in the Far East; the model has been related to the generation of hydrocarbons.
Regional geophysics
Core programme activities have been focused on interpreting the existing datasets, with an emphasis on picking up evidence of underlying structural controls and increasing our three-dimensional understanding of the crust.
These studies are underpinned by continuing improvements in the operation of the geophysical databases and by further developments in computer software for interactive display and interpretation of data.
A significant part of Regional Geophysics staff time was also devoted to support of geological mapping projects.
Field surveys undertaken to investigate specific problems included use of the 'deep sounding' capability of the EM42 time-domain equipment.
Geophysical work covered 16 separate areas, and details of the results, where appropriate, are included in descriptions of the relevant projects.
Commissions continue to be a source of outside funding, with international projects undertaken in Africa, continental Europe, Hong Kong, Indonesia, New Zealand and Yemen.
Sales of geophysical data were also maintained and a business venture to market geophysical services to the exploration industry was established.
Database and computing activities Effective methods for the storage and retrieval of information are essential when a variety of large datasets is to be handled, and the maintenance and extension of such systems has continued.
The aeromagnetic database was augmented by the incorporation of a number of digital survey sets, and improvements were made to its structure in order to accommodate different map projections and additional magnetic field parameters: all records now include locations expressed as geographical coordinates as well in a local grid system.
A digital index to geophysical borehole logs has been developed, giving access to information on the status of digital logs and the location of paper records.
A large number of logged water wells are now included in the database.
An index to local geophysical surveys is nearly complete, and techniques for dealing with the digital field data, including their retrieval and presentation as profiles and maps, have been proved in a pilot study.
The facilities available to users of the Vax computers at Keyworth have been expanded, and their implementation on the Murchison House Vax is in progress.
Software developments have included upgrades to the 2D colour mapping package (COLMAP) and the 2.5D gravity and magnetic modelling programme (GRAVMAG) which together form the basis for much of the interpretational work within the group; a version of GRAVMAG is now also available for PC usage.
Additional utilities include programmes for estimating source locations and depths using Euler's method, and for generating raster-mask files for inclusion on graphics displays.
The geothermal modelling package has been used to model the thermal history of two basins in the Far East.
The plot shows temperatures at a specific time.
Three-dimensional integrated geoscience mapping This project brings together research on both the handling of geological information and the combined modelling of a variety of geophysical  datasets.
The long-term objective is to develop techniques for displaying a unified three-dimensional representation of the geology, in which the interpretation based on data from surface mapping and borehole evidence is constrained by interpretations of gravity, magnetic, seismic reflection, electrical conductivity and any other relevant geophysical data.
Commercial packages to display and construct geological models were assessed, and a workshop on three-dimensional geological modelling, held at Keyworth, brought together a variety of groups dealing with different aspects of the problem.
Development of the inhouse MGIS-3D (Multiparameter Geophysical Interpretation System) software continued on Apollo 3D graphics workstations, in particular to enhance the display of geophysical datasets as illuminated three-dimensional surfaces.
This capability provides even greater insight into the structural significance of anomalies and trends than conventional image-based systems do.
In addition, both surface and downhole geology can be displayed.
Significant progress was made in establishing a digital database for a pilot study based on the Grantham area.
Geological maps have been digitised together with the lithology and stratigraphy derived from over 1250 boreholes and geophysical logs from over 70 boreholes.
Collaboration has been established with the Ordnance Survey on the use of their 1:10 000 digital terrain models and with the Polytechnic of Wales on geological  spatial modelling.
Regional geophysical interpretations
A structural analysis of regional gravity and aeromagnetic data from northern Britain has been completed, following on from an earlier study of southern Britain.
Lineaments highlighted by imaging techniques are evidence of the nature of Caledonian orogenesis, and variations in image texture can be related to specific geological terrains.
Depending on the nature of the rock units involved, structures may be better expressed in either the gravity or the magnetic data.
Thus, aeromagnetic anomalies support models of about 160 kilometres of sinistral strike slip movement on the Great Glen Fault, while strong gravity gradients from the islands of Mull and Skye probably indicate an abrupt thickening of the Caledonian nappe pile as a result of thrusting.
Regional geophysical data of the east Grampian area are displayed as colour-shaded relief images: left Bouguer gravity anomaly field illuminated from the north-west above and from the north-east below, and right aeromagnetic field reduced-to-pole and illuminated from the north-west above and from the north-east below.
The white lines depict the outlines of the Cairngorm and immediately adjacent granites.
A start has been made on a study of the Iapetus Convergence Zone, which is designed to complement local investigations in the Southern Uplands and northern England, and to provide the regional setting for them.
Modelling of the deep magnetic boundaries has provided good correlations with reflectivity boundaries picked up on deep seismic surveys, and images of the data and their derivatives have suggested the presence of major structural boundaries, both parallel and oblique to what is conventionally taken to be the Iapetus suture, which may be the margins of terrains assembled as part of a broader zone.
Colour-shaded relief maps of eastern England, illuminated from the north, show Bouguer gravity anomalies above and magnetic anomalies below.
In the potential field structural synthesis map far right, the colours indicate Bouguer anomaly values (red indicates high values, and blue low values) Gravity and magnetic lineaments are shown in yellow and green respectively.
A contract for the Belgian Geological Survey to generate a set of shaded-relief images and to define structural trends from their aeromagnetic data was completed.
Additional collaborative work being undertaken is a study of trends in the concealed basement of eastern England, to help in understanding the structure of the United Kingdom-Brabant Massif as a whole.
New colour and grey-tone images have resolved arcuate lineaments into separate south-east and east-south-east components: they indicate that the boundary of the Midlands Microcraton is more irregular than previously supposed.
These trends predate the Upper Palaeozoic cover and support the view that Lower Carboniferous sedimentation was controlled by the reactivation  of structural discontinuities in the underlying basement.
Integrated modelling of gravity and magnetic data along the Fennolora and Polar profiles has been completed in collaboration with colleagues in Denmark and Sweden as part of the European Geotraverse Project.
Refraction seismic interpretations for the Fennolora line provided the basis of a model of the broad-scale structure within which specific upper crustal features could be interpreted.
Seismic evidence of large relief on the base of the crust was not evident in the gravity data, suggesting that a high-density (eclogitic) layer is present in the lower part of the crust.
The final model derived for the Polar profile was consistent with five independent datasets (structural geology, gravity, magnetic reflection, seismic, and electromagnetic), and demonstrates unambiguously that the north-east border of the Lapland Granulite Belt dips gently to the north-east beneath the Inari Terrain to depths of 15 to 20 kilometres.
Borehole breakout study The state of rock stress within the United Kingdom is being studied as part of an on-going programme funded by the CEC using borehole deformation (breakouts) as an indicator of the orientation of the principal horizontal rock stresses in situ.
The average orientation of N138°E obtained for the United Kingdom is consistent with that of N141°E given for western Europe as a whole, which relates to a NW–SE compressive stress associated with plate-tectonic movements.
In detail, the results are less uniform: there seems to be a bimodal trend in the Midlands, where TMOS staff are investigating the formation of coal cleat (a fracture system perpendicular to bedding in coals) and its relationship to other joint sets, and to regional and local in-situ rock stress.
Marine geophysics The final phase of the continental shelf programme funded by the Department of Energy included the integration of data from other organisations' marine gravity surveys with the BGS dataset.
There is now almost complete coverage of the continental shelf between latitudes 48° and 62°N, and three geophysical maps at 1:1 000 000 (covering the North Sea, northern Britain, and Ireland and southern Britain) are in preparation.
Integrated Geophysical Surveys IGS is a commercial service that has been established within BGS to market advanced geophysical survey, processing and interpretational facilities.
This project was identified by the recent Price Waterhouse study as one of the best opportunities BGS had to exploit its data and expertise.
The essential components to be provided comprise:
licensing of digital United Kingdom geophysical data-sets;
full geophysical consultancy services;
advanced processing, interpretation and display services;
comprehensive geophysical survey capabilities;
sales of geophysical software.
The principal effort to date has been directed to setting up the operational structure, preparing marketing material, and general business development, including joint ventures with partners in industry.
Geological and geophysical can be displayed in various ways: a three-dimensional colour-shaded perspective view of the magnetic field of the East Midlands left vividly displays variations in the field.
Draping a 3.5-dimensional colour-shaded perspective view of the magnetic field in colour over a relief representation of the Bouguer gravity anomalies shows correlations between high and low anomalies in the two fields.
Petroleum geology, geophysics and offshore surveys
A wide variety of work, from outer space to inner space, is now carried out in the newly restructured division (PGGOS), including studies of solar and geomagnetic activity in the upper atmosphere, coastal and offshore geology, hydrocarbons on land and offshore, biostratigraphy, sedimentology and mineralogy, and earthquakes.
The diversity of expertise in the division provides a unique opportunity to study the behaviour of the earth in theory, to make practical scientific and applied geological investigations (including fieldwork), and to develop new technology.
The range of customers using the services of the division reflects the diversity of activity.
They include government departments and public and private industry.
A number of research programmes support the Core activities of the Survey.
Most of these programmes are funded through DES, though some have attracted funding from industry.
Petroleum geology
Funding from a variety of sources is being developed to support petroleum geology and related studies within BGS.
At present the programme is supported largely by the Department of Energy (DEn) which retains the Survey to interpret the seismic and well data that oil companies supply to DEn under the various regulations governing petroleum and pipelines.
BGS also makes regional evaluations and prospectivity assessments for DEn and manages the seismic and well-log data bases, and the curation of core and sample material.
The results of all of this work is confidential to DEn, but released well material can be examined in the laboratories at the core store in Edinburgh that BGS manages for DEn.
New projects supported by individual oil companies and consortia from industry will begin shortly.
Systematic offshore surveys
The last few sheets of the 1:250 000 reconnaissance geological map series are being printed and published.
A total of 314 maps (93 per cent) have been published, and the last of the remaining 22 maps in press should be published during 1992.
The summary map series at 1:1 000 000, is also nearing completion.
The two sheets of the sea-bed sediment map have been published, the two solid geology sheets are in press, and compilation of the two Quaternary geology sheets is in its final stage.
Work is now well advanced on the regional reports that describe the geology shown on the offshore maps.
The reports are analogous with the popular British Regional Geology guides on land, and the first of the series to be published,The geology of the Moray Firth , has been well received.
The information in the reports is derived from the BGS regional surveys, released oil company data and published material.
Where significant new or better quality data have become available, revision of some of the early 1:250 000 geology maps has been started.
Maps in the eastern Irish Sea area have been updated, and work has begun on a review, incorporating newly released commercial data, of the maps from the Moray Firth.
Plans are now well advanced to investigate the United Kingdom designated waters around the Rockall Trough and Plateau.
A desk study to establish a basic structural and stratigraphic framework for the UK sector of the Rockall continental margin has been made and a work programme including the acquisition of data has been designed.
A consortium from the oil industry with BGS is being established, hopefully for three years, to support the work, and detailed objectives are now being finalised.
The proposal centres on an integrated geophysical and geological survey of the Rockall Trough and broader aspects of the United Kingdom sector of the Rockall continental margin.
The Rockall Trough was probably initiated as one of a series of late Palaeozoic/early Mesozoic rift basins on the continental margin west of Britain.
Exploration of this basin has been greatly hindered by the presence of lower Tertiary volcanics that on seismic profiles largely obscure the underlying geology of the basin.
However, there is evidence to suggest that the volcanic sequence may be thin or absent south of 57° 30'N on the western margin of the Rockall Trough, where there is known to be a block-faulted margin structure.
The aim of the project is to undertake a structural and stratigraphic investigation on the basin margin.
A rapid reconnaissance survey of the northern part of the trough will also be undertaken to delineate the extent of the volcanic sequence within the basin and to identify potential 'windows' through which the sub-Tertiary geology can be studied.
Additionally, two regional transect lines are being included: they will traverse the margin in a bid to define the crustal structure better, and to improve our understanding of the tectonic framework.
The shallow drilling programme is central to the systematic survey of the continental shelf.
Over 550 boreholes have already been drilled and another 18 holes (funded by a consortium of 13 oil companies) were drilled in 1990, concentrated in the area west of the Outer Hebrides Platform and east of the extensive basalts that cover the outer shelf and North Rockall Trough.
The boreholes were drilled into windows of Mesozoic rock and provide evidence of the sub-Tertiary geology of the North Rockall Trough which is now being explored by a number of oil companies.
The programme also included drill sites on the Anton Dohrn Seamount and Rosemary Bank.
Coastal geology
The importance of the coastal zone has been recognised for some time, and a new group has now been formed in BGS in response to growing concern for the environments under pressure in this potentially fragile area.
The group calls on the experience of land and marine geologists, sedimentologists and coastal engineers.
The large ships used during the BGS offshore reconnaissance geological mapping programme could not approach close inshore, and so there is around the United Kingdom coast a largely unexplored area stretching in places several kilometres offshore.
The strategic aim of the new group is to map this area, linking land and shelf survey data, and thus to provide comprehensive geological cover for the coastal zone.
The group will investigate coastal processes and assess these in the context of late Quaternary and Holocene conditions.
The practical applications of the work will be to provide information for coastal planning and engineering studies, to identify marine aggregate resources, to give advice on the siting of outfalls, cable and pipeline routes, and to carry out geochemical baseline studies and investigate sediment contamination using information from the geological survey.
National Offshore Data Archive
The national archive of shallow seismic and sample information held by BGS mainly comprises data collected during the Regional Mapping Programme, but new data from a variety of sources are continually being acquired.
The complete archive is being reorganised to allow improved access to the data held and a quicker response time to enquiries.
In particular, BGS is seeking permission from commercial companies to publish an index of data held, though ownership will still reside with the original company.
We hope that BGS will be able to negotiate conditional access to these data.
The number of sea-bed samples from surveys made by the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office also continues to increase: it has almost doubled compared with last year.
As well as an index of data, BGS holds many sample analyses on computer under the Oracle database-management system.
These include geochemical data that now cover the whole of the North Sea.
Samples have been collected from an even wider area covering the whole of the United Kingdom continental shelf, but these have yet to be analysed and the results entered on the database.
Work is beginning on a geotechnical database, extending the current holding of shear-strength measurements to include values of moisture content, liquid limit and a variety of further data.
In software development, there has been further evolution of the mapping packages ALLPLOT and GRIDMAP, including publication of up-to-date documentation and improvement of the online help facility.
These programs provide a user-friendly environment for the production of computer-drawn sample-site and track maps as well as posted-value and contour charts, using appropriate gridding packages such as ISM and Unimap.
They are being adopted as the BGS standard map-plotting packages, and provide a powerful, geologist-oriented tool Other software developments include a digital data index that allows users to query the availability of sample data in an area of their choice.
The index is held on an IBM PC disk and is designed for oil companies and other would-be users of BGS data.
A report and data package was produced and sold to the hydrocarbons industry following the Department of Energy's announcement of a Frontier Licensing Round offshore of north-west Scotland.
It included new interpretations and maps derived from BGS open-file archives and provided a geological framework to help companies to plan surveys and prepare bids.
Operational capability and commercial opportunity
The operational capability established during the Regional Mapping Programme has been further developed through a range of scientific and commercial projects.
A feasibility study has been undertaken to determine the future development strategy for the BGS deep-tow boomer and plans are now being developed to enhance the performance and flexibility of the system.
BGS supported three NERC research vessel cruises.
During the Plymouth Marine Laboratories survey from RRS Challenger of gas-leakage phenomena from pockmarks in the North Sea, very high-quality data were acquired from BGS's PC-based digital seismic recording system.
The data were processed with the Seismic Kernel System (SKS) seismic package.
BGS operations are not always restricted to the marine environment: during February, a surface-tow boomer survey was made in support of a multiuniversity research project on the environmental history of Malham Tam in water depths never more than four metres.
The BGS rockdrill was further upgraded.
All the operating functions are now controlled by a subsea microprocessor, and the capability of the system has been increased to water depths of up to 2000 metres.
The upgraded system was successfully used on a cable-route survey across the Irish Sea for a commercial client.
BGS drilled 18 boreholes west of the Outer Hebrides for the shallow drilling programme described above (see Systematic offshore surveys).
Other surveys undertaken for commercial clients included high-resolution seismic profiling, gravity and sea-bed sampling, and coring surveys in the United Kingdom, the Middle and Far East, and South Africa.
Civil engineering and mineral extraction firms, and the hydrocarbons and power industries, all employed BGS during the year.
Some of the projects included laboratory analyses and interpretations of the data acquired, and the addition of sample material, held in confidence, to the BGS archive.
The offshore aggregate resource assessments funded by the Department of the Environment, The Crown Estate and NERC continued with a geophysical survey off the Humber Estuary which will be followed by a sampling programme in 1991.
Two BGS engineers visited Guangzhou (Canton) to train Chinese personnel in the use of sea-bed vibrocoring equipment provided to the Marine Division of the Geological Survey of China under the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
The equipment was commissioned on the support ship De Yue in the Pearl River prior to sea trials in the Pearl River Mountain Basin.
The sea trials, which were successful, were followed by a series of lectures and practical training at the Guangzhou Survey Base with a young and enthusiastic team of geologists and technicians.
In 1989 a BGS engineer was seconded for six months to the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) in Texas to work on the development of a downhole vibropercussive corer.
This year land-based prototype trials were followed by sea trials during ODP Leg 133 on board the drilling vessel Joides Resolution off north-east Australia.
The prototype tools gave encouraging results in the limited time available, and the equipment will be developed further.
This new vibropercussive technique promises to be a solution to the problem, posed in many parts of the world, of successfully coring fine-grained well-sorted sand sequences.
Chinese marine geologists and engineers from the 2nd Brigade on board the support ship De Yue in the Pearl River were trained in the operation of the vibrocorer that BGS had supplied.
Marine surveys to underpin research
A number of ongoing research programmes underpin Core programmes of offshore investigations.
BGS staff carry out some of these programmes; others are cooperative  projects between university groups and BGS, or in which BGS staff supervise research students.
A special study, based on the Quaternary mapping programme, has highlighted the control exerted by ice sheets on the sedimentological and morphological development of the area of the continental shelf and deeper waters.
Sedimentary models of glacially influenced shelf/slope/basin-plain environments in a passive continental-margin setting have been developed.
The next step is to compare this area of the United Kingdom with other glaciated mid-to high-latitude continental margins in both passive and active tectonic settings.
Submarine end moraines preserved on the outer part of the Hebrides and West Shetland shelves suggest that glacial ice extended out to the shelf break on at least two occasions.
The end moraines are now preserved as widespread flat or hummocky mounds.
Seismic data show that their internal structure is chaotic, and boreholes reveal that the dominant sediment derived from the glaciers is a poorly sorted stony clay.
Most of the sediment was probably deposited in front of glaciers that were calving icebergs directly into the sea.
When the ice sheet extended most widely, near the shelf edge, processes at its margin played an important part in the construction of the apron of sediment being deposited on the continental slope.
On the northern Hebrides slope the sediment apron is up to 200 metres thick and is composed largely of an amalgamated sequence of mound-shaped mass-flow deposits.
These consist of debris-flows composed of unsorted stony sands and clays with turbidite sands and muds: they are resedimented glaciomarine deposits from the ice-margin front.
The accumulation of debris flows in this area has caused the shelf-edge to have prograded seawards up to 5 kilometres in places.
On the lower part of the northern Hebrides Slope and in the basin plain of the northern Rockall Trough the debris flows are buried beneath a cover of mud that was derived from the glacier front, together with drop-stones that melted out of icebergs drifting in the area.
To the north, however, at the south-western end of the Faeroe-Shetland Channel, the stronger bottom currents have locally exposed debris-flow sediments at the sea bed.
Shallow cores show that the pebbly sands and clays that came originally came from the ice-sheet contain shells that lived in the shallower waters of the continental shelf.
Interbedded with these are glacier-derived muds containing the skeletons of small pelagic organisms, and mounds of sediments that have been accumulated by currents flowing along the continental slope.
These two types of fine-grained sediment are typical of deeper-water settings.
In this area, however, during the Quaternary they were invaded from time to time by thick wedges of debris flows.
The Jurassic palynology of north west Scotland, principally Skye, has been investigated to provide a reference section for offshore exploration in the Western Margin (the Rockall Trough to the Faeroe-Shetland Channel), to provide biostratigraphical data for the Land Survey, and to test the existing palynomorph zonal schemes for the English Jurassic.
These are dinoflagellate cysts from north-west Scotland.
Chytroeisphaeridia hyalina from the Staffin Bay Formation (Lower Callovian), taken using phase contrast at a magnification of 480 above, and Scriniodinium crystallinum from the Staffin Shale Formation Lower Oxfordian), Trotternish, Skye, at a magnification of 575 below.
Bottom currents were probably weak throughout the glacial episodes, but evidence from both the northern Rockall Trough and the  Faeroe -Shetland Channel suggests that the bottom currents became more vigorous at the onset of an interglacial regime as temperatures increased.
The core section shows light coloured muds and sandy muds from BGS offshore borehole 88/7 on the Hebridean margin.
The sediments are early to middle Pleistocene (about 730 000 years old), and were recovered from 75.5 metres below the sea bed.
They were deposited under glaciomarine conditions and show the effects of bioturbation: a large Planolites (P) trace has been reburrowed by later Chondrites (C).
There is a vertical Scolithes (S) burrow.
The large clast of igneous rock (D) is a glacial dropstone.
These results are supported by a detailed study of a borehole from the Hebridean margin.
This shows that there was significant  deposition of largely fine-grained sediments during the Elsterian and Weichselian glaciations but there is no evidence of large-scale deposition during other glacial periods or during interglacials.
The study reveals a fragmentary history of complex deposition and supports the hypothesis that there is major deposition on the shelf edge and slope only during periods of maximum glacial advance across the shelf.
The slope studies have revealed abundant evidence of sediment instability on the continental slope north and west of Scotland.
Submarine landslides from Neogene times on have been recorded.
Instability was greatest at periods of high sedimentation at the onset of deglaciation, when ice sheets reached or may even have extended beyond the shelf break.
Detailed studies of volcanic ash (tephra) deposits have provided new evidence allowing the correlation of late-Glacial and Holocene sequences from the ocean across the slope and shelf and onto the land.
Of particular importance if correct is the discovery of what the researchers believe to be the Saksunarvatn volcanic ash in southern North Sea cores and, by German workers, in lake sediments in north Germany.
If the identification is confirmed there is now a precisely dated time marker that can be followed from its source in Iceland across the North Atlantic and the North Sea and onto the European landmass.
Detailed geochemical studies of this and other ash horizons have provided evidence of a number of tephra deposits that can be used to provide chronostatigraphic information and new data on the size and activity of the Icelandic volcanic province.
Investigation of the southern North Sea Quaternary succession continues.
In this project, which is partly funded by the CEC, more than fifty scientists from Denmark, Germany, The Netherlands, Belgium and the United Kingdom are led by BGS.
The results of the project have shown that during the late Neogene and early to mid-Pleistocene a huge delta system developed in the southern North Sea basin.
The sediments were derived initially from Baltic rivers and then mainly from the Rhine, Meuse, Scheldt systems with minor contributions from British rivers.
Seismic evidence of the internal structure of the delta suggests that over thirty events can be identified across the region.
These are related to any one or a combination of eustatic changes in sea level, local changes in sediment input, and changes in basin subsidence.
The borehole and seismic data show that the depocentre of the basin migrated westwards during the early to mid-Pleistocene.
By this time the shoreline of the delta lay close to the present position of the United Kingdom/Dutch median line
At the end of the mid-Pleistocene the onset of the Elsterian glaciation brought major changes.
There was a significant fall in sea level, and huge valley systems were carved beneath an ice sheet that extended over much of the delta plain.
Similar but less pronounced events during the Saalian and Weichselian glaciations resulted in the complex sequence of dominantly glaciomarine sediments of the southern North Sea upper Pleistocene succession.
As part of the project, offshore buried late-Glacial and Holocene peat deposits are being studied in an attempt to trace the retreat of the north European coastline from the central North Sea to its present position following the Flandrian rise in sea-level.
The graptolites Monograptus triangulatus (Harkness) above  and Diplograptus magnus (H Lapworth) below are characteristic species from the Llandovery (lower Silurian) of central Wales.
As each persisted in the geological record for only about one million years, the presence of either, even in isolation, can give excellent biostratigraphical resolution.
Graptolites in the thick turbidite sequences of central Wales are often finely preserved as three dimensional moulds, sometimes even with the original periderm.
Such preservation greatly aids identification and correlation, and in consequence much new information on the morphology and evolution of this important fossil group is becoming available.
A study of Holocene sediment off the north-eastern coast of England has shown that heavy-metal pollution between 15 and 20 kilometres offshore has increased over the last 500 years.
The content of copper, lead and zinc in near-surface sediments have risen, and palaeontological studies have shown that there were marked changes in water temperature and coastal currents during the Holocene.
Part of a high resolution seismic line shows Miocene, Pliocene and Pleistocene sediments in the southern North Sea.
The line was shot jointly by the Dutch Geological Survey and BGS, and was processed by BGS.
The seismic data were collected as part of the multinational study, funded by the CEC and led by BGS, of the Quaternary geology of the southern North Sea.
Biostratigraphy, sedimentology and mineralogy
Specialist studies in biostratigraphy, sedimentology and mineralogy provide essential stratigraphic support for many Core activities both on land and offshore.
Palaeontological work has largely been concerned with Mesozoic and Tertiary studies in support of the petroleum geology programme for the Department of Energy and with particular problems of Lower Palaeozoic stratigraphy.
Graptolites are being used extensively to provide small scale correlation in Ordovician and Silurian strata in Wales, the Lake District and the Southern Uplands of Scotland.
They are the only common macrofossils in the basinal turbidite terrain that underlies the greater part of these regions.
They are extinct colonial  hemichordates, characterised by some of the most rapid rates of speciation and extinction known from the animal kingdom.
Currently, biostratigraphic intervals averaging 500 000 million years are routinely recognised in the Silurian; those in the Ordovician are somewhat larger.
Graptolite taxonomy has by no means been fully resolved even after 100 years of research, and new discoveries are still being made.
Current advances in knowledge of graptolite morphology and distribution are leading to the recognition of further subdivisions in the Ordovician and the Silurian.
The advances in graptolite biostratigraphy provide an accurate calibration for parallel work on acritarchs and chitinozoa from the same Lower Palaeozoic sediments.
Sedimentological studies have concentrated on elucidating the geometry of sand bodies in the North Sea, both as part of the programme funded by the Department of Energy and in response to the needs of commercial firms.
Oil-industry funding for research into sandstone provenance and correlation using heavy-mineral analysis has remained high: a number of projects are funded by oil companies.
Research has concentrated on Jurassic and Palaeocene hydrocarbon reservoir sequences and has made use of both conventional techniques and the more advanced geochemical techniques pioneered by BGS.
Whichever technique is used, there is clear evidence that stratigraphic variation in provenance provides a firm mineralogical basis for correlating sandstones and sets important constraints on possible locations of source areas, sediment transport pathways and evolution of depositional systems.
Concurrently with the industry-funded programme there is a BGS project to establish whether sediment mineralogy can indicate which basement massif the sediment was derived from.
Such massifs are the ultimate source of sandstones in the United Kingdom.
In the first phase of the study, present-day sediment from rivers that drain the Moine and Lewisian terrains of northern Scotland has been analysed.
This has shown that the two areas produce distinctive mineral suites that can be used to trace the source of ancient sediments.
There is good evidence that sediment from these terrains is a component of several sandstones formed from sources in the United Kingdom, although few sandstones are derived solely from the Moine or the Lewisian.
Monitoring seismic activity
A magnitude 5.1 earthquake, one of the largest in Britain this century, occurred near Bishop's Castle in Shropshire on 2 April 1990.
Shaking was felt from Ayrshire to Cornwall and Kent to Dublin, but damage was limited mainly to roof slates and chimney stacks.
A dense network of seismograph stations installed around the epicentre detected only six small aftershocks all within six weeks of the main shock.
These observations, though few, have provided critical evidence of the depth of the causative fault (14–15 kilometres), while evidence from the main shock showed the fault to be a strike-slip fault.
Main shock and aftershocks together demonstrated that the fault runs north-south.
No geological features visible at the surface correlate with the fault, which is characteristic of intraplate earthquakes.
The earthquake differed from most intraplate earthquakes of this size, however, in being followed by few after-shocks, in contrast to the magnitude 5.4 earthquake on the Lleyn Peninsula in 1984.
This suggests that its stress drop was relatively high, which is consistent with the frequencies of vibration recorded, which were high compared to those of the Lleyn earthquake.
Within the United Kingdom monitoring network, eight low-gain seismographs maintained for such large earthquakes were able to record the peak values of ground motion throughout Britain.
These records provided a rare opportunity to study the attenuation of strong seismic waves as a means of assessing seismic hazard.
A nationwide questionnaire on the effects of the shaking produced 9000 replies, which provided further information on ground motion effects.
While the Bishop's Castle earthquake does not exactly resemble any previously recorded earthquake, it is comparable with others in the general area of Herefordshire, notably in 1863, 1896 and 1926, all of which were around magnitude 5 on the Richter scale.
During the year, other earthquakes were felt, notably in Shrewsbury, the Channel Islands and the coal-mining areas of Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Glamorgan and Clackmannanshire.
An abandoned salt mine near Carrickfergus, Northern Ireland, showed signs of activity in September and early October 1990, and finally collapsed on 19 October, causing a depression 200 metres in diameter and 7 metres deep [see photograph on page 19].
BGS seismographs in Northern Ireland and south-west Scotland recorded the collapse, which was magnitude 2.5.
The map shows the felt area of the magnitude 5.1 earthquake of 2 April 1990 with MSK intensity values.
The epicentre was near Bishops Castle in Shropshire, but the shaking was felt as far afield as the intensity 2 area.
There was only minor structural damage to roofs and chimneys.
Worldwide, two devastating earthquakes dominated the news.
On 20 June 1990 a magnitude 7.6 earthquake in north-west Iran caused the deaths of 50 000 people; 100 000 were injured and 400 000 last their homes.
On 16 July a magnitude 7.8 earthquake  in the Philippines killed 1600 people and caused landslides that disrupted communications between the north of Luzon and the capital, Manila, in the south.
The whole country's economy was affected.
With continued support from a consortium led by DOE and NERC, the United Kingdom seismic network of over 100 stations, sited at remote locations to minimise the effects of man-made noise and stretching from Shetland to Jersey, has been extended into Pembrokeshire.
In Cornwall and the Midland Valley of Scotland it has been upgraded to a new digital standard, developed with Bergen University, which permits telephone access to sensors in these areas from anywhere in the United Kingdom or overseas.
The first of a new generation of strong-motion seismic data-acquisition systems has been developed, and commissioned at Hunterston power station for Scottish Nuclear.
A customised robust variant of it has been designed for the Ministry of Defence under quality-assurance procedures.
Data have been exchanged with international seismological agencies based in Boulder (Colorado), Newbury (England) and Strasbourg (France), and also with Norway and participants in an EC exchange network comprising Ireland, Denmark, The Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, France and Germany.
Outside the EC there has been direct scientific collaboration with scientists in California, in Memphis, Tennessee, and in Moscow.
A seismic hazard study has been made in collaboration with planners in Nepal.
Shear waves in cracked anisotropic rock
The Edinburgh Anisotropy Project, supported by a consortium of oil companies, has made several fundamental advances in processing shear waves in vertical seismic profiles and reflection surveys.
These techniques allow the anisotropic parameters to be estimated more reliably and computed a hundred times as fast as previously.
Oil companies have provided datasets for testing these new techniques.
Observations of temporal changes in the behaviour of shear waves before earthquakes, which can be interpreted in terms of stress changes, are arousing considerable controversy.
Several appropriate datasets are being examined for further temporal changes.
Magnetic observatory operations
The ideal magnetic observatory produces high-accuracy data in real time.
The United Kingdom observatories at Lerwick, Eskdalemuir and Hartland are now operating close to this ideal as a result of continued developments in instrumentation, communications and data-processing software.
A new instrument for vector field measurements, comprising a proton magnetometer mounted in a two-axis coil system, has been designed and built, and is under test.
The data provided will enable corrections to observatory data, previously made months in arrears, to be applied hourly.
Data transmission is handled by a dedicated IBM-PC that telephones each observatory every three hours, seven days a week, retrieving and transferring the latest data to the BGS Vax computer at Murchison House, Edinburgh.
Within minutes, a fully automated procedure passes the data through stringent quality-control procedures, and data derivatives, including a forecast of geomagnetic activity, are produced.
These are immediately available to customers on the Geomagnetism Information and Forecast Service (GIFS), accessible over the JANET network.
Using the experience gained in automating the United Kingdom observatories, BGS is now building state-of-the-art magnetic observatory systems for sale.
The Automatic Remote Geomagnetic Observatory (ARGO), is the latest design.
ARGO is controlled by an IBM-PC, and will operate in a wide range of environments, storing data locally on floppy disk or transmitting the values to a collection site via telephone, radio or satellite links.
An ARGO system has been sold to Hungary, and interest has been shown by other European countries intending to modernise their observatories.
Geomagnetic modelling
BGS collects geomagnetic data from sources world wide to use in the computation of models of the global geomagnetic field.
Models have been produced for the world magnetic charts, the navigational charts published by the British and American naval authorities, and for the International Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF), widely used in science and commerce.
The accuracy of global field models depends on the worldwide network of magnetic observatories.
In many third-world countries observatories are under threat of closure owing to shortages of funds, and in other countries equipment is becoming unserviceable.
A consortium of companies in the oil industry, the IGRF Users' Group, recognising the importance to the accuracy of global field models of data from third-world observatories, is funding a programme to equip some of them with systems built by BGS.
In 1991, equipment, similar to the ARGO system, will be deployed in Nigeria and Kenya.
An important application of global geomagnetic field models is in directional drilling for oil production.
A magnetometer is installed in a down-well tool in a special non-magnetic section of the drill-string, and its output is recorded as it moves along the well.
The path of the well can be traced provided the geomagnetic field at the drill site is known accurately.
The field value is computed from a global model.
The industry leaders are pressing all operators to adopt a standard geomagnetic field model for use in the North Sea, and the Department of Energy is supporting the modelling activities of BGS.
Global models take no account of magnetic fields caused by the magnetisation of local rocks (the crustal anomaly field), nor of the regular daily variations in the global field, nor of disturbances in the field.
Oil industry users demand the highest accuracy in magnetic reference, and have contracted BGS to study methods of modelling these phenomena in order to improve upon the field estimates provided by global models.
For the North Sea region the daily variation can be modelled accurately taking into account seasonal changes, except during periods of moderate and severe disturbance.
At any particular time accuracy can be further improved by using the detailed information on field changes recorded at the United Kingdom observatories.
Scottish Nuclear's power station at Hunterston is the first site at which one of the strong-motion seismic-event recorders, recently developed by BGS, has been installed.
Aeromagnetic surveys over the United Kingdom and the North Sea provide plentiful data on the intensity of the crustal anomaly field down to wavelengths of about 1 kilometre, but not on its direction.
Theoretical methods for transforming total intensity anomalies to vector-field anomalies have been studied.
Case studies for areas near Edinburgh and in East Anglia, regions with quite different geology, have been made.
The results of applying a transformation procedure to the aeromagnetic data were compared with vector measurements over dense networks in the two areas, made specially for the study.
There is very good agreement between the predictions and the observations, and the method has been used to produce charts showing short wavelength variation in compass heading over the Gulf of Mexico.
Forecasting geomagnetic disturbances
The Sun continuously emits charged particles that stream into space as the solar wind.
Eruptions on the Sun inject high-speed particles into the solar wind, and these can cause geomagnetic disturbances on reaching the Earth.
Magnetic storms occurring close to solar maximum are often isolated events because the solar disturbances responsible for them are intense but shortlived.
During the declining phase of the solar cycle, however, longer-lived solar structures, coronal holes, are important sources of geomagnetic activity.
These rotate with the Sun, so there is a tendency for high levels of geomagnetic activity to recur at intervals of 27 days, the solar rotation period.
This is a helpful property for prediction.
The coloured grid right shows variations of magnetic disturbance during the last two sunspot cycles between 1976 and 1990.
Each cell in the grid shows the level of magnetic disturbance during the day, coded red for high activity and blue for low activity.
The data are plotted in 27-day strips, to highlight those disturbances that recur with the solar rotation period.
Recurrent activity, which shows up as patches of red, is most common during the declining part of the sunspot cycle.
The maximum in the current solar cycle has passed, but both solar and geomagnetic activity remain high.
The Geomagnetism Group issues daily geomagnetic activity forecasts, making use of the most recent information on solar activity, and operates a real-time geomagnetic disturbance monitoring service for commercial customers.
The total-intensity anomaly field and the calculated-declination diagrams below, left and right illustrate an area 55 kilometres square centred on Bathgate, near Edinburgh.
The values range from -200 nanoteslas, shown as blue, to +500 nanoteslas, red.
A method for transforming the field intensity anomalies, which are scalar quantities, into estimates of the vector field anomalies has been developed and applied to the data for Bathgate.
The results are shown in the calculated-declination diagram, in which compass headings vary from 7.9° (blue) to 6.7° west of true north.
In many commercial applications the geomagnetic field is used for directional reference: field values for a particular location are computed using a global or regional model of the field.
During magnetic storms the geomagnetic field can differ very greatly from the modelled value: compass heading can change by several degrees, for example.
In other applications magnetic storms have more direct physical effects.
Rapid changes in the field cause induced currents to f ow in power distribution networks, and if the induced currents are strong enough the supply of power can be disrupted.
Oil pipelines are subject to corrosion where induced currents flow between the pipes and earth.
Short-wave radio communications are disrupted and the positional accuracy obtainable from satellite navigation systems is degraded because of the disturbed state of the ionosphere.
During magnetic storms the intense electrical currents that f ow in the upper atmosphere heat the air, causing it to expand.
The drag on low-altitude spacecraft increases.
Spacecraft electronics systems are vulnerable to damage by high-energy charged particles and are at particular risk during magnetic storms.
The European Space Agency has commissioned BGS to produce long-term forecasts of solar and geomagnetic activity for use in mission planning, and short-term forecasts for day-to-day management of spacecraft operations.
The Ariane spacecraft is launched.
The effects of geomagnetic and solar activity over the long term are important factors in planning satellite missions.
Short-term forecasts are required day-to-day in spacecraft management for orbit prediction.
BGS makes forecasts on solar and geomagnetic activity for the European Space Agency.
Minerals and geochemical surveys
This new division brings together the Survey's expertise in geochemistry, metalliferous and industrial minerals, analytical geochemistry, mineralogy and petrology.
The Division's commissioned work in 1990/91 included the continuation of three long-standing programmes for the DTI, a major new contract for UK Nirex Ltd, and many other commissions, old and new, for a wide variety of customers.
In addition, the division pursues its own Science Budget programme and provides specialist expertise to numerous projects led by other divisions of BGS, in the United Kingdom and overseas.
Hydrogeochemical maps
Systematic multielement regional geochemical mapping of the United Kingdom landmass by the BGS's Geochemical Survey Programme (GSP) has from the outset in 1968 provided regional data on the uranium levels of stream waters and on pH and conductivity, subsequently augmented by measurements of fluoride content and alkalinity.
In the 1990 field season, the range of elements and anions determined was increased, in collaboration with BGS hydrogeochemists in Wallingford, with the inclusion of arsenic, chloride and nitrite, and a selection of minor and trace elements determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry.
The arsenic data subset for North Wales has been specially prepared, in collaboration with the Geological Survey of Canada, to enable an assessment to be made of the use of arsenic in water as a pathfinder for the detection of precious-metal mineralisation and of potential natural and anthropogenic environmental hazards.
The distribution of arsenic in stream sediments, here shown in the East Grampians area, has applications in mineral exploration, especially as a pathfinder for gold, metallogenic studies, crustal evolution and environmental geochemistry and health.
The map is an example of those developed for the new Regional Geochemistry series.
The results of the North Wales survey, which was carried out under ideal stream-baseflow conditions during the summers of 1989 and 1990, show that the geochemical control imposed by lithology, together with the presence of thin, base-deficient soils and drift cover, causes surface water to be  highly susceptible to acidification in the region.
In contrast, the stream waters draining Carboniferous Limestone sediments of the Vale of  Clwyd have a distinctive character which is strongly influenced by the carbonate-rich lithologies that result, for example, in enhanced solubility for uranium in water.
Anomalously high uranium in water at Parys Mountain in Anglesey, associated with high arsenic and low pH, is related to the presence of metalliferous mineralisation, probably enhanced by the effects of mining in the past.
The Precambrian rocks of the south-western tip of the Lleyn peninsula are also anomalously high in uranium and arsenic, but not in pH.
Coastal influences are locally apparent: high salinity leads to high conductivity, and high concentrations of arsenic are associated with the coastal deposits.
Regional geochemistry of the East Grampians area
A new publication format has been developed for the GSP's Regional Geochemistry series, commencing with Regional geochemistry of the East Grampians area .
This publication contains the new 1:250 000 solid geology map sheet specially prepared to accompany the text.
The regional geochemistry of about 30 elements is displayed in digital imagery.
Several areas with anomalously high levels of trace elements that may indicate the presence of mineralisation are evident in the multielement regional geochemical dataset.
They include the association of particulate gold with pathfinder elements in Upper Dalradian metasediments in a zone between Aberfeldy and Comrie, anomalous arsenic and antimony that could indicate the presence of polymetallic sulphide and gold mineralisation in Argyll Group metasediments intruded by Devonian diorites in Glen Clova, and a gold arsenic association in altered metasediments at the margin of the Strichen granite.
Other new targets are indicated by anomalous levels of molybdenum, lead, arsenic and uranium near the margins of the Monadhliath and Ardclach granites.
The geochemical data are also relevant to the evaluation of contemporary theories of the geological evolution and lithostratigraphy of the region.
The geochemical evidence supports the interpretation that there are rocks of the Argyll Group around the Auchlee intrusion (immediately south of Aberdeen) in an area where the geological evidence is equivocal.
The controls exercised by basement structure on late Precambrian and Dalradian sedimentation are evident from the regional geochemistry, with abrupt variations, for example, in titanium, vanadium, chromium, nickel, magnesium, cobalt and copper coinciding with features such as the Portsoy lineament.
Recent attempts to subdivide the largely homogeneous psammites of the Grampian Group into shallow- and deep-water facies are supported in part by the regional distributions of elements such as cobalt and vanadium.
Variation in trends of magmatic evolution is evident from the geochemical signatures of intrusive igneous bodies, and there is good agreement between the geochemical characteristics of stream sediments and those of the underlying bedrock.
The geochemical data for the East Grampians also illustrate a number of important environmental features.
For example, the granites and the psammitic lithologies of the Central Highland Division and the Grampian Group are low in magnesium, copper, cobalt and (to a lesser extent) calcium, and soils developed on them are an inadequate buffer against acid rain — a potential threat to freshwater fisheries in the area.
Some contamination by heavy metals was detected, notably in the industrial areas of Fife, and also more widely by tin.
A minidigger is being used to collect a deep overburden sample for precious metal exploration in an area of thick drift cover in north-east Scotland.
High levels of uranium over the geochemically evolved granites such as Cairngorm and Mount Battock argue against using the granites as building stone for internal cladding on account of the potential risk of radon gas emanation.
However, the Rubislaw Quarry, stone from which has been widely used throughout the area, is located in the Aberdeen granite, which is less geochemically evolved and has a lower uranium content than the other granites.
Microchemical maps show the distribution of gold and platinum in a gold grain from south Devon (the field of view is 16 micrometres across).
The map for gold above left shows a gold-rich core (yellow and green) but many impurities and overgrowths towards the outside blue and purple).
The map for platinum above right shows a very thin platinum-rich outer layer (only 2 micrometres thick) that accounts for the silver-grey colour of the grain.
There is also an inner platinum-rich layer.
The work has shown that a complex history of several phases of precious-metal deposition and redistribution is recorded within the gold grains.
Mineral Reconnaissance Programme
This programme is funded by the Department of Trade and Industry with the objective of stimulating private-sector mineral exploration in Britain.
Seven reports were published during the year, describing the results of multidisciplinary surveys in Wales, south-west England and Scotland.
These included important new indications of mineralisation, notably in south Devon and the Ochil Hills, Scotland.
Synthesis of data arising from the recent discoveries of gold in south Devon suggests the presence of two phases of gold mineralisation.
The earlier phase in this new metallogenic model comprises epithermal mineralisation with associated potassium feldspar alteration and enrichments in arsenic, antimony, silver and copper.
The later mineralisation was at lower temperature, and was probably responsible for most of the anomalies in drainage samples.
This phase is thought to have been controlled by reactions between saline solutions associated with Permian sediments and volcanics and the underlying Devonian rocks.
MRP work in the Ochil Hills has shown the widespread occurrence of alluvial gold.
Detailed geophysical investigations in the most anomalous area identified a large induced polarisation anomaly between Borland Glen and Coul Burn, which diamond-core drilling showed was caused by a zone of altered and pyritised volcanic rocks.
Despite the presence of gold and minor base-metal sulphides in the drillcore from this zone, it is believed that this is not the main source of gold and there may be a more fertile source elsewhere in the area.
This possibility is being investigated by a private company
Multidisciplinary surveys looking for evidence of platinum mineralisation associated with basic and ultrabasic rocks in the Huntly area of Aberdeenshire revealed that enhanced levels of platinum and locally of gold were present in clinopyroxene bearing rocks of the Succoth-Brown Hill area.
It was concluded that some platinum enrichment is related to primary magmatic differentiation but that many of the high values, particularly of palladium and gold, are the product of later alteration associated with deformation.
A new geochemical relational database has been designed, based on entity relationship modelling and a full data analysis.
It will allow every stored parameter to be retrieved, and output to be tailored to customer demands.
Nearly 150 000 chemical analyses have now been loaded onto the existing database.
New data are added as they are acquired, as is information from old paper records when it has been converted to digital form.
The database is proving to be a powerful tool during the initial stages of mineral exploration programmes, and database products have been purchased by public- and private-sector organisations.
BGS and the minerals industry
The Minerals Group continued to maintain contact with the Minerals Industry Research Organisation (MIRO) by representing BGS on the MIRO Research Advisory Panel that is concerned with exploration, mining and geology.
For many years staff of the Group and its predecessors have represented BGS on the British Standards Institution committee concerned with aggregate.
They have also taken part in the work of several subcommittees and working groups concerned with, among other things, the revision of BS 812 (Testing Aggregates) and BS 882 (Aggregates from natural sources for concrete).
This work has grown in volume recently with the establishment of an EC committee for aggregate standards (CEN TC/154) and the need to harmonise British practice with new European standards.
The 1990 edition of the United Kingdom Minerals Yearbook , continuing the tradition of earlier editions, provided an authoritative commentary on recent developments in the domestic minerals industry in addition to comprehensive statistical data on mineral production, consumption, imports and exports.
This publication, and the Directory of Mines and Quarries , on which work for the next edition continued, provide prime sources of basic data for the United Kingdom minerals industry.
Several desk studies were carried out for customers, mainly dealing with the market economics of mineral commodities.
The Minerals Group continued to provide information and advice on a wide range of issues to the Department of Trade and Industry.
The Department commissioned the Group to prepare Mineral exploration for metalliferous and related minerals in Britain: a guide , which was published during the year.
The guide is designed to assist companies exploring for minerals in Great Britain: it summarises geological knowledge on the potential for metalliferous minerals and on styles of mineralisation, and reviews mineral exploration undertaken by companies and by BGS over the last 25 years.
It also describes the administrative and legal framework for exploration and the complex issues relating to land access, mineral rights ownership and the procurement of local-authority planning consent.
An anaerobic flow-through cell on a drilling site at Dounreay is being removed from the mud circulation line for measurement of acidity, redox potential, temperature and dissolved oxygen.
Analytical geochemistry
UK Nirex Ltd is currently undertaking site-investigation and safety-assessment studies in connection with the potential construction of an underground repository for low- and intermediate-level radioactive waste.
The Analytical Geochemistry Group (AGG) won a £750 000 contract from AEA Technology, acting on behalf of UK Nirex Ltd, to undertake the geochemical testing associated with two boreholes being drilled to 1300 and 900 metres respectively through Devonian sediments into Reay diorite or Moine metasediments at Dounreay on the north-west coast of Caithness.
A well-equipped field laboratory set up on site was manned throughout drilling operations by AGG staff.
A wide range of constituents of the drilling mud and formation waters were determined on site, and samples were collected for further analysis at Keyworth.
Comprehensive quality-assurance  procedures for the onsite measurements were developed for this project.
The Group has developed its expertise and facilities for organic analysis significantly during the year, particularly in the area of gas analysis.
Under contract to Sir William Halcrow and Partners, AGG staff made a field survey of the occurrence of methane at the construction site of a new nuclear-submarine refitting facility at the Rosyth Naval Base.
Gas chromatographic methods for the determination of herbicides, for example Simazine and Atrazine, are being developed for use in groundwater-pollution studies carried out by the BGS's Hydro-geology Group.
The new ARL 3580 inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer installed at the end of last year has been calibrated for the determination of major and trace elements in water.
About 3000 water samples, collected in the Liverpool Bay-Anglesey area as part of the Geochemical Survey Programme, have been analysed for 28 elements.
Work has started on developing procedures for dissolving solid samples so that this versatile technique of multi-element analysis can be applied to them.
The Group's X-ray fluorescence laboratories, which are currently operating at virtually full capacity, have produced more than a hundred thousand data points from a wide variety of geological samples from the United Kingdom and overseas.
Most of the data are supplied to the Survey's Mineral Reconnaissance Programme, but a significant amount is in support of Land Survey projects.
Highly precise determinations of rubidium/strontium ratios are made for the NERC Isotope Geosciences Laboratory.
More than four thousand samples of soils from the Tyne-Tees area and stream sediments from the Liverpool Bay-Anglesey area were analysed for 35 elements by DC-arc emission spectrometry for the Geochemical Survey Programme.
Investment in equipment and personnel during the year has placed the new inductively coupled plasma mass-spectrometry laboratory in a strong position to resume its former position as one of the leading exponents of the application of this powerful analytical technique to geological materials.
Data on a wide range of trace elements, especially thorium, uranium and the rare-earth elements, down to concentrations less than one part per billion (1:10&sup9), have been obtained from natural waters and experimental solutions from several projects, including those concerned with the mobility of nuclides in the geosphere.
Analyses have also been carried out for customers, such as Yorkshire Water plc.
In March 1991, the laboratory took delivery of a high-power Nd: YAG laser microprobe, specially built by Birkbeck College, London University, under contract to BGS.
It is capable of the bulk laser ablation of solids, and is also designed to enable holes less than 10 micrometres in diameter to be drilled in minerals to open individual fluid inclusions.
Coupling the laser to the ICP mass spectrometer offers the exciting prospect of obtaining much greater information on the composition of fluid inclusions.
As part of the Group's continuing support of the Survey's international activities, a visit was made to the Southern Sumatra Geological and Mineral Exploration project in Bandung, Indonesia, to commission a fire-assay laboratory and train staff of the Directorate of Mineral Resources in the determination of precious metals.
A second visit to provide expert advice on the running of a laboratory in which mineral exploration samples are analysed is planned for May 1991.
Much of the Group's work is carried out under a comprehensive quality-assurance programme, and the Group provides the internal auditors for the whole of the BGS quality-assurance programme.
Mineralogical and petrological studies
White mica (illite) crystallinity surveys were made as part of the multidisciplinary regional geological survey of central Wales.
Pelites were sampled at a density of one or two per square kilometre, and from the results of the survey, contoured maps of metamorphic grade for the Lower Palaeozoic strata in the Rhayader and Llanilar areas were generated.
Grade ranges from late diagenetic (Kubler indices ) to epizone ().
Anchizonal slates (), are widely distributed across both areas.
In the Rhayader basin, grade is generally correlated with depth of overburden.
However, Ordovician strata of the Tywi anticline were less deeply buried than adjacent Silurian strata, suggesting that this part of the Welsh basin is a basement high characterised by low subsidence rates.
BGS provided much of the logistical support for the first international conference arranged under the auspices of IGCP Project 294, Very Low Grade Metamorphism, which was held at the University of Manchester, 5–6 July 1990.
The title of the conference, 'Phyllosilicates as indicators of very low grade metamorphism and diagenesis', reflects the widespread use of these minerals by geoscientists as a means of elucidating the burial and metamorphic history of sedimentary basins.
A hundred and twenty geoscientists from 20 countries attended the conference, which was convened jointly by IGCP Project 294, the Clay Minerals Group and the Metamorphic Studies Group of the Mineralogical Society.
Thirty-two delegates joined a post-conference excursion to the Lake District and the Southern Uplands of Scotland.
The purpose of the excursion was to examine the relative influence of lithology, deformation and burial conditions on low-grade metamorphism in two contrasting terrains generated by the closure of the Iapetus Ocean in the Lower Palaeozoic.
The new central sample preparation facility at Keyworth now provides a full preparation service for commercial customers and for BGS.
The facility has been purpose built to process a wide range of geological materials, including rocks, drill core, soils, stream sediments and panned concentrates, in a closely supervised and clean environment.
Elements to be studied range in concentration from ore-grade to ultra-trace element.
All samples in the facility are handled in a strict quality control regime designed to identify any form of contamination, potential or actual, that if undetected or uncorrected could lead to erroneous analytical data.
Detailed mapping within the lava pile, 2–3 kilometres thick, comprising the calcalkaline Lower Borrowdale Volcanic Group, coupled with geochemical analyses of individual flows and other units, has revealed systematic cycles and patterns of magmatic evolution during the development of the volcanic field.
These can be related to rates of magma production versus differentiation by crystal fractionation within crustal magma chambers.
In addition, numerical modelling of the geochemical trends indicates that within one cycle the magma may have evolved by inputs of discrete batches of primary peridotitic partial melt that fractionated as it rose and mixed with earlier magma prior to eruption.
Lateral variation in the geochemical patterns of'  essentially time-equivalent stratigraphies suggests that disparate magma chambers and subvolcanic plumbing systems were feeding the extrusive rocks.
This is in accord with the volcanological model developed recently by the BGS team for the Lower Borrowdale Volcanic Group, in which the group is one element in an extensive plateau-andesite lava field erupted from numerous fissures and vents rather than from a central volcano.
The BGS Thin Sectioning Service completed its first year as a self-funding internal service.
In addition to standard 30-micrometre thin sections, the laboratories supply a range of polished, double-polished, and blue-resin-impregnated sections.
About 85 per cent of production was for BGS projects, and minor repayment contracts accounted for the rest.
Precision dating of mineral deposits
Many mineral deposits are the result of large-scale circulation of hydrothermal fluid in the upper crust.
To model such processes and to discriminate between the various mechanisms that are invoked to account for the genesis of the deposits requires a reliable estimate of the age of mineralisation.
Work by the Fluid Inclusion Research Group, in collaboration with the NERC Isotope Geosciences Laboratory, has pioneered two new geochronological techniques that overcome some of the limitations of conventional radiometric dating.
Using the fluid inclusions trapped in quartz, one of the most common minerals associated with metalliferous ores, precision rubidium-strontium isochrons have been obtained for the actual ore fluids.
This obviates the need for rubidium rich minerals (such as micas and feldspars) and can be applied to deposits hitherto undated.
The technique is best suited to hydrothermal systems older than 100 million years and has been proven for deposits as old as 1800 million years.
A second technique developed utilises the natural enrichment of the rare-earth elements in fluorite.
This is based on the radioactive decay of & sup147sm to & sup143nd (samarium-147 to neodymium-143) and is an adaptation of recognised methodologies.
Applied to fluorite deposits in south-west England, a samarium-neodymium isochron has been obtained for fluorite mineralisation at the Pendarves Mine which is in excellent agreement with previously determined rubidium-strontium ages.
Mineralisation in the Pennines
New lead-isotope and rare-earth element (REE) results from the south Pennine area confirm that basinal Viséan-Namurian shales were a major source of the mineralisation.
Lead-isotope data suggest that the lead in galena was supplied from progressively higher levels of the basins through time.
REE data for calcites are consistent with inputs from the shales and through dissolution of the limestone host rocks.
Fluorite REE patterns from both the north and the south Pennines suggest the importance of heavy REE to light REE fractionation in the ore fluids.
However, the different patterns and higher REE contents in the fluorites of the north Pennines possibly reflect additional input from the underlying Weardale granite.
Exploration criteria for gold
EC funding was obtained for a new project, to start in 1991, which will be aimed at the development of metallogenic/economic models and sets of exploration criteria suitable for gold exploration in western Europe from the analysis of multiple datasets (including mineral occurrence, geological, geochemical, geophysical and remotely sensed datasets).
The Caledonides of Britain and Ireland and the Hercynides of France, Spain and Portugal have been selected for study as representatives of the two main stratigraphic and structural domains of western Europe.
Parties contributing to this research programme will include BGS, the Geological Survey of Ireland and Riofinex North Ltd (Britain and Ireland), the Departamento de Geoquimica, Petrología y Prospección Geológica and the Instituto Tecnológico Geominero de España (Spain), the Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières (France) and the Empresa de Desenvolvimento Mineiro (Portugal).
The form and disposition of sediment-hosted base metal orebodies and the lithological and sedimentological characters of the host rocks at Alderley Edge, Cheshire, are examined.
A proposal for a three year integrated study of the Cheshire Basin to start in 1991/92 will lead to the production of three dimensional models of the development of the basin and the genesis of metalliferous mineralisation.
Uranium-mineralised micro-organisms
The Mineralogy and Petrology Group continued to contribute to research into natural analogues for radioactive-waste disposal on behalf of the Department of the Environment at two sites in Scotland, Broubster in Caithness and Needle's Eye on the Solway Coast, demonstrating the significance of plants and microorganisms in concentrating metals by biosorption processes and in encouraging secondary mineralisation.
Plant roots in the peats and estuarine sediments concentrate uranium in cell walls, especially in regions associated with transpiration processes.
At the Needle's Eye site, filamentous bacteria (probably actinomycetes) are found associated with altered vein hydrocarbons near the surface in hydrocarbon-calcite-uraninite-polymetallic sulphide vein mineralisation.
Cells of the bacteria were heavily mineralised with uranium, calcium, vanadium, bismuth, selenium and sulphur.
Particular metals are concentrated in different regions of the micro-organisms.
Uranium, selenium and calcium are concentrated in cell walls whereas bismuth and sulphur are concentrated within the cells.
Uranium, calcium and vanadium were precipitated as a fine platy mineral (possibly liebigite) associated with the mucilage  around the filamentous masses.
It was possible to grow cultures of similar filamentous microorganisms from samples of the hydrocarbon, showing that viable organisms were still present and that bioaccumulation of uranium and other metals could be a relatively modern feature.
Element mobility in hyper-alkaline waters
The Mineralogy and Petrology Group participated in an international research project investigating the hyperalkaline spring discharges of the Maqarin area in northern Jordan.
Project staff included researchers from BGS, the Forschungszentrum für Umwelt und Gesundheit (GSF, Germany), the Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI, Switzerland), the University of Ottawa, the University of Jordan, AEA Technology, and the Nationale Genossenschaft für die Lagerung radioaktiver Abfälle (NAGRA, Switzerland).
The work was funded by UK Nirex Ltd, NAGRA and Ontario Hydro.
The Maqarin hyperalkaline springs are associated with retrograde alteration and hydration of a high-temperature, low-pressure metamorphic assemblage in Upper Cretaceous and Lower Tertiary bituminous marls and limestones.
The metamorphism resulted from the spontaneous in-situ combustion of these organic-rich sediments and has produced a complex assemblage of minerals including quartz, wollastonite, spurrite, ellestadite, apatite, brownmillerite, magnetite, hematite, calcite and various oxides and ferrite minerals.
In addition, several rare mineral phases have been identified including oldhamite (CaS), previously known only from meteorites and blast-furnace slag, and an unknown copper-potassium selenide mineral.
Hydration of the metamorphic rocks has produced a complex sequence of secondary minerals including portlandite, calcite, vaterite, aragonite, ettringite, thaumasite, silica, tobermorite, afwillite and apophyllite.
A rare mineral, hashemite (barium chromate), previously identified from similar rocks in central Jordan, has also been identified here.
A complete solid solution has been found between baryte and hashemite.
The groundwaters associated with the retrograde alteration are highly mineralised and are buffered by portlandite solubility to pH 12.5, making them the most alkaline natural waters recorded.
The system is being investigated as a good natural analogue of reactions and trace-element migration predicted to be significant in a cement-back-filled radioactive waste repository.
The data obtained from the groundwaters are being thermodynamically modelled using speciation codes developed by AEA Technology, NAGRA and PSI.
The mineral phases predicted at equilibrium are being compared to the actual assemblage as a means of verification of the thermodynamic codes.
Radon hazard
The Survey has long experience of research in radiogeochemistry and is well fitted, at this time of growing public concern about radon hazard, to provide radon surveys and other related radiometric services.
Several small contracts to provide radon potential maps have been completed.
In collaboration with the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) and part funded by the CEC, radon distribution maps for two areas in Derbyshire and one in Devon are being produced.
With growing awareness of the hazard caused by the accumulation of elevated levels of radon in buildings, these maps are a guide to radon emission at surface related to different lithologies.
Results of the surveys have shown that the geological map alone cannot be used to predict radon hazard: soil-gas surveys must also be made.
Four gamma-radiation calibration pads (for potassium, uranium, thorium and background) each 1 metre square (a NERC central facility at Keyworth) are used to calibrate airborne gamma spectrometers as well as portable spectrometers.
They have advantages over larger fixed pads in that they are transportable and less prone to variation caused by moisture, and they give a more uniform distribution of the radioelements.
Environmental geochemistry
A review of the significance of natural contamination to planning and development in Great Britain is being carried out for the DOE with the aim of outlining in broad terms the relevance of the physical and chemical restraints on planning and development imposed by natural contamination.
The review's findings will be used primarily as the information base for formulating planning-policy guidance.
Natural contamination by radon, background radioactivity, radioactive waters, heavy metals, trace element excesses, methane, carbon dioxide, oil seeps, sulphates and sulphides are being considered.
Opposite Scanning electron microscope photo-micrography shows bright microbial filaments enriched in uranium and other metals.
The filaments are growing on the surface of fractured globular brittle vein hydrocarbon (bitumen) from the Needle's Eye, south-west Scotland.
Earth science information in urban planning: geochemistry of towns
Regional geochemical studies, including high-precision and high-resolution geochemical mapping, have been developed to a very high standard by the BGS.
The data that result are increasingly applied to the evaluation of environmental and epidemiological problems concerned with human and animal health.
Extensive calcareous flowstone and stalactite deposits are developed at spring discharge points in fractured bituminous limestones and combustion-metamorphosed marbles: the ground water is saturated with calcium hydroxide, with the consequence that calcite and aragonite rapidly precipitate when it comes into contact with atmospheric carbon dioxide.
These deposits are at Maqarin, northern Jordan.
In collaboration with Imperial College, the methods developed in the earlier regional  studies have now been adapted to the urban environment in order to enable environmental factors and epidemiological patterns and 'hot spots' to be compared with the natural background geochemistry and with the environmental contamination of soil, water and air arising from industrialisation and urbanisation.
The regional geochemical datasets held in digital image and map form by the BGS also provide a background against which specific problems in urban areas can be evaluated.
Urban geochemistry is at present mainly concerned with the interrelationships between the natural distribution of the chemical elements and anthropogenic contamination in the urban environment, their fluxes, pathways and influences on the community.
It is also a subject of increasing public concern.
The approach developed by BGS is both flexible and multidisciplinary and can be oriented either towards the solution of specific problems or to large-scale systematic surveys in support of programmes for urban improvement, industrial and urban renewal and planning.
International geochemical mapping
Members of the Geochemistry Group were active in both the Western European Geological Surveys (WEGS) Working Group on Regional Geochemical Mapping and on committees of International Geological Correlation Programme (IGCP) 259: International Geochemical Mapping.
Contributions to a proposal for the production of a geochemical atlas of western Europe, including an inventory of regional geochemical surveys of western Europe and a summary of the vertical distribution of trace elements in floodplain sediments in the United Kingdom, were prepared for the WEGS Working Group.
Meetings of the Working Group in Prague in August 1990 and Athens in October 1990 were attended, and a proposal for a research project to evaluate the usefulness of floodplain sediments as a low-density geochemical sampling medium was drawn up.
A paper describing the inventory was presented at an international workshop in Prague.
As members of the Field Methods and Analytical Methods Committees of IGCP 259, BGS staff helped to draw up proposals for sampling and analytical methodologies for international geochemical mapping.
A special issue of the Transactions of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, concentrating on the IGCP project, was edited.
Petrological image analysis by programmable Kontron IBAS equipment enables porosity in reservoir sandstones from the North Sea to be measured.
An optical image of sandstone impregnated with blue dye above left (field of view 2 × 2 millimetres) captured by video camera is segmented by setting colour or grey-level thresholds to create a binary image below left on which rapid volume and geometric measurements are made.
The same method can be used to measure backscattered-electron scanning electron-microscope images.
In another Kontron application, a modal-analysis grid created by IBAS programming is superimposed on an optical image of biotite granite above right (field of view 4 × 4 millimetres) to allow a preconfigured grey-level classification below right to be overridden by the user where necessary, thereby combining the advantages of expert interpretation with the speed of the computer.
The equipment is also being used to develop three-dimensional re-constructions of pore fabrics in aquifer rocks under the Nirex research and development programme.
Cathodoluminescence shows that patchy carbonate cements in a North Sea reservoir sandstone, formerly thought to be secondary concretions, have a primary microbioclastic fabric.
This suggests two source areas, one carbonate and one terrigenous.
The irregularity of the cements is due to local dissolution rather than to the precipitation of secondary concretions.
Calcite is shown in orange-red, quartz in brown and potash-feldspar in blue.
Groundwater and geotechnical surveys
HYDROGEOLOGY
Groundwater accounts for about a third of the public water supplies in Britain; in the south and east of England dependence on supplies from groundwater is locally much greater.
Anything that threatens either the quantity or the quality of these supplies is therefore very serious.
Normally the supplies are of high quality and need little treatment, but groundwater originates as rainfall entering the ground, and there it can dissolve substances, man-made or natural, present in the soil.
The effects of changes in land use on groundwater quality can thus be very significant, and they have again been a major aspect of the BGS Hydrogeology Group's work.
Farming
More intensive agriculture has led to increased concentrations of nitrate in groundwater in many areas.
Soluble nitrate is leached from the soil by rainfall and carried slowly down into aquifers.
One of the problems of studying nitrate pollution is that the water that replenishes aquifers — particularly the Chalk — typically takes many years to travel from the soil to the water table.
Changes in water quality brought about by changing land use may thus not be seen for decades.
One way of studying the effects of changing agricultural practices on groundwater is to drill and redrill sites at intervals of several years to observe changes in the vertical profile of nitrate and other solutes in the unsaturated zone of aquifers.
The Hydrogeology Group has been doing such work on behalf of the National Rivers Authority (NRA): repeat drilling at five sites in the Chalk of East Anglia reveals decreased nitrate concentrations in the upper part of the unsaturated zone.
This suggests a reduction in nitrate leaching brought about by the now well-established practice of cultivation of winter cereals, together with less use of fertiliser in the autumn.
In addition the repeat profiles provide valuable information on the mechanisms and rates of water movement in the unsaturated zone.
The establishment by the government of the Nitrate Sensitive Areas (NSA) scheme provides another opportunity for studying the effect of land use change.
Under a pilot scheme, ten such NSAs have been designated, representative of the range of hydrogeological conditions, land use and climatic regimes in the country.
Within these areas, which are the catchments of groundwater supply sources, a range of voluntary agricultural measures is being introduced, with agreed rates of payment to farmers who join the scheme.
To provide baseline data, the Hydrogeology Group, under contract to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF), is obtaining vertical profiles of nitrate concentration in the unsaturated zone of the aquifer beneath fields in the NSAs before the improved farming practices are introduced.
The profiles will be measured again after five years to assess the effect of the changes in agricultural practices on nitrate leaching and groundwater quality.
To complement this study, the NRA are funding BGS to investigate whether indigenous bacteria denitrify groundwater in the unsaturated zone beneath the soil, and, if possible, the rate at which they do so.
Previous research concentrated on the removal of nitrate that was observed when groundwater conditions change from aerobic to anaerobic.
The current research is being carried out jointly by the Hydrogeology and Fluid Processes groups in cooperation with the Soil Science Department of the University of Reading.
Another change in agricultural practice that has helped to boost food production has been the increased use of pesticides.
This increase has generally followed the increased use of fertilisers by something like two decades, so that as yet there is little pesticide in most groundwater.
In addition, it is not clear that pesticides will travel through the unsaturated zone as readily as nitrate does — they may, for example , be adsorbed by clays.
However, allowable concentrations of pesticide in drinking water are 3 to 4 orders of magnitude lower than those for nitrate, and BGS, on behalf of the NRA, has recently begun to study the fate of pesticides in subsurface waters.
The effects of changing land use: afforestation
In an effort to reduce overproduction of food, the suggestion has been made that land in lowland Britain be taken out of agricultural production and forested.
An additional benefit of such a scheme would be the reduction in application of fertilisers and pesticides.
Would the effects on groundwater be wholly beneficial, or might there be problems?
A difficulty in answering the question is that previous studies have generally looked at conifers in upland areas with high rainfall.
BGS and the Institute of Hydrology, largely funded by the NRA, therefore set out to study conditions below deciduous forest cover at a site on Chalk at Black Wood in Hampshire.
It seems clear that extensive areas of trees reduce recharge to the underlying aquifers, the forest canopies intercepting rainfall that then evaporates.
Water-quality profiles from the unsaturated zone also show significant variations, in particular a great variation between the edge and the centre of the woodland.
In general, chloride concentrations are high at the edges of the woodland and low in the centre.
Nitrate concentrations beneath the edges are very low — even lower (less than 1 milligram of NO&sub3/N per litre) than beneath unfertilised grassland — but they are high near the centre, and particularly high where trees have fallen: this releases large quantities of nitrate.
Replacing arable land with woodland would thus probably reduce the amount of nitrate leached to groundwater, but perhaps by less than was expected.
Another effect of trees is that they appear to concentrate pollutants from the atmosphere.
The Black Wood investigation and related studies by BGS have shown that sulphate concentrations in pore waters beneath trees are much higher than in pore waters from beneath heathland or unfertilised grassland.
For aquifers with a high carbonate content this is of little consequence, but in other aquifers the acidity of the subsurface water resulting from its sulphate content can persist to depths of several metres and can result in metals such as aluminium being leached into shallow groundwater.
This could have potentially serious consequences where these waters are used for drinking.
A sequence of profiles of nitrate in the unsaturated zone of the Chalk in Cambridgeshire shows downward movement of the concentration peak by about five metres.
This is slightly more than is predicted if the movement were that of a simple piston.
Sequential sulphate and chloride profiles behave similarly.
The legacy of industry
For several years, BGS hydrogeologists have been studying the occurrence of volatile organochlorine compounds in groundwater in the Chalk.
This research, previously funded by DOE, is now funded by NRA.
Many of these compounds are widely used in industry for cleaning and degreasing metals, for dry cleaning, and for processing leather.
Chlorinated organic solvents pose a particular threat to groundwater quality because they can penetrate quickly and deeply into an aquifer as a dense plume if spilled in significant quantities, and they then dissolve slowly into the groundwater.
They are unacceptable in drinking water in anything more than trace concentrations, and there is increasing evidence of organochlorine contamination in water-supply boreholes.
This year BGS enlarged the scope of its studies to include a site on Triassic sandstones where such a solvent had been detected in a production borehole.
The investigation included soil gas surveys and core drilling, and showed that modern industries were not responsible.The pollution probably derived from an engineering works that was closed some IS years ago.
The situation was the same at the Chalk sites: it appeared that the solvent originated from leaks or careless handling many years ago, and that groundwater is not being polluted at present.
The solvents persist for many years, and can take a long time to be degraded or removed; the good news is that, unlike some other forms of pollution, spillages of volatile organochlorines are apparently becoming rarer as awareness of the consequences of poor practice increases.
Environmental hydrogeochemistry
Most of the chemical reactions that give groundwaters their characteristic qualities occur near the surface.
Studying geochemical data from springs, shallow wells and river baseflow provides information on the processes that are active.
It is important to recognise these natural reactions and their effect on groundwater quality, and so to establish a baseline against which contamination can be measured.
Hydrogeochemical maps are being developed as an aid to interpreting environmental problems such as acidification and agricultural and mining pollution.
In collaboration with the Institute of Hydrology BGS is using a digital terrain model to represent geochemical data from a catchment.
The technique has been used to examine natural trace-metal variations in surface waters and shallow groundwaters in Northern Ireland: for example, high concentrations of aluminium and beryllium are found in waters associated with the Mourne granites.
The rare-earth-element contents of groundwaters derived from granites and metasediments in the Carnmenellis area of Cornwall are highly distinctive and stem from different water-rock reactions.
Cerium has been found to be notably depleted in the metasediment-derived waters, and this may help to define redox processes and groundwater provenance more widely.
Other work in progress includes the identification of likely sources of excesses (or deficiencies) of trace elements in potable water supplies that might have health implications, and in addition the identification of suitable pathfinder elements for hydrogeochemical exploration and groundwater tracing.
The interstitial water profiles of the unsaturated zones of acid lithologies (Triassic sandstones and Lower Greensand) are being examined in order to determine the mobility of toxic metals towards the water table.
Left A soil gas sample is collected as part of a survey to help delineate a plume of pollution caused by a volatile organic compound that had migrated a kilometre through the Chalk aquifer from the site of the original spillage.
It is known that volatile organic compounds dissolved in groundwater will release molecules into the vapour phase at the water-table, and these can then migrate upwards through the unsaturated zone.
Groundwater resources
The remarkable spell of dry weather that has affected much of eastern Britain since the autumn of 1988 continued in 1990/91; the autumn was particularly dry.
For the third successive winter, recharge to groundwater was much less than normal, and groundwater levels are greatly depressed in consequence, particularly in the Chalk of East Anglia.
The public has become more aware of the importance of groundwater (it is interesting to see how widely the term aquifer is used in newspapers now compared with during the drought of 1975–76), and public use of the Hydrogeology Group's enquiry service has increased.
Interest in the abundance of groundwater resources has been rekindled, after the emphasis on water quality over the last few years.
Right Soil-gas surveying detects extensive contamination of the Chalk aquifer up to a kilometre from an industrial site, the source of the contamination.
Groundwater is replenished by rainfall and depleted by aquifer baseflow to streams and by artificial abstraction.
The amount of groundwater in storage therefore varies in response to annual and longer term fluctuations  of wet and dry weather.
These effects are apparent in a temperate country like Britain: in arid and semiarid areas where groundwater is a major or only source of water, such as the Sahel, it is essential to have adequate estimates of recharge.
In Senegal a collaborative project with the universities of Dakar and Paris-Sud has had as its main objective the development of a simple and reliable technique for estimating groundwater recharge.
The necessary information is to be found in the geochemical record contained in interstitial water profiles of the unsaturated zone, and interpreting that information by the new technique gives good estimates of recharge.
Point estimates of aquifer recharge can be made from single profiles, and several profiles may be used together to determine regional recharge.
The record in a profile can contain inputs spanning more than a hundred years, and under favourable circumstances it can be used to chart oscillations in recharge, from which one can infer climatic history.
A seminar on the results of the project was held in Dakar in December.
Jersey
Water shortages can occur much closer to home.
Islands have traditionally posed difficulties for water engineers, particularly if they are densely populated or have influxes of visitors in the dry season.
Jersey is a case in point: its rainfall is only moderate and its economy is greatly dependent on tourism, and it faces increasing difficulties in meeting demands for water.
A survey of the groundwater resources on Jersey is being carried out for the States of Jersey.
Initial work comprised a well inventory, which provided hydraulic and hydro-chemical data throughout the island.
Monitoring groundwater levels, abstraction and quality continues.
Already it has been demonstrated that groundwater abstraction is high relative to the theoretical renewable resource, and that much of the groundwater is contaminated with nitrate.
FLUID PROCESSES
The British Geological Survey's capabilities for investigations of subsurface water-rock systems in sedimentary and crystalline rocks with low permeabilities are provided by the Fluid Processes Group (FPG).
This meets the growing need to improve geoscience knowledge relevant to strategies for subsurface disposal of hazardous and radioactive wastes.
The Group's research also extends to related areas: geothermal energy, subsurface microbiology, subsurface gas hazard, and transport of natural contaminants into aquifers and from the subsurface into the biosphere.
Most of the problems the group deals with require a multidisciplinary approach, and the staff's expertise covers a range of geological, chemical, physical and biological sciences.
There are facilities for field and laboratory work: major experimental projects in progress during the year include investigations into geochemical controls on radionuclide movement, dispersion which arises from natural heterogeneity in aquifers, and geochemical alteration of rock properties in systems perturbed by waste-disposal activities.
The impact of microbiological activity on geochemical and radiochemical systems is also being studied.
This experimental work is supported by simulation modelling of both physical and chemical processes: this is an essential tool for efficient design of experiments and for applying the results predictively [see illustration overleaf ].
FPG is recognised internationally as having research and consultancy experience in geological aspects of waste disposal and contaminant migration.
In addition to being a major contractor in the British programme to identify a safe geological repository site for radioactive waste, the Group carries out research in geochemistry, hydrogeology and microbiology within European Community projects and for various international customers.
These include projects to investigate organic complexation of radionuclides by experimental and modelling methods, and to develop instrumentation for remote monitoring of pollutant plumes through groundwater.
Methane review
Public concern about the hazards from methane gas in housing and engineered structures was heightened by the recent devastating explosions that occurred at Loscoe in Derbyshire and at Abbeystead in Lancashire.
The Construction Industry Research and Information Association (CIRIA) has been given the responsibility of gathering together and adding to what is known about the risks.
The association contracted the Fluid Processes Group to carry out a review of the nature, origins, occurrences and hazards of methane in the context of the construction industry in the United Kingdom.
The project is aimed at producing a guidance document that will appeal to planners, designers, practising engineers, students and the general reader.
In the course of this study, our understanding of the sources of methane (particularly of methane in groundwaters), our means of identifying these sources, and our ability to model the mechanisms of movement through the ground, have all been found lacking in some important way.
Further study of subsurface transport processes of methane are warranted, especially developing and validating models.
The concentration of chloride in interstitial water in the unsaturated zone is a chemical record that represents recharge to the saturated zone covering more than a century.
Comparing chloride concentration with rainfall at St Louis and water flow in the Senegal River over the same period has displayed the signature of droughts (in the 1970s, 1940s and 1910s) and of intervening periods of higher rainfall and river flow.
Identifying landfill gas sources
There is now more awareness of the problems that methane generated in landfill can cause, and improved methods for detecting methane are now available.
As a result, investigators are finding situations where the methane could come from one or more of a number of sources.
It is crucial to identify the source of the methane in order to be able to devise appropriate remedies, and FPG has been working in this area for some time.
One way in which the source of methane can be identified is to identify trace components of the gas that 'fingerprint' its source.
Landfill gas at first contains a multitude of volatile trace organic components, but individual components can separate out as the methane migrates.
A field investigation is being carried out to assess to what extent trace components can be relied upon to identify the source of landfill gas.
Changes in trace organics are being sampled and identified at various distances along a gas migration path from a landfill in Suffolk.
Nottingham Polytechnic is giving support with gas chromatograph mass spectrometry.
Migration of natural radio-nuclides
The DOE continues to support a study of the migration of the natural decay-series radionuclides of uranium and thorium in a variety of sedimentary settings in Cornwall and Scotland in order to test our ideas and modelling capabilities with a view to applying them to the geological disposal of radioactive waste.
The programme of work involves BGS, the Scottish Universities Research and Reactor Centre, AEA Technology, and WS Atkins Engineering Sciences Limited.
One of the localities investigated in detail is Needle's Eye: it lies on the Solway coast near Dalbeattie.
The cliff contains pitchblende veins that have been sources of dissolved uranium.
BGS has surveyed and sampled the flat floodplain deposits at the foot of the cliff to define water flows and uranium transport southwards over an 80 metre transect towards the Southwick Water tidal creek.
Concentration data for uranium in groundwater can be used to test models of uranium movement through the silty sediments.
At another site, in Caithness, use of the scanning electron microscope combined with an autoradiographic technique has helped to define the way in which soluble uranium had been translocated from a sandstone bedrock into the overlying regolith/soil.
There the uranium and manganese formed concretionary bands of manganese oxide and thereafter travelled slowly or not at all.
Most of the uranium in the sandstone bedrock, however, had been transported laterally by water flow into an adjacent peat bog.
This young postglacial uranium anomaly continues to be studied and modelled in detail.
The movement of trace-elements through the environment
A large number of chemical reactions take place when trace metals move through the environment.
Most metals are strongly sorbed to geological materials except when they form negatively charged complexes.
We have a good understanding of inorganic complexation, and sophisticated computer models have been developed to calculate the 'speciation' of metals in groundwaters.
The complexation of organic molecules, particularly the breakdown products from plant decomposition (humic acids), is more complicated.
However, it is essential that we understand the processes involved if we are to predict the behaviour of metals in such diverse environments as landfill sites, nuclear-waste repositories, rivers and the oceans.
For these reasons reactions between a number of metals and humic acids extracted from groundwater from different sites in the UK are being studied by a range of analytical and radiochemical techniques and attempts are being made to incorporate the findings into computer models.
BGS is reviewing all aspects of methane generation in landfill.
Field methane detectors, like this one in use at Loscoe, are an important means of gathering data.
Metals may become unexpectedly mobile If they become attached to colloids that are small enough to move with the groundwater.
Research into colloid movement is therefore also under way.
A series of experiments with model colloids in columns of sand has been carried out, and later this year the predictions based on laboratory experiments will be tested in the field.
The computer software PRECIP has been developed to predict chemical reaction accompanying fluid flow in geological systems.
In this example, the programme has been used to predict the behaviour of dissolved silica with time and space during the flow of calcium hydroxide through a sandstone in a laboratory experiment.
Pulses of dissolved silica develop in response to the net rates of sand-grain dissolution and of precipitation of secondary minerals.
Water-rock interactions
A better understanding of the origin and occurrence of ore deposits, and also of geothermal and hydrocarbon reservoirs, can be obtained by a combination of theoretical and laboratory studies that simulate the environmental conditions under which the deposits were formed.
The effects of natural variables such as temperature, pressure, fluid-flow rate and composition upon the rate and magnitude of the chemical interaction of fluids with rocks may be evaluated using such techniques.
Any change in rock porosity caused by the dissolution or precipitation of minerals when fluid flows through sedimentary or fractured basement rocks affects the rocks' permeability, and hence how fast fluid flows through the rocks and what volume is transmitted.
Computer software has been developed to link the rate of water-rock reactions with changes in fluid flow.
The software has been developed and tested with the aid of data derived from laboratory experimental apparatus designed to investigate rock-water reactions at elevated temperature and pressure (200°C, 300 bars) under fluid-flow conditions.
The software has been applied to the understanding of problems relating to the development of porosity in hydrocarbon reservoirs and the behaviour of rocks to be used for radioactive-waste repositories.
Geochemistry research for UK Nirex
Cement and concrete would be extensively used in a geological repository for low- and intermediate-level radioactive wastes.
The emplacement of over a million tonnes of alkali-rich cementitious material into a saturated groundwater environment would be likely to make the groundwater more alkaline.
Enhanced solution by the alkaline groundwater of minerals that line fractures in the repository host rock might affect the sorption capacity of the rock and its water-flow characteristics.
A programme of experimental and theoretical studies is under way at BGS to quantify the rate and magnitude of the reaction of the highly alkaline pore fluids characteristic of cements with the repository rock.
Work so far has demonstrated that reactions with the rock are fast relative to the rate of groundwater movement, so that the movement of chemical components in the system is best simulated by assuming equilibrium: the rate of chemical reactions can be ignored.
Computer modelling of the system has aided the assessment of changes in porosity and fracture widths in the repository rock over 10 000 years as a result of reaction with cementitious porefluids.
Geomicrobiology
Geomicrobiology, the study of geological and biological interactions, attracts increasing interest; in BGS, the number of projects that have a biological component is growing steadily.
A fully equipped laboratory has facilities for processing geological material, establishing its microbiological content and activity with a variety of techniques (such as acetylene block for biological denitrification and S-35 for biological sulphate reduction).
These facilities are being used in projects such as one in which the influence of microbes on radioactive waste repository materials is being investigated.
A series of microcosm 'black boxes' has been used to monitor changes in microbial floras as well as gross effects such as changes in leachate and gases.
Other projects relate to work on groundwater quality and the effects of artificial recharge in the London Basin; and controls on biological denitrification.
These last projects are carried out in collaboration with the BGS Hydrogeology Group.
Humic acids from groundwater are collected at Broubster natural analogue site, near Thurso, Caithness.
Left The concentration of uranium in groundwater at Needle's Eye, which is near Dalbeattie on the Solway coast, has been plotted.
Veins of pitchblende in the cliff are the source of uranium in the flat floodplain deposits at the foot of the cliff.
Below A reflected-light photomicrograph left of an open cavity in regolithic shaly sandstone shows collomorphic manganese oxide lining the cavity wall.
That the manganese oxide contains uranium is shown by the autoradiograph right, in which dense concentrations of alpha tracks reflect the manganese oxide's distribution.
The specimen is from Broubster, Caithness.
[The field of view is about 2 by 4 mm.]
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Engineering geology and geophysics were brought together in the Groundwater and Geotechnical Surveys Division in January 1991.
The new Group consists of staff from the old Engineering Geology Group together with staff from the applied geophysics side of the Regional Geophysics Group.
The close association that has existed over many years between geophysicists and engineering geologists in multidisciplinary projects at BGS will be enhanced by bringing these staff into one group.
In addition to integrating geophysical field surveying methods in engineering geological and civil engineering applications the Group will also give geophysical support to hydrogeological studies, landfill and pollution assessments, mineral exploration and local geological studies.
Engineering geological support for onshore survey projects will be maintained.
Engineering geology
Input to the geological mapping programme The Group has contributed to the onshore geological mapping programme of the Thematic Maps and Onshore Surveys Division in the Thame, Exeter and Grantham areas.
In the Thame and Exeter areas, project geotechnical databases each containing about 2000 records have been analysed to summarise the geotechnical properties of geological formations within each area and characterise them in engineering terms.
Preliminary drafts of technical reports have been prepared.
In the Grantham area engineering geologists are paying particular attention to land-slipping on the Middle Jurassic Lincolnshire Limestone escarpment and the underlying Lias clays.
The Group is also responsible for the supervision, staffing and running of the BGS drilling facility and has organised the drilling programme in support of onshore geological mapping.
Applied geology mapping Engineering geological interpretations of the soils and rocks of the Wrexham and Stoke-on-Trent areas were completed as part of the applied geological mapping of these areas for the Department of the Environment.
Technical reports on the engineering geology have been prepared.
Similar work has begun for the west Birmingham and south central Leeds areas.
For each, engineering geology maps of the solid and superficial deposits are prepared on which materials are grouped together on the basis of their engineering characteristics.
An accompanying technical report on the engineering geology is produced, based partly on the analysis and interpretation of geotechnical databases for each area.
For the west Birmingham project a database of almost 8000 records has been assembled from nearly 200 site investigation reports.
Some 550 reports were collected and assessed.
For the south-central Leeds project the database has 7700 records obtained from more than 170 site investigation reports.
The effect of geological processes on the geotechnical properties of soils and rocks In this project the relationship between the depositional environment, subsequent geological and glacial history and the geotechnical properties of the Gault clay, an important formation in Britain, are being studied.
The project is the first phase of a programme to study the major geological formations of the UK.
The work during the year has been divided into three fields of activity:
Area-specific studies of the relationship between geology and landslip hazard have been carried out in Shaftesbury, Dorset and Selborne, Hampshire, with additional data from other sites in Dorset.
Boreholes were drilled and geophysical investigations were made at Shaftesbury, and a draft report has been prepared.
Two continuously cored boreholes drilled through the Gault and adjacent formations at Arlesey in Bedfordshire and Burwell in Cambridgeshire have been logged geologically geotechnical analysis of the core will be carried out next year.
A programme to obtain geological and geotechnical data from a wide variety of sources, including engineering consultants, local authorities and service industries, is under way.
The aim is to build up a comprehensive database on the Gault of the United Kingdom.
Much of the project work has involved collaboration with other BGS groups, in particular Eastern England and Mineralogy.
Consultancy work in engineering geology Engineering geological consultancy work continues to be carried out for clients in the private and public sectors.
Landslip and rockfall problems in Kent and Yorkshire have been investigated, and specialised laboratory testing was carried out on material from onshore and offshore sites.
Rock physics The development of a high-pressure test rig to measure the velocity of propagation and the attenuation coefficient of both compressional and shear waves in natural materials at pressures up to 70 megapascals (0.7 kilobars) has continued in collaboration with the University of Reading.
Particular emphasis has been placed on the examination of the relationship between the static elastic moduli measured on laboratory samples and the dynamic moduli derived from borehole geophysical logs.
The technique of imaging borehole cores by electrical resistivity has been developed by BGS and Leicester University as part of NERC's Ocean Drilling Program Special Topic.
Work on board ship demonstrated the utility of high-resolution resistivity imaging as an aid to sedimentological analysis, in addition to the more obvious application of calibrating downhole resistance images of the borehole by means of the Schlumberger Formation MicroScanner.
The imaging technique and its particular applications in the oil industry are to be further developed through a research project sponsored by an oil company and carried out by BGS in collaboration with Leicester University.
Development of geophysical techniques
 Magnetotelluric  studies Work commissioned by the Admiralty Research Establishment (MOD), already in progress at the start of the year, was completed.
The project was a broad review of all electromagnetic geophysical methods for detecting submerged conducting bodies that might have military applications.
Confidential assessments of ground-based and airborne methodologies were delivered to the client.
The Survey's ability to apply vector electromagnetic methods to hydrogeological and other near-surface site-investigation work was studied.
Low-cost solutions that marry new digital-data acquisition boards to efficient processing algorithms were assessed prior to being developed.
Cavity detection including seismic imaging Following the conclusion of the CEC stimulation programme, undertaken in collaboration with the Centre de Estudios y Experimentación de Obras Publicas (CEDEX), Spain, links with CEDEX continued with the development of seismic-tomography capabilities for use in karst areas in which seismic signals are highly attenuated.
Such areas are widespread in Spain.
Trials were undertaken at the Contreras dam, which is known to have foundation problems; work to find suitable assessment techniques continues.
Electrical resistivity imaging has been developed to aid the prediction of fluid flow both in fractures and in the matrix.
A project to demonstrate the capabilities of the system in environmental and hydrogeological studies is under way.
Resistivity methods have been developed for investigating fracturing in boreholes.
The technique was successfully demonstrated in the Carnmenellis  granite in the course of a project undertaken in collaboration with the Camborne School of Mines and others to study hot dry rocks.
A numerical modelling scheme has been developed in collaboration with Bristol University that allows realistic three-dimensional geological models to be used, including the effect of boreholes in the cross-hole configuration.
Instrumentation development A remotely operated horizontal shear-wave source has been developed for use on the sea bed.
It has been used, in collaboration with the University College of North Wales, Bangor, both on land and at sea.
More work has been done on cross-hole seismic tomographic systems in collaboration with CEDEX: a high-power spark source and matched active receivers are now available for use in difficult environments.
BGS has licensed Campus Instruments to market and sell these systems on its behalf.
Computer-controlled resistivity systems have been further developed: in particular an electrode pad for core imaging has been completed in collaboration with Nottingham Polytechnic, allowing sections of core to be imaged automatically.
Site-specific geophysical surveys
Mapping applications The precise and particular methods of engineering geophysics can be invaluable in geological mapping, where problems of structure and stratigraphy are local rather than regional.
Staff of the Engineering Geology and Geophysics Group have made surveys of this kind at several areas in the United Kingdom.
At Clophill, Bedfordshire, detailed electromagnetic profiling has been used to map depth to the Fuller's Earth and its thickness and persistence.
The project was led by the Eastern England Group and funded by the Department of the Environment.
A similar study was carried out at Baulking, Wiltshire.
In Hertfordshire, detailed gravity, electrical and electromagnetic profiles have been measured over sites at Stevenage and Hitchin, where the existence of deep incised channels in the concealed surface of the Chalk was suspected.
The geophysical data confirmed the presence of these channels, and enabled the subsurface chalk topography to be interpreted with some confidence.
The movement of saline water in a simulated aquifer is recorded by BGS's electrical resistivity imaging system RESCAN.
The mapping of disturbed ground is an important aspect of the BGS Core mapping programme, particularly in urban areas.
Geophysical methods have been successfully applied to such mapping in two areas: at Coleorton, Leicestershire, where abandoned near-surface coal workings lie on the line of a new trunk road; and at Hayle, Cornwall, where shafts of old copper mines were detected at the site of a new water-treatment plant.
BGS has developed high-frequency sources and receivers for acoustic imaging that can resolve features down to about a metre.
In Northern Ireland, a detailed gravity survey  was made in the Cushendall area.
One of the objectives of this work was to trace the south-westward extension of the Highland Boundary Fault.
A desk study was also carried out to assess the potential for the use of electromagnetic soundings in the evaluation of structure in this area.
The potential for the use of such soundings for the mapping of deep structure was well demonstrated in the Eye area of Suffolk.
The data established the depth to basement rocks, and are of hydrogeological interest because anomalous conductivities arising from saline water at the base of the chalk aquifer are readily detectable.
Mineral exploration geophysics Geophysical input is provided to a number of programmes in other part of BGS, among which is the Mineral Reconnaissance Programme (whose work is described more fully in the section on minerals and geochemical surveys).
The MRP investigation of the mineral potential of selected areas of basic rocks in North Wales included an important geophysical component, with gravity, magnetic and very-low-frequency electromagnetic surveys.
In the study area, regional-scale data show that a well-defined gravity high coincides with significant aeromagnetic anomalies.
Initial indications are that the basic rocks responsible for the gravity anomaly are more extensive than originally mapped.
Models of the field data, gathered from three detailed traverses, will be reported in the coming year.
The Engineering Geology and Geophysics Group's responsibilities for borehole geophysics extend to boreholes drilled for mineral exploration.
Three deep boreholes in north-east Scotland were sited in order to test geophysical anomalies.
Induced-polarisation and resistivity measurements were made in the boreholes, and magnetic susceptibility logs were compiled from data recorded from core.
Interpretation of these data awaits the results of geochemical analyses of core material.
Databasing of the considerable MRP geophysics archive has continued, with useful progress on several fronts.
Data from some of the detailed airborne geophysical surveys made in the early years of the MRP have been digitised.
A collection of induced-polarisation and resistivity data from boreholes, recorded as part of several MRP drilling programmes, has also been digitised.
A major achievement has been the digitisation of a commercial aeromagnetic dataset held by BGS, covering a large part of north-east Scotland.
These digital data will now be of benefit both to further mineral exploration work in that area, and to the East Grampians mapping project.
Geoarchaeology
During the year under review, a range of earth-science techniques applicable to archaeology has been the subject of a continued publicity and marketing initiative, including attendance by BGS staff at conferences in this country and abroad, augmented by lectures, poster displays and publications.
Public awareness of the value of applying these techniques to archaeology has increased in consequence.
The range of disciplines applied to both regional and local assessment of archaeological sites in the landscape has been widened to include geophysics, geochemistry, airborne remote sensing and satellite imagery.
Visits to Keyworth by staff from archaeological units and county planning departments continue to be an important part of the initiative, highlighting the importance of the wide range of datasets held by BGS.
The number of enquiries and sales has increased
Geophysical surveys resulting from the initiative have been made to study saltern mounds on the Lincolnshire coast (for Lindsey Archaeological Services and English Heritage); to delineate terrace gravels near the Trent containing evidence of Roman settlement (Trent and Peak Archaeological Trust and Steetly Products Ltd); and to define the extent of a deserted medieval village under threat from road improvements (Leicestershire County Council).
The investigations of Quaternary sediments identified palaeochannels containing important environmental material contemporaneous with the nearby site.
In addition, a bathymetric survey of Finlaggan Loch, Islay, which was made for the National Museum of Scotland, was combined with investigations by a BGS diving team.
The interpretation of the complex form and history of the loch and the area around the settlement was much improved, a submerged causeway was located, and assorted artefacts were recovered.
BGS is collaborating with the Leicestershire Archaeological Unit in a long-term study to investigate the utility of NERC airborne multispectral scanner data (including thermal infra-red linescanner data) in locating new archaeological sites and the complex changes in the course of the Trent that have influenced the distribution of settlements since the Bronze Age.
Borehole geophysics The Group borehole geophysics team logged 44 boreholes over the year, mostly in collaboration with the BGS Hydrogeology Group and with the mapping groups within the TMOS Division.
Eight boreholes were logged at sites in Oxfordshire and Hertfordshire, as part of site-specific studies into industrial organic solvent pollution in the Chalk aquifer.
The geophysical observations provided data on aquifer inhomogeneity, which can be compared with the pattern of solvent dispersal (a fuller description of this work appears earlier in this section under the heading The legacy of industry ) A further six boreholes were logged for Anglian Water plc to determine the thickness of the confined Lower Greensand aquifer of north-west Norfolk, and lateral variation within it.
A pilot scheme is being developed to blend low-nitrate water from the Greensand with high-nitrate water from the Chalk.
A study of the dewatering of the Carboniferous Limestone of the Mendips involved borehole logging at seven sites.
A particular concern in this area is that deep quarrying of the limestone below the water table may have a detrimental effect on the surrounding Inferior Oolite (Jurassic) aquifers.
Twenty boreholes were logged as part of the BGS Core mapping programme, of which fifteen had been drilled specifically for the programme, and five were pre-existing water-supply boreholes made available to BGS.
Twelve of the boreholes were on the areas of the Coventry, Grantham, Shaftesbury and Witney map sheets; the remaining eight were in the Bedford area, in connection with the Fuller's Earth project.
The three boreholes that were logged in the Huntly area of north-east Scotland for the Mineral Reconnaissance Programme, provided a rare opportunity to collect geophysical data in situ in igneous and metamorphic rocks.
BGS provided the logging scientist for Leg 133 of the Ocean Drilling Program, in which the carbonate platform off north-east Australia was drilled.
The drilling provided for the first time borehole information on the age and evolution of the Great Barrier Reef Pore morphology was seen to be a control on both the resistivity and velocity logs, and when combined with Formation Micro Scanner data, should enable laboratory research to provide the basis of enhanced geological interpretation of the downhole geophysical logs.
Databasing and archive
The Group's responsibility for site-specific geophysical surveys brings with it the parallel responsibility for databasing the considerable archive of material from surveys of this kind made over the 40 years since the Geophysics Department was set up in the former Geological Survey of Great Britain.
The archive has two types of record: survey location maps and field data records.
The first phase of this work was to index the holdings of all the records in the archive.
This work is largely complete.
The second phase, digitising the survey location information, is progressing well, and in the next  phase a new unified index, based on the Ordnance Survey 1:10 000 quarter-sheets will be created.
This will encompass the widest possible range of survey descriptors, and will provide for cross-referencing to other BGS databases.
Red clay soils are sampled and tested in Kenya and Indonesia in the course of a project to investigate their engineering geological characteristics.
Left A soil profile in a plantation at the Coffee Research Station in central Kenya is sampled by means of a triple tube sampling barrel, designed by BGS, and middle the core samples are retrieved in lengths of 1.5 metres.
A considerable proportion of the archive relates to the very extensive survey work carried out by BGS's Applied Geophysics Unit for the Department of Trade and Industry's Mineral Reconnaissance Programme in the 1970s, and the archiving has therefore been supported with both MRP and BGS funds.
Overseas activities
Work continued on the second phase of the project commissioned by ODA to investigate the engineering geological characteristics of tropical red-clay soils.
Field sampling in Indonesia is supplementing earlier work in Kenya.
A collaborative project in Zimbabwe brought together remote sensing and hydrogeology as well as engineering geophysics.
Work was also undertaken in Ethiopia, Uganda, Hong Kong and Brazil.
Full descriptions of these projects are to be found at the end the section on international activities on p.54.
In west Java right tests are made in a trial pit.
In this in-situ collapse/consolidation test, water is added to the sample under  constant load, and the deformation is read from the dial  gauges to be seen in the middle of the picture.
International Activities
BGS activities overseas are mainly funded by, and carried out on behalf of, the British government's Overseas Development Administration (ODA).
They form part of Britain's continuing provision of aid and technical assistance to developing countries.
Over a hundred BGS staff worked in around 40 countries during the year, either full- or part-time.
The programmes undertaken are of two main types, the one country-specific, the other regional in emphasis.
The country-specific programmes, in particular, involve an important element of training and strengthening of counterpart organisations, linked to geological survey, mineral and energy resource investigations.
These technical cooperation (TC) programmes are mostly long-term assignments carried out by residential BGS teams, backed by shorter visits from headquarters based specialist staff and senior management.
ODA provides, through the British Council, many project-related degree courses at British universities.
BGS also continues to second staff to fill established posts in geological survey departments in the developing nations of the Commonwealth.
The programmes of regional type are research-oriented; an increasing emphasis is being placed on environmental protection.
They are carried out by United Kingdom-based staff, who go overseas on short-term assignments which aim to generate effective techniques of mineral, energy and groundwater resource exploration and development that are applicable to and will find general use in Third World countries.
Unlike the country-specific programmes, these projects are not dependent on formal requests from the governments of developing nations for their implementation but can only be carried out with their support.
They involve active and valuable collaboration between the BGS and relevant organisations in the countries concerned.
In addition to the programme funded by the government, non-governmental commissioned research was undertaken during the year: for example, staff on leave-of-absence or secondment terms fulfilled contract and consultancy roles in Fiji, Hong Kong, Jordan and Laos.
Bids were prepared for commercial work in the Falkland Islands and Laos.
The overseas work programmes are managed from within the International Division (formerly the Overseas Directorate) of BGS at Keyworth, by an Assistant Director and three Regional Geologists.
The Regional Geologists are responsible for BGS activities and for liaison and advisory work in Africa and the Middle East; Asia; and Latin America and the Pacific respectively.
Overseas hydrogeology is managed from Wallingford.
In the following sections of the report, country-specific programmes are outlined first, followed by remote sensing and regional programmes.
Africa and the Middle East
Botswana Two BGS staff remained on secondment to the Botswana Geological Survey Department, where they fill established posts of principal regional geologist and hydrogeologist.
The principal geologist is responsible for the planning and implementation of the regional mapping programme, editing reports and maps for publication, and supervising the library, technical records and publications sections.
The hydrogeologist supervised the national groundwater monitoring programme and retained overall responsibility for the computerisation of water borehole records.
This computerisation involves both Survey staff and outside consultants appointed to establish the large digitised archive.
A primary objective for ODA-funded BGS support for the Geological Survey Department is the training of junior professional and technical staff so that both posts may eventually be filled by local staff.
Training is both on the job and in the United Kingdom under British Council scholarships.
Left Participants in a BGS training course in photogeology make a stop in the southern Jordan desert at a dramatic cliff section of Palaeozoic red-brown and white fluvial sandstone unconformably overlying dark grey Proterozoic igneous rocks.
Egypt Under an Institutional Twinning arrangement support was provided to the Egyptian Geological Survey and Mining Authority's 1:250 000 geological mapping programme.
Professional advice and on-the-job training was provided to two field parties working on late Proterozoic volcanic-ophiolite-granite rocks in the South-eastern desert.
Egyptian geologists compiled the resulting maps under BGS supervision in Keyworth.
Right A BGS geologist and two Jordanian colleagues examine Lower Palaeozoic sandstones in the course of detailed stratigraphical studies in remote south-east Jordan.
Jordan In the latter part of the year the project activities were overshadowed by events in the Gulf.
However, normal work continued until mid-January, when short-term visits were suspended and the residential staff were withdrawn until April.
The project staff continued to support the 1:50 000 geological mapping programme  of the Jordan Natural Resource Authority (NRA) by providing professional supervision, advice and editing.
The stratigrapher/sedimentologist continued a programme of stratigraphic correlation of data from boreholes and surface sections.
A national standard lithostratigraphy for the Palaeozoic in the subsurface of Jordan was prepared for publication.
Following the departure of the resident cartographer in May, support for geological cartography was maintained by continuing to supply and maintain equipment and materials.
In addition to the above work, BGS staff made short-term training and consultancy visits.
A hydrogeologist and an isotope chemist provided professional advice to the ongoing geothermal resource study.
Hot-water sources with potential for winter greenhouse heating have been identified on the central Jordan plateau, and further studies are being undertaken.
In October, a BGS photogeologist, assisted by the resident team, ran a training course for NRA geologists.
An innovation for courses of this type was the inclusion of a series of photogeological field exercises in south and east Jordan.
Kenya The Editorial and Reporting Project aims to restart the publication programme of the Geological Survey Department by training junior Kenyan professional staff in field survey and report preparation, and by providing editorial and desk-top publishing services to eliminate an existing backlog of unpublished manuscripts.
One BGS officer is in post and he has been supported by a consultant editor.
Above and above right Volcanic centres in the northern Rift Valley of Kenya are being investigated as a possible source of geothermal energy.
On the left is a Recent volcano, and on the right the Barrier volcano, with Lake Turkana in the distance.
A desk-top publishing system with trained staff is now established in the Department.
Three reports in the major backlog are printed, one is at the printers, two are at camera-ready-copy stage, and two are in hand.
In the Western Province, fieldwork for the revision mapping of five 1:50 000 sheets is complete and the maps and reports are in preparation.
In the Eastern and Central provinces, revision mapping which had originally concentrated on the Proterozoic metamorphic rocks of the 'Mozambique Belt' has now been extended to include Mount Kenya, Africa's second highest mountain.
Right Lake Alice lies in a hollow formed at 13 000 feet on the slopes of Mt Kenya.
The underlying rock is the late Pleistocene to Recent Ithanguni trachytic complex.
BGS mapping in the East and Central provinces of Kenya has been extended to include the area in which Mt Kenya stands.
The bulk of this stratovolcano is composed of phonolites, but the mapping has demonstrated that almost half of Mount Kenya's slopes are the product of major epiclastic reworking, mainly by debris flows.
A large Late Pleistocene to Recent trachytic complex — Ithanguni, on the north-east slopes — was remapped.
Ithanguni is important because it has contributed most of the fine ash deposits that blanket the lower slopes of west Mount Kenya and make rich farming  and ranching land.
On the south-west flanks of the mountain, deeply incised rivers expose a major industrial mineral resource of pumiceous tuffs, which provide much high-quality building stone to Nyeri and the surrounding densely populated countryside.
This area of pumiceous tuffs is only a small part of a much larger blanket of Pliocene ignimbrites covering more than 20 000 square kilometres, which originated from a catastrophic eruptive phase in the central sections of what is now the Kenya rift.
The two resident staff concerned with Phase II of the Exploration for Geothermal Energy Project completed a series of maps at 1:50 000 of four dormant volcanoes — Korosi, Paka, Silali and Emuruangogolak — in the northern Rift Valley, and prepared draft reports on the geology and geothermal activity for each.
A technical review meeting held in Nairobi in October was attended by representatives of the British and Kenya governments, the commercial sector and aid agencies.
At this meeting a major publication presenting the results of Phase I of the project was released, and it was announced that ODA would provide further funding to enable the project area to be extended northwards to Lake Turkana.
Following the decision to extend the project, the survey of the volcanoes Namarunu and The Barrier has been completed.
These two trachyte-basalt shield volcanoes are in a remote and inhospitable area of the northern rift where helicopter support was essential.
Namarunu volcano is deeply dissected and pervasive hydrothermal alteration is everywhere to be seen, but there is no geothermal activity at the surface.
However, the discovery of an extensive hot-spring system on the rift floor around the eastern flanks suggests that Namarunu could still be significantly hot at depth.
The Barrier volcanic complex includes Telekis volcano, which is the most recently active centre in the Kenyan rift.
It is composed of three distinct volcanic edifices, the youngest of which has a large caldera which constrains the surface geothermal activity.
There are numerous steam jets and areas of superheated ground along fissure systems and ring faults.
On both volcanoes there is evidence that there was significant hot-spring activity on the summit areas in the past.
These former hot-spring systems may have formed during pluvial periods, when extensive lakes covered the rift valley and water tables were considerably higher than at present.
If this is so, it has important implications for the exploitation of geothermal resources.
Malawi The field-mapping training officer with the Geological Survey Department completed his assignment during the year.
Three trainees were given instruction in geological map preparation and report writing using field data collected during the 1989–90 field season.
Two new trainees joined the programme and were instructed in the preparation of base-maps from aerial photographs and photogeological interpretation.
They subsequently carried out geological mapping at 1:25 000 in the Nkhotakota Game Reserve.
This area is part of a larger block which was being remapped in order to complete the 1:250 000 compilation of the region.
A complex, migmatised metasedimentary sequence with calcsilicates and metavolcanic layers was found to be intruded by a synkinematic porphyritic granite.
Later ductile shearing on the granite contact has produced a sequence of porphyroblastic gneisses and mylonites.
Zambia An ODA-funded consultancy was undertaken to examine the backlog of unpublished maps and reports held by the Geological Survey Department and make recommendations on how it can be reduced or eliminated.
Zimbabwe Geological investigations are continuing in the Archaean Midlands Greenstone Belt of Zimbabwe as part of an integrated exploration project in which appropriate methods of regional structural analysis are being introduced as a basis for formulating sound gold exploration strategies and identifying targets for follow-up by the commercial sector.By the end of the second year about 1700 square kilometres (or 70%) of the project area has been tectonically mapped at scales of 1:25 000 to 1:50 000, and selected areas, including over 80 medium-to-small gold mines, have been subjected to detailed structural analysis at survey scales of 1:200 to 1:2500.
In terms of regional structural controls most of the auriferous deposits in the project area are spatially related to first-order faults and shear zones within the belt and along its margins; to major anticlinal fold axial traces and limb shears; or to the fracture envelopes around the major granitoid intrusions Follow-up geochemical field testing of soils for arsenic over selected targets outside the known gold mining districts was 60–70% successful in demonstrating that certain predicted structural settings would be mineralised.
There were significant gold showings in three of ten targets investigated.
The first two of a series of four two-week training workshops for would-be small-scale miners were held in Bulawayo and Chegutu respectively.
These courses, which are organised in collaboration with the Small-Scale Miners' Association of Zimbabwe and the Intermediate Technology Development Group, are designed to give intensive practical training in basic geology, gold prospection, surveying, sampling, orebody evaluation, business and financial planning as well as covering mining law, mine engineering, beneficiation methods, etc.
Each course caters for up to 25 English-speaking participants for which basic items of surveying and mineral separation equipment are provided.
Apart from the BGS staff working on the Midlands Greenstone Project, described above, the posts of chief economic geologist and editorial geologist were filled by BGS staff seconded to the Geological Survey Department for three years.
Asia
Bangladesh A member of BGS staff continued to advise ODA on the Barapukuria Coalfield Project, which covers exploratory drilling and site evaluation by British firms on contract to ODA.
A final monitoring visit was made early in the year.
China Scientific collaboration with the Ministry of Geology continued under the auspices of the Royal Society.
Final reports and atlases are being prepared in the United Kingdom with the assistance of a Chinese coworker, following a collaborative programme which integrated geological mapping, geochemistry, geophysics and remote sensing in a study of the metallogeny of granites of the South Jiangxi Province.
Under a programme jointly funded by BGS, the Royal Society and the National Natural Science Foundation of China, a visit was made to north-eastern China to investigate the structural relationships between the North and South China cratons.
As part of the project a Chinese graduate student, based at the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth , is studying the evolution of the Precambrian sequences of the Shandong Peninsula.
Hong Kong BGS has an open-ended consultancy agreement with the Hong Kong Geotechnical Control Office, of which the Geological Survey is a section.
Under this consultancy, BGS staff are seconded on unpaid leave into established posts or are retained as resident or short-term consultants.
During the year, three posts, Head of Geological Survey, mapping geologist, and marine geologist, were filled by secondees from BGS.
The fieldwork for the 1:20 000 mapping programme was completed on schedule, and all outstanding maps and memoirs will be published during 1991.
The series of twenty 1:5000 geological maps covering the buried marble area of north-west New Territories, produced by the BGS consultant, were published.
The consultant returned to Hong Kong in late 1990 to undertake a three-month study of a newly discovered area of buried cavitous marble at Ma On Shan in the central New Territories.
Site  investigations for a new-town project to house a population of 380 000 had revealed marble with cavities buried beneath 50 metres of superficial deposits in an area recently reclaimed from the sea.
The area underlain by marble was accurately delineated by means of closely spaced specially drilled deep boreholes, and the resulting maps have allowed the town planning authorities to modify their layouts.
The ambitious Port and Airport Development programme, which includes a new international airport on Lantau Island, was initiated during the year, and all staff of the Geological Survey were much involved with the project.
To accommodate the major developments, large areas of land will be reclaimed, with an emphasis on the provision of fill material from offshore sand sources.
BGS's involvement in the Geotechnical Control Office marine fill study continued and increased as the Hong Kong government expanded the search for offshore sand and gravel deposits.
BGS was commissioned to undertake a territory-wide gravity survey related to the new airport development, followed by a study of the seismo-tectonics of Hong Kong.
BGS has continued to provide specialist services in the fields of palaeontology, petrography and geochemistry.
One Hong Kong geologist spent five weeks with BGS in the United Kingdom being trained in field mapping techniques.
Top A drilling barge operates off the Hong Kong coast, where BGS geologists are making borehole and seismic interpretations for marine geological maps and memoirs.
Indonesia In its second year the Southern Sumatra Geological and Mineral Exploration Project continued the bilateral technical cooperation programme between the Directorate of Mineral Resources (DMR), the Geological Research and Development Centre (GRDC) of the Directorate General of Geology and Mineral Resources of Indonesia, and the British Geological Survey.
The project area covers the island of Sumatra south of the equator, and the BGS project coordinator/ economic geologist, project geologist, geochemist and geophysicist are based in Bandung.
Middle A BGS scientist (left), on secondment to the Hong Kong Geological Survey, briefs HE the Governor of Hong Kong, Sir David Wilson, on the geology of Chek Lap Kok, the site of the planned new airport for Hong Kong.
In the geological editorial programme in GRDC, work continued on the editing of two 1:1 000 000 geological maps and two 1:250 000 geological maps and reports.
Three 1:250 000 sheets were field checked.
A workshop on the interpretation of synthetic aperture radar imagery in the form of stereostrips and mosaics, was conducted in July by a remote sensing specialist from BGS.
Radar imagery interpretations of the geology and structure of eight 1:250 000 sheets were completed.
Bottom BGS geologists working in Indonesia collect an oil sample from a disused wartime oil well in the course of field work in the Oubilin Basin in Sumatra.
The Gravity Mapping Programme in GRDC focused  on the completion of regional gravity coverage in the mountainous western and swamp-covered eastern parts of southern Sumatra.
Four geophysical teams made a total of 600 gravity determinations during the year, as a result of which gravity data coverage increased from 50 to 70 percent.
Towards the end of 1990 the first proofs of four 1:250 000 gravity maps were checked.
The maps are to be published in 1991.
Training was given to geophysicists in Interactive Surface Mapping (ISM) on the newly installed VAX mainframe computer and in gravity and magnetic modelling techniques on personal computers.
The Regional Geochemical Survey in DMR progressed with the collection of drainage samples in three 1:250 000 sheet areas.
Chemical analysis and reanalysis and preparation of databases continued, and plotting software for use on personal computers was developed.Two atomic absorption spectrophotometers were rebuilt, and a BGS chemist commissioned the new DMR Fire Assay Laboratory and conducted a workshop on fire assaying during July.
Laos Following the award to BGS in August 1990 of a six-month Asian Development Bank consultancy, a BGS-led team comprising a geologist, an exploration geochemist, a bibliographer and a cartographer, together with a mineral economist from British Mining Consultants Limited, worked at the Department of Geology and Mines (DGM), Vientiane, between September 1990 and March 1991 to draw up a new Mineral Exploration and Development Plan for the government of the Lao PDR.
The main aims of the project were to formulate the course to be followed by the government to assess the worth of mineral resources of the Lao PDR and to provide an action plan for generating hard currency from minerals within a constantly evolving and highly competitive world economy.
The Lao PDR has good mineral potential for gold, copper, lead and zinc, which are currently ranked as mineral commodities of the first importance in world markets.
These metals occur in veins and alteration zones associated with volcanic and subvolcanic rocks.
There is also significant potential for gem-quality sapphires and for tin, as well as for industrial minerals such as gypsum, baryte, cement and abrasives.
The results of the project are to be shown on a new full-colour geological and mineral-occurrence map at 1:1 000 000 covering the whole country.
The map will be on sale at the DGM from mid-1991, together with a brochure for investors which includes a version of the map at 1:2 500 000.
Malaysia The first phase of the gold exploration subproject under the current Technical Cooperation agreement with the Geological Survey of Malaysia was completed.
An inventory and initial classification of the principal known gold deposits has been produced, and BGS has put forward proposals for a further programme of structural and chemical studies at prospect and regional scale to begin in 1991.
Latin America
Bolivia Compilation of the results of the third phase of the Precambrian project continued and the 1:1 000 000 mineral map of eastern Bolivia was prepared for printing.
Colombia The Pacific Coast Precious Metals Project (MPP), based in Cali, was completed during the year.
The project report and maps dealing with the regional geology and gold potential of part of the western flank of the Cordillera Occidental of south-west Colombia were handed over to the counterpart organisation.
During the four years of the project the BGS work established that the widespread placer gold deposits of the Pacific Coastal Littoral were in broad terms directly related to the presence of major mid-Quaternary mudflow deposits that either contained significant concentrations of fine-grained gold and accordingly were mined directly, or overlay older gold-rich palaeochannels preserved as deep-lead deposits.
Some of these deposits are interpreted as having originated in areas of extensive hydrothermal activity that were remobilised during the Quaternary following local volcanic and/or earthquake activity.
Subsequent reworking about regional N–S normal faults resulted in the deposition of gravels locally enriched in gold.
The atomic composition (gold:silver:copper) of the alluvial gold, in conjunction with the gold-inclusion data, regional geochemical studies and the geological field data, suggests the bulk of the alluvial gold was of intrusive origin, most probably related to mesothermal vein mineralisation above mid to late-Miocene intrusives located along regional faults in the Cretaceous metavolcanosedimentary sequence of the Western Cordillera.
Some of the gold, however, was clearly derived from an ultrabasic source; local higher-level epithermal mineralisation cannot be ruled out, but seems unlikely.
As a result of these conclusions, Ingeominas, the counterpart organisation, will now direct its exploration strategy throughout the western flank of the Cordillera Occidental towards locating major mudflow deposits on radar and satellite imagery and working upstream from these to potential source areas of bonanza lode-gold deposits.
During the four years of the project, counterpart geologists have undertaken short training courses in exploration geophysics, exploration geochemistry, heavy mineral identification, gold analysis using the scanning electron microscope, the use of microcomputers in mineral exploration, and remote sensing and mineral beneficiation, in addition to several in-house training seminars.
Costa Rica The three-year collaborative industrial-minerals project was completed during the year.
The first phase of the project was undertaken by two BGS staff and led to the publication in 1990 of a systematic inventory of the industrial minerals of the country.
In the second phase one resident geologist with short term specialist support worked in more detail on three commodities identified in the Phase I studies as having the most economic potential.
Metamorphic basement schists of the Cordillera Real, Ecuador (foreground) have been buried by the lavas of El Altar volcano in the distance.
These follow-up work included a detailed investigation of three diatomite deposits in Guanacaste Province of north-west Costa Rica.
About 3 million tonnes of good-quality reserves were defined at Loma Camstro, the most promising of the deposits.
Diatomite is now being extracted for use as a filter aid and as an anti-caking agent for coating fertiliser pellets.
In the second follow-up, also in Guanacaste Province, a borehole was drilled through the Barra Honda Limestone.
Studies indicate the limestone is of very pure, and meets international specifications for almost all uses.
BGS has recommended that potential export markets should be assessed.
The borehole also provided new information that will lead to a structural reinterpretation of parts of the Tempisque forearc basin, the hydrocarbon potential of which is being investigated by a local organisation.
A preliminary exploration programme for bentonite (the third commodity to be followed up) encountered several occurrences of the valuable clay.
This exploration will be continued by the Costa Ricans.
A postgraduate course in industrial minerals was initiated by project staff at the University of Costa Rica, and two working seminars were presented by visiting BGS experts in laboratory assessment of bentonites and limestones.
An ongoing ODA-funded professional linkage has been negotiated between BGS and the government of Costa Rica.
Ecuador The geological reconnaissance phase of the Cordillera Real Geological Research Project ended in March 1990.
Subsequent work in Ecuador has been divided into three programmes under the control of individual residential BGS geologists working with counterparts from the Ecuador Institute of Mines (INEMIN).
The Cordillera Real Mineral Programme is an in-depth metallogenic study following on the first four years' reconnaissance.
Fieldwork has concentrated on mineralisation in greenstones of the Jurassic Alao division and sediments cut by Cainozoic intrusives.
A number of quartz-carbonate veins bearing copper, zinc, lead, silver and gold have been examined and massive volcanogenic sulphide mineralisation has been confirmed.
Polymetallic mineralisation related to intrusions includes mesothermal or epithermal veins and hydrothermal breccias in granodiorite and dacite porphyries.
The El Oro Reconnaissance Programme is an investigation of the remaining area of metamorphic basement in south-west Ecuador and comprises east-trending (trans-Andean) rocks including ophiolites and blueschists.
Work in the south of this complex has revealed a Palaeozoic turbidite sequence intruded by numerous elongated late-Triassic granites, unusually aluminous and in places topaz-bearing.
Metamorphism becomes more intense northwards as does the abundance of the granites, which were emplaced syntectonically and deformed along east-trending vertical shear zones.
The National Map Programme includes the compilation of geologic, tectonic and metallogenic maps of Ecuador.
Data from the Cordillera Real and El Oro studies combined with field checks elsewhere indicate that a complex collage of terranes accreted during the Mesozoic, and the new maps use this collage as a tectonic framework.
The terranes include both oceanic and continental microplates.
All the continental microplates contain Palaeozoic metamorphic rocks intruded by late Jurassic granites.
The Inter-Andean Depression of Ecuador is controlled by two terrane boundaries (sutures), the Cainozoic reactivation of which provided channelways for the double chain of volcanic cordilleras, which form a caldera-graben.
Material collected in south-east Ecuador has revealed for the first time Triassic marine sediments with bivalves, as well as Jurassic microfloras and Cretaceous macrofaunas.
A Tertiary characinid fish was recovered from a previously unknown sequence near the watershed of the Cordillera Real.
The Pacific Islands
Fiji The senior hydrogeologist post of the Mineral Resources Department was filled by a Fijian during the year.
Before that the BGS hydrogeologist's main responsibility was to manage the investigation of the Sigatoka alluvial aquifers, which are to be developed for irrigation.
Solomon Islands BGS geologists filled the posts of principal mapping geologist/ geochemist and senior mapping geologist within the Ministry of Natural Resources during 1990/91.
They mainly worked on the final phase of a mapping and mineral exploration programme on the island of Santa Isabel, in which four BGS geologists have worked at various times over a six-year period.
Two geological maps covering western Isabel at 1:100 000 together with an accompanying report, and a compilation volume describing the geology and mineral resources of the whole island, were completed during the year.
The greater part of Santa Isabel has been confirmed as an uplifted marginal portion of the Ontong Java Plateau, an elevated area of anomalously thick oceanic crust which is here overlain by pelagic limestones and andesitic volcaniclastic sediments derived from an adjacent island arc.
Along the southern side of the island an ophiolitic suite with basalts unusually low in barium but high in titanium, zirconium and phosphorus is separated from the main part of the island by a major suture marked by serpentinite pods and lenses.
Geochemical results obtained as part of a collaborative study with the University of Hawaii confirm the separate identities of the terranes on either side of the suture.
At present exploration companies are much interested in the nickeliferous laterites that overlie the serpentinites on Santa Isabel, and stream-sediment geochemical work carried out by the Ministry has revealed a number of nickel and other metal anomalies that warrant further attention.
The mapping and mineral exploration of the northern part of the island of Malaita was started during the year.
Results so far confirm that the stratigraphy of the island is similar to that of Santa Isabel.
Major thrust structures probably reflect the emplacement and uplift of this part of the Ontong Java Plateau at the end of the Pliocene.
Alkaline basalts record the passage of the plateau over a hotspot during the Eocene.
Other duties of the BGS geologists during the year have included the identification of sources of rock aggregate for the construction of a hydroelectric plant and the assessment of environmental impact prior to the development of a gold mine on the island of Guadalcanal.
Vanuatu The established posts of Director and applied hydrogeologist in the Department of Geology, Mines and Rural Water Supply are filled by BGS staff.
The Director is also Commissioner for Mines, and vice-chairman and national representative for Vanuatu in the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC).
His duties include monitoring private sector prospecting (principally of promising gold and manganese deposits), licensing minerals exploration, coordinating the onshore and offshore studies of several international research organisations, and advising government on all geoscience matters, including water supply.
The applied hydrogeologist coordinates the national drilling programme for rural and urban water supplies, advises government on groundwater, surface-water, pollution and waste-disposal issues, and maintains the national hydrogeological database.
Some of the interesting scientific and development projects currently in hand for Vanuatu are deep ocean drilling on ODP Leg 134, geothermal energy investigations near the capital Port Vila, and the emplacement of a wave-energy measuring buoy.
Legislation for petroleum and water is currently being designed, and a water-resource planning map is projected, based on a computerised hydrological database that is currently in hand.
BGS scientists visited Harrachor Mine in northern Bohemia in the course of a field study of Variscan orogenic provinces in Czechoslovakia.
Europe
Three BGS scientists visited Czechoslovakia in 1990 at the invitation of the Czech Geological Survey (WG).
They gave a seminar at the headquarters of WG in Prague, and participated in a field study of the Variscan orogenic provinces in northern and eastern Bohemia.
There are contrasting styles of mineralisation in the Krupka orefield (granite-related tin and tungsten), at Harrachov (fissure-vein baryte and fluorite), and in the Jeseník district (gold in black shales).
In the Suchna-Rudna area, they sampled auriferous quartz veins hosted by carbonaceous Upper Palaeozoic flysch-type sediments in order to make fluid-inclusion studies for comparison with gold deposits in Spain, Portugal and the United Kingdom.
They also sampled post-orogenic sedimentary sequences in northern Bohemia in order to make biostratigraphic comparison between the Carboniferous-Permian boundary succession in that part of Bohemia and in south-west Britain.
Remote sensing
Remote sensing and image analysis support a variety of programmes both overseas (mainly funded by ODA) and in the United Kingdom.
Facilities include the I&sup2 S Model 75 and IVAS image-analysis systems linked to a VAX 8550 mainframe, and a PC-based system running ERDAS software.
The staff are specialists in image processing, digital remote sensing, and photogeology.
Above left This Landsat TM image shows south-east Zimbabwe during the dry season.
The image has been processed so that the colours represent gradations in vegetation density, ranging from blue (no green vegetation) through cyan, green and yellow to red (maximum vegetation cover).
[Vegetation density was calculated as the Difference Vegetation Index (DVI), and combined with the intensity component (representing topographic information) in an intensity-hue-saturation transformation of bands 3, 4, and 5.
The image was then retransformed back to red green blue colour space for display.]
On the ground right, in area B, the pale-toned ridges are coloured by kaolinititic alteration, and the lower slopes and ridges by iron oxides and hydroxides.
Remote sensing, engineering geophysics and hydrogeological techniques are being used in a study in south-east Zimbabwe aimed at improving the success rate of boreholes and dug wells so as to improve the provision of a reliable supply of clean water to rural communities in developing countries, particularly in semiarid tropical regions where droughts are frequent.
The geology of the study area consists of crystalline granite-greenstone basement rocks covered by regolith, and rainfall is low.
Data from Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) imagery have been processed to enhance subtle variations in vegetation density: in semiarid terrain such variations often correlate with the availability of ground moisture.
After the data have been processed, colour-coded vegetation levels can be seen superimposed on the relief.
This imagery is being used in the preparation of a hydrogeological map of the region.
Intensive surface geophysical surveys comprising galvanic resistivity, electromagnetic (including TEM), magnetic and radiometric measurements were made at four sites in where strong photolineaments, which were assumed to indicate regional-scale faulting, have been recognised.
Above right This detail from a Landsat TM image shows an area in the Arabian Shield, in the South-eastern Desert of Egypt.
Bright yellow areas show the presence of clay and iron-hydroxide minerals.
There is a gold mine in one such area (A in the south-west of the image), but a similar zone of alteration in the east (B) was previously unknown, and may have economic potential.
None of the surface techniques gave a well-defined and unambiguous response, and the yields of boreholes tapping these features were generally disappointing, suggesting that fracturing is not well developed at depth.
To test this possibility a cross-hole seismic tomography experiment has been designed, and equipment has been modified to suit the local geology where attenuation in the fractured basement aquifer is expected to be high.
It will be essential to drill shallow boreholes between the exploratory wells to ensure that  any steeply dipping fractures are not missed by the tomographic software.
The fieldwork is scheduled for 1991/92.
Remote sensing continues to provide important inputs to the Professional Link scheme between the British and Egyptian geological surveys, involving mapping/ training in the late Precambrian granite-ophiolite terrain of the South-eastern Desert of Egypt.
Landsat TM imagery, processed as hybrid composite images, have been used to identify zones of sericite, kaolinite, haematite and quartz-stockwork alteration in an area of volcanic schists containing epithermal and alluvial gold, known since Pharaonic times.
Some newly recognised alteration zones remain to be assessed.
At a regional scale, the imagery provides the basis for the geological mapping.
Increasing emphasis is being placed on the role that remote sensing can play in temperate climates such as Britain, where commonly the soils are glacially transported and where natural vegetation patterns have been extensively modified.
Panchromatic and false-colour infrared images, registered to the British National Grid, are proving very effective for the interpretation of both regional structures and geomorphology (see frontispiece ).
Imagery of the Lake District has been used to analyse the lineament pattern of the region.
Selected Landsat TM imagery taken during the winter months when the sun was low is being systematically processed for the entire United Kingdom land area.
These images enlarged to a scale of 1:100 000 provide information complementary to that from conventional aerial photographs.
Imagery from the Daedalus 1268 11-channel multispectral scanner and the Daedalus 1230 thermal infrared linescanner, acquired under the 1990 NERC Airborne Remote Sensing Campaign, have been used to locate archaeological remains in an area under threat from gravel extraction in the Trent Valley.
The images have pointed to the presence of several previously unknown sites of potential significance which need to be investigated on the ground.
Training courses in image analysis and remote sensing (including photogeology) are provided regularly to staff of BGS and overseas geological surveys.
The courses are designed to meet the needs of specific countries, taking account of the types of data and processing facilities locally available.
During the year BGS gave a remote sensing and image-analysis training course in Bandung, Indonesia, and a photogeology course in Jordan.
Staff of the Remote Sensing Group are preparing a new remote-sensing training manual for geologists in developing countries.
Image processing of datasets from sources other than remote sensing, such as geophysical gravity and aeromagnetic data, and geochemical element concentrations, has continued.
Being able to integrate such datasets digitally has made it possible to generate prospectivity maps in a study of carbonate-hosted buried mineral deposits in the north of England.
Regional programmes
These programmes comprise resource studies, energy studies, development of techniques, hydrogeology, and environmental and engineering geology.
All are funded under the ODA R&D programme.
Resource studies Two closely related projects are being undertaken under this heading.
An ongoing project is concerned with the assessment of mineral deposits such as building materials and industrial minerals for local use (which are of little interest to international mining companies), and the development of techniques for beneficiating minerals from such deposits.
During the year BGS worked on diatomite from Thailand, Egyptian brick clays and bentonites from Costa Rica.
Staff made several technology-transfer visits, and started work on samples from Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Bound copies of seventeen commodity and technique factsheets were produced.
These factsheets are very popular with organisations in developing countries.
In the second project, low-cost agromineral resources in various developing countries are studied and assessed.
Work continued on direct-application fertilisers and soil conditioners.
Investigations of the reactivity of potassium feldspar and phosphate rocks from Malawi and Sri Lanka using open leaching and closed incubation systems were begun in collaboration with the University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Field trials to test the effectiveness of phosphate and feldspar rocks continued in Malawi, Bolivia and Sri Lanka.
Energy studies The development of software during a project to investigate the thermal history of petroliferous basins of the CCOP region has continued, and some software has been supplied to the member states.
(CCOP is the Intergovernmental Committee for Coordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in Asian Offshore Areas.)
Modelling studies for the Gulf of Thailand and the Malay Basin have been completed and reports have sent out to collaborators for comment.
A study of the North Sumatra Basin has started, and data for the Subei/South Yellow Sea Basin are awaited.
It is planned to hold a workshop under the auspices of CCOP during the coming year.
As a contribution to the development of sources of geothermal energy, an attempt is being made to establish credible gas geothermometry for the East African Rift, for conventional models do not appear to be applicable.
Fieldwork has been undertaken in Kenya, Ethiopia and Djibouti.
Development of techniques The project to demonstrate and evaluate the use of a towed seabed gamma-ray spectrometer in Far Eastern waters continues.
A successful cruise was made off the Philippines; reports are in preparation, and modifications to the equipment are almost complete.
A second demonstration cruise is planned in Korean waters with the participation of other CCOP member-countries.
Staff working on a project to integrate geochemical data into a series of world geochemical maps have applied various techniques to establish a common format and to adjust sampling densities from the various regions to a common level.
Common-format maps were produced for parts of Bolivia, Zimbabwe, Kenya, the Solomon Islands and Indonesia.
Similar work is in hand for digital geophysical data, with an emphasis on their integration with other geoscience information.
Datasets from Uganda have been identified as giving the most complete cover available to BGS: They include aeromagnetic, radiometric, gravity, geochemical (rock and stream sediment) and geological data.
Various integration and processing techniques have been demonstrated on portable computers, ideal for developing countries, and digitising all the available information is in hand.
Following the successful testing of ammonium geochemistry as an exploration tool for epithermal precious metal deposits in the cordilleran regions of central and south America, a sampling programme has been conducted in an island-arc terrain.
The samples were collected at Lebong Tandai mine in south Sumatra with the cooperation of the Billiton Indonesia company.
The programme was designed to test the usefulness of the method in surface and mine environments and in drill cores.First results suggest that ammonium is a more efficient indicator of proximity to epithermal island-arc mineralisation than other commonly used lithogeochemical indicators.
The use of regional geochemical maps for environmental studies in developing countries was investigated using data from ODA sponsored mineral exploration surveys in Bolivia, Kenya, Solomon Islands, North Sumatra and Zimbabwe.
Regional geochemical maps provide information on background levels of metals against which environmental degradation can be monitored.
The application of regional geochemical maps for land use planning was demonstrated as they indicate areas characterised by major and trace element excesses  and deficiencies that may be of importance to the health of crops, animals and directly to humans.
Overbank sampling was investigated as a technique for pollution monitoring.
The Overseas Development Administration has funded an R&D project with major geophysical components.
It arose from the digitisation of archived paper records of previous international surveys, so that the information could be stored on computer and made accessible to modern techniques of data retrieval, image analysis and interpretation.
This led to the need to bring together the different datasets using systems that can be established in the developing countries in which the information is required, and emphasis has been placed on putting together a portable package of processing, interpretation and display facilities.
A training manual based on BGS's considerable experience of operating training courses in remote sensing is being produced to meet the needs of geoscientists in developing countries.
It will include both a text to accompany future training courses, and a self-tutorial.
A standard field kit is being assembled to complement three handbooks covering a wide variety of field geochemical techniques, including gas geochemistry.
Hydrogeology Eight projects were active during the year.
Most of them are concerned with the provision of safe water supplies to both rural and urban areas.
Increasingly the emphasis is on the identification and mitigation of pollution.
In a project designed to examine the impact of tropical and subtropical agriculture on groundwater quality, the hydrogeological conditions and agricultural regimes of potential study sites in Barbados, India, Sri Lanka and Mexico have been assessed.
Field programmes including drilling and sampling have now been carried out at Sonora, Mexico, in Barbados, in the north-western dry zone of Sri Lanka, and near Madras, India.
The most important pesticides in regular use in each area have been determined, and regular regimes for sampling and pesticide analysis established.
Final assessments of pollution risk for each of the four countries will be completed shortly.
Previous annual reports have described how BGS developed a technique to enhance the yield of water from hand-dug wells.
Horizontal boreholes drilled radially from the base of the dug wells add substantially to the yields of the wells.
Two new projects develop this work further.
In the first of these, undertaken in collaboration with the Institute of Hydrology, the use of collector wells for the irrigation of communal gardens in Zimbabwe is being investigated.
Successful methods of irrigation have been established, and the yield of the wells is being monitored.
A report on the construction and operation of one of the wells has now been written up.
In the second project, a successful technique of collector emplacement by thrust boring in medium-grained unconsolidated sand has been developed.
The technique, which is being tested in Zimbabwe and Botswana, holds great promise for enhancing rural water supply in many developing countries.
In the course of studies of saline intrusion near wells and in regional aquifers, a computer model developed to simulate scavenger well pumping in Pakistan agrees well with field observations.
Borehole-flow logging and saline-intrusion modelling has continued in Mexico, and BGS hopes to undertake a joint programme with the Centre for Water Resources Development and Management in Kerala, India.
A leaflet has been compiled outlining the problems caused by excessive amounts of iron in groundwater (a common occurrence), and remedial actions that can be taken.
Further field investigations have been carried out in the Orissa region of India.
The second project, which concerns the provision of a reliable rural water supply in developing countries and for which a study area in south-east Zimbabwe was chosen, is described fully on p.52.
Two Latin American cities have been selected for study of the impact of urbanisation on groundwater in developing countries.
Merida in Mexico represents a worst-case scenario, for it is built on a soil-less karstic limestone that is the aquifer, unconfined and shallow, on whose groundwater it is totally dependent: and it has no mains sewerage.
The second city is Santa Cruz in Bolivia, which is one of the fastest growing cities in South America.
Working links have been established with suitable counterpart organisations and a field programme has been agreed.
An inventory of boreholes is to be compiled and a survey of dug wells will be made.
There will be systematic sampling and analytical programmes.
A similar programme will be established in an Asian urban complex.
A simple hydraulic fracturing technique has been applied to ten boreholes in the Masvingo area of Zimbabwe, in which there many low-yielding tube-wells.
Results indicated that the yield of about half the wells that could be hydraulically fractured would be improved at a cost very substantially lower than drilling new wells.
Environmental and engineering geology In a project to investigate the engineering properties of poorly understood tropical red soils, fieldwork in Kenya and Indonesia has been largely completed, and additional samples have been obtained from Fiji and Dominica.
The geotechnical index programme is now complete and sophisticated triaxial testing of undisturbed samples from depth profiles has yielded important new research data.
Mineralogical analysis and microscopic examination of soil structures is well advanced.
The application of geochemical mapping to environmental studies in developing countries is being investigated.
Environmental geochemical maps of the Solomon Islands, eastern Bolivia, northern Sumatra, northeastern Zimbabwe, Harare (Zimbabwe) and part of Kenya have been produced by means of the UNIRAS/UNIMAP software package.
Interpretation of the maps has begun, and an evaluation of their utility for land-use planning will be completed shortly.
The effectiveness of overbank sediment sampling is being investigated for the detection and delineation of pollution caused by mining and other human activities.
The level and rates of radon emission in geothermal areas in Kenya and the Philippines have been studied.
Radon levels are extremely high in Kenya, but the radon disperses rapidly.
It could be a hazard only where it might build up in poorly ventilated buildings.
The work is being extended to other gases and to the composition of waters and their impact on environmental health.
Airborne geophysical data, mainly radiometric, acquired over parts of Ethiopia and Uganda more than twenty years ago, have been digitised as part of a project funded by the Overseas Development Administration.
The resulting datasets are amenable to a wide variety of transformations which, in combination with much improved display facilities, should lead to the recognition of additional and subtle features.
An informal collaborative project between BGS and the Observatório Nacional (part of the Brazilian Research Council, CNPq) is examining new geophysical methods that may help in the exploration of the vast basalt-covered basins in the interior of Brazil.
Hitherto, the flood basalt sequences, between 1 and 2 kilometres thick, have hampered assessments of the hydrocarbon potential of the underlying sedimentary formations.
Using magnetotelluric survey data supplied by the Brazilian National Oil Company (PETROBRAS), new data-processing and modelling schemes are being set up in a bid to improve the resolution of mapping of the geoelectric horizons of the shale sequences at depths of 2 to 3 kilometres.