

Great Wits and Madness
Among its several distinguishing features the human mind has two that most clearly define its uniqueness.
One is the capacity to take great leaps of imagination; the other is its susceptibility to the wild aberrations of insane thought.
The possibility of an inextricable connection between these qualities has long been debated, with sharp differences of opinion.
For some the conjunction has seemed obvious, for others itself a sign of fancy stretched beyond the bounds of credibility.
On the face of it the latter view certainly seems the more rational, since the two states in question appear to contain elements that are inherently irreconcilable.
One, with its morbid traits of personalised delusion, chaotic thinking, and bizarre affect, is so self-destructive that it frequently reduces the sufferer to psychological incompetence.
The other demands talents beyond — in the case of the most creative far beyond — the average, the ability to have insights or craft exquisite objects which, by common consent, we judge of great scientific value or aesthetic worth.
Contrasted in this way it seems improbable that madness and creativity could spring from the same source.
Yet from the earliest times it has been suggested that in the insane there is indeed a hint of genius and, by the same token, that originality demands a degree of lunacy.
‘Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae ’(no great imaginative power without a dash of madness), wrote Seneca.
He was quoting Aristotle, who had drawn the same conclusion three centuries before, and Plato's view of the poet as one possessed by a ‘divine madness’.
Ever since, numerous writers have paraphrased these sentiments, either in their fiction or through their own self-scrutiny.
For Shakespeare, as for Plato, the poet and the lunatic (and indeed the lover) were considered ‘of imagination all compact’.
‘How near is madness to genius’, said Diderot; while Dr Johnson, confessing that he himself had often been nearly insane, commented that ‘all power of fancy over reason is a degree of madness’.
Swift put it more pungently, enumerating the brilliant thinkers who would ‘in this our undistinguished age incur manifest danger of phlebotomy, and Whips, and Chains, and Dark Chambers, and Straw’.
Even Wordsworth, seemingly the most sober of men, was driven to write:
Judged on purely intuitive grounds, therefore, an association between creativity and madness can, with equal certainty, be enthusiastically embraced or vigorously rejected, depending upon one's perspective.
Which of these apparently contradictory views is nearer to the truth?
Is a trace of insanity a necessary prerequisite for originality?
Or is the idea merely a piece of folklore belief, sustained over the centuries by an inexact understanding of the quality of lunacy and destined to go the way of other popular myths, such as phrenology, astrology, and Mesmerism?
We should state at the outset that it is not the purpose, nor within the scope, of this book to try to answer such questions in their entirety.
This is partly because, for reasons to be discussed later, we shall be confining ourselves to a certain class of creative person,viz authors: it would therefore be presumptuous of us to extrapolate from our conclusions to other forms of originality.
Our scope is also even further limited by the set of authors on whom we have chosen to concentrate.
They were selected because it is clear that, judged by current psychiatric criteria, they all did suffer from episodes of psychosis — to introduce a technical term to be defined more precisely as we proceed through this and the following chapter, but which for the moment can be taken as synonymous with the layperson's conception of mental illness as it occurs in its most disintegrative form and which especially refers to serious disorders, like schizophrenia.
Being both eminent authors and psychotic persons our sample is scarcely representative, either of writers or of the mentally ill and therefore cannot, by itself, stand as evidence for the supposed connection between creativity and insanity.
Our interest in these authors, and our reason for choosing them in particular, were also dictated by the fact that their writings contain abundant evidence of their psychological disorder, which they themselves often described in great detail.
The main intention of our book, therefore, is to re-examine their lives and works in a manner not previously attempted, combining the expertise of the literary critic and the professional psychologist, in order to show  how their creativity and their tendency to psychosis shaped and influenced each other.
We should stress that we shall not be attempting either complete biographies or conventional literary criticism of our chosen authors, most, if not all, of whom have already received considerable attention from both those points of view.
Instead our aim is to show how, through joint literary and psychological analysis, new insights can be achieved into the artistic and personal qualities of the authors in question.
This will prove to be true, not only in considering the authors individually, but also in demonstrating some common patterns of behaviour, personality, and creative expression among writers subject to pathological mental states.
Despite focusing on some rather special examples where creativity and psychosis co-existed in the same individuals, our analysis will inevitably lead us to consider whether in these particular persons their tendency to madness and their capacity for unusual originality of thought were indeed, in some fundamental sense, intimately connected.
This, in turn, will cause us to address the broader issue of whether there is, in a more general sense, a genuine, causal association between insanity and at least some forms of creativity; and, if that is so, what it can tell us about the underlying qualities of psychosis and of the creative process.
As a background, we shall start by considering the evidence and arguments in the creativity/madness debate.
This discussion will be spread over two chapters and it should be noted here that, for clarity of presentation, it will sometimes be necessary to introduce very briefly in this chapter certain ideas which will then be discussed more fully in the next.
For, as we shall see, the topic we are about to review has many different strands, having been the subject of extensive and increasingly systematic enquiry from several different points of view that have taken it well beyond the realm of intuitive speculation from which it began.
For that reason it will be useful to summarise the main themes that will run through our account.
This will provide some guidelines for those readers unfamiliar with the area and also help to clear away in advance some misconceptions which, even among those knowledgeable of it, have sometimes obscured the debate.
The first point to be made echoes a remark in the opening paragraph of this chapter; namely that effective creative production and an ongoing state of serious mental illness seem quite incompatible.
We cannot emphasise too strongly here that we  would not disagree with that conclusion.
As we shall see in more detail in the next chapter, there are many features of such conditions that make them quite obviously inimical to the creative act.
These include not only chaotic disruption of thinking (and perception) upon which originality ultimately depends; but also disturbances of mood, motor response, and volition that secondarily prevent the individual from organising his or her mental processes into the orderly sequence required for creative work.
Or, as Sylvia Plath, one of the writers to be considered in this book, put it, with more feeling:
We can therefore anticipate — and this brings us to our second theme — that the answers we seek actually lie elsewhere than in a simple equation between creative and mad thought.
That is to say, if creativity and psychosis are found to be connected then this is more likely to be revealed, not as a function of the psychotic state itself, but in more subtle ways — for example , through certain modes or forms of thinking and perception which the tendencies to psychosis and creativity might prove to have in common .
Some space will be devoted later to this question, drawing on various lines of research and some current theories about the causes and underlying mechanisms of psychosis.
Suffice it to say here that the centrepiece of that part of our discussion will be the idea that normality and psychosis are essentially continuous with each other and that healthy varieties in thinking style and the disposition to psychotic breakdown substantially overlap, indeed may be identical.
Viewed in this way some part, at least, of the supposed connection between creativity and madness will then be seen to be entirely comprehensible.
In particular it will help to resolve the deep paradox that has already surfaced in this book and will continue to do so: how it is that the same features of individuality can be expressed in such totally disparate forms.
Our third theme will, however, sound several notes of caution.
One will be a reminder that, even if the above conclusions are correct, it does not follow that creativity and psychosis (or the tendency to it) are entirely synonymous.
The ability to formulate original thoughts, as well as the opportunity to put these into effect, both demand several other qualities, personal as well as situational, that may be partially or completely independent of those that might be ascribable to ‘psychotic’ modes of thinking.
In other words, in considering a possible connection between the creative and the mad it is the differences, as well as the similarities, between them that need to be understood.
Furthermore, we also need to keep in sight the fact that ‘creativity’ is itself an ambiguous concept, having been given various meanings and judged according to differing criteria depending on the context in which it has been studied.
How far, for example, is it simply a sign of high intelligence?
And is mere eminence a good yardstick?
It is unlikely that a single explanation can fully account for a human activity that has been defined in such varied ways.
Even if an agreed definition can be arrived at and some core features identified, it need not be the case that all forms of creative expression demand precisely the same set of mental operations or depend equally upon the same intellectual qualities.
Finally, although covered in more detail in the next chapter, a brief word needs to be inserted here about some psychiatric terminology that will be encountered in what follows.
This is necessary in order to clarify certain observations that some authors have made about the precise aspects or forms of psychosis to which creativity might be especially connected.
As intimated earlier, the general term ‘psychosis’ refers to serious disruption of the person's mental and emotional life.
As used here, it is also confined to a type of disorder that is normally described as ‘functional’.
That is to say, it has no obvious or gross organic cause, such as a brain lesion, a fact which sets it apart from the truly neurological conditions — like, for example , Alzheimer's disease or epilepsy.
But even functional psychosis can vary in symptomatology and psychiatrists generally distinguish between two main forms.
In one — schizophrenia — the emphasis is on bizarreness of thinking, hallucinations, and impaired social behaviour.
In the other — affective disorder — the predominant feature, as the name implies, is profound emotional change: either serious depression, or more classically, the wild mood swings of manic-depressive psychosis.
Although psychiatrists have traditionally preferred to regard these two varieties of psychosis as distinctly separable ‘diseases’, it now seems more probable — as we shall have occasion to state several times in this book — that that is not so.
For one thing, each can occur in a mild or ‘borderline’ form.
Furthermore, the symptoms of even full-blown affective psychosis and  schizophrenia overlap considerably, suggesting that they simply represent different ways in which a common tendency to insanity can manifest itself.
However, for the purpose of discussion in this chapter it will be more appropriate to preserve the distinction between them.
Bearing these points in mind, let us now start to consider the question of creativity and madness in more detail.
A complete review of what is now a vast, varied — and sometimes idiosyncratic — literature would take us well beyond our available space and our aim here will be to summarise the main approaches to the topic, in order to try to disentangle some arguments in the debate and draw some general conclusions from it.
In doing so we shall concentrate in this chapter on lines of research that address the general issue of whether psychosis and creativity are in fact connected.
Then, in the next chapter, after elaborating further on the features of psychosis itself, we shall return to examine how explanations of it might also give an account of certain aspects of the creative process.
The oldest, and what might be termed the ‘classic’, approach to the systematic study of creativity and madness is biographical.
Traceable to the early part of the nineteenth century, this consisted of retrospective psychiatric analyses of famous historical figures who, because of their accomplishments, can be judged outstandingly creative.
The seminal work of such type was that carried out by the Italian psychiatrist, Lombroso, who set out to demonstrate the pathological nature of genius, quoting examples as varied as Julius Caesar, Mohammed, Newton, Rousseau, and Schopenhauer.
Writing, as he did, in an era before medicine had even begun to construct its modern classification of psychiatric disorder, Lombroso included among his subjects many who would now be considered to have suffered from brain diseases of organic origin (Julius Caesar, for example, was epileptic).
In contemporary terms, therefore, his diagnoses were too inexact to stand as definitive evidence for (or against) a connection between creativity and madness, as we would now construe it.
Added to which Lombroso — more famous for his theory about the physiognomic stigmata of criminality — interpreted his observations on genius in a similarly negative fashion, viewing social deviance and the propensity to creativity as alternative expressions of biological degeneracy.
These early pathographic analyses nevertheless started a wave  of interest in the topic and subsequently stimulated many other medical writers to apply their diagnostic acumen to the problem.
Although mostly not accepting Lombroso's explanation of it, they were virtually unanimous in their opinion that genius is indeed often accompanied by madness, even allowing for cases that could be ascribed to gross disease of the nervous system.
Thus, Becker, in his historical survey of the numerous monographs published on the subject in the hundred years up to 1950, notes that the vast majority had reached that conclusion; though he also comments on the many different interpretations that were placed on the evidence.
These range from the notion that creativeness reflects the same warring psychological tendencies that are responsible for insanity to the intriguing, though question-begging, idea that some mad people are simply labelled as geniuses because of their apparently mystical and divinely inspired qualities of thought.
A notable exception to this consensus in the early literature that madness and creativeness are frequently connected is a study carried out at the beginning of the century by Havelock Ellis.
He conducted a survey of ‘British genius’, examining the psychological, physical, and other characteristics of 1020 eminent people listed in the Dictionary of National Biography .
Ellis found only a moderate rate (about 4 per cent) of frank insanity among his subjects; a figure, incidentally, that included some examples of brain disease.
Bowerman, in a less well-known but identical investigation of American geniuses, reported the same result.
Two points need to be made about these studies, however.
First, although rejecting the explanation of creativity that prevailed among medical writers at that time, both Ellis and Bowerman did consider that there was some connection with psychological morbidity, in a more general sense.
‘The prevailing temperament of men of genius’, Ellis said (and Bowerman agreed with him), ‘is one of great nervous sensitivity and irritability ‘, a tendency to melancholy, and what he called a ‘germinal nervous instability’.
The second point to note about the Ellis and Bowerman surveys is that neither was concerned with cases of really outstanding creativity, of the kind that have been the subject of individual biographical analyses.
The persons surveyed were certainly eminent, but mostly people (even politicians!) whose achievements were rarely so enduring as to place them in the class apart to which we would assign the truly original thinkers in history.
It could be argued that if a connection with florid madness is to be revealed in  biographical data this is most likely to be found in a conjunction among extreme cases: the very creative on whom most of the detailed accounts have concentrated.
More recent reviewers of the biographical evidence about the latter have certainly continued to comment on the remarkable frequency with which serious mental disorder occurs among outstandingly creative people.
For example, Prentky, in his book Creativity and Psychopathology , tabulates the probable psychiatric diagnoses that could be applied to certain eminent writers, artists, scientists and composers.
Among writers alone — and even excluding those discussed in the present volume — he concludes that all of the following were either schizophrenic or suffered from an affective psychosis: Strindberg, Baudelaire, Kant, Swift, Shelley, Johnson, Hölderlin, Donizetti, Conrad, Kafka, Coleridge, Schopenhauer, Barrie, Schiller, Crane, Chatterton, Rousseau, Tasso, Maupassant, Balzac, and Boswell.
In addition, Prentky notes, there were many others who showed signs of ‘borderline psychosis’.
A similar exercise has been undertaken by Karlsson whose work we shall refer to again because of the interesting comments he has made about his observations from a genetics viewpoint.
To the list of writers who developed psychoses Karlsson adds, among others, Hugo, Scott, Tolstoi, Pope, and Poe and puts the overall incidence of such disorders among the individuals he surveyed at around 30 per cent; a staggeringly high figure, given that , taken together, non-organic forms of psychosis are usually quoted as carrying a lifetime risk of about 5 per cent .
Of course, from a strictly scientific viewpoint these individual biographical studies can be criticised on the grounds that they are biased towards rather special cases; added to which, as Becker points out, such accounts were usually written by clinicians whose professional interest in the abnormal inevitably caused them to focus on signs of pathology.
In contrast, some contemporary clinicians who have discussed the topic have been much less enthusiastic about connecting creativity to psychosis.
This is especially true of certain psychiatric writers who, drawing on the concepts of psychodynamic psychology, have devoted considerable attention to the nature of the creative process and, in the course of doing so, have expressed an opinion about the idea.
Mostly they have been ambivalent, admitting on the one hand that both creativity and psychosis probably share similar underlying psychic mechanisms — unconscious motivation, involvement of  ‘primary process’ thinking (fantasy), ideational styles and so on; yet, on the other hand, unwilling to bring the two states together in any causal sense.
Thus, Storr acknowledges that a certain kind of original genius is inseparable from the schizoid (i.e. schizophrenic-like) personality structure, quoting Kafka, among writers, as a particular example.
However, he draws back from incorporating this into a general theory about creativity, preferring instead to emphasise the more superficial differences between the psychotic and the creative person: that the former is overwhelmed by and the latter in control of his or her ‘original’ thoughts.
Rothenberg, another psychiatrist to consider the question, reacts with similar equivocation.
He vacillates between describing the connection between creativity and psychosis as ‘folk-loristic’ and ‘clearly exaggerated’, and confessing to be puzzled that it has been documented so often.
Finally, he comes to the conclusion that psychopathology plays no causative role in creativity, except in the choice of subject matter, and that where it does exist it stems from social causes; for example the stress that the person of original mind experiences in being at odds with society.
Somewhat like Storr he suggests that it is only in overcoming such psychopathology that effective creating can occur — an uncontroversial conclusion but one that scarcely illuminates our understanding.
Arieti, an expert on both creativity and schizophrenia — and therefore the most qualified among these contemporary psychiatric writers to comment — is equally disappointing in the light he throws on the issue.
Admittedly he is more explicit than the other two in detailing traits, such as unusual forms of thinking, which seem responsible for both psychotic symptomatology and creative production.
He even underlines the similarity by noting that such traits can be either adaptive or detrimental — i.e. lead to illness — depending on whether or not they are modified by other, more positive, qualities.
However, he then fails to follow through his rather important point to the logical conclusion of considering how it might at least explain those many instances where outstanding originality and insanity have been found to co-exist.
In fact Arieti's coverage of the latter is very cursory and he swiftly shifts to a discussion of examples of, to use Pickering's term, ‘creative malady’; such as Proust's asthma and Darwin ‘s psychosomatic palpitations — examples that are interesting in themselves but largely irrelevant to the creativity/psychosis debate.
In short, although all three of these psychiatric authors offer  some fascinating insights into the depth psychology of creativity, we find little in their writings that helps to resolve the question of its possible connection with psychosis.
When the issue is addressed it is skirted around, it seems to us, by the unwillingness of all three of the authors concerned — understandable perhaps because of their daily closeness to the victims of mental illness — to see beyond the pathology of the psychotic state itself; their failure to appreciate our — or rather Sylvia Plath's — point made earlier: that when insane the psychotic individual is too preoccupied struggling against overpersonalised or idiosyncratic thoughts to create effectively.
Consequently, they never really probe the significance of what those two activities might have in common.
As for the results from individual biographical studies, they seem most comfortable with an explanation that simply appeals to the idea of ‘special cases’.
An even more negative view of such studies has been taken in academic psychology.
Indeed, in some quarters the whole subject matter of creativity and psychosis has been ignored completely.
For example, a quite recent book of advanced readings, entitled The Nature of Creativity , edited by a very prominent cognitive psychologist, and intended for researchers in the area, makes absolutely no reference to the topic!
Where interest has been shown it has tended to be critical of the idea of connecting creativity to madness.
The reason for this can be traced historically to the fact that research on creativity in academic psychology has formed a quite separate strand of enquiry from that originating in the early pathographic analyses carried out by medical writers.
In contrast to the latter, academic psychologists have concentrated more on creativity as a normal cognitive trait and with problems like its psychometric measurement, development, and correlations with other — mostly ‘desirable’— characteristics.
This work has its origins in the early intelligence test movement and, later, in a specific concern with creativeness as a possibly separable aspect of intellectual functioning.
Much of that research has, in turn, been inspired by an attempt, especially among American psychologists, to understand and predict ‘giftedness’: as such, in seeking reasons for differences in creativity, their preference has naturally been to look for evidence of the latter's association with excellence, superiority, and health rather than with maladjustment or psychological deviance.
The pioneering example here is a mammoth longitudinal study undertaken and described in a six volume work by Terman  and his colleagues who, beginning in 1921, selected a large group of so-called gifted children and then followed their progress over a period of thirty-five years.
We shall refer again to this investigation but there is one aspect of it which it is appropriate to comment upon at this point.
In what was in effect a digression from the main study, Cox, a colleague of Terman, conducted a ‘historiometric’ analysis of the mental traits of 301 carefully selected individuals, living between 1450 and 1850, who could be recognised as of outstanding genius.
In addition to retrospective estimates of IQ, Cox also constructed ‘psychographic’ profiles of character and personality for each of her subjects, rating them on the basis of biographical data for a range of social and emotional traits.
Since Cox confined herself to the truly great, her sample — unlike, say, Ellis' and Bowerman's — naturally contained the names of many individuals whom others have quoted as evidence for the connection between creativity and psychosis; including, incidentally, one (Cowper) who appears in this book.
Yet her own conclusions are strikingly different.
The picture that Cox paints of the prevailing personality of these ‘heroes of the past’, as she calls them, is glossed in the most adulatory terms, emphasising their extraordinariness in every respect: their single-mindedness, their ‘…persistence of motive and effort, confidence in their abilities, and great strength or force of character.’
Furthermore, she notes:
How do we reconcile Cox's impression of genius as superior, adjustive mental health with that which the medical biographers give, remembering that both are referring to a similar set of  individuals?
The difference is partly due, we suspect, to Cox's own bias in the selection and interpretation of her data; a bias just as strong as — though, of course, in the opposite direction from — that of which the pathographers have been accused.
Indeed, it is rather illuminating to discover that within the first few pages of her book — and before she has even introduced her own work — she peremptorily dismisses the idea that genius is akin to madness.
Notably, she reserves her criticism for Lombroso — not by any means, at the time she was writing, the only person to have made the connection — remarking that his method was merely one of ‘heaping up instances which support his thesis’.
Even if this is taken as a fair comment on the general scientific validity of the biographical approach to the topic, the preconceptions which Cox brought to her own analysis are also much in evidence.
A considerable part of her book is devoted to quite detailed synopses of the lives of the 300-odd geniuses whom she evaluated.
Careful scrutiny of these accounts reveals that in almost no instance does she give any hint that there were signs of mental illness in any of her subjects — even among those where this is known to have occurred.
For example— chosen, as it happens, from science rather than literature — take the case of Isaac Newton.
It is well-established that Newton had a most difficult personality, revealed on occasions in outright insanity; so much so that his name routinely appears on lists, such as those compiled by Prentky and Karlsson, of psychosis among the outstandingly creative.
Even Storr, someone who, as we have seen, is by no means convinced of a general causal connection between psychosis and creativity, writes as follows about Newton, choosing him as another of his examples of ‘schizoid’ genius:
Newton's quarrels with other scientists were famous, and need not detain us here.
His disputes with Hooke, with Flamsteed and with Leibniz are amply documented.
But there was a period in his life at which his suspicion and hostility to others overstepped the bounds of sanity.
The details of this illness remain obscure, but in 1693 Newton became sufficiently disturbed in mind for rumours of his insanity to gain widespread acceptance.
In September of that year he wrote to Pepys, Locke and other friends accusing them of being atheists or Catholics, and of trying to embroil him with women.
Various factors may have contributed to this ‘paranoid episode’, as we should now label it.
Yet no indication of this appears in Cox's account of Newton.
True, her book is devoted mostly to the early characteristics of her subjects, the brief biographies she provides for them ending in their mid-twenties.
But even here her reporting bias is evident.
Newton, for example, she merely refers to as ‘a sober, silent, thinking lad’, a description that contrasts markedly with Storr's:
In early youth, Newton was anxious, insecure, hypochondriacal and self-disparaging.
Indeed, depressive traits are more in evidence than paranoid tendencies.
It was only in middle life that he ceased self-denigration and began to accuse others of the faults of which he had previously found himself guilty.
Cox's preference for understating — or perhaps not looking for — early signs of pathology, even in those of her subjects who later showed it, is understandable if one recalls the origins of her study.
As noted earlier, the survey formed part of a larger programme of research into giftedness initiated by the American psychologist, Terman.
In the main investigation more than 1500 children were selected — on the basis of their very high IQs — and followed through into adulthood.
Periodic evaluations of their physical and mental health, personalities, and intellectual achievements showed that they maintained their superiority in all of these domains, including a relative freedom from insanity and other indications of psychological maladjustment.
Taken in conjunction with Cox's findings, these results are frequently quoted, even in the recent literature, as strong evidence, not merely against the idea that creativity and psychosis are connected, but actually in support of a quite contrary view: that high ability somehow militates against serious mental disorder.
As we shall eventually see, it so happens that the latter point is probably correct, but it is not a conclusion that follows directly from the results of the Terman project, for the following reasons.
As Richards has recently indicated, the Cox survey and the longitudinal study are not as mutually supportive as they seem at first sight.
The reasons essentially have to do with the relevance of IQ to creativity and are exposed when we compare both the similarities and the differences between Cox's historical figures and Terman's gifted children.
Both, it can be agreed, showed very high IQ, the latter well into the superior range, averaging around 150, and in some cases running up to 200.
Cox, of course, had to make retrospective IQ estimates for her subjects but these are  probably fairly accurate and average about 160, with a range overlapping considerably with that actually found in the gifted children.
Yet the outcome in the two groups is quite different.
Cox's subjects were, by any definition, outstandingly creative, to the point of being almost qualitatively distinguishable from their fellow men.
This could not be said, however, for any of the gifted children: although many showed talents in various fields and carried these through into adult accomplishments, none achieved the very highest level of creativity seen in Cox's subjects.
Admitting this, Terman and Oden comment as follows:
The above comparison articulates two, related, conclusions that can be drawn from the evidence reviewed so far.
The first is that the question of what constitutes great creativity, at least, is still left open to debate.
The second is that IQ, as measured by conventional intelligence tests, does not seem a sufficient explanation of it; even though it might be a necessary accompaniment — and indeed might help entirely to account for some other forms of high intellectual achievement.
The latter point has of course long been recognised in academic psychology and from the 1950s onwards considerable effort was expended attempting to identify the unique features of creativity.
This work took two directions.
One was concerned with the measurement of other intellectual abilities, apart from those revealed in standard IQ tests, that might explain differences in originality.
Another concentrated more on non-intellectual factors — such as personality traits — which it was thought might distinguish the highly creative individual.
The first of these lines of research led to the development of so-called creativity tests in which the subject has a free hand to generate his or her own responses to a given problem.
In other words, the test situation is open-ended — unlike the usual intelligence test, where the person is required to reach a single (correct) solution.
A typical example would be: How many uses can you  think of for a brick (or a paper clip)?
While much maligned — some might think justifiably — as trivialising what real-life creativity is about, the use of such procedures has in fact helped, to some extent, to clarify our understanding of what is involved in original thinking.
For example, research has shown that performance on these tests is unrelated to intelligence, at least above a certain minimum level of IQ, suggesting that they do tap something different.
An important explanatory concept has been that of ‘divergent thinking’; or what de Bono in a different context has called ‘lateral’ thinking.
This pursuing of tangential trains of thought in order to arrive at novel ideas has been seen to contrast with the ‘convergent’ thinking demanded by the items in normal IQ tests.
Of course, the ability to think divergently does not guarantee creativity, any more than does a high IQ.
Both convergent and divergent modes of thought are necessary for a creative act to occur: the writer must actually arrange his freely associated ideas into organised prose or the scientist finally home in on the solution to a problem.
So it is the capacity to mobilise both of these resources and switch smoothly between them that seems to be the hallmark of effective creative production.
When discussing unexpected failures for this to occur, academic psychologists have generally concentrated on the case where, despite high intelligence (and therefore presumably superior ability to think convergently) individuals are nevertheless relatively uncreative, either in real-life or in their performance on divergent thinking tests.
Clinicians, however, have long been aware that the opposite can also be found: an excessive tendency to divergent thinking — though they have usually called it something else — which the person has difficulty in translating into focused thought.
Arieti makes these points well:
Although Arieti himself fails properly to follow it through, his  observation underpins an important theme in our understanding of creativity as it relates to psychosis, and we shall have occasion to refer to it again.
First, however, it is necessary to consider the second line of research on creativity pursued in academic psychology.
As mentioned earlier, the failure to predict creativity from a narrow view of individual differences based on IQ also led to work focusing more on its personality correlates.
This was, in a sense a natural extension of a broadening perspective on intellectual ability, enclosing the idea that psychological qualities such as creativity might be as much a personality trait as a cognitive characteristic.
Among other research it led to a series of studies — mostly carried out in the 1950s and 1960s — of the personalities of very creative people.
The method adopted differed in important ways from the earlier biographical approach discussed so far.
It concentrated instead on living examples of people who were judged highly creative, thereby making it possible to evaluate them at first-hand on objective personality tests or similar assessment procedures.
Use of this strategy partly reflected an increasing shift of emphasis among academic psychologists — though continuing the tradition set by Terman — towards redefining creativity as giftedness or eminence.
And it meant sampling a more ‘dilute’ domain of creativity, few of the individuals studied entering the ranks of the great innovators (though they, in any case, are rarely recognised as such during their lifetimes).
However, the method does have the obvious advantage of avoiding the pitfalls of retrospective analysis, especially the impressionistic biases that certainly coloured many of the earlier biographical accounts of famous figures.
These personality studies usually proceeded by selecting, on the basis of peer evaluation or similar criteria, highly accomplished professionals in various branches of the arts and sciences.
The personalities of the individuals concerned were then examined using one or other of a number of procedures, ranging from objective personality inventories to depth analysis methods, such as the Rorschach ink-blot test.
The results of these studies are too numerous to detail here, but it turns out that the investigators concerned all reached fairly consistent conclusions about the personality traits that typified their subjects.
Although differences were to be found — especially comparing the arts and sciences — the highly creative were frequently described in similar terms as: sceptical, aloof, radical, self-sufficient, independent, bohemian, often introverted and usually more open to experience.
To the untutored eye, this picture of the personality of the creative individual might seem far distant from that of the psychotic; it is certainly often cited as evidence against the two being connected.
Again, however, we must be careful not to reach a too hasty conclusion.
Thus, research carried out over the past few years indicates that the traits described above actually overlap considerably with those found in so-called ‘schizotypal’ individuals, i.e. People whose temperamental make-up seems similar to that underlying schizophrenia, continuous with it in the personality domain but without any obvious signs of psychotic illness.
The description ‘schizotypal’ is really just a modern equivalent of the older one, ‘schizoid’, which has long been recognised as having an affinity with schizophrenia.
Furthermore — and in a more general sense than the ‘special cases’ quoted by Storr — it has also been regarded as having some association with creativity.
Here it is instructive to read the description by Manfred Bleuler (whose father coined the term ‘schizophrenia’) on some characteristic features of the person of schizoid character.
Noting that many qualities are deviant and undesirable Bleuler also writes of others that are positive:
It therefore seems probable that what the early personality studies of living creative subjects had revealed was their tendency to the schizoidness of which Bleuler writes, and which would now be referred to as ‘schizotypy’.
One particular finding from the original studies supports that conclusion.
There, writers were evaluated on the comprehensive personality questionnaire, the Minnesota Multiphasic personality Inventory (MMPI): the test provides scores on a number of scales, each of which has as its reference point a particular clinical syndrome (depression, psychopathy, schizophrenia and so on) and is labelled accordingly.
On  average the subjects scored highly on these scales, including that labelled ‘schizophrenia’.
This does not of course mean that the subjects concerned were psychotic, in a clinical sense.
Indeed an even more striking feature of the results was that the individuals examined were especially high on a measure of ‘ego strength’, indicating a greater than average resistance to mental breakdown: the finding is particularly interesting because the latter is usually very low in subjects who deviate markedly on the clinical scales of tests like the MMPI.
We seem here to have further evidence of the apparent paradox about creativity and psychosis to which we have referred several times.
The final studies to be reviewed in this chapter help, we believe, to take us a little nearer understanding that paradox, as well as offering more convincing evidence than that considered so far that the connection between creativity and psychosis is indeed genuine.
The work to be discussed, some of it quite recent, has generally lain outside both academic psychology and clinical psychiatry, mostly being carried out by experimental researchers from neighbouring disciplines with an interest in the topic.
The studies themselves have taken various forms, some directly addressing the issue of creativity and psychosis, others reporting results that bear indirectly on it.
All, however, can be gathered together under a common theme: that concerned with the genetics of psychosis.
One of the few established facts about psychotic illness is that it runs in families and only the most stubborn social theorist could now deny that one reason for this is that the disposition to it, at least, is partly inherited.
However, like many genetically determined characteristics — some of which indeed may be responsible for illness or deviance — such dispositions may not be expressed, or, if they are, expressed in incomplete form, or even revealed in qualities which at first sight seem distant from, even unconnected with, the pathology for which they are otherwise responsible.
It is this perspective on the genetics of psychosis that provides an entry-point into our understanding of the latter's probable association with creativity.
A geneticist who has done much to articulate the above view is Karlsson, whose observations about the high frequency of psychosis among the outstandingly creative we have already noted.
What Karlsson proposes essentially is that the genes responsible for the disposition to schizophrenia (he confines himself to this  form of psychosis) also code for creative ability.
Several lines of evidence do support this theory, including the results of one investigation, a large pedigree study, reported by Karlsson himself.
He conducted a retrospective survey of the professional status of the first-degree relatives of psychiatric patients admitted to hospital in his native Iceland between the years 1851 and 1940.
Using this same period as a basis for comparison with the general population and examining available records (including the Icelandic Who's Who), he was able to show that the relatives concerned significantly more often entered creative occupations.
Interestingly, authors appeared in this group with a frequency more than twice that found in the population at large.
Other investigations, using different research designs, point to the same conclusion, and have further demonstrated that the association is probably, as Karlsson suggests, largely genetic in origin.
These have concentrated on individuals adopted shortly after birth, making it possible to disentangle genetic from environmental effects.
One study, for example, has shown that children separated early on from their schizophrenic mothers are not only more likely than control children to become schizophrenic themselves but also show greater artistic and musical talent.
Another investigation, looking at the problem as it were from the opposite direction, compared adoptees selected for later estimates of their creativity and then examined incidences of mental illness.
Among the adoptees themselves the most highly creative showed an excessive rate of mental illness — as much as 30 per cent.
A figure not far short of this was also found in the biological parents from whom they had been separated, though not in their adoptive relatives, in whom the incidence was much lower.
It should be noted that the study just described did not focus especially on schizophrenia, the kinds of mental illness observed in the individuals surveyed covering a number of diagnostic categories, albeit mostly ones related in one or another to psychosis and probably reflecting a similar underlying disposition.
However, this does raise an important point of debate in contemporary discussions about the relationship between madness and creativity.
Thus some investigators have argued that the association is one, not with schizophrenia, but with affective psychosis.
As we have already mentioned, and as we shall reiterate in the next chapter, the distinction between these two forms of insanity is probably more a matter of psychiatric convenience than aetiological reality.
Nevertheless they do represent different ways in which psychotic vulnerability can manifest itself and reference to them helps to provide some clues as to which of its aspects might mediate any association that exists with creativity.
One investigator who has put weight on the relationship with affective, rather than schizophrenic, disorder is the American psychiatrist, Andreasen, whose work, also carried out within a partly genetics context, is of particular interest here because it has mainly been concerned with writers.
The individuals concerned were all members of the University of Iowa Writers' Workshop, a group which, as Andreasen herself points out, is the oldest and most widely recognised creative teaching programme in the United States, having spawned such eminent authors as Robert Lowell, Kurt Vonnegut and Philip Roth.
In a long study, spanning some fifteen years, Andreasen evaluated members of the Iowa Workshop and their families, comparing them with a carefully selected group of control subjects on indicators of psychopathology.
Her findings were that both the writers themselves and their families had a substantially raised incidence of mental illness, but especially of affective psychosis, including depression and forms of the disorder characterised by severe mood swings.
The diagnosis of ‘schizophrenia’, on the other hand, was not very frequent in her samples.
On the intellectual side all of the writers, not surprisingly, showed a high tested IQ, though not more so than non-writers, thus confirming other published evidence, discussed earlier, that intelligence as such is not a sufficient prerequisite of creative performance.
Finally, complementing these results Andreasen demonstrated that the relatives of her chosen authors also showed unusual creative talent, though over a wider sphere than the literary, including art, music, dance, and mathematics.
She concludes from her study that ‘the families of the writers were riddled with both creativity and mental illness’, the two intertwining to an extent which would make it difficult to deny their real association.
A substantially similar conclusion was reached from another very recent study which again specifically focused on the possible relationship between creativity and the affective features of psychosis.
The aims were similar to Andreasen's, but the investigators used a different research design.
Rather than creative individuals being taken as the starting-point, the individuals  targeted initially were people who had been diagnosed as having  had a mental illness, either a severe (manic-depressive) form of affective disorder or the milder, but aetiologically related, mood swings of ‘cyclothymia’.
These subjects, and their relatives, were then assessed for creativeness, as judged by a comprehensive set of ‘Lifetime Creativity Scales’.
Although somewhat less in individuals who suffered from full-blown manic-depressive psychosis, creativity was found to be significantly raised in both patients and relatives who were rated as cyclothymic.
The interpretation put on these results was that the latter may have an optimum level which facilitates creativeness; though beyond that point — as seen in the seriously psychotic — it may hamper creativity.
If, as the above evidence suggests and as Karlsson has argued, sufferers from psychosis — whether we call it schizophrenia or affective disorder — and the highly creative do in fact share the same genes, then it may be asked: what, in psychological terms, is inherited?
One view is that it has something to do with the energy, drive and willingness to take risks associated (in the ‘up’ phase, at least) with traits underlying manic-depression.
Although such characteristics probably do play some secondary role, we find this interpretation unconvincing and suspect that it stems from a need to make a connection with what are perceived as the relatively more ‘attractive’ features of psychosis, rather than with those emphasised in descriptions of schizophrenia, a concept that has taken on almost entirely negative connotations.
The explanation is implausible for two reasons.
First, it is too general: several other personality traits, such as anxiety — not specifically related to psychosis, though carrying risks for different forms of psychopathology — could equally well be said to generate the motivation necessary for creative production, and often do.
Secondly, although certainly important, the current preference by some writers to relate creativity to the affective forms of psychosis should not divert us from the fact that it is actually schizophrenia which has inspired most of the theorising — and generated a good deal of the empirical evidence — about how psychotic and creative traits might be related to each other.
It is more likely that what connects creativity to madness is some aspect of the thought styles which psychotic and original forms of thinking have in common and which, in the psychiatric domain, can be observed across the arbitrary diagnostic categories of psychosis.
Here, of course, we are referring especially to the capacity for divergent thinking, discussed earlier.
Although  academic psychologists have been reluctant to use this notion to cross the boundary between the normal and the abnormal, clinicians have for many years used a similar concept.
Their preferred description of it has been overinclusive thinking which has frequently been used to explain certain forms of thought disorder seen in psychotic patients, such as the tendency to cognitive ‘slippage’, loosely associated ideation, and difficulty in maintaining a tight boundary for abstract concepts.
The term itself was coined in the 1930s and arose originally from studies of schizophrenia, though it has since proved equally (if not more) applicable to psychotics with other diagnoses, notably mania.
It is no coincidence that the clinical tests for overinclusive thinking are not all that different from those devised by academic psychologists as measures of divergent, or ‘creative’, thinking.
Although naturally designed more to draw out signs of abnormality, they nevertheless demand similar mental operations, being open-ended procedures in which, for example, subjects are required to interpret proverbs or sort everyday objects in any way they prefer.
Such tests are rarely used nowadays, possibly because the concepts of overinclusive and divergent thinking are so similar and, in themselves, have little diagnostic value for differentiating the mad from the merely original.
Illustrating the point, a colleague of one of the present authors once administered a battery of overinclusion (thought disorder) tests to a group of local artists.
Several emerged as patently psychotic!
They were not, of course, in a clinical sense.
This difficulty in distinguishing the cognitive style of the highly creative from that of the psychotic has also often been noted by others.
For example, Andreasen and her colleagues asked a large group of psychiatrists to compare the written productions of two creative writers, including James Joyce, with those of psychotics and, without being given any other information, to try to reach a diagnosis.
A high proportion of the clinicians diagnosed the writers as psychotic, including 42 per cent who suspected Joyce of being schizophrenic (he did, of course, have a schizophrenic daughter).
Turning the comparison round the other way, another recent study examined the performance of schizophrenics on two standard ‘creativity’ tests.
Apart from those with persecutory delusions, the schizophrenics achieved much higher scores than other groups, including normals, with whom they were compared.
The authors concluded that creativity and psychotic  symptomatology do indeed reflect equivalent forms of cognitive processing.
It is also very probable that the cognitive style which overinclusive and divergent thinking have in common is strongly inherited.
Part of the evidence here comes from genetic analyses (e.g. twin comparisons) of normal subjects' performance on ‘creativity’ tests.
Other investigations have addressed the same question in a clinical context.
Thus, McConaghy and his colleagues carried out a series of experiments on what they call ‘allusive thinking’, a concept similar to overinclusive thinking and actually measured by them with a clinical, thought disorder test.
They reported that the healthy relatives of schizophrenic patients show high degrees of allusive thinking; as indeed do the relatives of mentally healthy subjects who themselves have high scores on their allusive thinking test.
These results, in turn, confirm a large body of other findings that ‘psychotic’ characteristics — temperamental as well as cognitive — tend to cluster in families where one of the members is diagnosable as mentally ill.
From a genetics point of view, therefore, a crucial psychological feature connecting creativity to psychosis would seem to be the distinctive cognitive style responsible for both.
Certainly Karlsson is clear on this point and, in commenting, also helps to unravel some of the mystery surrounding their apparently unlikely conjunction:
What Karlsson does not explain here, of course, is how some apparently psychotic individuals manage to achieve effective creativity — albeit in some cases only in between periods of illness  whereas others, probably the majority, fail entirely to do so.
Or, more critical perhaps, why — if evidence reviewed earlier is to be believed — many creative individuals even seem to have enhanced resistance to the mental illnesses to which, according to the theory outlined, their dispositions should make them more than usually susceptible.
Another problem that remains unresolved is the generality of the connection between psychosis and creativity.
In other words, can all creativity be explained in this way?
Or are we indeed, as some writers quoted previously would argue, merely dealing with certain special cases?
We believe that at least partial answers to these questions will emerge later in this book — we shall certainly return to them — but a few brief comments are worth setting down before closing the present chapter.
The first two questions posed above are probably related.
Even if the essence of originality lies in certain modes of psychotic thought, the ability to harness this in effective creative work — and by the same token the capacity to resist the psychopathology which it implies — must depend on other factors being present.
These might be intrinsic to the very temperamental make-up which itself predisposes to psychosis: here it is instructive to recall Manfred Bleuler's description, cited earlier, of the schizoid personality, with its overtones of hard-edged indifference to others, a quality that many will recognise in the highly creative.
Another important factor is certainly intelligence.
Although difficult, psychometrically, to disentangle from creativity, intelligence, as measured by IQ at least, certainly seems to represent a distinguishable feature of cognitive performance and, to the extent that it is genetically determined, is probably separately inherited.
Almost all outstandingly creative people are high in assessed IQ, a fact which must surely protect them to some extent from mental breakdown, both directly and indirectly, in the first case, by providing them with more flexible psychological resources to cope with stress and, in the second, by enabling them to make socially valued contributions that strengthen self-esteem.
In any given individual the balance between these various influences is no doubt a delicate one, and in some instances precarious, depending on numerous casual and pervasive situational factors.
Turning to our third question, whether the undoubted connection with psychosis offers an all-embracing theory of creativity might ultimately reduce to how we define the latter.
If we broaden it to mean simply ‘cleverness’ then obviously there can be several other explanations, mostly elucidated by an understanding of  general intelligence and the way in which, even in the absence of ‘psychotic’modes of thought, that facilitates high achievement.
Eminence as a criterion introduces the additional feature of relying on social judgement, perhaps diluting in various ways our evaluation of what constitutes ‘true’ creativity.
In this respect it is interesting to note a comment made by Andreasen on what she interprets as the relative failure of the Ellis survey to demonstrate very significant evidence of psychosis (or the tendency to it) among the eminent persons he surveyed.
She suggests that the people studied by Ellis were mainly those who were merely powerful or influential enough to get their names in the Dictionary of National Biography , rather than necessarily being intellectually creative.
However, it is unlikely that this is an entirely sound basis for making a sharp distinction between ‘psychotic’ and ‘non-psychotic’forms of creativity, if such a difference exists.
A certain kind of great achievement, as revealed in power or influence over others, might itself spring from traits of a psychotic nature.
We have already mentioned the suggestion that the manic's energy might be an important connecting link between creativity and psychosis.
Although personally we believe this to be of only secondary importance, its probable role in motivating innovative acts cannot be ignored.
Winston Churchill, an evident manic-depressive who rarely slept, is a notable example.
Are we to conclude therefore that eminence cannot be allowed as a yardstick of creativity?
Even if we confine ourselves to the more usual outlets for creative expression — in the arts and sciences — there is similar ambiguity.
Here we are reminded of studies carried out some years ago in Germany on the personality characteristics of a large group of professional painters and sculptors.
In It was found that, as predicted, the artists were more deviant on certain personality traits.
However, further analysis of the data indicated that the relationship had nothing to do with the individuals' talent, as judged by expert rating of their contributions to contemporary art.
Instead, it reflected how successful they had been in aggressively promoting their rather indifferent work.
The authors cynically conclude:
The most reliable and valid yardstick of creativeness, of course, is retrospective, the capacity for the products of originality to survive the fleeting whims of taste, fashion, or claims as to their truth or value.
Fortunately, most of the figures who appear in this book meet that criterion or, if not, they were certainly notable enough for them to have been remembered.
That they were also all subject to periods of psychotic breakdown makes them of additional interest and in the next chapter we shall examine precisely what that means and how it might help us to understand their particular form of creativity.
Wings in the Head
That it has been possible to reach this point in the book without describing the signs of insanity in detail is a measure of their universality and of the fact that most of us have an intuitive understanding of their general quality.
There are few who have not on occasion felt the press of irrational thought, been tempted into unwarranted belief, or experienced the highs and lows of inexplicable mood.
However, it is when these pass beyond some threshold of acceptability, both for the person and for others, that the individual is recognised as suffering in a state of psychotic disorder.
It is our judgement that all of the authors considered in this book were victims of such disorder and that the accounts of their lives in subsequent chapters can stand alone as evidence of that.
On the other hand, we realise that professional clinicians coming to the book might remain unconvinced about some of our chosen examples, as indeed might those readers who only feel comfortable with terms like ‘schizophrenia’ when they are used in a sense that has been given medical approval.
For that reason it is our intention to present, for all of our authors, explicit evidence that they did indeed meet the formal diagnostic criteria for psychotic illness, as used by psychiatrists.
This will be done by giving for each subject a brief clinical case description, based on the application of a standard diagnostic schedule, to be described at the end of the chapter.
We hasten to add that we adopt the above procedure without any deep reverence for psychiatric classification as such or for the psychiatric form of describing the person.
We are aware of the limited value of both as guides to comprehending the true nature of insanity, especially the more positive aspects we see reflected in the creative mind, and we fully agree with Lyndall Gordon who, when writing about Virginia Woolf, comments ‘Our language has, as yet, no term for madness which is not demeaning.’
Even when used, with effort to avoid evaluative overtones and as a purely descriptive device, psychiatric classification leaves much to be desired; for example in its inability to distinguish  clearly between different varieties of psychosis or draw sharp boundaries between the manifestly and the marginally insane, points we shall have cause to enlarge upon later.
Set against these deficiencies is the fact that psychiatry — if only by dint of the accumulated experience that comes from having to observe the more unusual among us — has developed a ‘language of symptoms’ that can prove useful in throwing the features of that deviance into high relief.
It is in that spirit that we shall use conventional psychiatric terminology here.
Although precise categories of mental illness are difficult to arrive at, there is at least reasonable consensus about the meaning of the more inclusive terms, ‘psychosis’ and ‘psychotic’.
Admittedly, in some popular usage the latter is occasionally employed as a synonym for ‘psychopathic’, particularly to describe individuals who commit grossly antisocial, and often bizarrely motivated, crimes.
As it happens, this use is not entirely wrong, since in many cases the person is insane and the psychopathic behaviour is itself a reflection of underlying psychosis.
However, in a less evaluative sense, and in the majority of cases, the description ‘psychotic’ refers to an abnormality of experience and behaviour in which the individual loses control of his or her feelings, perceptions, and ideas, may develop delusional beliefs that have no basis in reality and intermittently lacks insight into the fact that anything is wrong.
Experienced subjectively the state may range, depending on the degree of insight retained, from great perplexity and distress to arrogant certainty; observed objectively the behaviour seems grotesque and incomprehensible.
For most of this century it is those disorders gathered together under the heading of ‘schizophrenia’ that have been used as the paradigm for trying to describe and understand psychosis.
Yet even in this form, or forms — for many would prefer to talk of ‘the schizophrenias’— there is still no universally accepted set of criteria for diagnosis.
To illustrate the point, one of the present authors was recently asked to review a paper submitted to a prominent psychiatric journal, proposing a new set of rules for diagnosing schizophrenia.
In the course of their analysis the authors determined the extent to which their proposed criteria agreed with those contained in other existing diagnostic schemes — some ten or twelve of them.
Correlations varied over a very wide range.
Remarkably, one might think, one of the lowest — indicating almost total lack of agreement — was with a diagnosis arrived at using the  criteria introduced by Eugen Bleuler, the man who coined the term ‘schizophrenia’ in the first place!
Given such disagreement, in trying to convey some sense of what psychiatrists mean when they talk of ‘schizophrenia’ it is probably more informative to consider the range of symptoms that might be found across a group of individuals who have received that diagnosis.
The following list, close to that used in this book, summarises the most prominent symptoms:
Delusions that the mind is being controlled by an external force or that thoughts are being inserted or removed or can be heard by others.
persecutory delusions, such as being the victim of a world-wide plot.
Other bizarre delusions, for instance about the body; e.g. that it is being transformed into that of a werewolf.
Hearing voices that keep up a running commentary in the head.
Hallucinations in other modalities, such as vision, taste or smell.
Incoherent speech, marked loosening of ideas, derailed thought, blunted or inappropriate emotion, and grossly disorganised behaviour.
Any one of the above features could result in a person being labelled schizophrenic, providing some other criteria are met, such as the symptoms having lasted for a certain length of time.
Yet none, by itself, is vital to the diagnosis being made.
Some other general qualities of schizophrenia can be appreciated by examining attempts that have been made to identify various subtypes.
One old classification recognised four such varieties: hebephrenic, paranoid, catatonic, and simple.
Although now virtually abandoned, being almost entirely useless in both research and clinical practice, this scheme does draw out some of the ways in which the symptoms of schizophrenia can sometimes cluster together.
Hebephrenia was once used to describe a form, typically beginning in adolescence, in which the person complains of auditory hallucinations, talks in an incomprehensible way, and shows totally inappropriate emotional reactions to other people.
Such individuals are often of low tested IQ even before they fall ill, certainly afterwards their intellectual performance is poor.
This is also true of so-called ‘simple’ schizophrenia, where poverty of speech and thought, apathy, and flat emotional response are the  predominant features.
In contrast, paranoid schizophrenics are often of high, sometimes very high, intelligence: their difficulty, as the name implies, is the development of unshakeable persecutory delusions, though in other respects their personality and intellectual functioning are usually well-preserved.
Finally, catatonia, in which the person enters a state of total physical immobility, is rarely seen nowadays.
However, it is interesting because of its paradoxical nature; the apparent lack of behavioural responsiveness actually conceals very much heightened psychological and physiological sensitivity, with which the sufferer copes by withdrawing into the inactivity of catatonic stupor.
One reason why these categories have proved of little practical value is that particular individuals may shift from one to another over the course of time, a fact which also illustrates an additional distinction that has to be made in describing schizophrenia.
While some features, like disturbances in thinking or perception, form its central core, others — social withdrawal, for example— are secondary reactions to the mental distress that these cause.
There is, therefore, a longitudinal dimension to the condition that makes it difficult to arrive at hard and fast diagnostic rules.
Furthermore — and this probably gives us the best clue as to the intrinsic nature of schizophrenia — there is fluctuation in mental state over a much shorter time-scale.
Thus, the person may rapidly and unpredictably veer from one extreme of a symptom to the other.
For example, he or she may complain now of thoughts racing through the head, now of having no thoughts at all , or, on one occasion, of being bombarded by external stimulation, making concentration difficult, and, on another, of being fixated on some trivial detail in the outside world.
Although in trying to arrive at a definition of schizophrenia much emphasis has been placed on the disturbances that are found in cognitive functioning (perception, thinking, and attention), abnormal emotional response is almost universal.
This may cover the whole gamut of emotions, including elation, despair, anger, irritability, anxiety, and inexplicable fear.
These may occur either as a primary feature or secondarily, as a reaction to the disrupted mental functioning.
However, it is where the emotional component predominates that psychiatrists have traditionally labelled the illness ‘affective’, rather than‘schizophrenic’.
Two points should be noted here about psychiatric usage of the term ‘affective’ in defining types of psychological disorder.
First, it  focuses on those aspects of emotion that have to do with prevailing mood , especially changes associated with feelings of depression and elation, though also including other emotional reactions, such as general irritability.
Secondly, by no means all abnormal changes in mood signify a psychotic disturbance.
Indeed in many — perhaps the majority of — cases of, say, depression the altered affect is perfectly understandable as a reaction to external stress, such as loss, bereavement, failure, or social circumstances.
Psychotic depression, on the other hand, is more severe, seems to come ‘out of the blue’, and to the observer appears to have a more biological ‘feel’ about it.
It would be diagnosed if the person complains of or shows such things as: poor appetite and weight loss; disturbed sleep pattern; loss of energy and an inability to experience pleasure; feelings of guilt and self-reproach; difficulty in concentrating; suicidal thoughts; and behaviour that is very greatly slowed down or, alternatively, agitated and restless.
Some of these symptoms may be so extreme that the psychotic quality of the condition is clearly evident.
For example, expressed guilt may be so deep as to become delusional, generalised to the point where the individual believes that he or she is personally responsible for some major catastrophe or for all of the evil that exists in the world.
A depressive reaction of psychotic proportion frequently occurs alone but in other cases it may be replaced by a state of mania which may also, though more rarely, be found without swings into depression.
In mania — technically referred to, unless extremely severe, as ‘hypomania’— the individual is more than usually active, is distractible and talkative to the point where meaningful conversation is impossible, is expansive and grandiose in attitude with an inflated sense of self-importance, and may embark on reckless activities, such as unrealistic spending, gambling, or sexual indiscretions.
It is perhaps worth noting in passing that, although this manic-depressive form of psychosis is frequently interpreted as an alternation between two opposite mood states (representing abnormal extremes of sadness and happiness), that is almost certainly wrong.
Thus, many manic-depressives, even in their ‘up’ phases, describe feelings of depression and it is probably more correct to think of their psychotic state as a whole as a rather peculiar co-existence of irritable moods.
Although it is the mood disturbance that stands out in affective psychosis, individuals who meet the criteria for either the ‘unipolar’ or the ‘bipolar’form (as they are sometimes called) sometimes  also show features reminiscent of schizophrenia, as we shall see for several of the subjects evaluated in this book.
Such mixture of affective psychosis and schizophrenia may be revealed in changes in the symptom profile that are observed when the person is studied over a period of time, or it may be evident within a single episode of illness.
In these cases some psychiatrists resort to the description ‘schizoaffective’ which, although itself an old term, is now often used in recognition of the fact that the traditional categories of schizophrenia and affective psychosis really only represent varieties of insanity as they occur in their pure forms.
In addition to these informal clinical observations, there are several other, more scientific, reasons for believing that schizophrenia and affective psychosis are not as distinct from each other as was once thought.
Thus, recent statistical analyses — applied with the aim of trying to demonstrate that the symptoms of manic-depression and schizophrenia form two separate groups — have shown that there is actually no obvious dividing-line between them.
Nor, looked at from a genetics point of view are they clearly distinguishable: cases of manic-depression, for example, can often occur against a family background of schizophrenia, and vice versa .
Finally, the treatments for these two ‘types’ of psychosis are by no means specific, drug therapies found useful in one frequently also proving effective in the other.
Of course psychologists, unlike their medical colleagues in psychiatry, have never really been convinced of the reality of such categorisations of psychosis.
We can appreciate one reason for this if we examine the question, not from the viewpoint of symptoms used to try to distinguish schizophrenia from affective psychosis, but by looking at the underlying psychological processes that are responsible for the two states.
Here, far from finding differences, we find crucial similarities.
A good example, relevant to this book, surfaced in the previous chapter where we discussed ‘overinclusive thinking’ as an extreme, clinical, manifestation of divergent thinking.
The notion of overinclusive thinking actually arose originally from studies of schizophrenia ; yet, as already mentioned, it is found as, if not more, commonly in people diagnosed as suffering from mania, helping to account for the wild ‘flight of ideas’ typically observed in that condition.
Another, quite separate, reason why the idea of watertight categories of psychosis has never seemed very plausible to psychologists stems from the difficulty of defining the outer boundaries of  insanity and the existence of so-called ‘borderline’ disorders that carry the overall flavour of schizophrenia or manic-depression, but which are not severe enough to meet the diagnostic criteria for either.
These halfway conditions have long been of interest, though until recently mainly among psychoanalysts or other writers outside mainstream psychiatry.
Now, however, they are being formally recognised as mild, but genuine, variations of full-blown psychosis.
One example, which is certainly related to schizophrenia and which we shall come across again, is ‘schizotypal personality disorder’.
Here the individual shows mild or transient psychotic-like symptoms, such as strong ‘magical’ or superstitious thinking, including illusions of the presence of another person; paranoid suspiciousness and hypersensitivity to criticism; aloofness in interaction with others; and odd, vague, digressive speech.
Another borderline manifestation of psychosis is ‘cyclothymia’ in which the mood swings of manic-depression are evident, but less marked.
If terms like ‘affective psychosis’, ‘schizophrenia’ and ‘schizoaffective disorder’have a use, therefore, it is merely as labels of convenience, as shorthand descriptors of the flavour of a given individual's form of insanity — and even then often only at a certain point in time and subject to qualifications as to the severity of disability.
For many other purposes it is more informative to regard different ‘types’ and degrees of psychosis as variations on a single underlying theme of psychopathology; with particular forms of psychotic reaction being dependent on the co-existence of other, essentially unrelated, intellectual and personality traits that colour the individual's behaviour.
In this respect it is very illuminating to consider what happens when people are given so-called ‘psychedelic’ drugs, such as LSD.
In our experience the latter — which mimics ‘natural’ psychosis rather well — produces a range of reactions that closely parallels those found in schizophrenia and affective disorder, subjects' reactions being highly predictable from a knowledge of their underlying personality.
In other words, the cyclothymic become hypomanic, the schizoid more withdrawn, and the hypersensitive somewhat paranoid.
In the light of the foregoing, psychiatry itself is increasingly being forced to admit that the firm categories of psychosis with which it has tried to work for many years are of limited value.
It may be asked why psychiatry has made such heavy weather of coming round to that view.
The main reason has been its long  standing commitment (still evident in some quarters) to the idea that each of the different forms of functional psychosis is really a distinct type of brain disease, equivalent to those studied in neurology.
In other words, psychiatrists have used as their analogy disorders such as Huntington's chorea or Alzheimer's disease, which are known (or can be assumed) to have a discrete organic cause in the nervous system and which are like other infective or degenerative physical diseases, except that they happen to affect the brain.
Yet the above comparison has never worked, nor could it have been expected to.
Quite apart from nearly a hundred years of intensive research having failed to demonstrate such a cause of functional psychosis, there is another important reason why it is totally inappropriate to draw on analogy with the neurological diseases proper.
A characteristic of the latter is their solely deteriorating impact, the fact that when even their mild signs are present they bring about only incapacity and inefficiency of function.
Furthermore, such deficit is a primary, intrinsic feature of those diseases, usually having a progressive course.
Functional psychosis, on the other hand, is radically different.
It is true that during bouts of acute psychotic illness — or as an accumulating effect of several episodes — there may be impaired social and intellectual functioning, but this has more the appearance of a secondary consequence and, in any case, is by no means seen in all individuals.
More significantly, as is already clear from our discussion so far, functional psychosis also contains within itself a potential for the very opposite of deficit, the occasional capacity for superlative functioning and high achievement; this is the paradox of which we wrote in the previous chapter.
Such conjunction of the excellent and the awful is never found in any genuine neurological disease.
If the functional psychoses are not ordinary brain diseases, then what are they?
Elsewhere one of us has offered an opinion on that question, together with appropriate supporting evidence.
Here we shall merely try to summarise the main points that are immediately relevant to the topic of this book.
A crucial first step in our account takes up again a theme, introduced in the previous chapter, about the continuity between the normal and the psychotic.
The argument here is that the psychological tendencies responsible for the symptoms of psychosis are not the prerogative of the clinically psychotic.
On the  contrary they are a natural feature of the human condition, present in everyone to a greater or lesser degree.
In other words, just as people differ in extraversion, intelligence, and proneness to anxiety so, too, do they differ in the extent to which they show psychotic characteristics.
Such traits are widely distributed in the general population and, as considerable research over the past decade has shown, are easily measurable with self-rating questionnaires, of which there are now very many.
One example is a questionnaire devised some years ago by one of the present authors for detecting ‘schizotypal’ traits in normal people.
The items in this inventory were modelled on the list of symptoms used by psychiatrists to diagnose the borderline condition of ‘schizotypal personality disorder’ referred to earlier, but toned down for use with non-clinical populations.
Research with this questionnaire (and others like it) has demonstrated that schizotypal personality traits are frequently found in psychologically healthy individuals.
In other words, when asked systematically about it, many perfectly normal people freely admit to having had mild ‘symptoms’ reminiscent of schizophrenia, such as hallucinatory experiences and other sensory illusions, inexplicable mood change, feelings of unreality, strong ‘telepathic’thoughts bordering on the sense of being influenced from a distance, and distorted thinking of almost delusional quality.
At the level of reported experience, therefore, there seems to be a genuine continuum running from the obviously psychotic, through a borderline (though still clinically diagnosable) form of disorder, to the normal, but schizotypal, personality.
Although schizophrenia and the associated traits of ‘schizotypy’ have been the main focus of interest, research has also shown similar continuity with affective psychosis.
Indeed, the results of very recent work reveal two interesting parallels with the conclusions reached about the psychotic illnesses themselves.
First, when we examine a very wide range of psychotic traits in normal people, using questionnaires that contain different kinds of item, we find that they tend to group into clusters closely corresponding to the different ways in which clinical psychosis manifests itself: in emotion, in perception and thinking, and in socially deviant behaviour.
Secondly, however, these clusters also show a certain degree of relatedness or overlap.
As in the clinical domain, there seems to be a common theme of ‘psychoticism’ which nevertheless, in a given individual, will be revealed as a unique blend of several different constituent elements, each of which is continuous  with some recognisable symptom pattern found in psychotic illness itself.
Study of these various components of psychoticism as found in normal people has not been confined to the superficial level of observable traits, measured by questionnaires.
On the contrary, the development of such instruments has only been a first step, preparatory to examining the reasons people differ on such traits.
The guiding principle of that research has been the idea that the personality differences partly reflect underlying physiological differences in the brain, each person having a characteristic temperamental make-up that is represented at the biological level as a ‘type of nervous system’.
This principle is a quite general one that has been applied to several ‘dimensions’ of personality.
The simplest and most obvious example concerns individual differences in the susceptibility to anxiety.
There it is well-established that part of the reason people differ, even as adults, is because certain regions of the brain responsible for triggering fearful behaviour are simply more reactive in some individuals than in others.
Examining psychotic traits from a comparable point of view is more tricky because it is still unclear precisely what properties of brain activity are likely to prove crucial to a description of the schizotypal nervous system.
The best clues are almost certainly to be found by studying those aspects of brain function which, if they become deranged, could account for the symptoms of psychotic illness, and currently a considerable amount of research is in progress testing out various possibilities.
Details of the experiments themselves do not concern us here, but some of the ideas that have emerged from them are of interest because they add further to our understanding of how, looked at from a biological perspective, creativity can be connected to psychosis.
We shall return to this point later in the chapter.
However it is first necessary to consider another important consequence of the view of psychosis being presented here.
Although many people possess the psychotic traits we have been discussing, only a few will show the signs of even a borderline disorder and still fewer will develop a full-blown psychotic illness.
What can we learn from this about psychosis?
Actually two questions are being posed here.
First, what determines whether the outcome for the person is a morbid one, leading to disordered behaviour and experience?
Second, if psychotic traits  are so widely distributed — and apparently perfectly compatible with mental health — how can they also be associated with such disintegrative states as schizophrenia?
The answer to the second question requires that we look at psychosis from a slightly different point of view from that adopted in most medical literature.
There, as we have seen, psychotic reactions are always referred to as diseases — which they are, to the extent that they involve serious disruption of the nervous system's behaviour.
However, the term ‘disease’ is slightly unfortunate in this context because it conjures up notions of a ‘cause’that has little or nothing to do with the natural state of the organism but which is imposed on it, having a discontinuous effect; as, for example, in infectious diseases.
However, this is almost certainly not true of disorders like schizophrenia, which are better visualised as aberrations of otherwise normal physiological and psychological processes which for some reason pass beyond their usual adaptive limits; here the term ‘dysfunction’, rather than disease seems more appropriate.
It should be emphasised that nothing unusual is being stated here.
There are many comparable examples in the psychological sphere, as well as in the domain of physical disorder.
Again, take anxiety as an example.
As a personality trait, this is a universal characteristic, necessary not just for survival but also, at moderate levels, for motivating optimum performance on many everyday tasks.
Yet exactly the same trait, if too high, can disrupt and disable, in some cases bringing about the symptoms of anxiety neurosis.
Some physical illnesses, known as systemic disorders, also have a similar quality.
Thus, very high blood pressure can become established as a pathological state —‘essential hypertension’— which can help to precipitate strokes or heart attacks.
However, performing its adaptive function blood pressure is merely a natural physiological trait, though one that can vary over a wide range even in healthy individuals.
In all of these cases — anxiety, blood pressure, or psychotic temperament — the underlying trait, as well as describing differences between people, also acts as a disposition to the appropriate dysfunction to which it contributes.
So-called psychotic ‘disease’ can therefore best be seen as a normal, healthy characteristic gone wrong.
The other question posed above — Why do some people become ill and others not?— is less easy to answer, except in the most general terms.
Certainly, it seems reasonable to assume that  individuals whose temperamental make-up is more ‘psychotic’, and who therefore have a greater predisposition to psychosis, will be in greatest danger of passing over the threshold into overt illness, just as those of anxious temperament are more likely to develop an anxiety neurosis, and persons whose blood pressure is more labile will carry an enhanced risk of heart attack or stroke.
But since in all of these examples the relevant traits act only as dispositions, the actual outcome in any given individual will depend on the interaction between vulnerability and other factors that trigger illness, leading to symptoms.
Unfortunately, in the case of psychosis it is still unclear precisely what these additional factors are; unlike, say, cardiovascular disease where it is possible to point to very particular things, such as smoking and diet.
Nevertheless, we can say something further about the vulnerability itself; namely that the psychotic temperament does seem to be under strong genetic control.
It has been shown, for example, that identical twins resemble each other quite closely on schizotypal traits.
In addition, immediate relatives of diagnosed psychotics show schizotypal characteristics more frequently than would be expected by chance.
These results are not too surprising given the research findings discussed in the previous chapter and suggest that what is inherited as vulnerability to psychosis forms a broad set of dispositions that include both temperamental and cognitive features.
Taken against the background of considerable other evidence about the genetics of psychosis (especially schizophrenia) we can therefore certainly conclude that inheritance plays a major role in determining susceptibility.
Usually this has been emphasised as an attempt to make a statement about which people in the population are most likely, given other interacting events, to develop psychotic illness; in fact that is how we initially phrased the question here.
However, from our present perspective it is actually more pertinent to turn the question round the other way and ask: why is it that some people, despite having a strong genetic disposition for psychotic illness do not actually break down — or, even if they do, are partly protected from its more devastating effects?
Concern for this issue has recently surfaced in studies that were indeed set up originally to try to isolate the factors that determine which among a selected sample of children are likely later in life to have a schizophrenic breakdown.
Typically, these are long-term, follow-up investigations of the children of known schizophrenics — and therefore chosen because, on purely genetic  grounds, they should be at greater risk.
Predictably, a greater than average proportion of such children do develop symptoms of schizophrenia — or of some related ‘borderline’ condition, such as schizotypal personality disorder.
However, what has often gone unnoticed is that in most cases this does not happen and, even more interesting, in some the outcome is what has been called ‘outstanding’; that is to say, the individual turns out to be a highly competent and sometimes very creative adult.
Such observations have given rise to the notion of the ‘invulnerable child’ and are now leading to a radical re-appraisal of the results of risk research, with a shift of emphasis towards trying to understand the factors that enable some individuals to survive, or even profit from, their disposition to insanity.
A clinician who has written extensively on this topic is Anthony, who has also discussed the implied association between psychosis and creativity.
One important point which Anthony makes is that the essential quality of the psychotic temperament is emotional hypersensitivity or ‘skinlessness’, with which the child copes by developing a degree of resilience to painful thoughts and events.
Invulnerability may be achieved and expressed in several ways, of which one is the flight into creativity.
According to Anthony, this may vary in the extent to which it is effective in keeping actual psychosis at bay.
In some cases it will be entirely successful, resulting in a ‘healthy’ form of constructive competence and creativeness in which, though outer-directed, the individual is not afraid to explore his or her inner world.
In others, however, the coping is always uncertain and psychotic breakdown a constant threat.
Of these Anthony writes:
By way of illustration Anthony quotes several famous writers including one (Virginia Woolf) considered in this book as well as Kafka and Hans Christian Andersen who, Anthony recalls, had both a psychotic grandfather and a father who became deluded.
Commenting on Andersen he notes:
Although writing here with a different purpose from our own — and exclusively from a psychodynamic perspective — Anthony nevertheless articulates for us the final theme that remains to be developed in this chapter, which concerns the formal similarities between the mechanisms of mad and creative thought.
We have already, in the previous chapter, examined this question rather superficially, by noting the modes of thinking they have in common, described as overinclusive thinking in the clinical, and as divergent thinking in the creativity, literature.
However, much more recent ideas developed in academic psychology, and applied to the clinical phenomena of psychosis, allow us to take the account rather further than that.
We are referring to theories, based on detailed laboratory studies of both normal schizotypal and diagnosed schizophrenic subjects, about how the ‘psychotic’ brain processes information.
The theories in question arose originally out of a joining together of empirical research and clinical observation, some of which go right back to the very earliest descriptions of schizophrenia and it is therefore instructive to consider, first, what Bleuler himself believed to be the essential features of the ‘disease’ that he had named.
Bleuler proposed that most fundamental in schizophrenia is the loosening that occurs in associative thought, later to be studied as overinclusive thinking.
He further suggested that an immediate secondary consequence of this is a ‘splitting’ of mental life, leading to autism.
Here ‘autism’ refers to the domination of consciousness  by fantasy, by internally generated thoughts which the psychotic individual finds increasingly difficult to distinguish from ideas that originate in perceptions of external reality.
Even Bleuler himself considered what most of us would now recognise as a truism: that ‘autism’ is a feature of normal mental life, accounting for the emergence, or in some cases deliberate exploration, of ideas that arise without logic from unconscious layers of the mind.
The difference between the normal and the schizophrenic is, then, solely a matter of degree, depending upon the extent to which the products of autism become fixed in place or, alternatively, remain under rational control.
Strömgren draws the comparison as follows:
If it is indeed the loosening of control over associative thought — Woolf's ‘Wings in the Head’— that is the basic mechanism responsible for autism then the question arises: what is it about the mind that modulates this process, allowing it some free rein, though being capable on occasions of going badly awry, leading to psychosis?
The answer to that question, in essence at least, was provided nearly thirty years ago, by a perceptive schizophrenic introspecting about our own psychotic experience.
In a now  well-quoted passage from her account, in which she was trying to capture the feeling — commonly reported by schizophrenics — of being flooded by stimulation, she wrote:
Simultaneously with clinical observations such as these, academic psychologists were also beginning to incorporate a similar idea into their models of normal cognitive functioning and most contemporary theories of human information processing contain the notion of a mechanism that screens and selects the products of consciousness; necessarily so, since organised thought would be impossible without some device that allows the mind to choose from among the many stimuli — both internal and external — with which it is constantly bombarded.
Early versions of these theories were quickly taken up by clinical researchers looking for a formal way of examining what their patients — like the one above — were telling them and many experimental studies were carried out, guided by the hypothesis that schizophrenic features like overinclusive thinking are due to very weak filtration of the contents of thought, resulting in the psychotic individual finding it difficult to pursue a logically connected train of ideas.
The same theories were also used to explain the normal variants of overinclusion — divergent or allusive thinking.
On the clinical side the view still prevails that schizophrenics have difficulty, as one author has put it, ‘limiting the contents of consciousness’.
The theories in academic psychology that might explain this have also become more sophisticated, making it possible to identify more precisely the stage of information processing at which the crucial filtering effect occurs.
Processing of stimuli goes through a sequence of phases.
The first is automatic, occurring below the level of awareness, and involves rapid, parallel scanning of a large array of potentially significant events.
Only a proportion of these are passed on to the next stage of conscious analysis.
Selection almost certainly involves a process of active inhibition which screens out, among other things, unwanted or inappropriate associations between thoughts.
Using specially arranged cognitive tasks it has been possible to show that this  inhibition is weaker than average in psychotic individuals, otherwise ignored information being relatively more available for conscious processing.
Applied to clinical psychosis, information processing theories naturally highlight the disruption of intellectual functioning that can occur when the mind is overwhelmed by ideas pouring indiscriminately into awareness.
However, there is now evidence that the mechanism responsible for this can act in a similar fashion in some normal individuals; as one would expect these are people high in schizotypal traits.
The only difference between them and the psychotically ill seems to be the greater intellectual control they retain in managing the freely associated ideas which an equally weak filtering system allows into consciousness.
The same cognitive mechanism responsible for the deleterious effects of psychotic disorder can therefore also be seen as a gateway through which the raw material of creativity, originating below immediate awareness, is passed for elaboration by the conscious mind.
The theories that have guided these insights into the mechanisms of psychotic and creative thought do not, of course, specify what it is about the brain that might account for the differences observed in schizophrenic and schizotypal individuals.
Information processing models are essentially of the ‘black box’ type; that is to say, although assuming that processes like filtering do have physiological correlates, the models themselves are formulated in purely psychological terms.
For our purposes here that may not seem to matter very much.
However, it is important for two related reasons.
First, it is clear that psychotic illness involves, if nothing else, a serious disruption of brain activity.
And, secondly, as discussed earlier, a continuity view of psychosis rests very heavily on the idea that it is the type of nervous system they have in common that connects the normal to the abnormal.
Any biological data that are available must therefore further enhance our understanding.
Biological research into psychosis has taken, and continues in, many directions.
Currently one of the most viable theories is that psychosis has something to do with peculiarities in the functioning of the two brain hemispheres.
Although going back well into the nineteenth century, in the past two decades this idea has generated a vast amount of research by psychologists, physiologists, neuroanatomists and other scientists.
The work has demonstrated that psychotic individuals do indeed show some imbalance  in hemisphere organisation that could account for their bizarre psychological experiences.
Interpretations of the source of this imbalance have varied, but most persuasive is the theory that it reflects an unusual form of communication between the two halves of the brain, involving the anatomical structure (the corpus callosum ) that joins them together.
Indeed, it has been suggested that it is here that the ‘site’ of psychosis lies; not in a strictly anatomical sense but as a functional property, determining the way the corpus callosum modulates the flow of information between the hemispheres.
To appreciate the significance of this idea it is necessary to look briefly at some general features of the lateral arrangement of the brain as it relates to psychological function.
This can be best understood as the two hemispheres being engaged in a co-operative exercise, to which each contributes according to the task it is specialised to perform.
Here two features should be noted.
One is the left hemisphere's predominant role in speech and language.
The other is the different modes of information processing adopted by the two halves of the brain.
The left, consistent with its primary language capacity, is sequential and analytic in its style and has often been regarded as the rational half, responsible for the organisation and expression of conscious thought.
The right hemisphere has a more global, less focused, free-ranging style and, being ‘silent’, can only influence conscious awareness indirectly.
Interestingly, there is also a close correspondence between these two processing modes and the two stages of information analysis referred to in the psychological theories described earlier.
Thus the right hemisphere is well-placed to undertake the early parallel, preconscious scanning of large amounts of information, the left taking on the later function of conscious elaboration of selected items.
The delicate balance of cooperation between them — occurring across the corpus callosum and involving some kind of filtering process — is therefore of crucial importance in allowing the left hemisphere to remain responsive to the right hemisphere's influence, yet sufficiently in control to avoid overloading of conscious, directed thought.
The conclusion from psychological research that information processing is unusual in psychotic individuals thus finds an exact parallel in theories emphasising the functioning of the corpus callosum as the physiological vehicle for psychosis.
The studies on  which these theories are based, incidentally, have involved the use of test procedures that make it possible to assess the relative contribution of the two hemispheres to psychological performance, usually on tasks that demand the processing of linguistic information.
Differences in the patterns of performance observed on such tests — including reduction of the usual left hemisphere dominance in language, as well as intruding effects emanating from the right hemisphere — have led to the conclusion that in psychosis there may be enhanced communication between the two sides of the brain.
However, the same has again been found to be true of some normal schizotypal individuals and, notably, the genetically related children of schizophrenics.
This suggests that the quality of interhemispheric control merely represents a particular style of cerebral organisation which can certainly become a potential biological vehicle for psychotic disorder but which, in favourable circumstances, constitutes a brain mechanism responsible for the flexibility of thought found in some creative people.
The experimental research just described has given substance, in several respects, to some older or less empirically based ideas about psychosis and creativity.
The schizophrenic's and schizotypal individual's hypersensitivity, which many clinicians have emphasised, can be traced to weak modulation of stimuli that impinge upon the mind, leading to an undue awareness of events — both internal and external — less available to others.
This can have disastrous consequences, in some cases sending the person into an insane state.
In others of similar nervous system and temperamental make-up it can, through the relaxing of controls over rational thought, facilitate the entry into the autism of which Bleuler wrote and from which much healthy creativity springs.
At a neurological level this interplay between conscious and unconscious influences on thought almost certainly depends upon the lateral organisation of the brain, and on a particular involvement of the right hemisphere.
Although physiologically naive to suggest, as some have, that the seat of creativity lies in the right hemisphere, the latter's contribution must be considered of unique importance, given what is known about its style of cognitive processing.
All of the approaches to psychosis and creativity considered here — clinical or experimental, psychological or physiological — have laid stress on, and indeed provided evidence for, a common theme: the continuity between the healthy and the pathological, the  constructive and the destructive.
This slant on the topic has been deliberate, in order to draw out connections that are often ignored or, if they are recognised, swept aside as too uncomfortable to contemplate.
However, we feel it is also important, in concluding our account, to re-emphasise some earlier points.
Psychotic illness itself is frequently a discontinuous event and mostly inimical to organised thought.
Furthermore, true creativity is relatively uncommon even in those individuals who never overtly break down but whose mode of thinking resembles that of the diagnosably psychotic: it is rarer still in those who do pass beyond the threshold into clinical disorder.
The authors discussed in the remainder of this book are therefore of unique interest.
As individuals who used language as the medium for their art they probably take us closer than any other kind of creative person to the heart of our topic; given, that is, the nature of psychosis as a disorder, essentially, of linguistic expression.
Furthermore, all of them, despite on occasions entering states of manifest psychosis, remained sufficiently fluent to articulate their experiences, either in their fiction or in records of their lives, or both.
They have therefore left us with an unusually rich source of material through which to examine several questions about psychosis and creativity already raised, but as yet unanswered, in this and the previous chapter.
Why, for example, were they unique?
And were they so as individuals?
Are there any common themes running through their lives and writings that can elucidate our understanding both of creativity and psychosis?
In the final chapter we shall return to consider those questions.
However, one question which has to be settled in advance of that is: were our chosen authors truly psychotic, as judged by current clinical criteria?
As we shall see, in some individual cases this has been disputed.
In others there is little or no disagreement.
In yet others an answer has never, as far as we know, previously been sought.
Our own solution has been to subject the material about each author to a formal analysis, applying a psychiatric assessment procedure that is widely used in research and clinical practice.
The procedure in question is the Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia , or SADS.
This comes in two forms, that used here being the SADS-L, or Lifetime Version, which enables the assessment to be based, not on a single episode of illness, but on accumulated information about the person, covering the longer time periods over which our subjects could be studied.
The SADS-L provides precise criteria for diagnosing a spectrum of psychological disorders but, as the name implies, its main focus is major psychotic illness: schizophrenia, affective disorder (depression, hypomania, and manic-depression) and the mixed condition of schizoaffective disorder.
Our aim was to determine whether our authors met the criteria for any of these forms of psychosis and, if so, to ascertain in each case which ‘diagnosis’ provided the best description.
Our method of proceeding was as follows.
First, one of us (GSC) developed a simplified version of the SADS-L, extracting all of the items relevant to the diagnosis of psychotic illness.
Since the SADS-L is normally used in a face-to-face interview situation these items are mostly in the form of questions and here the original wording was retained.
Our modified schedule was then applied to each of the subjects by one or other of two of the present authors (either GW or RP).
She was asked to draw on her knowledge of the subject's life material and reply to each question, supplying evidence, as nearly as possible using the subject's own words, that was sufficiently detailed for the answer to be evaluated properly against the original SADS-L criteria.
Completed in this form the schedule for each subject was then scored (by GSC), using the rules contained in the SADS-L.
The procedure adopted was to err as far as possible on the side of conservatism, scoring each reply as ‘psychotic’ only where this seemed reasonably certain.
Where replies were ambiguous or lacking in detail further information was requested before reaching a decision: in some cases this was supplemented by material obtained from elsewhere.
Use of the above method clearly has some weaknesses, the most obvious being that ours were not ‘blind’ assessments and could clearly have been influenced by our preconceptions about the subjects.
Against this can be set the fact that the following chapters present very full accounts of their lives and works which should at least allow readers to make their own judgments, especially as we have included (in an appendix to the book) details of our ‘SADS-L’ procedure.
Another difficulty is that of assessing the mental state of individuals who are no longer alive.
Although less of a problem with twentieth- or late nineteenth-century figures, this becomes more serious with individuals from an earlier age, for three reasons.
The first is sheer lack of information.
The second is the shifting nature  of society's concepts of insanity, which requires some disentangling of the significance of whatever information is available.
Thirdly, there is the possibility that abnormalities judged by us to be psychotic in afunctional sense were actually due to organic brain diseases unrecognised at the time; for reasons discussed previously this would rule them out of court for our purposes.
Unfortunately, there is no real solution to these difficulties and again we can only leave it to the reader to arrive at his or her own conclusion on the basis of the material presented.
Finally, although not a criticism of our method — indeed, if anything, quite the contrary — it should be noted that for several of our chosen authors it was possible to arrive at more than one ‘diagnosis’ that fell within the general category of psychosis.
Where this was so it will be discussed, together with other comments, in the brief ‘case descriptions’ attached at the end of each of the chapters that follow.
Mediaeval Madness
The spectrum of human behaviour remains fairly constant throughout the ages.
Human beliefs and activities change, feelings and responses change hardly at all.
The attitudes of Job's comforters are unsurprisingly the attitudes of many people today when faced with mental illness, just as Job's symptoms are recognisable as those of a severe reactive depression.
The symptoms of psychosis as we know them today appear in all literatures from the earliest times.
Egyptian papyri, Greek myth and medicine, Roman history, the Old and the New Testaments all contain examples of what we now recognise as psychotic episodes; some of them, like the legend of Orpheus, associate creativity and psychosis.
Although God specifically warned Job's comforters not to postulate his sins as the cause of his sufferings, the Middle Ages preferred, like most ages, to ignore what God said.
To the mediaeval mind, madness was a direct result of, and punishment for, unacknowledged or unrepented sin.
In the widely-read Saints' Lives of the period, sinners are frequently struck with madness, to be restored to sanity when they have repented and been absolved.
It was admitted that occasionally the good were afflicted too, and that in these cases God was probably testing their faith, or even possibly allowing them their purgatory on earth, but on the whole the Church found it more satisfactory to believe that madness was punitive and well-deserved.
The loss of reason was a just punishment for an evil life, which was the result of the misuse of reason.
The folk in Hell, said Vergil to Dante, were ‘le genti dolorose/c'hanno perduto il ben dell'intelletto ’— the miserable race who had lost the good of intelligence.
While literature and religion stressed the moral causes of insanity, there were some commentators who, working from pure observation, suggested other causes, physiological or emotional.
Bartholomaeus Anglicus, a professor of theology at Paris, discussed in his encyclopaedia De proprietatibus Rerum the three major types of insanity; frenzy, amentia and stupor, which he associated with excesses of choler, melancholy and phlegm.
It was known  that fasting could cause hallucinations, and extreme weather conditions were thought to affect the mind.
Frenzy was used as a description of rapid mood changes and raving, amentia could refer to violence or terror, stupor to apathy and poverty of response.
He enumerates also many symptoms easily recognisable as those of psychosis.
The depressive patient is ‘feynt, ferdful in herte without cause…
Some wene that they sholde deye anone unresonably…some love and desyre deth’.
Of schizoid and deluded patients he says, ‘Soche holden theyr peas whan they sholde speke to-moche whan they shold be styll…
And some wene they close and conteyne the worlde in theyr hondes…and therefore they put not theyr hondes to take mete…’ paranoid patients ‘fall in to full euyll suspiccions without recouer and therfore they hate and blame theyr frendes, and sometyme smite and slee theim’.
The nightmares and perception of strange smells that we shall see in our more modern writers were as prevalent in mediaeval times: ‘He dremyth dredful dremes of derknesse and ferdfull to se, and of stynkynge sauoure and smelle.’
Froissart in his Chronicles describes the probably schizophrenic Charles VI, who set out on a punitive expedition to Brittany, in spite of being ordered to rest by his doctors, who had evidently recognised the signs of an approaching attack.
He had had severe headaches and depression, and was made nervous by a warning of treachery from a madman who ran out of the woods.
Startled by a lance accidentally falling on a helmet, he attacked his own men, killing four, and could not be disarmed until he was exhausted.
The doctor who attended him, Guillaume de Harselly, was evidently experienced in cases of mental illness, and warned the royal counsellors that other attacks of the same kind were to be expected.
The king's next relapse resulted in permanent disability; this was regarded as a divine punishment for his early excesses.
Canon law prescribed that every physician, before attempting a cure, must persuade the mentally ill to apply to the physicians of the soul, their confessors.
No physical remedy could succeed unless the spiritual remedy had first been applied.
After that, the possibilities for the disturbed were very much what they were to remain until the introduction of the major tranquillisers — and indeed what they had been from Roman times.
The violent against themselves and others were shut up, sometimes in darkness, they might be bound to prevent harm, they might be flogged or starved.
The less disturbed needed to be freed ‘from cause of matere of besy  thoughtes…and somdele be ocupyd’.
In other words, they needed release from stress, and occupational therapy.
Celsus suggested that they should be gently argued with rather than opposed, and that music and light reading might help to turn their thoughts into a more rational channel.
Medical literature, though bound to note and discuss the physiological causes, in no way contradicted the strong belief promoted by all other literature of the time, that madness was punishment for sin.
Mediaeval literature has frequent references to insanity, in sermons and saints' lives, where holy men struggle with the insane and usually cure them, by the power of God, or where the violent against Christians ultimately become mad; in homiletic literature, where the figures of Nebuchadnezzar and Herod present fearful lessons; and in Arthurian romances, where Tristram and Lancelot are interesting figures to the modern psychologist.
Both of them have psychotic interludes, occurring after particularly stress-loaded incidents, both are in guilt-producing situations (Lancelot doubly so, since he has inadvertently betrayed the woman he adulterously loves) and both, in losing their reason, lose their humanity.
They run wild into the woods, filthy, skeletal and naked.
Lancelot, although befriended by a hermit, cannot be brought back to a normal state of mind because the hermit is too poor to feed him properly, and ‘for defaute of sustenance he waxed more wooder than he was aforetyme’, and became violent, breaking the legs and arms of those who tried to help him.
Both knights have to be bathed, shaved and properly clothed, and well looked after before they come to themselves, and Lancelot is ‘sore ashamed’ of his madness, and asks that it be kept from common knowledge.
It has been suggested that the wild man, or wood-wose, who appears so often in medieval literature, is a conventional figure typifying madness and deriving from the mad king Nebuchadnezzar, who was ‘driven away from among men, and did eat grass like an ox, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till his hairs grew like the feathers of eagles, and his nails like birds claws.’
But all literary conventions have their origin in life; is it not possible that the wild men were psychotics driven out of towns and settlements by a society unable to cope with them?
They either died there from hunger or exposure, or were taken back into their community when they had recovered sufficiently to present no menace.
Margery Kempe (c. 1373-??)
In an age when sin and madness were so strongly associated, the only reason for confessing to having been insane would be that complete recovery showed divine forgiveness of whatever sin had caused the madness in the first place; and this is the reason advanced by the two mediaeval authors who admit to having been mad, Margery Kempe and Thomas Hoccleve.
Hoccleve was a scribe by profession, and was therefore able to write his own confession, but the difficulty in considering the case of Margery Kempe is that she was illiterate, and dictated her account of her life to two different scribes, one a poor writer and the other a priest.
We are therefore presented with a book which was not ‘written in order…but like as the matter came to the creature in mind…for it was so long ere it was written that she had forgotten the time and the order when things befell’.
It is likely too that the priest tidied up and eliminated any traces there may have been of disordered thinking or language, as he almost certainly corrected any theological mistakes, for his own safety.
Ruskin (who will be discussed in a later chapter) also wrote his autobiography in old age, and without our knowledge of his life from other sources we should have a distorted picture of his childhood, and should know nothing at all about his marriage.
Yet he had letters and journals, as well as his own books, to help in his compilation; Margery had nothing but her own memory.
What is valuable about her book, therefore, is not its accuracy, but its testimony to her thoughts and feelings.
She was the daughter of a respected and well-to-do burgess of Lynne (as King's Lynn was then called) who had been five times Mayor, and Alderman of the High Guild of the Trinity.
Doubtless he gave her a good dowry when she married another burgess, John Kempe.
Though she told her husband ‘shrewdly and shortly’ that she thought she had married beneath her, he proved on the whole a sympathetic and supportive husband in what cannot by any standards have been a normal or comfortable married life.
Margery became pregnant soon after her wedding, was continually sick during the pregnancy, and had a difficult childbirth.
She sent for her confessor because she was in mortal sin; she had withheld from him in confession a sin of which she was ashamed, but because he spoke sharply to her, she did not confess it at all this time either.
Fearful of damnation, and angry at the priest's reproof, she went out of her mind, and was ‘wondrously vexed and laboured with spirits for half a year, eight weeks and odd days’.
Her breakdown cannot be better described than in her own words: ‘She saw, as she thought, devils opening their mouths all inflamed with burning waves of fire, as if they would have swallowed her in, sometimes ramping at her, sometimes threatening her…night and day, during the aforesaid time’.
They told her she must give up Christianity and deny, not only God and all the saints, but her father, her mother, and all her friends.
‘And so’, says Margery with a touch of complacency, ‘she did.
She slandered her husband, her friends, and her own self.
She said many a wicked word, and many a cruel word; she knew no virtue or goodness, she desired all wickedness; like as the spirits tempted her to say and do, so she said and did’.
The devils urged that she should kill herself and be damned with them in Hell, and it was evidently to contain her attempts at suicide that she was ‘bound and kept with strength day and night’; even then she ‘rived the skin on her body against her heart with her nails most spitefully’.
Then, after eight months of this, she had, one day when her keepers had left her alone, a vision of Christ, in a purple silk mantle.
Soon after this, Margery ‘became calmed in her wits and reason, as well as ever she was before’, and was able to cope with her usual occupations, ‘wisely and soberly enough’.
But in her personal and religious life she was very far from wise or sober, which might lead theologians to think that the apparition of Christ which she saw was a hallucination rather than a pure vision.
Traditionally the visionaries of the Church have been either opponents of Christ, like St Paul or St Eustace, who were converted by their visions, or men and women already leading lives of heroic sanctity, like St Teresa or St Francis.
Far from leading a more Christian life, Margery after her breakdown thought only of outdoing her neighbours, for ‘all her desire was to be worshipped by the people’.
To this end she dressed in the most outrageously modern and expensive clothes, ‘so that they should be the more staring to men's sight’.
This, naturally, caused a good deal of gossip.
Then, to increase her income and her reputation, she plunged into business enterprises for which she was ill-equipped and inexperienced; in three or four years she had lost most of her money and people refused to work for her, ‘it was advised about the town…that neither man nor beast would serve the said creature’.
But at least these antics attracted attention; ‘then some said she was accursed; some said God took open vengeance on her; some said one thing and some said another’.
It has been the habit of the saints to try to avoid attention; Margery seemed to try to attract it.
One night as she lay in bed with her husband, she heard ‘a sound of melody so sweet and delectable, that she thought she had been in paradise’.
After this (but only ‘when she was in any company’) she could not restrain herself from saying, ‘It is full merry in Heaven’.
Naturally enough, this called forth the response, ‘Why speak ye so of the mirth that is in Heaven?
Ye know it not, and ye have not been there any more than we’.
She made herself even more unpopular by bursting into tears whenever she heard music, ‘with great sobbings and sighings after the bliss of Heaven’.
She also wanted to put an end to any sexual intercourse with her husband, though formerly both he and she had had great enjoyment from it.
Her husband, who had put up with a great deal, and was to put up with much more, was not yet prepared to lose his marital rights.
But Margery had ways of getting what she wanted.
She began to get up at two or three every morning, and was in church most of the day, often sobbing ‘boisterously’, and making a great outcry for her sins.
Not unnaturally, the congregation complained about this.
‘Many people thought she could leave off as she liked’, and others ‘slandered and reproved her’ for not looking after her home and children.
Many of her former acquaintances refused to speak to her.
Two years after her conversion to strictness of life, she was sexually attracted to a man she knew well, although she seems to have had just before this a grandiose sense of her own imperviousness to sin.
‘She was so strong…that she dreaded no devil in Hell…
She thought that she loved God more than He did her…
She many times desired that the crucifix should loosen His hands from the Cross, and embrace her in token of love.’
When the man first tempted her and then rejected her, she was ‘all shamed and confused in herself’, was afflicted with horrible temptations to lechery and despair, and ‘the devil put into her mind that God had forsaken her’.
She was in depression for about a year.
Then she heard Christ speaking to her, saying that she would have victory over all her enemies, and that she was to give up the hair-cloth that she wore and her continual saying of the Rosary, but must stop eating meat.
(Christ was very apt to tell Margery to give up things she had become tired of; he was later to tell her to eat meat again.)
She now began to have the strange experience of  finding herself taking part in the life of the Holy Family.
She was present at the birth of the Blessed Virgin, who was then given over to her care for twelve years, and at the Visitation and the birth of St John the Baptist and even at the birth of the Saviour, when she was allowed to provide bedding for the Virgin and swathing-clothes for the Child.
She went with them into Egypt after seeing the three Kings present their gifts.
Later, her husband became impotent when he tried to make love to her — by the power of prayer, Margery insists, but the reader may have reservations.
When she had made the rounds of the many churches in Lynne, she was ‘urged in her soul to go and visit certain places for ghostly health’, and her husband, either from kindness, or afraid that she would get into trouble, accompanied her.
On the way back from York, they finally resolved their marital problems; he was to make no sexual demands, she was to give up her Friday fasts and pay his debts before starting on her pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
Then they went on to Bridlington, Canterbury and ‘divers places of religion’, where Margery was often in trouble because of her noisy weeping, which went on nearly all day, ‘both forenoon and afternoon also’.
Her husband, poor man, often left her ‘as if he had not known her, and left her alone amongst them, choose how she might’.
Yet, she admitted, he was ‘ever a good man, and an easy man to her…and had compassion on her, and spoke for her as he durst, for dread of the people’.
But there seemed to be no way of keeping her out of trouble; her maid, ‘seeing discomfort on every side’, first refused to obey her, and then left her.
She was often hauled up before sheriffs for what would now be causing a breach of the peace, and before Bishops to see whether she should be burned for heresy, and frequently ended up in prison.
Like the prophets of the Old Testament, she was compelled to reprove sinners, especially those in high places, such as the Archbishop of Canterbury; and, like the prophets, she did it with immense tactlessness.
Some dignitaries did befriend her, usually to get her away from their own localities.
It must have been a relief to everyone who knew her when, in 1414, she started from Yarmouth on her pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
Almost immediately there was trouble with her fellow-travellers on account of her ‘great weeping and boisterous sobbing’, and her continual exhortations to the good life, which she would not cease from even at meals.
Some of them evidently knew her, for they said ‘they would not put up with her as her husband  did when she was at home and in England’.
They would not let her speak at table and made her wear a white canvas apron and a short gown ‘so that she should be held a fool’; but, said Margery with unholy self-satisfaction, ‘she was held in more worship than they were, wherever they went’.
They turned her away from their company, but she reached Bologna before they did.
In Jerusalem, her ‘crying and roaring’ took on a new form.
When she came to Calvary, ‘she fell down because she could not stand or kneel, and rolled and wrested with her body, spreading her arms abroad’, because she had a vision, or hallucination, of the Crucifixion.
For the first time she gave vent to loud screams, which became her usual method of attracting attention from that time: ‘this manner of crying endured many years after this time, for aught any man might do, and therefore, suffered she much despite and much reproof’.
She had these cryings often, she says complacently, while she was in Jerusalem and Rome, but when she returned to England, they were much less frequent; then they occurred once a month, once a week, daily, seven or fourteen times a day, and at last‘whenever God would send them’, in church or in the street — never, apparently, in the privacy of her own home.
‘The crying was so loud and so wonderful that it made the people astounded unless they had heard it before’; she ‘made wondrous faces and expressions’ too.
Her hearers found it difficult to believe that this screaming was involuntary; some thought she was drunk, or ill, or possessed by an evil spirit, but most of them just wanted her out of the way: ‘some wished she was on the sea in a bottomless boat’.
Groups of pilgrims never wanted her company, but Christ told her to go with them, ‘whether they would or not’.
By the time she reached Venice, they had had enough: ‘they would not go with her for a hundred pound’, and left her on her own.
She reached Rome via Assisi, and, though she found shelter in a hospice for pilgrims, she was soon turned out.
When God the Father announced that He wished to marry her, she would have preferred the Manhood of Christ; nevertheless, she was married to the Father in the presence of the Son, the Holy Ghost, the Virgin, the Twelve Apostles, St Katharine, St Paul, and numerous other saints and virgins.
After this she began to hear strange sounds and melodies ‘that she could not well hear what a man said to her at that time, unless he spoke the louder.
Once she heard the sound of the Holy Ghost, which was like a pair of bellows in her ear, though it later turned into the sound of a dove, then of a robin that sang only in her right ear.
She smelled strange scents, and saw ‘with her bodily eyes’ small white things, as thick as specks in a sunbeam, which appeared at night as well as in the daytime.
For sixteen years after the heavenly wedding, she felt ‘a flame of fire’ in her breast, which God told her was the heat of the Holy Ghost.
She might have found it confusing that, in spite of having been married to the Father, it was God the Son who told her to treat Him as her wedded husband and kiss Him as much as she liked in bed, but Margery took things like that in her stride.
Having given away all her money in Rome, she begged her food, or existed on charitable donations.
It was the year when the canonisation of St Bridget was confirmed, and Rome was full of pilgrims.
Margery had a particular devotion to this saint, whose Revelations she had heard read aloud in an English translation.
In fact many of her visions seem to be a sort of sacred one-upmanship on St Bride, who also had visions of the Holy Family, but was not allowed to play nearly so intimate a role in its life as Margery.
Then again, Margery saw the Blessed Sacrament flicker like a dove's wings, and was told by Jesus, ‘My daughter Bride saw me never in this wise’.
And Margery's visions outdid in splendour anything that was narrated ‘in either Hylton's book or Bride's book, or Stimulus Amoris , or Incendium Amoris , or any other that she ever heard read’.
Although she was penniless, she managed to get back to England: Margery never had much difficulty in finding people who would give her money to go a long, long way away.
Her husband took her back to Lynne where, unaccountably to the reader, since she had paid all her debts before she left for Jerusalem, she found herself heavily in debt.
She went to church in Lynne, and there gave her first really loud scream.
This met with a poor reception.
Some thought she had epilepsy because she ‘wrested her body…and waxed all blue and livid like the colour of lead’.
It is not surprising that many citizens ‘banned and cursed her’, nor is it wholly surprising that there were some among them prepared to give her money to go on a pilgrimage to the shrine of St James of Compostella in Spain.
Some of her best friends said rudely to her, ‘Why have ye given away your money and other men's also?
Where shall ye now get as much money as ye owe?’, and when she was given forty pence she bought herself a furred cloak with it rather than paying off any of her debts.
Still, she reached Bristol, and waited there for a ship, ‘with plenteous tears  and boisterous sobbings, with loud cryings and shrill shriekings’, and, although her fellow-voyagers threatened to throw her overboard, she got to Spain and back to Bristol in a month.
She soon set off for Leicester, where she sobbed ‘hideously’ and was put in prison with two unlucky fellow-pilgrims.
However, there were people there who were ‘greatly desiring that she had been out of that country’, and she bustled off to York, where the Archbishop paid a man five shillings to lead her out of the town.
At Beverley she was arrested; so, unfortunately, was the Archbishop's man, which brought the Archbishop breathing fire to Beverley.
Margery, always totally serious herself about her mission, seemed unable to avoid leading others into farcical situations.
She was arrested again after crossing the Humber, and again three miles out of Ely.
When at last she reached Lynne, she succumbed, not unnaturally, to ‘many great and divers sicknesses’.
She may have had another breakdown, since she speaks of ‘a great sickness in her head…so that she feared to have lost her wits therethrough’.
Nevertheless, she says that whenever she could persuade her scribe to let her dictate to him, ‘she was hale and whole suddenly in a manner’.
All this time, her cries and weepings had so increased in volume and in duration (sometimes she cried for five or six hours) that she was forbidden to go to church, and had to be confessed and absolved in a private chapel.
Her ‘high revelations’ ceased, and she had delusions from the devil instead; he sent her ‘foul thoughts and foul memories of lechery and all uncleanness’.
She saw ‘horrible sights and abominable, priests, heathen and Christian’, showing her their genitals, and the devil told her she must fornicate with them all.
‘She could not say nay; and she must needs do his bidding; and yet she would not have done it for all this world.
Yet she thought it should be done, and she thought these horrible sights and cursed memories were delectable to her, against her will’.
She was brought almost to despair, until after twelve days the hallucinations ceased.
All this time she kept up her cryings and roarings, indeed, when she was ‘barren of tears a day or half a day’, she was much depressed.
She ‘could find no comfort in meat or drink or conversation, but ever was gloomy in face and behaviour till God would send them to her again, and then she was merry enough’.
It was natural that her children (those who survived) should be repelled by her bizarre antics.
She tells us that when she met with one of her sons ‘against his will’, they quarrelled, because she, ‘some deal moved with sharpness of spirit’, insisted on telling him to flee the perils of this world; the young man, doubtless angry at his mother's squandering of his inheritance, ‘sharply answering back’.
He acquired some unpleasant skin disease, and his mother would not pray for his healing until he begged her forgiveness.
Later he married abroad, and when Margery was about sixty years old brought his German wife and child on a visit to her, but died when he had been in England about a month.
His father died shortly afterwards, and Margery was given permission by her confessor to escort her daughter-in-law as far as Ipswich, where the latter was to take ship for home.
Here, she was ‘commanded in her heart’ to go over the sea with her daughter, who was not at all pleased: ‘there was no one so much against her as her daughter, who ought most to have been with her’.
Margery was rather fearful about disobeying her confessor, but Jesus assured her that he could overrule a priest, and she set off without money or luggage.
She stayed in Danzig five or six weeks, to her daughter-in-law's horror and embarrassment, since she had her cryings and roarings ‘as well as if she had been at home’.
Then a chance encounter with a man going to see the precious Blood at Wilsnak in the Duchy of Brandenburg determined her to accompany him.
It was not a successful pilgrimage: ‘the more she wept, the more irked was her man of the company, and the more he tried to go from her and leave her alone’.
Ill, insulted, lice-ridden, afraid of rape, she still ‘kept on with her fellowship with great anguish and discomfort’, till they reached Aachen, where a rich English woman gave Margery leave to accompany her back to England.
But after a few days of Margery's company ‘the worshipful woman sped herself fast out of Akun with all her retinue’.
Somehow Margery got to Calais, where she met ‘divers persons who had known her before’; they would not let her know which ship they were sailing on, but Margery ‘speered and spied’ until she found out, and put her luggage aboard.
The persons who had known her before secretly got ready another ship, though ‘what the cause was, she never knew’, says Margery ingenuously.
She had her revenge; she hastily boarded their ship, leaving her belongings on the other ship, and prayed not to be sick.
She wasn't, while the persons who knew her before, especially the rich woman, were ‘voiding and casting full boisterously and uncleanly’.
In spite of trying to help them on the voyage, Margery was left alone at Dover.
She travelled via Canterbury to London, where she spoke ‘boldly and mightily’ against the vicious, did a good deal of sobbing and crying, and was turned out of several churches.
When at last she reached Lynne, she found a very angry confessor, and his ‘full sharp words’ are almost the last we hear of Margery; we do not know what happened to her after her book was finished.
Margery's ‘visions’ appear not to be typical of those of more orthodox mystics.
Some of them happened, she said, when ‘her eyes were ever together-ward as if she would have slept’, some she saw ‘with her ghostly eye’; most of her experiences with the Holy Family she describes just as she does her other, more ordinary experiences.
It seems likely that the visions of the devils and of Christ that she saw during her first breakdown were actual hallucinations, as were the later seeing of obscenities, and what she called the ‘flickering’ of the Sacrament.
The white quivering lights which she so frequently saw probably resembled the white ‘eels and strings’ that Ruskin complained of, and had their origin in the psychotic brain.
Her many ‘seeings’ of Christ and the Holy Family may have been delusions which she actually lived through, as Ruskin lived through his conflicts with the Devil, or they may have been deliberately induced auto-hypnosis deriving from the Revelations of St Bridget, to whom Margery had a special devotion.
But most of the content of Margery's thinking was derivative.
She heard readings from Hilton's Scale of perfection , from which she may have absorbed her preoccupation with virginity.
Her desire to kiss lepers probably originated in the story of St Katherine, which she would hear read on the appropriate feast-day in church.
Her prodigious roarings and weepings would be licensed in her mind by the examples of St Mary of Oignies (whose book she had heard in an English translation), St Bonaventure, St Elizabeth of Hungary and an unnamed priest she had heard of who wept ‘so wonderfully that he wetted his vestment’.
These outcries became her trademark, by which she was known everywhere she went.
If they were an attention-seeking device, they were successful; even when she was turned out of the church as she frequently was, the eyes of the whole congregation were on her; sometimes, she reports proudly, people stood on stools to see her better.
But this imitation of well-established exemplars is another mark of the psychotic rather than the genuine mystic.
Everything that Margery says can be traced to what she would hear in sermons and readings.
Her few originalities are so naive as to be laughable (such as her picture of the persons of the Trinity  sitting on different-coloured cushions) or so deranged as to be pitiable.
Margery Kempe has been diagnosed as a case of religious hysteria who never recovered from puerperal fever, a victim of sexual repression, and as a hysterical personality who had psychotic episodes with pathological distortion of the sexual impulse.
It is more likely that she was a schizophrenic, for whom the religious beliefs of her day provided a means of escape from the daily life with which her inadequate personality could not cope.
Her hyperactivity and restlessness were taken up in the constant roaming, first about the churches in her own neighbourhood, then to religious sites in England, then on pilgrimage in Europe, all of them respectable things to do.
This solitary travelling, in an age when travel was dangerous, may seem to show her as an indomitable and independent woman, like Mary Kingsley in the nineteenth century; but in fact, like most psychotics, she was extremely dependent on others.
She set up everywhere she went a series of dependency relationships, attaching herself either to the compassionate, the powerful, or the merely expedient, when her lack of judgement often led her to be rejected, robbed or ill-treated, but — again a psychotic trait — she seemed unable to learn by experience.
She needed continual reassurance, and although she had been told by God himself that all her sins were forgiven and that she would not need to go to purgatory, she confessed and had herself absolved four, five or six times a day.
Her complete indifference to her fourteen children must also be abnormal.
Were they looked after by servants or grandparents while she prayed, sobbed and travelled?
She mentions that once, having just given birth to a child, she was ordered by Christ to get up and go to Norwich, though her journey appeared to be without purpose.
At another time, He told her that she had conceived again, and when she, fearful that this would interrupt her ‘contemplation’, asked how she should look after the child, Christ replied casually that he would find it a keeper.
Her roaming about served another purpose: it enabled her to pour out her life-story, her experiences and her ‘revelations’ to a perpetually new audience.
In other times she would have been obsessively at her pen or her typewriter; as it was, she harassed her scribes and possible scribes continually — to death, it would appear in the case of the first one.
She had the psychotic's need to discharge the contents of the over-charged brain, and she notes  how often she was ill when she was unable to dictate, and how much relieved, and physically improved she felt when she could.
It is significant that, in an age when belief in miracles, extreme saintliness and revelation were of the stuff of daily life, so many of her contemporaries believed Margery to be mentally ill; only, probably, the superstitious, the credulous and the ignorant believed her to be a genuine mystic.
But at least her psychosis gave students of English literature and social history a book which can claim to be the first extant long prose narrative in the English language, and the first autobiography by a psychotic personality.
Thomas Hoccleve (1368/9–1426)
Like Margery Kempe, Thomas Hoccleve followed a secular calling, and like Chaucer, his contemporary, he wrote only in his spare time.
His working life was spent as a civil servant in the important government Office of the privy Seal in Westminster, where Chaucer was Clerk of the Works.
In spite of his breakdowns, Hoccleve achieved a position of seniority and in due course retired with a pension.
His professional work as a scribe meant he could command the means and materials for copying his work, and he was able to supplement his income by writing verses.
His access to patronage, too, was gained through privy Seal connections.
He used his poetry as an autobiographical outlet, incorporating detailed personal matter about his illness into the dull routine of conventional composition and translation.
The autobiographical passages are the most lively part of his work.
Although literary critics have been cautious about assuming that Hoccleve is indeed writing about himself in these passages, rather than adopting a conventional autobiographical stance which is in fact a fiction, there are strong arguments to support the reality of his claims.
Much of what he says about his money troubles and his illness is consistent with the evidence of extant records which show his salary was often in arrears, and that at the time he says he was ill his salary was being collected for him, indicating his absence from work.
Again, it would have been professional suicide for a civil servant to describe the indignities of derangement and to represent himself as having been mad, unless the facts were as well known to his colleagues and masters as he says they were; while to try, on  the other hand, to put his known condition in a better light, as Hoccleve does, is sensible only if the fact of his illness was well known but his recovery less well recognised, which is what he claims.
Moreover, it is difficult to believe that anyone who can be as dull as Hoccleve can, when using literary conventions, could suddenly become as lively as he does by merely adopting a new one: the ‘autobiographical’ convention.
There can be little doubt that Hoccleve is describing his own experience.
From an early date — extant records suggest 1407 to 1410 — Hoccleve was obsessed by anxiety about his financial security.
His salary should have been adequate, with the perquisites of office, and though salaries were often not paid promptly, he seems never to have been in need.
He admits he was extravagant as a young man, and liked to show off by over-tipping the ferryman.
One  balade , addressed to ‘Maister Carpenter’, has come down in his own hand, with a marginal list showing that the poem, which is a begging letter, could be recycled, and addressed to a new recipient on each occasion.
According to this poem, his dread of foreclosure by his creditors is keeping him awake at night.
Another poem of this period, addressed to the Duke of York, complains of his poor eyesight.
Clearly this, had it really existed, would have threatened his livelihood, but there is no evidence of its being anything more than imaginary.
Insomnia and deteriorating sight are recurring themes in Hoccleve and in the work of other writers studied here.
Hoccleve's longest and most popular work, judging by the number of surviving manuscripts, is the Regiment of Princes , written 1411–12.
This work belongs to the genre of the ‘Mirror for Magistrates’; it offers conventional advice to kings and rulers on all relevant themes.
The irrelevant parts are those in which Hoccleve's obsessions crop up.
The poem is some 5500 tines long, but the first 2000 are Hoccleve's personal introduction, purporting to explain how he came to write the rest.
Dialogue is one of Hoccleve's favourite forms.
Accordingly, his introduction takes the form of a long conversation between himself and an old man, a Beggar, who approaches him while he is walking in the fields after a sleepless night at Chester's Inn, where the clerks lived.
His description of the anxiety he is suffering suggests Cowper's later experience of madness, when the nightmares of waking and sleeping states merge indistinguishably; and his mental state brings on a sensation of alternating extremes of temperature:
It is interesting that Hoccleve's old Beggar embodies all that Hoccleve most fears: poverty, old age and helplessness in the face of them.
Confronted by the figure of the Beggar, Hoccleve at first remains withdrawn in his ‘seekly distresse’; he refuses to speak to him, then begs him to go away:
But the old man insists, and Hoccleve eventually confesses that his great problem is anxiety (‘encombrous thoght’), and the Beggar offers to cure him, if he will unburden himself and listen to Reason.
The Beggar claims it is by speaking of his troubles that he has himself been cured, after a severe change of fortune which has brought him from wealth to his present condition.
The dangerous alternative to the psychiatric help he is offering is Despair.
He therefore counsels Hoccleve to have faith and so avoid damnation.
Although Hoccleve believes in the sacrament he has no wish to prove dark theological matters (or, probably, to enter on a long psychoanalysis, which, though free, will mean listening as well as talking).
The Beggar tells him he has done him good already, and asks him not to spurn but to honour the experience of old age, claiming that poverty has shown him God.
Hoccleve now apologises for his earlier attitude and welcomes his help, embarking on a long exposition of his case.
He speaks of the trouble he has in getting paid, his fear of old age and its isolation and poverty when he can no longer work; and he describes the privations and pains  of his working conditions.
He must concentrate all day, not talk or sing like other workmen; the work gives him back, stomach, and worst, eye trouble.
After twenty-three years of this his eyesight is nearly spoiled.
He again apologises, this time for his long moan, and asks advice.
The Beggar's view is, reasonably, that Hoccleve's income should be enough even though he had a wife, and has by marrying her, cut off the possibility of a career in the Church.
He must be practical.
On the spiritual plane, the Beggar advises him to be reconciled to God's will and his own lot in life.
He should avoid sins for which a change of fortune may well be God's punishment.
Hoccleve is distressed by the corruptions of the time (which recur in the main work as well as here).
He feels his faithful services are not valued, and he longs for death.
The Beggar reproves him, then turns to practical advice.
Hoccleve should apply to prince Henry for patronage and protection, using his talents as a scribe and making a translation on the duties of a prince.
They part, but it is arranged that they can meet again any day in White Friars, near Chester's Inn, at seven in the morning.
Hoccleve duly begins to translate his sources for the main work next day.
It seems that writing and translating is temporarily effective, or at least that the Beggar's use for an introduction to the poem is of no further service, because no further meetings between them are recorded.
However, if there were good effects from the Regiment of Princes enterprise, they were only temporary.
1421–2 finds him once more using a dialogue convention to describe his woes, and it is now evident that there have been serious developments in the interim.
In his new poem, the Complaint , it is autumn.
He lies awake and thinks how, since his last illness, the will to live has left him.
It is his sense of swelling sorrow that is making him burst out into his poem.
He recalls how God visited him with sickness, as he does others, and how he suffered a ‘wyld infirmytie’, as everyone knew, that ‘me owt of my selfe cast and threw’.
He lost his memory, but it returned, and it will be five years on 1 November since he recovered.
The bitter injustice which is afflicting him so deeply now is that in spite of the fact that he has been perfectly all right ever since, no-one will believe it.
People who used to seek him out in Westminster Hall and in London now turn away and avoid him.
He might as well be dead.
He is embarrassed as well as frustrated when he hears people say he may go mad again when the hot weather comes, when he has maintained his sanity for many summers.
It is pure conjecture on their part.
He remembers how  people said he looked like a wild steer, gazing about on all sides, holding his head too high, and how they said his brain was buckish, and totally devoid of sober reasoning power.
He says his gait, too, was like that of a roe, starting hither and thither, not staying, not stopping; he was brain-sick.
One man said his feet and eyes were in constant motion.
Hoccleve knew his opinion wouldn't be valued, and this saddened him.
He tried earnestly to look cheerful, but their words made him shake with fear, sweat and turn hot and cold.
At home, in the privacy of his room, he went straight to his mirror to see if he looked normal, but he realised he might not be a good judge of that.
But all that is in the past.
Now he is well, he is being wronged.
It might be better to keep out of sight, but then there will be worse gossip.
Some people still think him mad, but God has cured him, and in any case they shouldn't judge by appearances, which are deceptive.
Although he is unhappy and feels it is time to die, he thanks God he is well again.
He is going to translate a work of consolation, in which a mournful man (‘Thomas’ in the margin of Hoccleve's own manuscript) holds a dialogue with Reason.
Reason argues that trouble is the punishment for sin, and should be born patiently, as a means to salvation.
Hoccleve has taken Reason's words to heart, and will now put up with the gossip about his illness.
He bids farewell to sorrow, hoping henceforth to unpick with patience the lock of his disease, taking his punishment, and seeking to amend his life, giving thanks, and asking for mercy.
He enlivens things further by continuing with a sequel, the Dialogus cum Amico .
In a clever piece of bridgework between the two, the poet is interrupted by an old friend who comes knocking at the door and calling his name.
The visitor wants to know what Hoccleve is doing, and when he finds out, implores him not to publish his Complaint , but to let people forget about his illness.
Hoccleve knows they still remember; he still hears them talking about him.
He insists that God ought to be thanked publicly for his cure, just as any other physician would be in such a case.
He (unlike those he holds guilty of some of the corrupt practices that seem to obsess him both here, and in the Regiment of Princes , the coin-clippers and counterfeiters), has done nothing wrong.
His friend changes the subject and asks what else he means to write, and Hoccleve says he will translate Suso's Lerne to Dye .
He is fifty-three ageing, losing his sight, and should prepare for death.
His friend fears the difficult work may overtax his weak brain.
He  is afraid too much study has caused him to regress to his former state of madness, and urges him to wait until he has regained stability.
The worst may be over, but the illness is still lurking.
Hoccleve is distressed at such mistrust.
His friend vows steadfastness in friendship, but repeats his warning: his illness came from too much study, and he shouldn't do it again.
This Hoccleve rejects outright: his long sickness sent him out of his mind, not too much study.
The friend gives way, and a compromise is reached: Hoccleve won't overdo it.
In the view of his friend, Hoccleve is unwise to trust his own judgement rather than the friend's, but a programme of translation, with patronage in mind, is drawn up.
The friend is to visit him from time to time to make sure he proceeds with discretion.
Unlike the Beggar, the friend does return once, looks over Hoccleve's work (a translation from the Gesta Romanorum), and goes home to fetch him a better copy, including the moralising of the tale which Hoccleve's copy lacks, and which he immediately begins to translate.
The borrowed book may be a fiction taken from Isadore of Seville, one of Hoccleve's sources, but the liveliness, and the determination with which Hoccleve insists on going his own way, whatever his friends advise, is lifelike enough.
Advice not to write, in mediaeval times and later, is of little use to any of the authors considered in this book.
When original composition is too demanding, translation, sometimes with original additions, is the next best thing.
Hoccleve, besides being a clerk, was an admirer of Chaucer.
The best portrait of Chaucer was one he had made from life for his patron's copy of the Regiment of Princes , where it accompanied Hoccleve's praise of his master.
Hoccleve ‘s interest for us is accidental: the pressures of his mental illness pushed him into vivid personal confession in an age in which autobiography was almost always purely conventional.
In different ways, but for similar reasons, Hoccleve and Margery Kempe began a new kind of writing.
Case Descriptions
Margery Kempe
All psychiatric assessment procedures contain an instruction to set aside as diagnostically insignificant any experience that occurs as  part of a shared religious or subcultural belief system.
To follow that rule uncritically for Margery Kempe would make it virtually impossible to reach any conclusion about her from a modern psychiatric viewpoint, given the religious climate of her times.
A diagnostic evaluation of her must therefore assume that, even judged against that contemporary background, she showed evidence of genuine psychopathology.
In Kempe's case the problem is slightly eased by the fact that even she recognised her state after the birth of her first child as a sickness of mind and we should not regard this as an isolated episode of ‘puerperal psychosis’ that was unconnected with her continuing aberrant behaviour.
Whatever the spiritual significance of her experiences, Kempe has certainly attracted attention from others as a mediaeval example of psychiatric disorder; for example in Dale Petersens,A Mad People's History of Madness and in porter's more recent A Social History of Madness .
Porter, although regarding the diagnostic exercise as trivial, quotes Drucker's view that Kempe represented a case of hysteria, overlaid with psychotic episodes.
According to our evaluation, judged against the SADS-L criteria we have used, the psychotic element is much more manifest.
Thus, we find in Kempe both manic and depressive features to an extreme degree.
In manic periods, which seemed the most common, she was grossly overactive and reckless in behaviour, rarely slept, talked incessantly, and showed typical grandiosity in her claims that Christ had singled her out for special revelations.
When depressed she was beset with ‘sudden sorrow and grief’, afraid of eternal damnation, ‘mourned and sorrowed as though God had forsaken her’, suffering her ‘to have as many evil thoughts as before she had good ones’.
During her first episode she was also suicidal, reporting that ‘she despaired of her life, weening she might not live’ and that ‘she would have destroyed herself many a time at their [the devils,]stirrings…’.
In addition to these signs of affective psychosis Kempe also showed features of schizophrenia, notably hallucinations, occurring in several modalities.
She continually saw visions — for example, of Christ and of scenes from the Gospels — and once ‘the Sacrament shook and flickered to and fro , as a dove flickereth with her wings’.
She also sometimes ‘felt sweet smells with her nose…
They were sweeter’, she thought, ‘than ever was any sweet earthly thing that she smelt before’.
But most typical were her auditory hallucinations:
Given this mixture of affective and schizophrenic features a modern psychiatric diagnosis for Margery Kempe would most likely be ‘schizoaffective psychosis’, precipitated in the first instance by childbirth.
Thomas Hoccleve
Assuming, as we do here, that Hoccleve's description of psychological breakdown is genuinely autobiographical we find recognisable signs of the nature of the illness in the author's writings.
Mitchell, in his analysis of Hoccleve's works, calls it ‘an emotional disorder which bordered on insanity’.
Medcalf goes even further, quoting a clinician's opinion that Hoccleve suffered several episodes of a manic form of affective psychosis.
While agreeing with this description of Hoccleve's illness as of psychotic severity, our own evaluation is that it had a more depressive quality, many of the symptoms described by Hoccleve meeting the modern criteria for serious depression.
In his Complaint , for example, Hoccleve refers several times to his feelings of general despair: and:
In the prologue to that work he writes, too, of his sleep disturbance:
His withdrawal from company and his inability to communicate with others are also clearly evident.
‘I hadd lost’, he says, ‘my tonges key’.
And through it all there are constant thoughts of death:
Two other features reveal the severity of Hoccleve's disturbance, while it lasted.
One is the effort he expends, in his long Dialogue with a Friend , to convince others that he is now well.
The second is the extent to which his friends recognised the change in him.
Using the terminology reminiscent of contemporary descriptions of madness (cf. those by the thirteenth-century encyclopaedist Bartholomaeus Anglicus) Hoccleve relates what others said of him: that he was incapable of sober reasoning, that his brain was buckish, that his gait was like a roe's, darting hither and thither, and that his eyes were constantly in motion.
This last sign, although not of diagnostic significance here, is nevertheless of some interest and we shall return to it, together with some other features of Hoccleve's mental state, in Chapter 10.
The Powers of Night
CHRISTOPHER SMART (1722–71)
Hoccleve's death marked the end of the first quarter of the fifteenth century.
In the two hundred years which followed English literature saw the flowering of the Renaissance.
Neither the writers of that period nor their audience were unaware of the rewards of madness as a subject.
Some seemed fascinated by it, particularly by its dramatic presentation.
It was a staple of the revenge tragedy as Kyd, Tourneur or Shakespeare conceived it, and plays by Dekker, Lyly, Webster, Ford and Middleton all made use of madness on stage, and of actors specially trained for the parts of madmen.
Kyd's Spanish Tragedy and Shakespeare's Hamlet show a careful study of the language of madness.
In view of the harsh treatment of the victims of mental illness in hospitals like Bedlam, where members of the public or the acting profession could study their behaviour at first hand, it is not surprising that no striking instances of writers proclaiming themselves mad by writing about their own affliction have come to light in this period.
Malvolio's treatment, in Shakespeare's Twelfth Night , when he was supposed to be mad explains the desirability of keeping such an affliction quiet.
Not until after the middle of the seventeenth century do we once more find a government clerk making use of verse as an outlet after he has become psychotic, and then, as he writes from the asylum, he has nothing to lose by revealing himself.
James Carkesse worked in the Navy Office of Samuel Pepys.
According to Pepys' Diary , he was educated at Westminster School, and became a scholar of Christ Church, Oxford, in 1652.
Pepys met him in 1665.
He was not as good a poet, nor as good a clerk as Hoccleve, and was discharged from his job as unfit for office on 8 March 1667.
He appealed, and was reinstated by the privy Council, but was unable to continue his employment for long.
In 1678 he was confined in a madhouse in Finsbury.
He conceived his mission to be a religious one, ‘to reduce Dissenters unto the CHURCH’.
His book of verse,Lucida Intervalla (1679), does  little for his reputation as a poet.
He uses doggerel and lampoon as weapons against his captors.
What he writes is of interest because it shows his attitude to his illness, and to the importance of relieving the pressures of his illness.
He seems to have been a difficult patient.
In ‘The Cross Match’ he argues with his doctor, who fails to appreciate Carkesse's thesis that violence is justified in a good cause, and he defies anyone who is in any way concerned with his incarceration.
He considers himself the victim of a plot, regards the asylum as Hades, and refuses to accept that he is mad.
He shifts his ground, arguing first, that he has feigned madness and that the doctor is a fool to be taken in; and second, that his doctor has mistaken poetic genius for madness because he is a fool.
The one constant is that the doctor, not the patient, is a fool, or mad.
‘The Riddle’ concludes firmly:
In ‘The Mistake’ he says he won't survive the harsh treatment and cold of his prison, and that his erratic behaviour is a response to this treatment.
‘On the Doctors letting him Blood’ maintains that the treatment is useless unless his doctor will use his lance ‘to prick my poetick Vein’, yet he is incensed ‘On the Doctors telling him, that ‘till he left off making Verses, he was not fit to be discharg'd’.
Carkesse believed that madmen vent their rage by words on air, poets by ink on paper.
As to doctors:
While Carkesse thought writing could cure his condition, Smart looked on much of his output as a vehicle of praise to his Creator for his cure.
In 1756 he suffered a severe bout of fever.
It was to celebrate recovery from this illness that he wrote his Hymn to the Supreme Being, on Recovery from a dangerous fit of Illness .
The poem describes his conversion, and marks the turning-point in his life.
Its theme is the recovery of a man who, in the very moment of death, is saved, and dedicates the rest of his life to God, a theme derived from the Biblical account of King Hezekiah.
The style and feeling of the poem is exalted, but it is written with perfect lucidity, and a firm sense of the tradition of Christian conversion.
It is not clear whether the condition Smart is describing was purely physical, or of a psychotic nature, but two verses suggest he was mentally as well as physically afflicted in 1756:
Before his conversion in 1756, Smart's life had been very different from what it was now to become.
He was born in Kent, to a Durham family which possessed its own coat of arms.
On the death of his father in 1733 he was sent to Durham, to be educated within the sphere of influence of the family.
He went up to Cambridge in 1739, to Pembroke College, as a sizar, was awarded a College scholarship in 1740, a degree in 1743, and a College Fellowship in 1745.
This last appointment would have procured for him a secure income and a safe environment for life, had he remained in it.
He held a praelectorship in philosophy (1745) and in Rhetoric (1746); but his Cambridge duties were not too onerous.
By 1744 he was already spending some of his time in London, where Dodsley was his publisher.
He felt the attraction of the literary life of the metropolis.
However, life in Cambridge was not dull.
In 1747 he wrote, produced and acted in The Grateful Fair, or, A Trip to Cambridge , and had acquired a reputation as a wit.
His colleague, the poet Thomas Gray, six years his senior, was becoming concerned for his reputation in other respects by 1747 when he wrote to his friend Thomas Warton about Smart's conduct: ‘His debts daily increase (you remember the state they were in when you left us)’.
Smart was deaf to advice, however, and in his play, which is bursting with wit and humour, ‘He acts five parts himself and is only sorry he cant do all the rest.
He has also advertised a  collection of Odes; and for his Vanity and Faculty of Lying, they are come to a Jayl, or Bedlam, and that without any help….’
His friend Dr Burney, not a Cambridge man, expressed similar concern at Smart's lack of discretion: ‘While he was the pride of Cambridge and the chief poetical ornament of that University, he ruined himself by returning the tavern treats of strangers who had invited him as a wit and an extraordinary personage, in order to boast of his acquaintance’.
If Smart's hyperactivity and conviviality were already causing comment — and the mention of Bedlam suggests a degree of exaggeration in these tendencies — at least he had the protection of his College and his friends while he remained in Cambridge.
But in 1749 he committed a greater indiscretion when he left Cambridge for London, to live on his wits.
Although he was no longer resident, Pembroke kept his name on the College books until a still greater indiscretion made that impossible: he married, and what was worse, married a Catholic, in 1752.
The inevitable consequence of his marriage was that he forfeited his fellowship, and the security it had given him.
His wife, Anna Maria (Nancy) Carnan, was the stepdaughter of the printer John Newbery.
A further consequence of this rash act was the birth of two daughters dependent on him; Marianne (Polly) was born in 1753 and Elizabeth (Bess) in 1754.
For the time being, Smart's literary success continued.
Between 1750 and 1755 he entered poems five times for the annual Seatonian prize at Cambridge and won every time.
In 1752 he published Poems on Several Occasions with Newbery.
But when the fever struck in 1756 he was obliged to give up the periodical work by which he made a living in London.
When he recovered, he had experienced conversion, and from that time on he refused all offers of writing work that was not for the glory of God.
What was more, he considered it his duty, not only to pray in public himself, but to induce his friends to join him, often at inconvenient times and in conspicuous places.
Mrs Thrale, whose source of information was probably their mutual friend Dr Johnson, puts the state of affairs in a nutshell:
Smart had become a nuisance.
In March 1757 an application was made on his behalf to St Luke's Hospital for the insane, a private asylum opened in 1751 by a group of London philanthropists.
He was admitted on 6 May, and remained in the care of Dr William Battie, a distinguished physician and a Cambridge graduate who had himself held the scholarship which Smart held after him.
Although Battie was not a religious man, Smart was fortunate that he was a humane doctor, who believed in treating Smart's kind of illness with sedatives and drugs and not with cruelty.
He would have fared less well in Bedlam, or in some of the more notorious private establishments of the time.
Smart had always attracted friends, and they served him well now, securing him the necessary recommendation to St Luke's by a bookseller, perhaps a connection of Newbery's, who had become a banker, probably one of the bankers who formed a majority of the Governors of St Luke's.
Visitors were not allowed.
He probably did not see his wife or children while he remained there.
On 12 May 1758 he was discharged as incurable, but his name remained on the books, so that he could be re-admitted, but no longer without charge.
Smart's nephew and biographer, Christopher Hunter, records the fact that ‘After an interval of little more than two years, Mr Smart appeared to be pretty well restored’.
The ‘pretty well’ sounds a cautionary note.
As Hunter says, ‘his mind had received a shock from which it never fully recovered’.
It seems that after his discharge he remained in Dr Battie's care for some time, probably at the doctor's private residence.
Smart's friends were not all alienated by his misfortune, because on 26 January 1759 David Garrick presented a successful benefit for him, acting a leading part himself, at Drury Lane, and Newbery and Carnan published one of the plays performed, also for Smart's benefit.
A letter from Thomas Gray to his friend Mason on 18 January expresses surprise that ‘poor Smart is not dead as was said’.
Mason fears death might have been the better part, and asks Gray to contribute to the benefit on his behalf.
Mason's reservations were well founded.
‘But is he returned to his senses?
If so, I fear that will be more terrible still’, he writes.
His fears were real  enough.
During 1759 Smart was again consigned to a madhouse, this time in Bethnal Green.
His younger daughter remembered being taken to visit him there by her mother.
In 1759, while Smart was confined, his family moved to Dublin, although his wife returned two years later to Reading, they were never reunited.
Smart suffered the isolation which all those afflicted with mental illness suffer, and of which he, in his later poems, Cowper, in his letters and poems, and Clare in his, complain so poignantly.
Few of the friends who had written complimentary tributes to Smart at the time of his release from Dr Battie's asylum expected him ever to be able to write again.
They were mistaken.
His conversion led to an upsurge of praise the pressure of which could not be denied.
He was released from confinement in January 1763, and in that very year published, with other poems,A Song to David , his masterpiece.
A collection of Hymns and Spiritual Songs covering the Church calendar appeared in 1765, together with his translation of the psalms and a translation of The Fables of Phaedrus .
In 1767 there followed a verse translation of Horace in four volumes.
For children he published Parables in verse in 1768 and Hymns for the Amusement of Children in 1769.
There were also two libretti for oratorios probably dating from 1765, as well as other miscellaneous poems.
No doubt some of these productions were the result of friends' efforts to re-establish Smart in a condition of solvency.
But the main thrust of them was towards a religious revival.
After his conversion, Smart saw himself (as the surviving fragments of Jubilate Agno make clear) as obedient to Christ in all his works.
On entering the asylum involuntarily, he voluntarily made vows of poverty, Chastity and Obedience.
His marriage to his wife was now a spiritual marriage only.
Now, in his ‘jeopardy’ as he called the imprisonment in the asylum, ‘I am the Lord's News-Writer — the scribe evangelist’.
‘For li the grace of God I am the Reviver of ADORATION amongst ENGLISH-MEN .’
By his writings he was confident he could modernise and re-vitalise the worship of the Church of England.
In A Song to David , which must have been written in the asylum, as it was publicised soon after his release, David, who represents the poet and is thus a symbol for Smart himself, leads the hymn of Adoration in which all Creation joins, every creature making his individual and characteristic contribution.
Smart's short prefatory note is elaborate and slightly inaccurate, but emphatic on the subject of David's excellence, his consecration of his genius, and his high worthiness for ‘The  transcendent virtue of praise and adoration’.
Contemporary reaction to this magnificent poem is typified by a critic in The Monthly Review in 1763 who thought he knew that Smart was forbidden the use of writing materials in the asylum and that he had written it ‘with the end of a key, upon the wainscot’.
Smart's nephew Christopher Hunter, in his edition of 1791, thought it belonged to a group of poems which had been ‘written after his confinement, and bear…melancholy proofs of the recent estrangement of his mind’.
It was natural enough that those who knew Smart's recent history should look for evidence of his recent condition.
But if the poem is exalted in the Classical and Renaissance tradition of bardic poetry, Smart's understanding of his position is perfectly clear.
In Jubilate Agno he writes:
Smart associates the harp not only with praise, but also with creativity, as two of the verses in Jubilate Agno show: and:
In 1756 he had opened his poem On the Goodness of the Supreme Being with an invocation to Orpheus (the Gentiles' David) which beseeches him for inspiration for his great religious theme:
Even earlier, in 1751, he had had the same theme in mind when he began On the Immensity of the Supreme Being :
The Song to David is Smart's mature sacred and heroic ode on the theme of David.
As early as 1746 he had pondered such a work, writing in his preface to the Ode for Musick on St. Cecilia's Day of the ‘fine subject…that is David's playing to King Saul when he was troubled with the evil Spirit’.
He had been ‘much pleased’ with the suggestion, ‘but was deterr'd from improving it by the greatness of the subject…
The chusing too high subjects has been the ruin of many a tolerable Genius’.
By the time of his confinement and release, he was deterred no longer.
While Smart's contemporaries failed to appreciate the sublimity of his Song to David , later critics have signally failed to agree on its construction and Smart's own note of explanation does not quite match the case.
Browning, who revived it in the late nineteenth century, thought it showed Smart rising from sanity to transfiguration, or, as Rossetti put it, from Earth to Heaven.
Architectural and musical comparisons have been made to explain its structure, and numerological interpreters have made play with the mystical numbers implicit in its succession of twelve virtues, seven pillars, ten commandments, four seasons, five senses and five degrees.
Smart himself says in Jubilate Agno ‘there is a mystery in numbers ’(C19).
The repeated use of the word ‘Adoration’ and ‘Glorious’have also provided a basis for critical interpretation.
All agree that  the structure is there.
Its exact nature has not emerged to the satisfaction of all readers.
From A Song to David to his Translation of the Psalms of David was a short step, and perhaps a necessary one for Smart.
Structure for the translator is not the problem it is for the composer of an original work of the order of the Song .
His structure is provided for him by the original.
The psalms translation was first advertised in January 1763 and was published in August 1765.
The probability is that a large part, even most, of the work was done in the madhouse, and that Smart finished it after his release.
It is exactly the kind of work that might be suited to a poet of Smart's mind recovering from a severe mental illness.
Linguistically, the text presented no challenge, as he allowed himself to be guided by the two translations already in use in the Anglican liturgy, those of the Book of Common prayer psalter, and the Authorised Version of the Bible.
Technically, Smart gave his delight in varied versification free play by making use of twenty-five different stanza forms, generally taking one stanza for each verse of every psalm, and using neologisms, puns, aphorisms and turns of wit as he found opportunity.
Theologically, he used the psalms translation as one way to promote his intention of revitalising the Church of England, by Christianising his version.
‘In the translation’, he announced, ‘all expressions, that seem contrary to Christ, are omitted, and evangelical matter put in their room’.
The Old Testament savagery of a vengeful and jealous God gives way to the teachings of Christ, and David becomes often the Christ he prefigures, and becomes very much Smart.
Smart was not the first to try to modernise the psalms, which had played a central role in Anglican worship since the Reformation.
Watts had earlier published The psalms of David Imitated in the Language of the New Testament, and Apply'd to the Christian State and Worship before, others had followed.
Smart went further than any of his predecessors in this attempt to provide, according to his prefatory note, a version ‘Adapted to the Divine Service’.
He wanted it to replace the official versions in the liturgy.
His evangelicalism was not extreme; it lay within the limits of Anglican tolerance.
But his hopes of superseding the liturgy with any such matter were doomed to failure.
He completely misjudged the question, and his translation was ignored by churchmen as well as by the editor of the influential Monthly Review , who had been irritated by Smart's angry response to earlier criticism, and dismissed it with short shrift.
Smart's claims that he had the  support in this enterprise of ‘many of the Bishops and other dignified Clergymen’ seems to have been completely unrealistic.
The work of translation itself, quite apart from his grand conception of his purpose in undertaking it, must have afforded him some solace.
He adds many a personal note, for instance in psalm 31, which he expands to give full measure to the woes of the scorned man imprisoned by his enemies.
Among other personal touches, he introduces seafaring imagery on several occasions: Christ is helmsman in psalm 31, and in psalm 89 he adds to the raging sea of verse 9 a reference to the navy which is very expressive of his Englishness.
As with Cowper, sea imagery struck a chord with Smart, and he chooses to use it in his ‘Epistle to John Sherratt’ in 1763.
In this poem he thanks his benefactor for obtaining his release after ‘Well nigh sev'n years’ of captivity:
The application of seamanship to Smart's release from potter's madhouse in Bethnal Green strikes the reader with more force, however, than its addition here and there to the language of the psalms.
In the Psalms of David Smart had his pattern laid out for him, even if he chose to embroider it a little.
In the third work of this asylum period, the Jubilate Agno , he was much more ambitious.
He kept the design, but cut it to his own material, merely using David's poetry as a model for his own original composition.
If A Song to David , in which he attempted a new and regular form of the ode, was written on an upswing of creativity at the beginning of a psychotic episode, and the psalms translation made during convalescence afterwards,Jubilate Agno is particularly important because its internal dates strongly suggest it was composed during his confinement, and from day to day of his illness, during the period 27 July to 30 January 1763, just before his release.
In St  Luke's Hospital he would not have been allowed to engage in demanding intellectual work.
Dr Battie believed in avoiding extremes of pleasure or anxiety, and recommended only those occupations which absorbed the patient's attention without creating strain, such as copying lists of names.
Smart may well have begun thinking out his remarkable composition while he was in St Luke's.
It survives in four separated fragments, was not published in his lifetime and probably remained incomplete.
He probably revised it as it went along and his recurring use of various kinds of lists as a basis for the structure of the work may well reflect Dr Battie's influence.
The last fragment, D, consists entirely of a list of names.
The most dominant structural factor in the work is that much of it is cast in the form of canticles.
The paired lines closely follow the parallel verse-form of the psalms, the first statement in each pair generally beginning with the word ‘Let’ and the second with the word ‘For’.
Fragments A and D contain ‘Let’ verses only, Fragment B contains only ‘For’verses after verse 295 (ending in verses 695 to 768 which contain the celebrated passage ‘I will consider my Cat Jeoffry’, an animal Smart was apparently allowed to keep at Bethnal Green).
Skilfully reconstructed by his modern editors, Smart's poem yet remains too much in draft form to reveal its patterns fully, but it shows an elaborate network of complex verbal associations.
The overall plan appears to resemble the Benedicite , beginning with a call to all nations and all creatures to rejoice:
The species of creation are then called on to give praise one by one, using a succession of lists: lists of names, Biblical or contemporary, linked with the lists of birds, fishes, plants, trees and gems.
D51 may provide a clue to Smart's intentions  
The four words ‘Star — word — herb — gem’ may refer to contemporary occult philosophy, which saw a continuous order of relationship in nature.
The ‘Let’ verses carry this part of the pattern, while the ‘For’verses make a continuous sequence of their own; and within the sequence, each ‘For’verse supplies a comment on the preceding ‘Let’verse.
This comment may be of a moral, biographical or prophetic nature.
The system is seen working according to this plan in Fragment B, but even there it is not consistently maintained.
Perhaps it was not intended as an overall plan.
Some fragments are linked by the lists of names, A4 to B295 going from the Biblical book of Genesis to Revelation; fragment C returns to the Old Testament while D is a list of contemporary names.
As Smart's editors have shown, the wide range of reference would easily be available within the compass of a few standard books, which he knew and could have obtained in the Bethnal Green asylum.
Internal dating in Fragments B to D indicates with all but certainty that they were written on a daily progression; B at the rate of three pairs of verses a day from 27 July to 29 October 1759; one verse a day from 30 October 1759 to 1 June 1760; and three verses a day from 2 June to 26 August 1760; C at the rate of two verses a day from 21 February to 12 May 1761; and D at the rate of one verse a day from 12 June 1762 to 30 January 1763.
Although there are some irregularities, Smart seems to have had a fixed task allocated for each day and to have kept to it.
Fragment A is more difficult to analyse as the evidence is incomplete and the habit of keeping to a set rate of progress may not have evolved at the A stage of composition; but it could have been completed between June 1758 and April 1759, in a shorter or longer time depending on whether he wrote one verse or three each day.
Repetitions in the text, as well as breaks of pattern, suggest the four fragments may represent stages in composition between A and C, with a more complex scheme emerging as it developed and an entirely new beginning in Fragment D.
It is likely that had Smart completed his revisions and published the work he would have included an explanatory preface, as he does in A Song to David and the psalms translation.
As it is, he had given enough indication of his intention in the work, quite apart from its psalmodic basis, to make it clear.
The title refers to psalm 100, the Jubilate Agno , and to Christ as Agnus Dei .
The opening lines of Fragment A are a call to worship and a declaration of praise.
B43 
refers to the work as ‘my MAGNIFICAT’, and B332 explains his motive:
As in the psalms translation, he is much preoccupied with the Christian outcome of Old Testament doctrine, and his particular concentration of effort is on his own countrymen, and his own Church.
He insists on this:(A433)‘For the ENGLISH are the seed of Abraham ’;(B225)‘St. Paul is the Agent for England’.
That Smart identified himself with other disciples as a missionary is apparent from a long passage in Fragment B, beginning at line 123:
He blesses God ‘that the CHURCH of ENGLAND is one of the SEVEN ev'n the candlestick of the Lord’(B225).
His own role is emphatically stated: ‘I am the Lord's News-Writer — the scribe-evangelist’(B327).
Smart assumes a prophetic as well as an evangelical mission.
He identifies himself with the prophets of the Old Testament in addressing contemporary life, and echoes St Paul when he sees himself keeping the streams of doctrine pure: ‘For I am inquisitive in the Lord, and defend the philosophy of the scripture against vain deceit ’(A130).
His genealogical lists suggest a need to search for and establish his own identity.
In assuming the mantle of David and writing his own psalms, he may even be expressing in this work a sense of identification with David as a type of Christ.
At the very least he sees himself as descended from Agricola, steward of England, and as Christ's deputy, when he says in B137:
In B151 he compares himself to Christ even in the matter of his lunacy:
That Smart should have been stigmatised as a madman in all his publications after his confinement is not surprising, if any of this fragmentary, unpublished work in progress was known to his contemporaries.
Apart from the grandiosity of the plan, and the exaltation of the mood of Jubilate Agno , the work reveals the man in all his undefended innocence: ‘For I blessed God in St. James's Park till I routed all the company ’.
The intricacies of association which link Creation and the Millennium to his personal hopes, griefs and anxieties have proved a minefield for scholars.
He received visits in the asylum, and Boswell reports that on one occasion, probably in 1760, Dr Johnson thought Smart ought to be locked up; his opinion varied, as no doubt did Smart's condition, from time to time.
He is reported to have said to Dr Burney:
It was through one of several friends who had remained loyal to him through the seven years of his ‘jeopardy’, in two asylums, that his release was obtained: apparently Sherratt walked in and removed him from custody.
The note of triumph which concludes the Epistle of 1763 in which Smart ‘hail'd the restoration day’‘with the lyre’, the instrument of David, indicates the extreme difficulty those once detained had in securing their release.
Sherratt seems to have been an eccentric himself.
But Smart may have owed his  freedom in some measure to a House of Commons Committee of Enquiry into the problem that year.
The subscription list for the translation of the psalms, launched in 1763, attracted a brilliant list of his friends and supporters, including William Cowper.
Unhappily, many of the 700 subscribers must have failed to deliver the second cash instalment and take up their copies when the book was published in 1765.
Granville Sharp wrote to one of these, John Sharp, Archdeacon of Northumberland, relaying Smart's appeal to take delivery of his ten copies.
He records Smart's statement that he ‘must have finished an unfortunate life in jail had it not been for the good nature of a Friend, who could not bear to see his tears’.
Whatever his friends did, Smart was unable to live within his income.
They must have felt they had secured his future when a Treasury pension of £50 per annum was obtained for him in April 1766, but his letters continue to reveal his financial anxiety.
In 1768 Fanny Burney wrote in her Diary:
In April 1770 he was again arrested for debt, and this time wrote to an unknown friend: ‘After being six times arrested: nine times in a spunging house; and three times in the Fleet-prison, I am at least happily arrived at the King's Bench [Prison]’.
He had been imprisoned for want of bail.
Here Thomas Carnan obtained some freedom of exercise for him.
Here he must have written his final work,Hymns for the Amusement of Children .
From here he wrote his last letter, again recorded by Fanny Burney, now Madame d'Arblay, and engaged in writing the life of her father.
In it he asks her father's help for one of the other prisoners, saying ‘that he had helped him ‘according to his own willing poverty’.
Here he died, after a short illness, perhaps, as his nephew's biography says, of a liver disorder, but more probably of gaol-fever, debility and the shock of re-arrest, coming on top of the disappointment of all his worldly hopes.
Before his arrest in December 1765 Smart completed a translation of Horace, not remarkable for its felicity, but indicative of his need  to continue his literary activities at this time, and the natural support afforded by translating.
It is remarkable for his description there of the way in which his own original composition had been done.
He admires in Horace ‘the beauty, force and vehemence of Impression: which leads me on to a more rare and entertaining subject, not anywhere (I think) insisted on by others’.
He had hit on the same theme in Jubilate Agno , B404:
This is an illuminating comment on Smart's work, which like that of all three of the poets of this period studied here, breaks clean from the worn-out conventions of eighteenth-century poetic tradition, and brings a new life to poetry.
That it is uneven in quality, and incomprehensible in the intricacies of private association, is the inevitable result of his condition.
It is tempting to wonder what Smart's genius could have been had he not been tormented by madness; but perhaps without the enhanced perception that came with illness, he would not have written at all.
Case Description
In his collection of essays on genius the distinguished neurologist, the late Sir William Russell Brain, concluded about Smart that ‘clearly he suffered from manic-depressive insanity or cyclothymia’ and there is much to support that diagnosis.
Even before what appears to have been an acute phase of illness in 1756, Smart showed many characteristic signs: impulsiveness, reckless spending, drunkenness and — leading eventually to his confinement — his disinhibited behaviour of praying in public and on inappropriate occasions whenever the spirit moved him.
The form of his religious ‘conversion’ at that time — his belief that he was a person of special  importance, having a Messianic mission — is also typical.
Less appears to be known about whether his mood swings were severe enough to justify manic-depression as a primary diagnosis; but Smart himself gives us some clue when he writes: ‘For I have a greater compass of mirth and melancholy than another .’
(B132.)
Most informative about Smart's general state of psychosis, however, is the Jubilate Agno , written during his period of confinement.
It is perhaps a technical point whether we regard this work — with its fragmented associations and obscure, perverse and personalised allusions, as an example of schizophrenic language or, as Brain argues, evidence of manic flight of ideas.
Certainly, judged from a purely clinical standpoint the Jubilate reveals all of the features of psychotic thought disorder, of which, chosen at random from its 1739 lines, we may cite just one example (B590 — 4):
Finally, for the literary reader it should be noted that claims to have penetrated the meaning of the Jubilate in no way contradict the conclusion that its form is essentially ‘psychotic’, since it is well accepted that, with effort, the sense in schizophrenic language can be discerned (see Forrest for a discussion of this point).