

Summer heat: rappers respond to the LA riots COOL DUDES Brad Pitt and Antonio Banderas DUMB DUDES Bill & Ted, Wayne & Garth KETAMINE The new Ecstasy?
London's new model army YOUNG STYLE REBELS Deee-Lite workwear Michael Clark
Deee-Lite discuss UFOs, cosmic coincidences and the serious side of pop (above, and p52); Fashion Hype heads for the best summer hats (below, and p30); and LA in flames (right, and p72)
‘I hope all this shit that's going down can bring about some sort of understanding,’ says NWA's Eazy-E about the riots in Los Angeles.
‘A lot of people have had their eyes opened up now.
I've been through my neighbourhood, where they've torn down liquor stores and burnt down everything.
It just makes no sense.
Where are they gonna go to shop, buy food and clothes?
The racism, the police brutality and the looting have got to stop.
But I can't say stop the violence, because there's always going to be violence.
I think it's going to be a long summer with a lot of killings.’
A full report on the LA riots appears on p72, and there's a news story that's closer to home on p44.
Ketamine is being hyped by many as the new Ecstasy.
It's not.
In fact, hardly any of the pills being sold in UK clubs are Ecstasy any more.
So perhaps it's time to look to ourselves for fun, not to chemicals that make us edgy, paranoid, ill — and broke.
letters
Write to THE FACE (Letters)
Bitter lemon
Have you stopped to realise how much you have hurt Jason Donovan over this outing case?
When Jason gives some of the money back, which he shouldn't have, you say it isn't enough.
How ungrateful can you get?
How dare you call the fund to raise money for your poxy magazine the Lemon Fund, just because he uses lemon on his hair!
And then your editor goes on Jonathan Ross' show and humiliates him more (I have written a letter to Ross as well, for laughing at Jason like that).
I want to thank that girl who spat at her at a bus stop.
Barbed Wire
We at Select were appalled at the severity of the court judgement against your magazine and believe that it raises serious impediments to press freedom.
While we believe THE FACE to be a pretentious load of bollocks that's completely lost the plot, we support absolutely your right to continue printing such old tosh.
Please accept our contribution to the Lemon Fund.
Respect due.
Cheque mates
Please accept our contribution to the Lemon Fund.
As you know, we too suffered at the hands of the law on the freedom of speech issue with NWA.
Thank you for supporting new artists over the years and for being the most adventurous and innovative of magazines.
May you be doing so well into the next century!
Points of order
A)
Native Tongues (Hype Trivia) is not a ‘black answer to The Word .’
It is Ready Steady Go meets Soul Train .
It's alright, we won't sue.
B)
No account of Italian fascism can ignore the presence of the Mafia.
In the past 100 years, the only time it was defeated was in Mussolini's reign, which accounts for the popularity among older Neapolitans, sick of living with Mafioso, for his granddaughter.
C)
Apart from the above, FACE 44 demonstrates page after page why you are so important.
I wish the enclosed cheque had another ‘0’ after it.
Model citizen
No one has won in the libel case brought against you and none of those involved has really benefited.
Mr Donovan's mere financial gain will probably make little difference to him and it is debatable whether his name ‘has been cleared once and for all’ as it did not need clearing in the first place.
The gay community has not benefited as the case presented the media with yet another opportunity to imply that there is something libellous and ‘wrong’ with being gay.
And, of course, THE FACE has not benefited.
As a young gay man, I was deeply saddened by Jason's actions.
I also feel very sorry for him: he is the same age as me and I would hate to be put under the pressure that was evident in his shaking frame after his statement.
As a heterosexual role model, he could do so much that is positive towards an end to prejudice, but he chose not to.
Legal eagle
The law says suggesting someone may be homosexual is worth £200,000 damages.
The law says 16 years' wrongful imprisonment for murder is worth £100,000 damages.
The law says you can marry at 16, but not consent to homosexual acts until you are 21.
The law says marijuana is more dangerous than alcohol.
The law says there are no such things as lesbians.
The law says a male erection is obscene.
The law says the Los Angeles police used reasonable force to apprehend Rodney King.
Sticky fingers
It's said that you will always remember your first time.
For me the moment came in July 1983.
After some fumbling I had managed to read my first article by Julie Bitchkill.
It was about Janis Joplin.
The issue I refer to had Stephen Morris (New Order) on the cover (sort of) and cost 75p!
I was 14 then and have, like many other people, grown up with THE FACE.
How do you put a price on nine years of being informed and entertained?
The cheque is enclosed.
Culture club
Congrats — your best issue for a long time (Love Sees No Colour, FACE 44).
A positive image in conflicting times.
As a black reader of nine years, I have seen within your magazine people of all colours and cultures, but with the same ideals.
In this issue it was great to see you on the streets, showing people united in the fight against growing racism.
The late Ray Petri would have been proud of this issue.
Attitude with a capital ‘A’.
Stay true and remember, love is the best drug.
If the face fits
I was surprised to see an advertisement featuring Jason Donovan in FACE 44.
I don't care if he appeared in the ad in return for a donation to the Terrence Higgins Trust.
After what he did to THE FACE, I don't see why you should have a picture of him in the magazine.
You should not have anything to do with him.
History lesson
Having been an avid reader since Volume 1 No. 99, I think that this latest issue (FACE 44) is one of your best yet, on a par with your great 100th issue.
Good luck, and I look forward to No 200.
Ad nauseam I was deeply saddened by the Jason saga, but unfortunately I was upset by other aspects of your May issue.
As a gay man I find your sudden input of gay advertising patronising.
For too long homosexuals and homosexual advertising has appeared outside the gay press only when trendy magazines decide to put out special issues.
Will you continue to advertise Gay Times , and will you have more gay-orientated interviews like the one with Justin Fashanu?
Please continue a positive attitude to gay issues, or don't do it at all.
Anyone is free to advertise with us at any time,Gay Times included.
As for content, did you read our recent pieces on Derek Jarman's sainthood, the New York drag scene, Kinky Gerlinky, Flesh,The Lost Language Of Cranes , Hollywood homophobia, George O'Dowd,My Own Private Idaho and Young Soul Rebels?
Loved up
I was totally broke, fed up, and the news that racism is increasing all over Europe really made my day.
But your May issue gave me hope.
It showed love does exist in this horrible world.
Your uplifting, inspirational attitude in the face of Jason Donovan's damages award inspired me.
Being black, female and having experienced racism can make you bitter.
But the way to defeat the bigots is to not let them create hate inside you.
When you love, you lift yourself up higher than any Nazi trash could pull you down.
Movin on up
After reading your coverage of the upsurge of fascism, I want to thank all those involved — the features were informative, interesting, shocking and uplifting.
I felt proud that you were not afraid to cover such provocative matters.
Long live THE FACE!
The good fight
I'm just too disheartened to intellectualise about the fascists you reported on in the Love Sees No Colour issue (FACE 44).
I feel like rounding up the fuckers and shooting each one of them.
But that won't make me a freedom fighter, just another fascist!
Keep up the fight!
LA voice
Thanks for the great May issue — it was very surreal to read about racial (in) tolerance and (in) justice in Europe while Los Angeles was burning.
The pot of face relations in the US has been simmering and bubbling furiously, until it finally boiled over and hit the burner.
I fear that our nation has set itself up for a decade of national strife.
I wish a prominent member of the American print media would present an open unbiased, informative ‘Man on the street’ issue, such as you did.
I think it is very important for those outside America to understand that, like myself, the media and people of Los Angeles do not speak for the rest of the country.
They speak in their own voices — let them be heard!
NI Contribution
It was excellent to see some much-needed and much-deserved coverage of Belfast (FACE 43).
The city has always had a crowd who knew that to get anything out you have to put something back — from Tokyo Joe's at the end of the Eighties, through the larger clubs you mentioned such as Base and Joy, to Sugarsweet at present.
There has also always been a set of discerning clubbers who would travel to London, Manchester, Glasgow and Ibiza (before it got overrun by teds and dodgy promoters) and keep Belfast abreast of developments.
The scene in Belfast is growing as more people start realising that you have to put some effort in to make it work.
The city has potential, and I hope your feature will be the first of many to show a side of Belfast that is usually ignored.
The answers?
Re Tripper B's notes and queries (FACE 44):
1.
Some of the reasons raggas don't smile include poverty, injustice and crack-cocaine.
2.
You can't grow pukka skunk because marijuana needs between six and 12 weeks of 12-hour nights to flower.
Because of our distance from the Equator, England may get three to four weeks if we're lucky, then the frost kills them.
Try growing indoors under lights.
High-pressure sodium are best, but you can get away with fluorescent if you can live with smaller buds.
3.
The old bill might be straight in Leyton but there are growing numbers who smoke weed and support calls for legalisation.
Sensible Mr Plod is beginning to see that chasing kids for getting high isn't really a goer.
There is little public support and possession arrest no longer impresses lads in the canteen.
4.
David Icke is fucked up on God.
History indicates this substance is far more dangerous and addictive than drugs.
5.
The world's biggest hookah was smoked in Amsterdam on Queen's Day a couple of years ago by over 200 people simultaneously.
When it comes to rolling joints, size has little status these days — it's imagination that scores the real points.
Can't you do any smokable models?
It's best to begin with easy ones like the Starship Enterprise, the Blackpool Tower or Fergie, and then work up to some more difficult ones.
6.
Your willy shrinks because speed is a vasodilator and opens up your blood vessels.
The blood rushes out of your dick and up to your heart.
Or perhaps amphetamine just gives you an insight into the world as it really is
.
Weird customs
Every time I receive THE FACE, the envelope has been ripped open, apparently by avid customs officials convinced that ‘dark grey plastic’ rhymes with ‘pornographic’!
Please spare my copies in future by sending them in a pale pink envelope with flowers on.
Toy boys
Thanks for your article in FACE 43 on Yobots.
I think everyone should have one!
I come from Holland and in Amsterdam toy robots (especially Japanese ones and deleted ones from Holland) have been accessories for over a year now.
The sad thing about the Yobots article is that, since its publication, Quasp has been overtaken by trendy wimps.
To stay hardcore it had to close and start elsewhere under another name.
Blast is still going strong though, perhaps because its sound is too loud for wet fashion victims to handle.
As my Mancunian boyfriend says: ‘Hardcore — know the score.’
Would you dare wear a Yobot?
OK, OK.
Time to come clean.
Just in case you don't already know, our Yobots piece was an April fool.
Neither Quasp nor Blast exist, although we've heard that enough worried Mancs have been asking about their location, wondering why they hadn't yet heard about them.
Congratulations to the Mail On Sunday for checking before they stole the story, and to Passenger for being the first London shop to stock up on robots.
Ooops
Normand Blouin took the photo of Jean-Marc Barr used last month, and Max Abbiss was responsible for the ‘No More Ugly Germans’ video, from which some stills were taken.
Apologies to both of them 
Save The Face
The recent libel action brought against THE FACE by Jason Donovan has left the magazine in a position of serious debt.
Jason Donovan is not seeking the full amount controversially awarded him by the jury in the High Court, but we are still required to pay him the sum of £95,000 in reduced costs and damages.
We have our own legal costs on top of this.
THE FACE is not a wealthy magazine; don't believe what you read or hear to the contrary.
We are a small independent company publishing one other title,Arena .
This magazine is equally under threat.
We have launched a public appeal to raise the £120,000 total needed in order to put this whole unpleasant episode behind us.
The good news is that we are already over a quarter of the way towards our target, having raised the sum of £34,055 in the six weeks since the trial.
A further £7,500 (approx) will be added as a result of sales of this issue: just over 10p of the cover price now goes directly into the fund.
Extra revenue will come from the sale of T-shirts and record bags starting this month (see p95).
The trial was an ordeal for everyone directly or indirectly involved.
The goodwill and support has been overwhelming, and we thank everyone who has written or faxed and especially those who have donated money or who are involved in fundraising activities.
motherfunkers
‘It looks like we're going to be taken back to Woodstock here,’ quipped Patrick Forge recently, as the motley Mother Earth crew took the stage at his and Gilles Peterson's Talkin Loud night at the Fridge in Brixton.
But despite the retro threads and a name stolen from a Sixties psychedelic-funk group, tracks like ‘Theme From Riot On 103rd Street’(featured on Acid Jazz's ‘Totally Wired 7’ round-up) prove that Mother Earth are doing something interesting.
With trippy guitars working around strange out-of-time sampled rhythms, and the obligatory Hammond organ in the wings, Mother Earth are carving themselves an individual niche on Acid Jazz's strengthening roster.
Alongside keyboard player Ceri Evans' Sunship project and vocal sensation Jamiroqua, Mother Earth are proving there are new, diverse sounds emerging on a record label that some people pigeonholed way too prematurely.
‘There's a rockier feel to Mother Earth that separates us from a band like the Heavies,’ comments founding member Bunny.
The band's debut release, the ‘Stoned Woman’ album, out this month, serves as a summary of their achievements so far and a blueprint for future possibilities — in much the same way the Brand New Heavies' debut did a couple of years back.
Dodgy consciousness raps aside, where Mother Earth really diverge from the standard Brand New London Funk, is in the loud, up-front guitar and organ bursts, which are pricking up ears beyond the established Acid Jazz audience.
‘Great, if you're into Carlos Santana,’ reflected Patrick Forge following the Fridge performance, the band's fourth public outing.
Mind you, guitar pyrotechnics and silly moustaches never did Mr Santana any harm .
Mothership connection: Acid Jazz protégés return to earth with trademark guitar pyrotechnics at Brixton's Talkin Loud night
kidnapped
Asked to paint a mental picture of the typical French intellectual, most people could come up with the significant details.
Black polo-neck, black suede shoes, black flop of hair.
Long elegant fingers wrapped around a Gauloise.
French film-maker Eric Rochant is different.
He smokes Lucky Strikes.
Otherwise, he's right on target.
Much praised for his Paris-set debut feature,A World Without Pity , he looks poised to consolidate his reputation for conceptual clarity with his second film,Autobus .
A simple tale of a teenager (Yvan Attal, near left) who hijacks a school bus to take him to his girl in another town, it is also a complex allegory of Love versus the Law.
‘The theme is that of existential recognition,’ says Rochant, unhelpfully.
This might explain why many of the characters in the film, like the bus driver or the teacher in charge of the kidnapped brats, are nameless: shorn of individual psychology, they become social types.
Autobus was inspired by a newspaper story about a ‘sentimental terrorist’, and is partly modelled on Sidney Lumet's hostage drama Dog Day Afternoon .
Its concentrated visual style, however, is all Rochant's own.
A product of the cine-literate culture of Paris, he was in and out of cinemas as a kid (‘I started with westerns and finished with Bergman’) and graduated from film school in 1983.
Would he describe himself as an intellectual?
It's a question which makes him laugh.
‘I have nothing against intellectualism,’ he says.
‘I can't conceive of making films without thinking about what I'm doing.
I am not an instinctive film-maker.
The trigger is an irrational desire.’
Er, thanks Eric.
We've never doubted it.
Naughty by nature: Busi's latest novel
latin lover
Aldo Busi gives good quote.
Speaking on the telephone from his home in Brescia, the notorious gay Italian author delivers a breathless and effortless spiel in promotion of his new novel Sodomies In Elevenpoint .
‘I am ink disguised in the form of a human being,’ he declares.
‘I live for my art.
Life is just a pretext.
The true text is what I write.’
What he writes is an occasionally impenetrable riot of language, mixing gay sex, hypocrisy, deception and disease in provocatively-titled novels — such as his debut,The Standard Life Of A Temporary Pantyhose Salesman .
‘To write about Aids is bad taste,’ he deadpans.
‘It's better to die of Aids than talk about it.
It's so boring.’
Instead his works celebrate every conceivable venereal disease, physical disfigurement and medical condition: his gaze is unflinching and his sexual appetites unquenchable.
‘I can make sex with boys from 15 to 70.
I have no sexual tastes, those are just for the low classes.
When I reached 24 I no longer wished to be tied to my little and limited taste.
I gave myself away to everybody: fat, high, low, ugly, perfumed and badly-smelling.’
Busi's books seek to strip away layers of deceit, show the world as it is, which perhaps explains the author's penchant for attending his book launches in the nude.
‘I used to like to striptease in public.
Before, I was such a handsome man, so sexy, so divine and so promiscuous.’
There's no stopping him now.
‘I am an élitist — there's no way to be anything else.
I am one of the greatest writers of the century.
In Italy, I am the greatest.
It's not a question of being arrogant, just being frank.’
Aldo Busi — what a guy!
He just can't stop entertaining his public.
bogus videos
Out this month on video,Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey sees the dudely duo once again making the space-time continuum like totally safe for metal heads, babes and all non-heinous types everywhere.
It's required post-club viewing, and we have 20 copies to give away to the first 20 correct answers (drawn out on June 25) to the following.
Alex Winter plays William S Preston Esquire (aka Bill) but who plays Ted ‘Theodore’ Logan?
Is it a.
Keanu Reeves b.
Jim Reeves c.
Vic Reeves.
Answers to 
white riot
‘This is the future of rock'n'roll!
Everyone else has bottled out, and anyway most white bands are cocksuckers.’
These modest words come from Swindelli (below, white jacket), vocalist/rapper with The 25th Of May, who is animatedly holding forth on the merits of the band's neatly titled debut LP ‘Lenin And McCarthy’.
‘We're the first band to successfully marry a number of different styles like hip hop and pop.
People like EMF and Jesus Jones have had a go, but they've always gone more for the rock aspect, with the technology just tagged on as an afterthought.
Our record uses technology as an integral part of the songwriting and the whole artistic endeavour.’
Named after Argentinian Independence Day, the group have attracted most attention for their confrontational political stance, most pertinently summed up on their recent mail order-only single and the LP's strongest track, ‘Fuck The Right To Vote’.
‘The Parliamentary system isn't there to give people a say in how the country is run but to delude them into thinking they have some power.
Most of the power in this country really lies with people who never have to be voted in, like the police, the judiciary, and the Whitehall mandarins.’
Elsewhere on the LP there's their poppiest single to date, ‘It's Alright’, along with an attack on army brutality in Derry, a moving condemnation of the police at the Hillsborough disaster, and a clever put-down of strike-breaking Sun -reading, working-class Tory supporters.
Swindelli reserves special loathing for John Major, though.
‘He's an uneducated gobshite.
I could do his job any time but he couldn't do mine.
He's a class traitor, and if he ever comes round to this house he's fucking dead.’
demo delights
One of the amusing sideshows in any Olympic Games is the ‘Demonstration Sports’ category.
Here any quirky sport, however athletically peculiar, is allowed to push for serious status and the chance to win a rather tasteless medallion.
This summer's games include such demo delights as Tae kwon do, roller-hockey, and Basque pelota (aka jai alai).
Tae kwon do is the Korean art of self-defence and Britain's rather good at it, so expect a lot of that on your screens.
Roller-hockey is less likely to be there, being a rather namby-pamby non-contact sport played by white men in tight shorts and elasticated socks (left and below right).
Basque pelota looks like being this year's corker as it involves catching a tennis ball in a fruit bowl and throwing it at a wall (below left).
I'm sure we'll all be rooting for our boys in this one, or perhaps not, given that the only people who play it live in small towns in the Pyrenees.
One can only assume that this puppy's there so Olympic hosts Spain at least get a sniff at a medal.
Only a few sports eventually get to bathe with the big boys in the glow of the Olympic flame, synchronised swimming being a recent one to do so.
You can only begin to guess what the ancient Greeks would have made of that, and the subsequent impact on Renaissance sculpture.
june manifesto
What we, the nation's hopeless, should demand
On the way to Barcelona, the Olympic torch pays a little detour to Benidorm where it can ignite a real roarer of a bonfire in which anybody in possession of a ‘Brits on the piss!’
T-shirt is burned at the stake
Combat gear should stay out of clubs and back on squaddies and serial killers
Anyone partaking in the dungaree revival outside the privacy of their own bedroom should be strung up by the braces and hooked on a lamp-post for the crows to peck at
A fifth Summer of Love be confined to a four-day binge in August.
Well, a week if it's sunny
The makers of Until The End Of The World own up that it was actually shot in Bolton with some clever filters and a broken Nintendo
Someone explain why the one party we're all sick of is the one they don't close down
Puffa coats be finally let down for summer
nicolette
Vanessa Paradis meets Billie Holiday in the chill-out room at a rave.
Bizarre?
Maybe, but if you've heard Nicolette's debut album, you'll know this strange-style hybrid is for real.
‘Sure my music is techno-based,’ says the breathy jazz-house diva from Glasgow, ‘but the house and rave scenes owed much to jazz in the first place.’
Believe it.
Nicolette's fusion of banging bass and meandering, torchy vocals — spiced with American blues and African music influences — has been impressing people since she was signed by north London's Shut Up And Dance in 1990.
‘School Of The World’, her debut single, was released to critical acclaim in November of that year.
It not only introduced the musical hybrid that dominated Nicolette's work, but also boasted a rare lyrical thoughtfulness.
‘I always take myself as a starting point when it comes to songs, going on to explore situations in a manner that is very sound-oriented,’ she says, rather vaguely.
But considered in the context of the two years spent in Paris jazz clubs, exploring a musical genre that has often relied on experimental vocal contributions, it all begins to make sense.
Her sound was further developed by two follow-up singles in 1991, ‘Waking Up’, which stormed clubs, and ‘O Si Nene’, a complex six-minute track sung partly in Ibo, one of the native languages of Nigeria.
With these intriguing and utterly uncategorisable singles behind her, Shut Up And Dance's only female artist was tipped to bring another set of accolades for the hardcore/ragga-oriented label with her debut album.
And she delivered: ‘Now Is Early’, released in April, has been one of the highlights of the year.
The thumping, street-tough beats of label owners and producers, PJ and Smiley, may never entirely disappear, but the sparse nod towards hardcore works all the better against Nicolette's sugar-sweet, jazzy vocals.
‘To be honest, I'm a bit tired of being described just as a jazz singer or with words like ‘abstract’,’ she says, responding to reviews that have tried a little too hard to distance her from the rave scene she still feels so much a part of.
Regularly going to London raves such as Labyrinth and Dance Party and drawing inspiration from them remains an essential part of her work and lifestyle.
Nevertheless, it is doubtless her keen embrace of a jazz legacy — which now sees her planning to form an all-female acoustic jazz band — that is giving her access to a wider audience blissfully unaware of her label's principal associations.
So for those who argue that the rave scene has produced little else but badly dressed pre-pubescents, look no further than Nicolette.
She certainly knows the score.
‘If you look at house music, it's always welcomed outside influences like jazz, I see myself as part of this tradition.’
books
Savage Nights Cyril Collard
As the purple sarcomas bleed over his body, the Parisian film-maker hero switches his affections between drugs, men and the obsessive teenage Laura.
Love in the time of HIV with a soupçon of French-Arab mysticism
The Kinky Friedman Crime Club Kinky Friedman
First British publication for legendary C&W maverick Friedman, these three late-Eighties novels all feature a NY-based country singer turned amateur private eye.
Relentlessly smart-arse, but enjoyable
Tintin: Hergé And His Creation Harry Thomas
Lazily-written but entertaining guide to the quiffed explorer and his creator.
Good insights into the darker side of Hergé's career, but the lack of illustrations from the Tintin books cries out from every page
War In The Age of Intelligent Machines Manuel De Landa
Theory-crammed history of artificial and military intelligence which suggests that the ‘cybernetic organism’ is as ancient as the Greeks and as modern as the  Tomohawk missile.
Meticulously researched, elegantly designed
The Other Side Ruben Martinez
In the aftermath of the LA riots, this collection of essays reads like prophetic despatches from the front.
Martinez draws sensitive portraits of hispanic life in LA, Mexico, Cuba and El Salvador, looking for his own centre and identity
Breaking Bounds
Subtitled ‘The Dance Photography Of Lois Greenfield’, this crisp B&W picture book spans the NY snapper's ten-year career.
If you haven't got 15 quid to spare, wait for the exhibition coming soon to London's Barbican (see right)
Salvatore Ferragamo: The Art Of The Shoe
An indulgence for sure, but a sumptuous one.
Five decades of work by the Italian genius prove that there's more to fantastic footwear than Red Or Dead (see left).
Eat your heart out Imelda Marcos
Clockers Richard Price
Not the post- Presumed Innocent potboiler the cover suggests, this New York meltdown novel is a great pulpy read (if a little long).
Hollywood screenwriter Richard Price tracks the survivalist streetlife on the crack-war frontline in superbly taut, poetically profane prose.
Scorsese is directing the film — can't wait
England's Dreaming John Savage
Now in paperback (and even bigger), this lovingly-detailed history of punk from Malcolm and Vivienne's art-school antics to Sid's suicide may drift into occasional pomposity, but it remains the definitive guide to the spirit of '76.
Heavy stuff
Way Past Cool Jess Mowry
Taut, pacy, absorbing tale of LA street gang life that's probably as close to the real thing as it's safe to get.
Mowry's semi-autobiographical account avoids either gun glamour or sentimentalism, but it's already been snapped up by Hollywood which will no doubt insist on both
Alma Cogan Gordon Burns
Cogan was a Fifties singer who died tragically young; but in  Burns' brilliant intermingling of fact and fiction, she lives on into middle age to examine her portrait in the basement of the Tate, meet her most obsessive fan, and discover her strange links with Moors murderer Myra  Hindley .
One of the best British novels for some time — now out in paperback  
Harlesden's prince of glamour, Omar: even more the golden boy of UK soul thanks to his confident second album, ‘Music’
omar
GLAMOUR IS IN SHORT supply on the streets of Harlesden.
There's little sign of it in the boarded-up, recession-blasted shopfronts and litter-strewn pavements of the north-west London suburb, and in neighbouring Neasden its distant echo was last heard when self-proclaimed ‘Queen of Soul’ Mari Wilson reared her bee-hived head.
But in the upstairs room of an innocuous street-corner office, there's a different kind of soul playing; a far cry from the retro-kitsch of Wilson, or, for that matter, from the seamless transatlantic gloss of Luther Vandross and Alexander O'Neal.
Unpredictable, emotional and alive, it is, in keeping with the area, soul with the rough edges intact.
Drifting out of an open window, riding over a choppy bassline, comes the distinctive voice of Omar.
Almost a year after his ‘There's Nothing Like This’ hit single and reactivated album put him on first-name terms with the British public, Omar Lye-Kook is still based in north London, operating out of his father's tiny Kongo Dance offices and recording down the road in Willesden.
‘It's very important for me to have the same people around me as I did on the first album…it's a community thing, it means I can keep the same vibe as I had before,’ he says.
Maintaining that vibe means retaining control.
He may be financially tied to Talkin Loud and parent company Phonogram, but there are few strings attached.
They sign the cheques, he writes the songs and the result of this amicable, arm's-length relationship is ‘Music’, Omar's second album and — given that his Talkin Loud debut was originally released on Kongo Dance — his first new material in some three years.
‘Music’ resonates with live strings, percussion and brass.
A clear progression from his more spartan first LP, it also has an experimental edge that will surprise many.
‘People have listened to tracks and they're amazed, they're like, ‘Oh you've mixed a reggae bassline with a soul feel!’
But to me there's such a fine line between music forms like Cuban, latin, reggae and jazz that I don't really separate anything.’
Before the album's release will come a single, ‘Your Loss My Gain’, that's neither particularly immediate or commercial and so makes a surprising choice to re-establish him in the public domain.
‘Maybe the single won't come up to people's expectations,’ he admits.
‘The album itself is everything I want at this stage…but y'know you just can't predict how people will take it.’
Indeed, a lot's changed in the music industry over the year Omar's been absent.
Observing his success, and that of his Talkin Loud labelmates, the Young Disciples and Incognito, many companies have responded with their own signings.
Acts like DonE, the Escofferys, Ray Simpson, D'Influence and Nu Colours are all part of a wave of new British soul about to enter the mainstream with major backing.
A situation which now makes Omar look less like the golden boy of UK soul and more like its grand old man.
Unsurprisingly, he rejects the suggestion: ‘Carl Macintosh [of Loose Ends], Jazzie B — they've done much more than me.’
But whatever his current position, either forerunner or leader of the soul pack, the strength of his popular support remains an uncontestable fact.
His followers sold out the Hammersmith Odeon before any major label knew who he was, and more recently, when he appeared on the black talent show The 291 Club simply to present an award, he received the kind of reception you'd expect for the ghost of Marvin Gaye.
‘It's really strange,’ he muses, ‘I thought things would have died down by now, because I did the music such a long time ago.
But I'm still not over what it does to people and what they think of me because of it.
‘Music’ will continue where ‘There's Nothing Like This’left off, by establishing a place in the hearts of many listeners.
And who knows, it may even bring a touch of glamour to the streets of Harlesden.
Perhaps when you're raised on the Essex-London borders and your dad, brothers and uncles all (that's all ) work as chartered accountants in Chingford, it's easy to develop a sense of life's absurdity.
Alan Davies did, and as a stand-up comedian he has refined a form for its expression that the live circuit and television like .
His baggy rambles about his day-to-day, metropolitan life, and his energetic use of his body in his joke-telling (he calls it ‘physicalising’, but then he did drama at university) has earned him two appearances on Tonight With Jonathan Ross , about a million bookings per week on the London circuit, and a place in the hearts of audiences and promoters.
He certainly belongs to the new breed, welcoming the demise of ‘the political correctness of comedy’, and making ‘a conscious effort to avoid clichéd topics like sex and news-based subjects.’
His growing fame hasn't gone to his head yet, though.
‘The nearest I've come to celebrity so far is sharing canapés with Samantha Fox on the Jonathan Ross show.
To be honest, I just found the whole thing hilarious.’
Set to be as ubiquitous as the Body Shop or Habitat in years to come, the Japanese bits 'n' bobs shop Muji is opening its second London store this month at 39 Shelton St, Covent Garden.
The desk accessories (mostly metal, see-through plastic and recycled paper), food (dried seaweed and banana-flavoured bubblegum) and clothes (knickers and vests, pictured left) you can already find in the established west Soho branch will appear alongside furniture (brushed metal tables and shelves) and bikes.
Muji's own make of eco-friendly transport follows sturdy, basic designs which reject the complexity of mountain bikes — and taking simplicity a stage further is the shaft-driven, zinc-plated cycle (below) which eschews the regular oily chain for a visually spare look.
Muji is not simply a post-matt black yuppie haven, but beware — once you buy one thing, you'll find it hard to stop .
Glasgow fashion emporium Ichi Ni San is spreading its style gospel via a newly-opened bar-cum-club (right and below), a hair salon and a designer sale shop.
‘Small, intimate and European’ is how owner Stephen Flannery describes the ambience of Bar 10 which opened last month.
With an interior by design supremo Ben Kelly (the Haçienda, Dry), Bar 10 serves Euro snacks, beers and wines till midnight every evening, with a licence extension to allow a more respectable dawn closing under consideration by the authorities.
Top hair stylists are being recruited for the Demon Barber, which is set to open this month, and the recently-opened designer sale shop stocks John Richmond, Val Pirou, Helen Storey and Jean Colonna at a snip of the original designer tag .
Bar 10 is at 10 Mitchell Lane, The Demon Barber at 63–65 Virginia St, and Sale Shop at 26 Bell St, all Glasgow
You start with an ordinary saloon car.
You bolt on the tail and wings you've been towing behind on a trailer, flip a couple of switches on the dashboard, and then find a strip of flat land to take off from.
No, this is not a joke.
Molt Taylor, an aero engineer from the US, has been working on his Aerocar for 40 years.
He now hopes to put the world's motorists into the air by selling the wings and tail in kit form.
His machinery works, and he even has government approval — all he needs now is a manufacturer.
The wait shouldn't be too long, though: anyone with experience of the M25 will know that the consumer demand is already firmly in place.
Leeds' answer to Nell Gwyn dishes out free fruit
back to basics
At Back To Basics in Leeds' town centre there's not a bare chest in sight.
The smell of Vicks is noticeable by its absence.
And no one, but no one is wearing a bobble hat.
As a haven from the sweat-soused rave experience, it has found an eager clientele, and filled its membership list within six months of opening.
The name being dropped enthusiastically in cities down the M1 and along the M62, it's now earning a reputation as one of the grooviest nights in the north.
The club was set up late last year, with perfect timing.
Techno Tracies and crop-headed sheep on drugs were tainting the atmosphere at raves, and there was beginning to be something familiar in the frenzy of old favourites such as Kaos and Ark.
With techno enjoying a second coming in Leeds and banging out of every other shop in the renovated arcades on Saturdays, some people were getting home after a day's shopping and fancying something a bit different.
One Saturday last November, they got their first taste.
Since then, Back To Basics hasn't looked back, refining its relaxed feel, attracting a slightly older crowd, and preserving the enthusiasm and innovation by turning away the wrong sort at the door (‘It's just letting in people you'd want as your mate,’ according to co-founder and one time punk Dave Beer).
The 800-capacity club fills up by 11, with hundreds still trying to get in.
The dress codes take in everything from PVC and leather to second-hand paisley and fake fur.
There are even people in berets, but no one minds.
Everyone gets on fine.
They talk for goodness' sake.
The interior is a blend of motorway crash and Christmas grotto.
On the main floor a lorry serves as a DJ booth (cab) and stage (trailer), and the walls and ceiling are festooned with white camouflage netting.
There are alcoves for exchanging intimate gossip, and a small shop where Sola, a local clothes designer, shows her wares.
A smaller room upstairs is transformed into a dance cave with more netting, and bubble slides and projected film stills add psychedelic kitsch.
The sounds, laid down by resident DJs Ali Cooke and Ralph Lawson with high-profile guests, are slinky house and garage, although the eclectic ‘tribal-acid-funk’ mix in the upper room might feature Nirvana, The Cult or Duran Duran.
This is not a predictable club.
The flyers claim it's all for the disheartened clubber; judging by the grins on the wall-clinging buddhas, faith is being restored.
Fun, frolics and Frankenstein's fruit at Leeds' new post-techno hedonist hotspot, Back To Basics
snack attack
Grub's up but prices are down in two culturally diverse London restaurants.
Belgo dishes up curious Belgian nosh, Wagamama sushi and Sapporo
At first thought, Belgium and Japan would seem to share no cultural connection.
The land of the rising sun is home to short, impassive and incredibly clever people who feed their brains with raw fish, while Flanders is full of immensely fat, stupid people who quaff beer and dunk their chips in mayonnaise.
Both cultures, however, have recently spawned new restaurants in London which thankfully drag the eating-out experience from the outmoded, plastic-flexing Eighties into the less-affluent Nineties.
Belgo and Wagamama are examples of a new breed of classless, functional and cheap restaurants conceived by seasoned caterers who have a sure feel for how people want to eat right now.
At Belgo it's the Belgian national dish of moules and frites while guzzling glasses of zesty, spicy Höegaarden blanche .
At Wagamama it's a bowl of noodles, perhaps with slices of chicken, seasonal greens, bamboo shoots and spring onions, maybe with a side order of gyoza dumplings, while sipping a bottle of crisp and dry Sapporo Draft.
Neither describes itself as a restaurant.
Belgo styles itself as a brewery eating hall, serving an extraordinary range of potent Belgian brews with names like Kwak and  Delerium Tremens.
Wagamama is a ramen bar, specialising in the sort of food immortalised in the quintessential gastroporn flick,Tampopo .
The motto of Wagamama is ‘positive eating, positive living’, whereas the slogan of Belgo is probably something like ‘knabbelen, pottepei!’(pig out, you pisshead!).
Wagamama is a smoke-free zone, whereas Belgo sells untipped Tigre gaspers in cute packets that haven't changed since the Fifties.
Both establishments have austere, utilitarian looks with plain wooden floors and blank surfaces.
Belgo was designed and built by a bald bloke called Arnand Zenz whose witty interpretation of the concept includes strange tubing that pours out from the kitchen and opaque glass bricks for the toilet walls.
Wagamama was designed and built by a firm called JSP, from a conceptual sketch by John Pawson (the renowned minimalist architect responsible for Wakaba, the expensive Japanese restaurant in Finchley Road).
Belgo is bang opposite the Roundhouse in Camden Town, behind a grey concrete façade with the name stamped across it.
You go up some steps to a reception area, from where you have a clear view down into the clean kitchen, then down some steps into a dining room that looks like a well-lit Tube tunnel.
Wagamama is around the corner from the British Museum, through a discreet glass door, past a sand-filled ashtray and down some stairs to a big white basement with a shiny open kitchen at one end.
‘Wagamama’means a stupid and wilful child who winds up his parents.
The walls of Belgo are embossed with the names of Rabelaisian fish that read like insults:‘Coldeel, Begginback, Cocklicrane, Assface.’
At Wagamama you sit on plain wooden benches at long wooden tables and eat healthy, MSG-free oriental fast food served by bright young people dressed in white.
At Belgo you sit on plain wooden chairs with pickaxe handles for legs and eat stoemp (it's a bit like bubble 'n' squeak) served by sardonic men in monk's habits.
No longer need a thin wallet limit your choice of restaurant to a tedious toss-up between vegetarian Indian or Chinese.
Wagamama's motto is ‘positive eating, positive living’, whereas at Belgo it's probably ‘knabbelen, pottepei!’(pig out, you pisshead!)
Both Wagamama and Belgo are open every day from midday until eleven, neither accepts bookings, and you can get away with spending less than a tenner in either.
Top to bottom: kitchen frenzy and moule -wielding monk at Belgo; crisp interior at Wagamama
music
Since about 1988, Rob Gallagher (aka Galliano) has been putting together the cross-cultural, many-sided musical jigsaw that shares his nickname.
This new Talkin Loud LP, ‘A Joyful Noise Unto The Creator’; is proof that the jigsaw is now complete.
Galliano have found their frequency, honed their poetical tones, and made the record they always threatened to make.
With Mick Talbot in the producer's chair, this boasts a full-bodied sound that takes up a more relaxed, less esoteric stance than ‘In Search Of The 13th Note’, concentrating its positive energies on the music as well as the lyrics.
That does not  mean the south London crew have sold their souls for mainstream acceptance.
They're still as militant and hard to pin down as ever, nabbing bits of soul, funk, ska and reggae, and adding their own peculiar ideology to create a more forceful and joyful noise indeed.
The Creator will be well impressed 
Andrew ‘Doc’ Livingstone's Top Ten
As keyboard player for the prolific Joey Negro, Andrew ‘Dog’ Livingstone often finds himself woken up by the radio alarm clock blasting out his latest piano riff.
Not that he gets much sleep these days, being kept busy by a multitude of projects, which include running Centrestage records, putting together a live disco band, and releasing his own material like the Lifeforce ‘Disco Fever’ EP, which sold out its first pressing in one day.
Now he is also doing red hot disco remixes starting with Kenyatta's ‘Keep Me Coming’— just out on 4th & Broadway.
He thinks disco's reputation as tacky is unfair: ‘Disco's got a more sophisticated approach to it, with the way it's built up in layers.
What I want to do is to take all the best elements, like live strings, and recreate them.’
He also admits to having a streak of the trainspotter in him, and it took three days ploughing through his extensive record collection before he finally managed to produce a top ten.
hype! trivia
THIS CURIOUSLY wart-like plastic troll (right), currently clawing its way from Seventies' oblivion to Nineties cool-kitsch, has had a boost from Wrangler.
With the obligatory ‘W’ across its malformed chest, the tousle-headed little aberration appears in the latest set of increasingly hep ‘Be more than just a number’ads,
HAUTE couture millinery and contemporary dance is not a combination to set everyone's pulse racing, but it should produce an event that's different .
They come together in Headstrong , the result of a collaboration between dance group Adventures In Motion Pictures, and five hat designers whose numbers include Fred Bare.
It runs from June 10–11 at the Cabot Hall, Canary Wharf, London
THERE was a somewhat disturbing influence of life imitating art at San Quentin prison last month when Robert Alton Harris chose his last words before going to the gas chamber.
‘Whether you are a king or a street sweeper, we all have to dance with the Grim Reaper,’ he uttered — which you may remember is from that poignant, sensitive art movie,Bill And Ted's Bogus Journey.
THE CONCEPT of a Squatters' Ball might conjure up the image of crusties in black tie and taffeta but this isn't yer average kind of ball.
Deptford's Conscious Collective are taking over the Tabernacle, Powis Sq, London and the Albany Empire, to raise cash for the Advisory Service For Squatters and the Squatters Action Group For Secure Homes.
If they're half as good as the parties Conscious did at Lady Flo's, it's going to be a blinder.
LOS ANGELES' hottest T-shirt, and it's heading this way: ‘I survived the 100 per cent off sale at Fedco’
THE POWER of design: one in four people drinking from cans adorned with Pepsi's new logo believe the cola tastes better, according to the company's market researchers.
The formula has not, in fact, been changed at all LENNY Henry wants to make a British version of New Jack City .
With his own production company, Crucial Films, funded by the Beeb and with ‘all manner of people dropping off bits of writing’, it seems he may have a good chance.
‘There's loads of talent out there amongst ethnic minorities, but not much is being utilised.
We're starting a writers’ workshop this month with people like Neil Gaiman getting involved.’
Budding auteurs should contact Polly McDonald
ITALIA house can assimilate anything, mixing completely unrelated elements into seamless tracks that are clever, commercial, and miles away from the backroom botch jobs now dominating the UK dance scene.
Those wishing to hear the music at its home should join Flying's annual club jaunt to Rimini.
The rest of us can make do with Profile's fine new compilation ‘Avanti!’, 11 tracks to prove that Italian dance was more than just a passing fad.
We have 20 copies for the best replies to the following question: How many DJs does it take to change a lightbulb?
Answers by June 25 to The Italian Job.
Please specify vinyl or CD
3.3.3, an art exhibition at London's Diorama gallery from June 11–July 4, features the unusual centrepiece of a decommissioned Bloodhound missile.
Other elements include installations, sculpture, text and posters.
One of the three artists is Norma Fletcher, who you might remember as the door person at Freds in our recent Bouncers feature (FACE 42)
YOU MAY not have heard of serial killer and cannibal Ed Gein, but you've probably seen his movies.
His crimes were the basis for The Silence Of The Lambs, The Texas Chainsaw Massacre and Psycho .
The actual facts about the career of Gein and other murderers are collected as the subjects of a new video series,Murderers, Mobsters and Madmen .
Just perfect for when you're in the house on your own at night
TANK GIRL is now going the way of all great cult heroes, having been fought over hard for a film by Hollywood.
The resulting live-action flick featuring Jamie Hewlitt's foul-mouthed and shaven-headed cartoon character is due for release at the end of next year.
Actors have not yet been announced, but the appealing rumour that Johnny Depp and Winona Ryder were up for the lead roles has been denied
WITH A title like Tango ‘Til You're Sore , it was always going to be one of the sexiest plays of the summer.
For good measure, the playwright Robert Young has added some erotic Seventies disco dancing (very now), Skin Two-type costumes by Kim West, and built the plot around the ‘twin aphrodisiacs of money and erotic dance’.
Sounds A-1 to us, Bob.
It runs from June 15–July 11 at the Finborough Theatre
THERE aren't too many great British thrillers these days, but Yardie is one.
Written by young(ish) black author Victor Headley, it's a fast-paced tale of cocaine gangs, guns and revenge set in London's Harlesden and Hackney, and could repeat the success of Richard Skinhead Allen's legendary novels.
Stylish, hip, funny — book of the month, or something
barometer
Disco
A huge influence for early summer's new tunes, clothes and attitude
Leeds United
League champs, and proof that a club can boot out its fascists
Old school arcade games
Breakout, Asteroids, Gorf — old arcade faves being resurrected by those in the know
Coming together
Weatherall and Galliano link-up wonderfully on the ‘Skunk Funk’ remix — an end to club cliques?
Lucky Charms
Nestlé's kicking cereal.
Previously only on import
London gay bars
Industria and the two Villages — deservedly packed
Liggers
‘You're not on the list’— who cares, pay up and enjoy yourself
Car aesthetics
Ford rumoured to be  bringing out a new Capri — a nation quakes
The Labour Party
Back in a mess when the country needs it most
Club admission prices
Finally falling, so we can afford to go out mid-week too
Shell suits
At last being replaced by all-in-one velour trackies, especially in the North-west.
Is this an improvement?
films of the month
news and reviews compiled by jim mcclellan and steve beard
Close shave: Brad Pitt risks quiff collapse with love interest Catherine Keener in Johnny Suede
JOHNNY SUEDE
Apparently Tom DiCillo cut his cinematic teeth working with Jim Jarmusch, and his directorial debut Johnny Suede certainly shows signs of the latter's influence, as it doodles out a familiarly minimal comedy around a cool fool who learns the limits of his own hip moves.
But DiCillo comes over looser than his mentor, less mannered, more immediately likeable.
With cartoon quiff and one hand permanently down his Y-fronts (self-absorbed cool as masturbatory male narcissism, geddit?),
Brad Pitt stars as Johnny, a hipster idiot hung up on Fifties Kitsch who wanders incongruently through a contemporary bombscape filled with symbolic rubble and fetishised meaninglessness.
Eventually he collides with female common sense, AKA teacher of retarded kids Yvonne, self knowledge beckons and his quiff collapses.
In between there are some great dopey male bonding scenes with Pitt and black buddy Calvin Levels (eg the attempt to decide whether or not to move in with Yvonne), plus some not-so-hot episodes with Nick Cave (crap as usual as platinum rocker Freak Storm).
DiCillo succeeds in giving things an edge, developing his hero into a critical parody of the Reaganite retreat into the Fifties — Johnny is a pathetic symbol of modern America's decadent fixation with its own outmoded popular myths.
All this, great gags and Brad Pitt in his underwear — how can you refuse?
films on release
THE PLAYBOYS ‘Well made’ trip through the sexual mire of Fifties Ireland, written by Shane My Left Foot Connaughton, detailing a predictable love triangle — unmarried mum Robin Wright (actually pretty good) caught between uptight copper Albert Finney and free-wheeling actor Aidan Quinn.
The only fun comes from ticking off all those Blarneywood clichés: grubby tykes, repressive priests, rolling hills, distance IRA thunder, professional paddies, rutting horses etc
THE MAMBO KINGS Cuban brothers in rhythm Armand Assante (hairily upbeat) and Antonio Banderas (moodily homesick) do the Hispanic hustle, break up, make up and sell their souls to America.
Occasional directorial cleverness (the photo booth scenes) and a script which mostly keeps faith with the edge of Oscar Hijuelos' novel make this surprisingly entertaining
THE ADJUSTER The ‘loss adjuster’ of the title is a melancholic insurance clerk who attempts to rebuilt the lives of his disaster-stricken clients from the record of old snapshots, his feelings gradually eroded by constant exposure to these images.
Director Atom Egoyan weaves sex, censorship and second-hand experience into his theme, and ends up with a reflective movie that's also both faltering and uncertain
AUTOBUS Post-New Wave whizz-kid Eric Rochant follows A World Without Pity with a trip to the French provinces, where a passionate youth quietly dying of smalltown boredom hijacks a school bus to take him to his girl, Charlotte Gainsbourg.
Part road movie, part love story and part social commentary,Autobus pulls off the difficult trick of making a simple tale resonate with complex themes and emotions
The Waltons' Award for Promoting the Completely Unbelievable Charms of Rural America this month goes to Paradise , starring Don Johnson a-fishing and a-philosophising on the river and Melanie Griffith getting to grips with root vegetables in the kitchen.
Worst Career Move of the month: ex-world's greatest sleazeball James Woods trying to come on like a middle-aged woman's dreamboat opposite Dolly Parton in Straight Talk , which also has the biggest supporting cast of the month: Griffin Dunne, John Sayles, Spalding Gray.
But then Dolly needs all the support she can get (boom boom)
strip tease
Typecast, moi?
For her first post- Peaks movie, Sherilyn Fenn (left) stars as archetypal floozie Candy Cane, a mix of Marilyn Monroe and all the women JFK ever slept with (OK, maybe not quite all of them) in the latest assassination flic Ruby .
Focusing on the small-time hood (Danny Aiello, the pizza parlour boss of Do The Right Thing ) who shot Oswald, this winds up as a daft romance.
The kitschy Sixties strip routines are, er, amusing — but wasn't this kind of thing supposed to belong in Fenn's pre-Lynch past?
MEDICINE MAN Misconceived eco-movie directed by the usually reliable John Die Hard McTiernan pits gruff Sean Connery (plus grizzled ponytail) against huffy Lorraine Braco in a battle of the sexes which is also a fight to save the rainforest.
He's a world-famous scientist searching for a cancer cure, she's the spiky assistant who proves herself by falling for him.
The mix of screwball comedy and moral bombast fails to work, and there is much too much in the way of quaint native lore, bungy-jumping through the jungle and Connery practising his golf swing
THE LAWNMOWER MAN Overloaded trash morality which mixes cyberhippie obsessions and Frankenstein -style paranoia to hysterical effect.
Gardening simpleton Jeff Fahey gets a dose of VR therapy, his brain gets bigger, he discovers hair gel, and before you can say Altered States he's accessed his primal mind and is mowing down enemies (literally).
If you're wondering, the computer FX are just Tron crossed with 2001 and a dash of fractal soup
Groan —rumour has it that the stars of art porn slick The Lover (Tony Leung Jane March)‘weren't faking it’ in their love scenes (yeah, yeah).
An old scam.
Past bedroom Method-ists include: Jessica Lange and Jack Nicholson in The Postman Always Rings Twice (on the kitchen table); Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie in Don't Look Now (from every [camera]angle); Beatrice Dalle and Jean-Huges Anglade in Betty Blue (for most of the film); Carre Otis and Mickey Rourke in Wild Orchid (a baby oil ad in disguise); Gérard Depardieu and Miou Miou in Les Valseuses (it was a girl); Tom Hanks and Hooch The Dog in Turner And Hooch (only joking…or are we?)
Ubermoppet Macaulay Culkin is now the 53rd most powerful person in Hollywood, according to America's Premiere magazine.
He earned his position by forcing Fox head Steve Roth to give him the lead in the much-touted The Good Son and $8 million in return for doing Home Alone 2 .
Only a few years, and Roth will have to cope with Big Mac's adolescent mood swings.
Bet he can't wait.
With the summer certain to be dominated (again) by sequels (Legal Weapon 3, Batman Returns, Alien&sup3;, Honey I Blew Up The Kids ), Hollywood pundits are keeping busy predicting this season's sleeper hits.
Current hot tips —Sister Act , which has Whoopi Goldberg hiding out in a nunnery (oh dear) and Encino Man , post-Wayne dumbshow about a neanderthal surf punk with Pauly Shore (see p90).
Our tips — the Damon Wayans vehicle ‘Mo Money or Ice-T and Ice Cube trying to go mainstream in The Looters 
just say no
According to Martin Scorsese, who you might expect to know about such things, going to the cinema is like taking drugs.
Much of his Taxi Driver , he says, arose from his belief that movies are a ‘kind of dream state, or like taking dope’.
Leaving aside the issue of where Mart goes to see his films, the observation is interesting because it directs attention towards one of Hollywood's generally unnoticed pre-occupations.
The film industry is obsessed with drugs.
They are plot staples for every cut-price thriller, the agents of character mutation and visual  delirium , and devices which encourage characters to talk about themselves.
Drugs movies such as Naked Lunch and My Own Private Idaho seem in many ways to play deliberately on the similarities between drug experience and watching a film: both of these are clearly just as much concerned with seeing wonderful things in the dark as they are with falling apart under pressure.
The big similarity between drugs and the movies is that they both offer simulated experiences of reality.
The difference is that only one is legal.
This is the reason that most drugs movies — especially those like Postcards From The Edge and Wired , which are set in Hollywood — denounce their source material so hysterically.
Hollywood actors always seem to do their best to show that drugs are the worst.
Anyone out there remember Michael Keaton doing his nut in Clean And Sober or James Woods acting pop-eyed in The Boost (both 1988) to show you should just say no?
Now it's the turn of Jennifer Jason Leigh (pictured) and Jason Patric to (respectively) moan and mumble as they make tracks across the border separating responsible undercover police work from plain strung-out weirdness in this month's Rush , Lili Fini Zanuck's sombre adaptation of Kim Wozencraft's semi-autobiographical novel about life as a narcotics cop in Seventies Texas.
Blues singer Greg Allman is put to good use as the big bad dealer at the centre of events, a weighty presence always just out of reach.
Otherwise, things fall a little flat.
Despite the title, the only scene which hints at the metabolic urgency of drug use comes when Leigh drives zonked-out through a lit-up industrial landscape.
A ‘trip’ sequence twice over, in that it frames drugged-out perception through a moving windscreen, it's a good advert for the cinema-as-drug concept.
A technology of intoxication, you might call it.
You can't get much more psychedelic than that.
videos on release
Mutronics (Medusa) Mutant pulp directed by FX man Screaming Mad James which crossbreeds kung fu, SF and body horror, and comes up with high-kicking men in monster suits.
Entertainingly stupid
DOGFIGHT (Warner Bros) Macho marine River Phoenix (believe it) and ‘ugly’ proto-hippychick Lili Taylor ponder boyish rituals, Vietnam and the true meaning of the Sixties in a low-key romance.
Just sharp enough to avoid sentimentality
JACOB'S LADDER (Guild) Freaked-out Vietnam vets get together and discover they were used as government guinea pigs during the war.
Gripping if a little confusing at times
HANGIN' WITH THE HOMEBOYS (Columbia TriStar) The four homeboys in question — two black, two hispanic — quit the Bronx for a night out of bonding and bravado in Manhattan.
Sharp characterisation, fine comedy performances and spot-on dialogue.
Rent it
ADDAMS FAMILY (Columbia TriStar) Efficient entertainment that benefits from the biggish-budget treatment and some neat casting choices — notably Angelica Huston as Morticia.
Not as funny as its box-office receipts might suggest 
fashion news
Seriously into leather?
More expensive than Dirk Bikkembergs,Chrome Hearts ’ range of waistcoats, jackets, belts and jewellery is unbeatable for quality.
Worn by the likes of Seal, Naomi Campbell and Lenny Kravitz, it uses precious stones, silver and gold in a tasteful way.
Available from Browns.
Joe Casely-Hayford 's self-financed label is set to see changes following the liquidation of the business.
By the time you read this, discussions with prospective new backers should be resolved, with new licensing agreements at the label likely and Casely-Hayford optimistic despite his problems.
Watch this space
First the women-only porn mag,For Women , now Sh!, an underwear, sex toys and props shop run by women for women.
They also offer made-to-measure clothes (including leather trousers) as well as safer sex info.
Find them at 22 Coronet St. Cynthia Payne, eat your heart out
The film hasn't even arrived yet, but people are already going OTT with Malcolm X T-shirts, hats, necklaces — anything they can print an ‘X’ on.
If you want the real deal, go and track down Spike Lee's original Forty Acres And A Mule merchandise
Milan design duo Dolce e Gabbana are responsible for the latest pin-up girl collection from Italy.
The newly-opened TOKIO shop, the second branch in London, is the sole outlet for the label in the metropolis.
Workwear gets another boost in July with the opening of The PIL Shop , stocking all the usual suspects — Hard Yakka, Brundstone, Carhartt — plus utility wear from Thailand and Vietnam, leather and suede tool belts, made-for-industry gloves and Australian Stanley knives.
The vogue for dressing down is getting to the upmarket emporia.
Striking a loftily superior tone, New York designer store Charivari is running ads with anti-slumming slogans such as‘Flannel shirts.
Chinos.
Nesting.
Wake us when it's over’
The next step from the crop and the pudding-bowl haircut is the big hair, according to Glasgow's avant-garde hair gurus DLC .
To persuade their clients of the merits of the extension, the DLC salon is holding monthly wig parties, and punters are already swamping them with demands for afros and bouffant, bum-length Dolly Parton styles.
We're not convinced yet, but if you are, ring to make your appointment
Tip for the summer —extra long baggy shorts , Chili Peppers style
Additional information from Ashley Heath and Seta Niland 
London girls
After the supermodels, a new generation is coming through with new ideas and attitudes.
Introducing five faces for the Nineties…
‘It's about time different ideas came.
The supermodels are beautiful girls but it's time for a completely different approach
‘I consider myself a feminist.
You have to keep certain principles.
I find the idea of plastic surgery ludicrous’
‘None of the models now look innocent.
They look aggressive and tough.
Even the prettier ones have a tough attitude.
Kate has a sensitivity and a gentleness in her face that we haven't seen for a long time.’
With a hint of wistfulness in his voice, renowned photographer Steven Meisel is talking about British model Kate Moss.
He has just photographed her for the latest Dolce e Gabbana campaign in New York.
Kate's delicate, smiling beauty was first brought to the spotlight when, in 1990, she appeared twice on the cover of THE FACE in rapid succession.
Now, at the age of 18, the faintly gangly, freckled kid from Croydon with the ‘moonchild’ face, as one make-up artist puts it, is enjoying international modelling success.
She recently appeared in Italian Vogue , photographed by Ellen Von Unwerth.
That Meisel speaks so highly of Kate bodes well for her future.
He and Von Unwerth, along with fellow top photographers Herb Ritts, Albert Watson and Peter Lindbergh, exert a huge influence on modelling careers and images.
Meisel helped launch Linda Evangelista on to the road to superstardom, and it was Von Unwerth who captured Claudia Schiffer's sex kitten quality and used it in the Guess advertising campaign which made the model famous.
So is Kate Moss set to be a new supermodel?
‘There will always be top models,’ replies Meisel, ‘but I think the whole supermodel thing is becoming boring and a bit ridiculous.’
Photographer and ex-model Corinne Day, who championed Kate from the outset, agrees.
‘It's just the same faces and there's nothing behind those faces.
Photography is 80 per cent casting, and with Kate it was something more than a beautiful face.
I always play down the beauty of a model.’
Corinne's casting choices are now watched closely by advertisers.
Her latest discovery, Rosemary (this month's FACE cover star) already has Levi's and Pepe jeans competing to use her in their campaigns.
Corinne spotted Rosemary in McDonald's in Oxford Street.
‘I was stuffing my face,’ says the softly-spoken 17-year-old with a broad, bright smile.
She enjoys modelling, but is sometimes baffled by the amount of money she is paid for ‘standing around doing nothing’.
She doesn't feel that she's ‘learning anything’.
Her priorities are clear.
She recently turned down £1,500 for a day's work because she did not want to miss school.
She is studying for A levels in Farnham, Surrey, and would ultimately like to study psychology at university.
‘I don't want this to change my whole life.
I want to be able to get away from it.’
Ellis, head of the New Faces division at Models One agency, was attracted by Lorraine Pascale's individuality.
‘There's real life in her face.
She has a gap in her teeth.
Personality is so important, you've got to be able to project a mood.
Just look at the way that fashion's going.
It's becoming more free — more location work and running along beaches.
It's more about beauty coming from within.’
Lorraine is one of Britain's most popular black models.
A regular in FACE fashion shoots, she has modelled on the catwalk for a host of designers from Yohji and Galliano to St Laurent, as well as for numerous magazines and advertising campaigns.
Steven Meisel views the rise of models like Kate Moss as an indication of a more general mood in the fashion industry.
‘In the Eighties, the Amazon woman kind of took over.
We were brainwashed into seeing qualities like gentleness and sensitivity as negative and weak.
But they're part of being human.’
He likens the Nineties to the Sixties.
‘People protest about what they believe in now.
They are interested in the human condition.’
The human condition is not, it must be said, traditionally the terrain of the model.
But 19-year-old model Saffron Domini needed little persuasion to appear in a harrowing film about racism and violence.
The MTA (model-turned-actress) has become a cliché and is, reasonably enough, the focus for much derision in the celluloid world.
Yet Saffron's performance in the, as yet, unscreened TV drama Welcome To The Terror Dome , made by Nigerian director Ngozion Onwurah, breaks the mold of glamorous roles usually bestowed upon the budding MTA.
The film, funded by the BFI, tells the story of a white girl (played by Saffron) in a mixed-race relationship who becomes pregnant and is subsequently the victim of a brutal beating by National Front thugs.
She appears through much of the film bloody and bruised.
She didn't get paid but loved it.
She even had doubts about returning to modelling afterwards.
It's a far cry from Peter Lindbergh's forthcoming supermodel film, featuring all of the girls (bar Christy Turlington) in a glamour extravaganza.
Although voices of dissent are being heard, there is no sign of the supermodel phenomenon abating in the near future.
The girls have been recruited, again, by George Michael for the video of ‘Too Funky’, his contribution to the Red Hot And Dance Aids benefit project.
The models are, uncharacteristically, giving their services free of charge to directors George Michael and Thierry Mugler, although filming had to be postponed because of the models' hectic schedules.
‘Six million if you don't mind,’ was Christy Turlington's reply to designer Valentino's suggestion that she was worth a million dollars.
Linda, Christy, Claudia, Naomi and Cindy are the world's most bankable beauties.
Schiffer, Turlington and Crawford this year signed exclusive multi-million dollar contracts with top cosmetics companies.
Revlon paid Schiffer a reported $6 million for a four-year contract for another three years for $3 million.
Christy Turlington, the image behind Calvin Klein's Eternity fragrance since ‘88, this year signed a $2 million, two-year deal with Maybelline cosmetics.
On top of these contracts, the girls, along with the other supermodels, can expect to earn anything from $7,000 to $25,000 for each catwalk appearance at twice-a-year shows, and Gianni Versace reportedly paid Turlington £50,000 to appear exclusively at his Milan show.
It's no wonder that, as Steven Meisel puts it, many people in the industry are ‘resentful of the money they earn’.
When Evangelista demanded £8,800 for an appearance at Valentino's show last year, he refused: ‘I like them, but I hate the stardom created around them,’ he said.
‘They should walk, show, change, walk and show again.
That's what I ask them; not to be stars, but to become Valentino women.’
Katharine Hammett, in a Sunday Times interview, demanded, ‘What are these girls really good for?’
They are, like it or not, good for profits.
Designers use the girls because they ensure editorial coverage.
Advertisers use them because they ensure sales.
The supermodels are a safe bet and, in times of recession, that is what matters.
What troubles their detractors, however, is the corporate power with which they have become inextricably linked.
Their faces have come to represent little more than voluble wealth.
Revlon owner Ronald Perleman told American Vogue that they are beautiful ‘not in an out-of-reach way.
They are accessible women to aspire to in the Nineties.’
Not!
Perhaps it's the fault of the Hollywood star system for neglecting its role of fantasy and glamour.
Now that movie stars dress down, sleep around, admit to neuroses and drug habits, it is left to the supermodels to live out fantasies.
They date and marry stars, dress in designer clothes, and are phenomenally rich and cosmopolitan.
There is, it must be said, a strong kitsch appeal to the supermodels' star status.
They are always worth watching out for in Hello!, whether it's Cindy, in wildly-inappropriate garb, among a cluster of nomadic bedouins in the Judean desert, or Naomi dodging the cameras with De Niro in Paris.
They are icons of money and sex.
‘If she were a President, she'd be Baberahm Lincoln’ is one of the quips about Claudia Schiffer in Wayne's World .
The trouble is that, unlike other camp icons such as Madonna, the mega-models take themselves very seriously, with the possible exception of Cindy Crawford.
‘Women ask themselves why they don't look like us,’ she remarks in Lindbergh's film.
‘What they don't know is that we don't look like that either.’
The supermodel decorum and driven professionalism is getting bland and corporate.
When Schiffer arrived at the Academy Awards to mark her debut as Revlon's new star, she emerged from a double stretch limo, accompanied by suitable escort, Dan Moriarty, Revlon's vice-president.
The event smacked of an earlier era of Hollywood where tyrannical film moguls ran the lives of their contracted artists, vetting them for indiscretions and disloyalty.
MGM's Louis B Mayer even told his artists who they could and could not date.
Ultimately, however, it is the models themselves who wield the power.
‘If a photographer is getting it wrong, I say no way,’ says Cindy Crawford in the film.
‘I say it straight.
Put the light here, do it like this.’
They are, without doubt, strong women.
This doesn't make it alright, according to Saffron.
‘They're strong, but they're strong for the wrong reasons.
Look at Thatcher.
I don't have much respect for them.’
‘It's all awfully stressful and business-like,’ says Meisel of the supermodel phenomenon.
‘You have to have perfect teeth, get your boobs done.
It's taken the fun out of being a model.
Girls like Kate are beginning to change that.’
The Moss/Pascale school of thought is down to earth.
They see modelling for what it is.
‘We had a laugh,’ says Moss of the Dolce e Gabbana shoot, citing ‘fun, money and travel’as modelling's main attractions.
‘I take it seriously, but I'm not obsessed.
I still go out and have a good time.
People want personality.
I don't pose,’ she pauses.
‘Well, actually I do pose, but I don't pout.’
She says she would probably end up being ‘paranoid’ if she were to reach supermodel status.
She wouldn't like it if people knew what she was and she didn't know anything about them.
‘Easy money,’ is how 19-year-old Pascale puts it.
‘It doesn't last all that long, so you might as well milk the business while you can.
I can't see myself doing it for a long time.
It's fun sometimes, but it can also be really degrading.
I want to use my brain.’
She used to frequent fashion parties but now says she ‘can't be dealing with it’.
Born in Hackney of Jamaican and St Lucian parents, she is conscientious about turning up on time and ‘not having a hangover’.
Black girls, she says, ‘have to try twice as hard, especially in Britain’.
She also harbours acting ambitions, although she admits that it's probably because she has got used to ‘getting attention’.
The fact that she, ‘unlike Christy Turlington, can just look like a homegirl’ is, she feels, a possible advantage in the acting world.
She is pleased for Naomi Campbell, although she says that she should ‘remember where she came from.
It's important to have good friends back at home, otherwise you could turn into something you're not.’
Twenty-year-old Sarah Murray, another of Corinne Day's protégés, is similarly relaxed about her career.
‘The day I have to start dieting is the day I give up modelling.
I'm not about to change for anybody.’
She says she will ‘give it a year’ and see what happens.
Ultimately, she would like to work in film, behind the camera.
She studied for two years in audio-visual design.
None of this new generation of models make any pretence about the inanities and absurdities of their job, and their brand of individual beauty reflects that approach.
They are all strong enough to be soft.
‘People are looking for a change of expression and mood,’ says Steven Meisel.
‘Beauty and the changing attitudes to it are always a reflection of how the world changes.
People are becoming less aggressive.
I'm enjoying the Nineties very much.
I think it's a healthier, more gentle decade.
Fashion and photography are only very small parts of that, but it's good to be able to use those things to say something.’
The reign of the ultra-model will, no doubt, continue for a time.
The relentless bombardment of images and icons of affluence and perfection is not waning.
But those images are becoming harder and harder to stomach in a world hit by recession.
There are signs, even in advertising, of a change of sensibility.
‘Reality is the best fantasy,’ reads the slogan for a recent perfume campaign showing a couple and baby in a spartan bathroom.
Sarah Murray was recently turned down for a catwalk show because her walk wasn't suitable.
‘It's my walk.
Everyone's got their own style.
We can't be robots’.
trick or treat?
Contrary to what you may have heard, Ketamine is not the new Ecstasy.
It's just another dodgy substance we don't know nearly enough about
‘Ecstasy hinted at how powerful the mind could be, and once first gear was mastered there was a second gear, and a third.
Compared to MDMA, Vitamin K was tenth gear.’
Jay Stevens,Storming Heaven: LSD And The American Dream 
LSD seemed just right for the Sixties.
Its appearance coincided with an economic boom and an ideological crisis.
For many, the drug was a catalyst, but the changes that acid produced were shaped by wider influences.
It didn't matter if you saw God, quit your job, and took the journey to India.
There were plenty more jobs to come back to when you had spent all your money and caught hepatitis.
At the time, some people believed that the drug had changed their lives immeasurably, that they had gained profound insights into the human condition, but, by and large, the major impact of LSD was cultural.
The drug created a new style, a new language.
It also created new markets: the style was appropriated by hip young entrepreneurs and used to shift new products to the new drug subculture.
The era also gave birth to a whole array of new social problems.
As users got bored with acid, methedrine came along to take its place.
Over the last five years, Ecstasy has had an even bigger impact.
During 1990 and 1991, it seemed anybody who ever smoked a joint was taking Ecstasy.
As in the Sixties, many people felt that the drug had transformed their lives.
And, to some extent, perhaps it did.
Raving resembled a huge, religious ritual, and like other such rituals it gave many people an insight into a transcendental state.
Yet the bargain that we make with drugs may well have a Faustian quality.
When a new drug arrives in a society, it is like an infant taking a screwdriver to a clock.
Perhaps we can take it apart, but can we put the thing back together again?
Ecstasy first hit the UK in a big way around 1988.
Five years later, people are just beginning to recognise that there are problems associated with the drug.
The physical and psychological problems may or may not be fewer and less serious than the problems associated with other drugs, but who knows what kind of problems the cultural changes will produce?
For the last few months, the papers have been full of stories about Love Doves, Disco Biscuits and Dennis the Menaces, and now they bring you Special K, Vitamin K, Kit-Kat.
Journalists, desperate to break the story on the latest trend in designer drugs, are hyping Ketamine as the drug to take over from Ecstasy.
Until last year, virtually nothing was known about Ketamine in the UK.
A general anaesthetic with analgesic (pain-relieving) properties, it is produced by Parke-Davies and marketed as Ketalar.
Because the drug is less likely to depress the respiratory system than other pain-killers, it has been marketed as particularly useful for young children and the aged.
However, they take it under controlled conditions, while their heart, blood pressure, and respiration are being monitored — not in a nightclub in unknown doses.
So where did the drug appear from?
According to researcher Jay Stevens, investigations into psychedelic drugs have continued unbroken since the Sixties.
In the USA a loose network of people whom Stevens terms ‘the neuro-consciousness frontier’ have continued to systematically explore the effects of mind-altering drugs upon the human psyche.
As the laws were changed to prohibit the use of certain tools, they moved into other substances that were still within the law.
Anyway, by the time Stevens' book was published in 1987, the network had devised or discovered a whole new pharmacopoeia with strange-sounding names.
Names such as Adam, Eve, Venus, Intellex and 2CB.
Stevens asked many of his sources for their tip for the top, and the two drugs that kept coming up most frequently were MDMA (Ecstasy) and Ketamine.
The Psychedelics Encyclopedia lists nine families of different psychedelic drugs.
The family that includes Ecstasy, the phenylethylamines, has almost 200 different member drugs.
Ketamine isn't even a member of any of the nine families.
The drug it most closely resembles is PCP, an animal tranquilliser.
Now there's a recommendation.
If speed will turn you into your parents, PCP might turn you seriously psychotic.
All that those LA police offices had to say to get acquitted of beating Rodney King was that they believed he had been using PCP.
Not guilty.
The jury believed that they used the tools necessary to keep him under control.
Californian neuroscientist John Lilly may have done most to bring Ketamine to our attention.
Lilly is the man responsible for such scientific breakthroughs as the invention of the isolation tank and communication between human beings and dolphins.
He was the model for the main character in the film,Altered States , and in his autobiographical novel,The Scientist , Lilly tells how he was given the drug by a doctor to cure a recurring migraine.
He found that K allowed him to ‘look across the border into other realities’, and went on to take the drug every day for 100 days.
Talk about using a sledge-hammer to crack a nut!
Lilly believes that while he was in the ‘K state’ he made repeated contact with extraterrestrials, the beings who manage Earth Coincidence Control, your local branch of Cosmic Coincidence Control.
These entities are placed on Earth to manage coincidences in such a way as to inch us gradually along the evolutionary path and, while on Ketamine, Lilly was able to communicate with these extraterrestrials, who informed him that they had removed DNA samples from Earth and transported them to another planet.
There, they proceeded to genetically engineer all of Earth's large-brained mammals — primates, dolphins and whales — which the entities then replanted, fully evolved, back on Earth.
Other Ketamine users also report being plugged in to information networks while in K cyberspace.
They have been reported as spending a great deal of time analysing conversations that they have held with the various Ketamine entities.
These beings offer great insights into life, the universe and everything.
In the words of one such traveller into the realm of the hyper-real, ‘It is no great accomplishment to hear a voice in the head.
The accomplishment is to make sure that it is telling you the truth.’
So how does the drug work?
Ketamine's major consistent effect is dissociation, the adoption of an objective or dispassionate perspective.
Classic dissociative phenomena include out-of-the-body experiences, astral travel, near-death- and rebirth-type experiences.
For these reasons Ketamine has been explored as an adjunct to psychotherapy.
Researchers at the Psychoneurological Research Institute in St Petersburg are using the drug in doses one tenth of those used in surgical anaesthesia to try to cure people suffering from depression and phobias.
But they recognise that, even under controlled conditions, the process of losing one's sense of individuality can produce ecstatic or horrifying results.
People who have taken the drug report a range of effects from the unpleasant to the downright dangerous.
Reports from America offer numerous examples of users who get trapped in repeated, compulsive administration of the drug giving rise to incidents usually associated with bad acid trips, with people believing that they can fly or attempting to get out of moving vehicles.
Others have suffered paranoia or severe delusional states.
In the last few months, it has been increasingly evident that such incidents are no longer limited to the USA.
Having the Ketamine entities lie to us may be the least of our worries.
‘I felt as though I was stuck in this network of electrical impulses.
As the drug wore off, I felt like RoboCop, or Terminator, some kind of mutant cyborg.
My face seemed to be made up of a mass of needles or electrical impulses.’
It isn't just drug use that causes unforeseen problems — drug prohibition also has an unintended impact.
If police success causes marijuana shortages, then people use other drugs to compensate.
In Scotland, where there is a shortage of imported heroin, people abuse pharmaceutical drugs that can do just as much damage.
The combination of a massively-expanded market for Ecstasy and a shortage of supply has led to Ketamine making its first appearance on the British black market.
In the past, the only sources of the drug were tiny supplies that aficionados diverted from medical use.
In the early part of 1990 during the first great Ecstasy draught, Ketamine came to light in police analysis of seizures of tablets sold as Ecstasy in nightclubs in various parts of England and Scotland.
One user, in his thirties with a vast experience of illegal drug use, came across the drug in this way.
He bought a quantity believing they were Ecstasy, but when he tried them found that they were another drug altogether.
‘They were nothing like MDMA.
If you took one and closed your eyes, there was slight colour and patterning, but no euphoria, no stimulation, no desire to dance.
All that they did was make the room slightly wobbly.
A few nights later, I took three or four at once, to see what happened.
It was like entering another dimension.
All of a sudden, you're no longer there.
You can't move, you can't think, you can't function.
It's only as you begin to come out of the Ketamine state that you begin to appreciate where you are or where you've been.
Eventually, the world begins to reform, and you get some insight into the relationships between various parallel dimensions.
‘The closest thing that I can compare it to is the film.
Tron .
I felt as though I was stuck in this network or maze of electrical impulses.
At first, I had no sense of being there, or rather, I was there and not there at the same time, a sort of annihilation of the ego.
As the drug wore off, and I became more aware of being inside my body, I felt like RoboCop, or Terminator, some kind of mutant cyborg.
My face seemed to be made up of a mass of needles or spikes or electrical impulses.
The slightest movement would be accompanied by an intense sense of mechanical activity in my body.’
This Ketamine user reported no desire to take the drug again.
‘It isn't a social drug like Ecstasy, and it isn't a stimulant, so you don't have any desire to dance.
It isn't even euphoric, it's just very, very weird.
I've had the experience a couple of times — just to use the tablets up.
It was interesting, but I've no desire to repeat it.’
Twelve months later, this user's experience is being repeated all over the country, sometimes intentionally.
Ketamine is far easier to produce than Ecstasy — the precursor chemicals are easier to get hold of, and, because it isn't illegal, you are unlikely to do time if you get caught.
So some unscrupulous drug dealers are still trying to pass Ketamine off as E. Others, no doubt working on the basis that you can't fool all of the people all of the time, have thought ahead and worked out a clever marketing strategy.
Our experience of a drug is shaped by the interplay of three factors — the pharmacology of the drug, the mind-set of the user, and the setting in which the drug is used.
In order to promote the idea of rebirthing, some K dealers are providing jars of babyfood and dummies to drive the point home.
Dummies have since caught on as a fashion accessory at raves, but whether the trend was sparked by the emergence of Ketamine, or whether it's just a way to keep the burning under control, is lost to myth and drug folklore.
But trick or trend, Ketamine is beginning to have nasty consequences.
There have been several hospitalisations over the past few months, people who entered catatonic states after taking what they believed was E but turned out to be K. Now everybody is jumping on the Ketamine bandwagon.
At an upcoming rave in Scotland, the flyer lists ‘Special K’ as a featured attraction along with laser flowers, brain machines and gyroscopes.
This is particularly ironic given that at least three people were hospitalised after taking Ketamine at the same venue.
There have also been at least five hospitalisations in the North-west recently, all people who became catatonic after taking what they thought was Ecstasy.
Last week, I was told about a club that closed an hour and a half early because the organisers were so freaked out by the number of collapses.
It appears that the second Summer of Love may have spawned another monster.
Liverpool drug researcher Alan Matthews argues that any discussion of Ketamine is pointless.
‘Kids no longer talk about buying an E, they say they had ‘a tablet’.
They have cottoned on to the fact that the dealers come up with a different brand name every week.
Over the last few weeks, we've had Phase Fours, Phase Fives, Turbos, Flatliners, Shamrocks.
It's all completely meaningless.
The tablets change every week, and even the people who are selling them don't know what's in them.’
In light of this, anybody who takes strange tablets should observe certain basic precautions.
First, don't drink or mix your drugs — Ketamine is a general anaesthetic, for God's sake.
You shouldn't even eat, let alone get pissed.
Second, Ketamine has a slow onset taken orally, so if your tablet doesn't work,don't drop a few more and cross your fingers.
Instead, go home.
Whether Ketamine will gain an informed constituency in this country remains to be seen.
I suspect it is unlikely.
The most likely scenario is that we will continue to see a surge of Ketamine experimentation fuelled by sensationalist media articles and the renewed enthusiasm for quasi-psychedelics prompted by Ecstasy that has overtaken us in recent years.
However, as Ketamine lacks the euphoric and social properties that led o the widespread use of MDMA, the drug is likely to disappear as suddenly as it seems to have emerged.
At the end of the day, debates over whether we are taking Ecstasy or Ketamine may prove to be missing the point.
Every weekend now, tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of people are taking tablets containing unknown substances, and God alone knows what the real long-term consequences of that are likely to be.
johnny suave
After stripping off in a Levi's ad and Thelma & Louise , Brad Pitt has been hailed as the new James Dean, a sex symbol for the Nineties.
With his new film,Johnny Suede , he's out to prove he's more than just a pretty face
I'm greeted at the gate to Brad Pitt's ageing West Hollywood bungalow by his melancholic red coonhound Deacon.
Brad, I find out, can't greet me himself because he's busy cleaning up the mess Deacon made the night before in his living room.
Mess is perhaps an understatement.
The place looks like it was ransacked by an LAPD squadron looking for drugs or a thrash metal band who found them.
House plants are overturned — the green parts mysteriously missing — mauled pillows are strewn about and couch cushions have been systematically shredded.
Something resembling hard wood floors is just visible beneath a veil of potting soil and foam rubber confetti.
Anybody else would have put the mutt to sleep.
But Brad seems to find Deacon's talent for domestic sabotage endearing.
‘He's going to have to go to boot camp,’ says Pitt in his soft Missouri drawl.
‘Usually it's just shoes, so we tie the shoe of shame around his neck.
He gets real humiliated and has to leave.
I wouldn't recommend a coonhound.
They're a lot to deal with.
He's all instincts.’
Brad disappears to change clothes, and, when he returns, a grey T-shirt hanging out over green satin pyjama bottoms ‘for maximum comfort’, offers me a cup of coffee.
‘This is Hills Brothers 50–50, 50 per cent caffeine, for people who can't make up their minds,’ he says, rinsing out a couple of mugs.
‘Strawberry milk or regular milk?
I tell you, there's nothing better than Nestlé's strawberry, and so good for you.
I'm just a regular host aren't I?
Are you impressed?’
When the coffee is served, he pops a Dire Straits CD — from a loose pile that includes the Platters, Ray Charles and Led Zeppelin — into a CD ghetto blaster sitting on a shelf by the kitchen table.
His other dog, Maggie, a black labrador, trots in to check me out.
Brad fires up a Camel Light and we continue.
The 28-year-old actor has been taking some time off to get his life back in order after filming three movies due out this year.
First up, the low-budget surrealistic comedy Johnny Suede , then Ralph Bakshi's morality tale of humans adrift in a cartoon universe Cool World , and finally Robert Redford's country period drama The River Runs Through It .
Does he find his new celebrity intruding on his life?
‘More responsibility comes with it, of course,’ he responds.
‘But you got to be ready for it.
First you're like, arghh, arrgghh.
Then you're like, more responsibility?
OK.
Do I keep doing this?
I got to take care of this too.
That was kind of abstract, wasn't it?’
Yeah, can we get more specific?
‘There's just more things to be taken care of, it seems to me,’ he says, spitting a mouthful of sunflower shells into a cup.
‘More people are paying attention, so you've got to be more on the ball if you want to keep doing what you're doing.
It's too easy for them to find another kid.’
Pitt stands up and asks if I want a full tour of the house.
Deacon's escapades aside, housekeeping doesn't appear to be the actor's strong suit.
The floor is littered with cigarette butts.
Dirty coffee cups, overflowing ashtrays and junk food wrappers adorn most of the other flat surfaces.
There's also an odd assortment of drums and stringed instruments — a couple of electric guitars, a bass, a mandolin — lying about.
His bedroom, however, in revealing contrast, is utterly tidy, fitted out in industrial black.
A small framed photo of girlfriend Juliette Lewis — who shot to fame as the sexually awakening daughter, Danielle, in Cape Fear — sits atop a bookcase.
IT MAY BE A trite aphorism to say people resemble their dogs.
But when I interview Johnny Suede writer-director Tom DiCillo a couple of weeks later, ‘instinctive’ is the first adjective out of his mouth to describe Pitt's performance as a huge-quiffed, suede-shoe-loving Ricky Nelson wannabe.
DiCillo, who adapted Johnny Suede from a monologue he used to perform at downtown New York clubs, says casting the lead was the most depressing experience of his life — until Pitt showed up.
He was looking for something along the lines of Jon Voight in Midnight Cowboy , an American from nowhere, and all the actors coming in were doing an Andrew Dice Clay or Billy Idol number.
‘They did this thing where they thought Johnny Suede's problems were cool and funny,’ recalls DiCillo.
‘They came in and were real anuses.
I'd say, ‘Do you guys realise this guy is a complete wreck emotionally?
Who doesn't have the faintest clue who he is?’
They didn't get it.
It wasn't until Brad came in and, damn, there was just something very magical about it.
He took off his boots and did this monologue about suede.
I really believed he did love this suede.
I was immediately convinced that this was the guy.
He was not afraid to show that Johnny is this guy with all of these problems on his sleeve.’
‘The trap with Johnny was very simple,’ explains Pitt.
‘You play the outside of a guy who wants to be hip and happening.
To me, he had to be pretty unsettled inside to have to put on all this and that.
He's looking to all these outside things to make him a man, make him happy.
The end of the movie is really the beginning of Johnny.
He wakes up one morning and realises he's been an idiot.
He didn't need the hair.’
DiCillo fondly recalls two other examples of Pitt's instinct for the character.
The first was a scene where Johnny has just cheated on his girlfriend Yvonne, and a tell-tale pair of panties falls out on to the floor.
They were having trouble with the close-up, until DiCillo finally asked Brad to give him ‘a deer caught in a car's headlights’.
‘He said, ‘Oh, OK,’’ recalls DiCillo.
‘Boom!
And that worked.
I love that moment in the film.
It's quite beautiful.
It's Brad's moment.
He understood the part and was willing to explore it.’
But the scene where Pitt really won DiCillo over was the one where Johnny walks around alone in his tiny flat farting and scratching in his ratty underwear.
It's the epitome of uncool, but Pitt embraced it.
‘The underwear came and he didn't think it was ratty enough.
So he took it and tore the shit out of it, and made it as ratty as possible,’ says DiCillo.
It's impossible, of course, not to draw comparisons between this decidedly unsexy image and Pitt's infamous Levi's spot, which also involved parading around in his underwear, albeit a slightly more glamorous pair of boxers.
Brad's publicist had warned he wouldn't want to discuss that lucrative little foray into the world of commerce, but Pitt doesn't flinch when the subject comes up.
‘I did it for an introduction before the films came out in Europe,’ he says.
‘Thelma was going to pen up there and then all these others were going to be out there later.
I don't regret it.
I had fun.
It was simple.
It was light.
People were great.
A little vacation.
I don't want to be called the 501 guy by any means, but it was fun.
So yeah, it was alright.’
Still, Pitt's not particularly comfortable with his pin-up image.
His sexy performance as a criminal cowboy JD in Thelma & Louise , the guy who gives Geena Davis her first orgasm and then robs her blind hasn't helped much.
‘Another sex symbol.
How boring,’ he says.
‘That's just what the world needs.
Somebody who symbolises sex.’
But isn't that what people are paying you for?
‘I guess so.
But that's not what you go after.
You go after an honest character.
Because of Thelma that's what they noticed.
The guy came off sexy.
I don't know.’
He may profess not to enjoy it, but Pitt has an instinctive understanding that playing up the teen idol image will help him get where he wants to go as an actor.
That pandering side of the business has taken its psychological toll, though.
Recently, he confesses, he has been plagued by a recurring dream in which all these Hollywood types he barely knows are asking to borrow his toothbrush.
Doesn't take an expert in Jungian analysis to figure that one out.
Curiously, after dodging a lot of personal questions, the actor opens up when talking about his relationship with Lewis, whom he met two-and-a-half years ago filming a lurid NBC movie of the week Too Young To Die?
The precocious actress, who was 16 at the time, played a young runaway whom Pitt's character beats up, turns into a junkie and sells for sex.
Love at first slap?
‘It started out with conversations.
And then, when we finished it, we decided to play ball,’ he says, adding later, ‘I don't feel like we deserve [to live together]just yet.
Not that anything's wrong, it's just that there's time for that, that's all I'm saying.
There's time.’
Although the couple are rarely seen in public together — Lewis went solo to the Golden Globe awards, though Brad accompanied her to the Oscars — Pitt says it's not a conscious choice to avoid the paparazzi, they just never go out.
Period.
‘We've only been to two movies in two-and-a-half years,’ he says.
‘One was my premiere, one was hers.
You try to avoid those types of events, but you have to be courteous.
You don't have to be an idiot.
And you don't have to be the rebel guy.
You can get by, you can have fun.
But if I don't have a reason to go, no I won't go.’
‘Juliette and I have been able to help each other.
You have someone else on your home team.
What we have goes beyond acting.
The work is not the basis of our relationship.
It's what we do’
When Pitt wants to have a good time he invites his ‘little group of buddies’, including actor Dermot Mulroney — a whiz on the cello — over for an old-fashioned ‘hootinanny’ jam session.
‘A bunch of people come over and play tunes, odd instruments, accordions and flutes and drums.
Anything anyone can grab,’ he explains.
‘We had one of those nights recently when everybody got on bongos and played to [Peter Gabriel's]‘Passion Sources’.’
When I press him for more names he suddenly gets the deer-caught-in-the-headlights look, and, deciding he's already revealed too much, replies, ‘Ah, just people.’
He gets up, pulls out the ‘Passion Sources’ CD and pops it into his ghetto blaster.
The kitchen is soon reverberating with eerie Arabic wailing.
After a few minutes he replaces it with something more conducive to conversation, the Neville Brothers' ‘Yellow Moon’.
PITT, THE PRODUCT of a strict Southern Baptist upbringing in Springfield, Missouri, was once headed for a career in journalism.
A few credits shy of his degree at the University of Missouri, however, he took off for Los Angeles, ostensibly to attend art school, which he never did.
On his arrival, he knew instead that his destiny lay with the movies.
Waiting for his break, he supported himself with a series of odd jobs: driving limos, handing out cigarette samples and even dressing up in a giant chicken costume to promote a fast-food franchise.
He has fond memories of those early struggles.
‘I was just so excited to be here.
Everything was fun.’
His family is supportive of his career.
And though he's no longer particularly religious himself — although he does believe in God — Pitt says he admires them for their dedication to their beliefs.
Religion just isn't his thing, too much ‘like rival high schools’.
Pitt remembers that as a little boy attending church he'd sit cowering in the pew, afraid the preacher would ask him to come up and give the benediction.
‘At the end of the service they always called somebody up,’ he recalls.
‘I was always petrified they were going to call me.
I'd have this little prayer in my head: Don't be me.’
I found a lot of guilt and a lot of fear that I don't agree with.’
That upbringing served him well for Robert Redford's Thirties drama The River Runs Through It , adapted from a novel by Norman MacLean about family conflict and fly fishing.
‘It's about a family who can't communicate.
I know that sounds odd,’ he says.
‘They're very set in Christian beliefs and their ways.
And my character feels differently, and he kind of goes on his own path — but it ends up a distinctive path because he's gotta live one way with his family and then he has this other life going on.
It's about his brother trying to get to him.
It's fantastic.
It'll rip your heart out.’
Pitt, who camped out in a tent roasting hot dogs with Deacon for a week at a time during filming, has since taken the sport of fly fishing to heart.
He and his room-mate Buck Simmons occasionally practise their casting on the street in front of his house and are planning a fishing trip together.
The actor shows a very different side in Bakshi's Cool World , a part-live, part-animated project about a young man who escapes into a parallel cartoon universe when reality gets too real.
‘All these bad things happen to this kid and he checks out,’ says Pitt.
‘The cartoon characters can't have sex with the humans.
But the humans come over and they want to.
My job is to keep them from doing it.
But at the same time I've got a cartoon girl I'm dying to get it on with.
It's an unusual film.’
Pitt goes back into action this summer when he will shoot a ‘very poetic script’ with John Malkovich entitled Forget Me Not .
‘The Malk's character is a complete cynic on life, not just a cynic, we're talking complete apathy,’ he says.
‘My guy's an impulsive-obsessive and through a chain of events gets amnesia.
He gets a new start on life because he doesn't remember.
See it sounds hokey, I can't do it justice.
It's really well-written.’
He and Lewis are also set to work together again this year in California , in which he plays a serial killer.
Pitt is obviously a big fan of his girlfriend's talent and says he hopes to work with her a lot: ‘Genius isn't a good word, because it's been so abused, but…’
Now that she's been nominated for an Oscar, it would be natural for there to be competition between them.
‘I'll answer that question.
No,’ he says.
‘That's why we're still together I think.
It's something we got to watch out for.
You have your egos, honestly speaking.
But it hasn't been a problem.
I'm completely proud of her.
If I'm going to be associated with someone, it's got to be somebody I'm proud of.
‘First [our careers]were very separate, and lately we have been able to help each other.
It just becomes more fun.
You have someone else on your home team.
What we have goes beyond the acting, you know?
The work is not the basis of our relationship.
It's what we do.
It's what we have fun doing, but what drives us crazy also.’
The real barrier has been the time spent apart, he says.
Lewis also had to contend with tabloid reports about an off-screen romance between her boyfriend and Geena Davis during the shooting of Thelma & Louise .
Did that cause problems on the home front?
‘Well, see, we know what's at home.
We just know what's at home.
We had one split on the way up.
Couple of months.
It's hard when you're away doing films, of course…
‘You hear about people having sex, you know, actually doing the act while they're filming.
It goes on.
But see, what it comes down to, and it's universal for all relationships, is communication.
You know?
Because if one of those feelings starts coming up, you have to make it known and then get around it.
Egos get in the way man.
Egos are monsters.
You got to get around the ego.’
At some point during this soliloquy I look down and notice man's best friend humbly licking my shoe.
Below left, top to bottom: JD, the sexy cowboy who sets Geena Davis on fire and then robs her blind in Thelma & Louise; big quiffs, tatty underwear and exposed flesh in Johnny Suede; big bucks and teen magazine centrefolds for Levi's 501s
deee cool
With new songs about Aids and the ozone layer, global space cadets Deee-Lite have thrown away the map to planet fun.
Well, that's the theory anyway…
Lady Miss Kier of Deee-Lite once met Jimmy Carter —‘the best American president,’ she and her fellow group members concur — in Boston.
‘I asked him to get the UFO files opened.’
And?
‘He told me he'd seen a UFO himself in 1967…’
But before she could inquire any further, Mr Carter was dragged away by anxious security personnel.
There is the sound of a UFO at the very beginning of the new Deee-Lite album, ‘Infinity Within’, sampled from a documentary.
It was taped by a Swiss peasant.
‘And now,’ says Miss Kier, ‘it's one of the many sampledelic relics.’
I am sitting with Deee-Lite and a couple of their American press agents in a modest Manhattan restaurant called The Savoy, and I am already feeling unqualified for inclusion in this company.
In the world of Deee-Lite, things aren't good, they are beautiful and incredible.
Little just happens : most events earn a ‘wow!’ for their wild synchronicity.
Events are rarely normal; usually strange (‘Let's hear it for ‘strange’!’ exclaims Lady Miss Kier over dinner).
There are no visits to the countryside, there are experiences with Mother Nature.
When they refer to other people, whether they are good or bad people is generally discussed in terms of their spirituality.
I feel that somewhere over my head is hanging some kind of spirituality.
I feel that somewhere over my head is hanging some kind of spirituality-ometer, and that I have been found wanting.
But maybe it's just paranoia.
Kier turns to me.
‘Have you never seen a UFO?’
I shake my head and trawl my spoon through the last of my soup.
THE SOUNDBITE VERSION of the Deee-Lite story you probably know: a Russian émigré (Super DJ Dmitry!), working as a go-go dancer in New York clubs, is introduced to a bald New York textile designer (Lady Miss Kier Kirby!) by the fountain in Washington Square on a sunny day in 1982.
They live together and, a few years later, start making music together.
A Korean Japanese musician (Jungle DJ Towa Towa!) sees them perform, gives them a tape of his music and is invited to join.
Their camp costumes and hotch-potch dance music assemblage — which they proclaim as ‘holographic techno soul’— bewitches New York clubland and then, with their first single, ‘Groove Is In The Heart’, and subsequently the LP ‘World Clique’, the world.
And now they have another LP.
Most people would consider it a difficult moment.
Dance music changes fast, so you can't just stay the same, but the dance music audience has little patience with those who can't find a new trick that is just as magical as the old one.
Ask De La Soul.
Deee-Lite, though, just feel very misunderstood.
They are furious that some people thought they were just some zany fashion experience, a house group, Seventies revivalists.
They are furious that people thought all their lyrics on ‘World Clique’ just oozed naive positivity (though, pressed on this, Kier says, ‘We didn't think it was the place for a pop group to depress people.
They hate themselves enough already.
They don't need a pop group to drill it into them how miserable they are’).
‘A lot of people didn't get the concept behind it,’ says Kier.
‘A lot of people thought the world clique was an élitist group of artists.
What we were talking about was all five billion members of the planet…’
‘Five human billion,’ interjects Dmitry, ‘and the trees.
And just thinking globally.
Instead of nationalism, more like waving the Earth flag.’
DMITRY'S FATHER HAD A GLOBE , and he would point out to Dmitry the different countries and continents, and would make young Dmitry memorise the names of their capital cities.
‘He really turned me on to geography.
He wouldn't tell me a whole lot about what the countries were like, because he didn't know himself.
He'd never been out of Russia.
But he got me started; the curiosity.’
Dmitry's father manufactured watches.
His mother taught music.
They were, he says, middle-class.
They lived with Dmitry's grandmother until Dmitry was nine and they applied to leave when Dmitry was about 16.
To settle in America they were forced to sign documents stating that they had been persecuted in Russia and were seeking political asylum.
‘In a way it was true,’ he reflects, ‘but it was definitely a propaganda tool as well.
I don't think I could ever do anything like that again.’
They arrived the evening of the day before Halloween.
‘Hell's night, when kids throw rotten eggs and break windows.’
They checked into a home.
On Hell's Night.
‘All we knew was that we were walking down the street and people were throwing eggs.
We said, ‘We'd better get back to the hotel and try to figure out this country in the morning.’
In the morning they tried again.
‘We took a subway into Manhattan,’ Dmitry remembers, ‘and things started looking a little less bleak.’
In Russia he'd mostly listened to the progressive rock records that cool Russian youth adored.
His first month in America he bought an LP for its cool cover.
It was Parliament's ‘The Clones Of Dr Funkenstein’.
He fell in love with it, and followed to where it pointed: the rest of the P-Funk clan, ska, reggae, Sugarhill rap, the Ohio Players, Earth Wind & Fire, ‘gospel disco’, Sly & The Family Stone…
‘INFINITY WITHIN’ STARTED OUT AS A POEM,’says Kier.
‘I never finished it, but it seemed better just as an idea to sum up the album.
The first album was a lot about outward feeling.
We thought the correct balance to that would be to look within yourself.
So ‘Infinity Within’ is looking more towards yourself as an individual, starting to take a stand.
Especially about the environment.’
This, they want the world to know, is a far more directly political record.
They say that the flabby reaction to the Gulf War (and the lack of reaction to their vague anti-Gulf War B-side ‘Riding On Through’) made them realise they needed to be more specific.
And so there are a few exceedingly specific, instructional songs on ‘Infinity Within’.
‘Rubber Love’: wear a condom.
‘Vote Baby Vote’: vote.
‘(I Had A Dream I Was) Falling Through A Hole In The Ozone Layer’: a list of environmental tips.
(They kept the latter over from ‘World Clique’ until it could appear in America on a less-wasteful Eco-Pac CD.)
We have an awkward, and increasingly tense discussion about the use of such songs — for though I wholeheartedly agree that all the ideas they promote are self-evidently good things , I worry simply whether such songs have any positive effect — and they start bandying the word ‘cynic’.
‘That's what the media's for: to be useful in positive ways.
Throughout the ages, artists have turned on people to knowledge.
And we can do that’— Dmitry
‘I just think more people in the media should take the initiative to bring the public's attention to these problems,’ Dmitry finally exclaims. ‘that's what the media's for.
To be useful in positive ways to raise the public's consciousness.
Throughout the ages, artists have turned on people to knowledge.
And we can do that.’
I begin to suggest that sometimes it isn't useful for such ideas to come through pop stars: it makes them trendy and…
‘What's wrong with being trendy,’ snaps Dmitry, ‘if it's a positive trend?’
‘The peace sign was a trend, but it ended the war,’ says Kier.
(The Vietnam War, she means.)
‘The danger,’ she says, a little tetchily, ‘is not taking a chance.
Not speaking up.
Not asking questions.
The danger is passivity…
Still, they are giving 5 per cent of their profits from ‘Infinity Within’ to Greenpeace.
THE YOUNG MISS KIER loved spinning in circles, making herself dizzy.
‘I was really spacey,’ she giggles.
‘I was really lucky because I had a really great mother who would expose me to a lot of really great things.
Like, her politics were really cool…’ she says, and explains how her mother would set up estate agents and expose them for discriminatory letting policies.
Kier accounts for her free-thinking clothes sense from the fact that from the age of three her mother left her to dress herself.
Kier wanted to be a go-go dancer, then a psychologist, then a textile designer.
All her family read books, so, as the youngest, she hated it, and rebelled against it.
‘I was ‘fuck that over-intellectual stuff’— I just wanted to go out and experience life.
So it's really ironic I've ended up writing.’
She was so unwilling to read that when she did something bad, her mother would make her read as a punishment.
The worst punishment of all was Wind In The Willows .
She was in trouble later bullying other kids, getting into fights, knocking down all the garbage cans in an alley, pulling fire alarms in her lunch break at school for the thrill of seeing the fire trucks go by, shoplifting.
‘This boy who lived next door to me taught me how to shoplift for him.
He was older so I listened to him, so I'd shoplift all these things and give them to him.’
Her philosophy of life changed when she was 17 and met this girl who was from a really weird and fucked-up background, but who was ‘so positive’.
It taught her that ‘life is what you make it.’
OVER DINNER DMITRY AND KIER muse about growing up next to parks.
‘We have a vine — a wonder -vine — and we used to swing on it,’ says Kier, ‘until the cops cut it down.
And then another weird thing — wanna hear about my playground?— there were all these coffins from the cemetery and the ground had eroded so much they were coming out.
We never opened them.’
‘Some kids where I lived dug a dead person up,’ says Dmitry.
‘They got this skull and put candles inside it.’
‘We took flowers from the cemetery,’ says Kier, ‘and gave them to my mum.
And my friend found our library teacher dead in the park.
She'd committed suicide.’
We walk back to Dmitry and Kier's flat.
The two of them walk together and gently paw at each other rather sweetly.
Halfway home, Dmitry disappears.
When he turns up back at the flat, he has a bunch of red gladioli.
Inside their front door the walls are covered with sky-blue fur then, further on, with reflecting silver paper.
On the walls are paintings by Tabboo, the artist friend who did the lettering on their first LP sleeve.
One says (and shows)‘three dogs, two cats, one rose quartz, another precious moment’.
Kier says she thinks he's ‘speaking about cluttering, and the beauty within that.
There's a lot of clutter in the world.’
A large, lettered ‘LOVE’ by Tabboo is on the bathroom wall.
The flat is soundproofed with 18 inches of concrete above and below.
Towa walks straight over to the turntables and starts mixing together two copies of Lil Louis' ‘Club Lonely’.
We are greeted by Carmelita, one of their cats.
A new song, ‘Pussy Cat Meow’, celebrates them and a dream Kier had a long time ago.
She'd been reading about how Egyptians believed cats guided your dreams, and dreamed that she was roaming around their flat from a cat's point of view.
She ended up eating from the cat's bowl.
They show the Deee-Lite dictionary they have been compiling — nearly 400 words that includes slang from around the world, Esperanto and Deee-Lite's own language.
Butterfly Beat : ‘a beat that makes you want to fly’.
Camel Toe : ‘if your pants are too tight and you're reaching the double yo-yo’.
Daputamodra : ‘mother of the whore — motherfucker-in Castilian’.
Kuggle : ‘pretentious girl — I think it's Eastern European’.
Queenious : ‘self-explanatory’.
Sea Horses : ‘Cuddle.
Haven't you ever seen two sea horses clinging to each other in a current?’
‘I wasn't getting as much attention as I wanted, so I kind of got into Dmitry's music just to get his attention, and to be around him more’— Lady Miss Kier
Another Deee-Lite list is of people who have sampled them.
They have noted 37 so far.
They wanted to put a note on ‘World Clique’ saying ‘Free samples available on request’but their lawyer wouldn't let them.
On the new LP it will say something like ‘Free samples if someone uses it in a really creative way.’
They've stopped their publishers take action over several infringements —‘We thought it's not really in our spirit’— but some still rile.
I ask them whether they had thought Madonna's single ‘Rescue Me’— with its ‘I believe in the power of love’line, remarkably familiar in both lyric and tune — was weird.
‘Yes,’ says Kier.
‘Yes,’ says Dmitry.
‘Yes,’ says Towa.
They exchange ‘best not say any more’ glances.
DEEE-LITE'S FIRST CONCERTS used DAT backing tapes, but it riled them that people thought all their music was borrowed and sampled.
They rose to the bait and decided they needed to prove a point, putting together their nine-piece Bootsy Collins-featuring live band.
For the band's first shows, Towa was onstage, videoing, taking photographs, appearing to operate this and that.
Then he disappeared.
People began to mutter.
That he couldn't stand Kier and Dmitry's bickering.
Or that they'd sacked him.
‘That was a bummer,’ says Kier.
‘Because he doesn't really tour with us, someone just assumed we had kicked him out.’
Her explanation: ‘He was going to tour but when it got closer he realised he didn't want to.
He's a real family person.
He really likes to be home with his girlfriend.
He's not a natural ham, like me and Dmitry are.
We like to get a lot of attention.
He never wanted to live in the public life.
Dmitry was the only one who was really…’— her voice trails off, but she hits the right phrase just before the thought disappears —‘…counting on it.’
TOWA WAS BORN IN JAPAN,and though his parents were also born there, his grandparents were Korean and so is his passport.
Though it is waning, Koreans are discriminated against in Japan.
When he talked to his mother on the telephone last night about the Los Angeles riots, she pointed out that the same sort of thing — Koreans being attacked by cops, but the cops never being guilty — used to happen in Japan.
continued on page 96.
When he was small, Towa wanted to be a cartoonist.
Then, out of respect for his father's career, he wanted to become an architect.
Next, for a short time, he fancied becoming a baseball player.
Instead, by the age of 15, he was wasting his money endlessly playing computer games, until one day he discovered the Yellow Magic Orchestra, and then Kraftwerk, and then Asian music and various ethnic musics (‘Sounded like techno to me,’ he mutters).
He tinkered with his own music at home.
His favourite radio show was Ryuichi Sakamoto's —‘He played everything from Indian music to Erik Satie’— so he sent Sakamoto a tape, who broadcast it twice, and ‘we became a good relationship’.
(It's one that has persisted: Towa worked on Sakamoto's forthcoming back-to-electronics LP.)
He now lives in a flat a little further uptown with his Japanese girlfriend.
‘I like this,’ he says, running his eyes around Kier and Dmitry's bedroom, ‘but mine is much more black and white, and much smaller.
My house is really simple.
I like simple.’
KIER SITS ON HER BEDSPREAD , and fiddles with the lighting.
First she brings in some individual candles.
Not quite right.
So she brings in a whole candelabra and balances it on the floor.
Around the bedroom are scattered clothes.
There is a purple-wax-in-clear-oil bubble lamp.
There is a ghetto blaster on either side of the bed.
‘I've tried every drug once,’ says Kier, ‘but heroin was not a drug I was interested in pursuing.
When I tried it, it was so beautiful, I knew I could try it just once’
She tells me about Dmitry and her.
She was attracted to him because of his go-go dancing at the Roxy.
‘I just thought, ‘Can I get some of that?’’
About six months later they became lovers.
For several years she continued with her textile career while Dmitry struggled with various groups.
She finally got involved for the oldest reason of all: ‘I wasn't getting as much attention as I wanted, so I kind of got into it just to get his attention, and to be around him more.’
She is maybe aware that this sounds sweet but a little ideologically uncool because she swiftly adds, ‘It seemed like the ultimate — to make music together.’
PERHAPS IT IS SOME NEW Nineties landmark on the fame ladder: having your first OD'd-on-heroin rumour.
Lady Miss Kier's started spreading, she says, after a bread-cutting mishap in Chicago.
The knife was sharper than she'd allowed, and soon blood was spurting over the tablecloth with each heartbeat.
She fainted and was taken to hospital.
‘There were, like, 50 people in the emergency room and someone there figured, ‘Pop star in an emergency room whose face is green — she must be OD-ing.’’
‘I've tried every drug once,’ she says, ‘but heroin was not a drug I was interested in pursuing.
When I tried it, it was so beautiful that I knew exactly why people keep doing it.
It really does seem to do away with all your problems.’
She sighs.
‘But I know junkies, and I knew this was something I could just try once.
There's millions of junkies and not one of them ever wanted to be a junkie.’
The other rumour she heard was that she was a drag queen.
She listened to a debate on the subject on a New York radio station.
The notion rather tickles her.
‘There's no reason why drag queens should get a bad rap,’ to which she adds, a little curiously, ‘They're pagan.’
WHEN THEIR NEW LP WAS nearly finished, Deee-Lite had some friends round to Dmitry and Kier's flat.
New York's DJs: Todd Terry, Frankie Knuckles, Tony Humphries, Little Louis Vega.
Deee-Lite seem a little offended when I ask whether they weren't worried whether the DJs wouldn't like their new songs.
‘It was an incredible experience, because they're all really sharing people.
It was a pretty euphoric experience.’
The DJs heard six songs and were asked for advice on the first single.
The favourites were ‘Thank You Everyday’, ‘IFO’ and ‘Runaway’.
So Deee-Lite settled on ‘Thank You Everyday’(DJ copies were pressed and circulated), but later changed their mind to ‘Runaway’.
On a promotional video interview, they say they consulted the ancient Chinese book the I-Ching to make this choice, but when I bring it up Kier gives another reason.
‘The other song was really slammin' for the dancefloor but it's a love song and it just didn't seem right.
You could feel it.
Like the earthquake coming before the riots.
You can feel these things.
How do the animals know?
They were running all over the place.
You can just feel these things.’
Nevertheless, they do consult the I-Ching from time to time.
‘We know it's a good friend,’ says Dmitry.
‘It's just a beautiful philosophy,’ says Kier.
‘It's the only oracle I've ever read that meant anything to me.’
THERE IS A BLACK AND WHITE photo of Sly Stone on the wall of Dmitry and Kier's flat.
It sits in their work area: an exercise bike, keyboards and twin turntables, and a computer left plugged in to produce fractal swirls.
We sit in the big room and watch some unedited footage from the ‘Runaway’ video.
It's a song about running away —‘a Jack Kerouac On The Road experience’— but also about how ‘if you don't like this town, you're not going to like the next town either — you can't run away from yourself’.
On the TV in front of us, Miss Kier dances by the roadside and, when we peer closely, we can see butterflies fluttering around her.
A chance accident.
This butterfly only migrates there in flocks like this once every four years.
Synchronicity.
The video was shot over three days in My Own Private Idaho territory, Portland, Oregon, by its director Gus Van Sant.
They love him: ‘My favourite all-time director right now,’‘The sweetest guy,’‘Spiritual,’‘Stylish and unique,’‘Definitely into the psychedelic aesthetic,’‘So compassionate,’‘A painter as well.’
‘And he writes songs!’ gushes Kier.
‘He played us two.
So beautiful.
It sounds like the Velvet Underground mixed with…’— and she searches for the appropriate ingredient —‘…with Nico.’
Van Sant (who has also directed videos for the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Tracy Chapman) wrote the script.
Deee-Lite are three hitch-hikers picked up in a red 1962 Falcon station wagon that levitates into the clouds.
They land in a field among crop circles (they bought crop circle footage off National Geographic , and when they watched it the only car you could see in it was — synchronicity!— a red station wagon…) and then pick up a hitch-hiking alien.
Earlier, in the restaurant, they had discussed crop circles with their press agents, Joanne and Stephen.
(Having had to admit that, despite living near the epicentre of circle activity, I hadn't seen one of them, I was keeping quiet.)
‘They figured out it was all a scam, right?’ says Joanne.
‘No, they didn't ,’ exclaims Kier, adding contritely ‘it could go either way.’
‘The DNA of the grass is changed,’ announces Dmitry authoritatively.
‘It keeps growing, but horizontally.’
Then Kier tells us about the time she saw a UFO.
‘Me and my sister and my uncle — my sister, who's a scientist, right?— we were walking along and we saw this light go across the sky, then it stopped and made this complete square, then it was gone.’
‘Wow,’ says Dmitry.
It is with some personal relief, still distressed at my cosmic shortcomings, that I learn that the UFO-spotting records of the male members of Deee-Lite is rather less impressive.
Towa?
‘Not really,’ he says.
‘I thought so once.
I like watching birds in the night and I saw something once in Miami, on the beach, moving, really geometric.’
He shakes his head.
‘But I was drunk and stuff.’
Dmitry?
‘I've never seen one,’ he admits.
‘But,’ he adds brightly, ‘I've seen a documentary’
MONITOR the generation game
Gavin Hills on the latest lifestyle novel for twentysomethings
DON'T WORRY, MOTHER…
IF THE MARRIAGE DOESN'T WORK OUT, WE CAN ALWAYS GET DIVORCED
OH NO!
IT'S FINALLY HAPPENED!
THE BLINDING FLASH OF LIGHT!
PHEW!
IT WAS ONLY LIGHTNING
Quit your job .
You are not a target market.
The times they are a changin'.
Yuppie was yesterday.
Now is the generation that lives, loves and wanders.
Come join the poverty jet set, the generation without a name: Generation X. I'm talking about my generation, or rather Douglas Coupland is in the hipster's first novelette Generation X (Abacus, £5.99).
The book is a documentation of the ‘nameless’ and ‘forgotten’twentysomething generation, and is being touted as a signpost for the decade.
A funny creation, it's probably best to read it first before you change your life, as all it may signpost is another batch of second-rate lifestyle articles.
More of a manuscript-script than a masterpiece, it comes complete with its own Nineties dictionary (eg ‘Mid-Twenties Breakdown: a period of mental collapse occurring in one's twenties, often caused by an inability to function outside of school or structured environments coupled with a realisation of one's essential aloneness in the world.
Often marks induction into the ritual of pharmaceutical usage’).
It also boasts ‘attitude road-signs’ such as‘you must choose between pain or drudgery’, and a bunch of cartoons (see above).
This whole ‘Gen X’ thing has been big news in the States.
It's proved a good way of picking up and pigeonholing the plight of the young middle classes living in a country in retreat.
The book itself tries to exist away from the markers in the margins, yet can't seem to live up to the chapter heading promises.
What little story there is centres around a small clapped-out condo in Palm Springs where three friends (Dag, Andy, and Claire) have drifted from jobs or lives they despised.
Having given up hope of a career, they have doubts about the future and support themselves by working in ‘low pay, low prestige, low benefit jobs in the service industry’ or ‘McJobs’.
They sit staring into the sun and telling each other stories.
The stories reveal their fears, anxieties, and search for faith.
The net result is like sitting in a club with all the right credentials but failing to have a good time.
For all its relevance and cleverness, you can't get around the fact that this book was written not for a generation but for a media eager to snap up fresh-tasting morsels.
A tried and trusted formula: a new sub-group, some new words, and new hip.
Old hat for press and public to gobble up.
Young writers have always felt part of an ignored generation.
Remember the blank generation?
Less Than Zero?
The cult with no name?
Each generation of angry youth demands its very own chronicler.
Generation upon unnamed generations of writers have revelled in this fact: they put pen to paper, do the literary equivalent of the ‘Wham Rap’, and get endlessly celebrated by the media.
By the time this younger generation has been correctly defined, it has grown older and replaced by some new unknown demographic quantity.
So it goes on.
The young writer ages and, if he's lucky, gets some serious book advances under his belt and a monthly column in Rolling Stone .
Some of us talk work, Macs, and security.
Others talk of drugs, Nintendo and India.
The fabric of the West has no binding philosophy
Sitting as we are on the end of the millennium, there is bound to be a lot of reflective soul searching.
Unfortunately, by confining yourself to pinning literary tags on your own, closely observed generation, the picture distorts.
There is no longer a generation gap.
Age is no longer the benchmark criterion we use for distinguishing people.
The old rules are gone now.
What we've seeing is not a gulf between old yuppies and young ‘Xers’, but an ideological rift developing between people of all ages.
Age no longer breeds a commitment to conformity.
From 15 to 50, there are those whose beliefs lie with ‘the system’, and those who lie outside it.
The book records, but doesn't understand.
The line of fate is going wonky; birth, school, work, marriage, kids, career, retirement, death.
The middle-ground certainties of life are shifting.
A job is no longer for life.
You can have children in your forties.
Marriage, if considered, is arrived at later in life, and there is always divorce.
As a proportion of your salary, housing is more expensive than ever before.
Travel is at its cheapest.
As a stake in society comes in at a higher cost, the old certainties begin to wither.
What we are seeing is not some kooky ‘Generation with no name’ but a crisis, in, well (sorry to sound so meaningful),Western philosophy .
Youth culture has impregnated generation upon generation with half-baked alternatives.
Now we have a society where some people — young and old — cling with belief to the system's formal structures, while others just drift with them looking for fun, ease, comfort, and ultimately a way out.
Some of us talk work, Macs, and security.
Others talk of drugs, Nintendo, and India.
The fabric of the West, for all its denim glory, has no binding philosophy, no consensus, no dreams of the future.
This isn't counter-culture, it's main street.
The twentysomethings of the X generation may be more predisposed to quitting a job and drifting.
But they're still faced with looking for what they really want.
The quest isn't a spiritual or political one.
That would be too unfashionable in the narrow confines of popular culture, and uncomfortable in a real world where the desire for a new video recorder is part of your coding.
Generation X is not about post-yuppiedom.
It's a small warped mirror reflecting one of the crises of our age.
A Western crisis, faced by those with some cash, some consciousness, and some dodgy career options.
The twentieth century fades behind us and history roller-coasters on.
We stare at the sun.
Blindly we are carried to the abyss of the 21st century without a philosophical air bag to spring out and cushion us on impact.
December 31 1999.
Enjoy the ride down, let the wind fly through your hair, go with the flow, and wait for the big crash.
I hope I die before I get old.
latin lover
Pedro Almodóvar used him in five films.
Madonna said he was the sexiest man in the world.
Now, with The Mambo Kings, Antonio Banderas makes his Hollywood debut
His face bearing the ruby-red signature of four sets of young Mambo princess lips, Antonio Banderas grins sheepishly as he stumbles out of a Beverly Hills hotel bedroom.
It's hard to tell what's going through his mind.
Is this a publicity nightmare or perk of budding stardom?
His shrug seems to say, ‘Hell, why not?’
Earlier, at the start of the FACE photo shoot, the actor had confided, ‘I'm not sure I am doing the right thing.’
But, an hour later, the models tearing at his clothes as he lies in the king-size bed, he seems resigned to the proceedings.
Borrowing a line of dialogue from his new movie,The Mambo Kings , he proclaims, ‘I love this country!’ as a buxom brunette in a skimpy white dress straddles his prone body.
During a break in the action to wipe the lipstick off, I ask how he's holding up and whether or not he's still concerned about the image it will convey.
He shakes his head.
‘I felt like a gangster,’ he says.
‘Not like James Bond, but a gangster.
I would love to play a role with these girls.
They could be my sisters.
I would love to have four sisters, beautiful girls, long legs.
And we are all robbers and make a very good living from that.
I can use them, they can use me.’
Sisters, huh?
‘Well,’ he adds after a moment, ‘maybe I deserve it.’
Sort of a reward from two monotonous, tiring weeks of promotion for his first English-language movie.
The Mambo Kings , adapted from Cuban-American Oscar Hijuelos's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, spins the tale of two Cuban musician brothers who flee their homeland to seek fame and fortune in the Big Apple's mambo clubs.
The 31-year-old actor plays younger brother Nestor Castillo, a melancholic, introverted trumpet player, who despite marrying the luscious Dolores (Maruschka Detmers) pines for Maria, the love he left behind in Cuba.
Producer-director Arne Glimcher had tapped him for the role after catching his performance in Pedro Almodóvar's Matador , in which he plays a melancholic bullfighter wannabe who faints at the sight of blood and gets dizzy watching clouds.
The first meeting was less than auspicious.
It consisted of him smiling and nodding repeatedly to Glimcher's long-winded pitch.
‘It was like a comedy,’ says Banderas, who spoke only Spanish at the time.
‘Finally I had to tell him, I don't understand one word you're telling me.’
He was hired anyway on the condition he spend two months studying English at Berlitz.
FLASHBACK TO TWO weeks earlier in New York.
A post-premiere mambo party at Harlem's legendary Roseland dancehall studded with stars and industry bigwigs.
Many of his peers seem uptight, all too conscious of the legions of photographers and TV cameras.
But Banderas is treating the event like a family reunion.
He's having a great time, dancing with anyone and everyone.
Shaking hands.
Accepting congratulations.
Even belting out duet of the Cuban anthem ‘Guantanamera’ with salsa star Celia Cruz.
He loves this country.
Although a veteran of a dozen movies, to many outside of Spain Banderas is still that dark-browed guy who sent Madonna scurrying to the ladies' room in last year's docu-melodrama In Bed With Madonna .
While the pop princess' disappointment at finding a wedding ring firmly on his finger seemed real enough to viewers (and is confirmed by those who witnessed it at first hand), Banderas likes to believe it was all an act for the cameras.
An innocent only recently unleashed into the world of international celebritydom, he can't comprehend that even its foremost denizens are also sometimes afflicted by star infatuation.
‘I think she was just joking,’ he says.
‘I want to think she was joking.’
Hollywood was awash with rumours some months later when Banderas came to Los Angeles for Mambo Kings , paid a visit to Madonna's house and was spotted dining with her on several occasions.
‘I met her later in Los Angeles because we were involved in the musical Evita ,’ he explains.
‘I admire her.
She's a real artist.
She's very tough and very sweet at the same time.
You know, we became friends in Los Angeles.
Maybe we'll work together in the future.’
(Evita , in which he was to play Che Guevara, has bounced from studio to studio and remains up in the air because of casting and budget disagreements.)
Banderas plays the innocent, but he's savvy enough to know there's gold in them there coat-tails.
‘In a way it was like taking out a full-page ad in the New York Times ,’ he grins.
‘Everybody was asking, ‘Who is this guy?’’
Everybody who's not a fan of Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar's films, that is.
Banderas has appeared in five of them.
The actor's face has the perfect blend of boyish innocence masking a darker psyche to add buoyancy and depth to Almodóvar's weighty psycho-sexual thrillers, which explore the nexus of male lust and violence.
The charm and naivety he exudes easily enables us to forgive his more sado-masochistic tendencies in movies like last year's controversial Tie Me Up!’
Tie Me Down!, in which he played a less-than-bright former psychiatric patient who kidnaps a B-movie actress so that he can prove his love to her.
Banderas professes not to understand why the movie raised feminist hackles around the world, particularly in Germany and the United States: ‘He's not very smart, but he really loved her.
Sexually, he never touched her until she took the option to do that.’
Besides, the actor thinks movies shouldn't be afraid to push a few buttons.
He's most proud of Law Of Desire , Almodóvar's film about homosexual lovers which challenged the post-Franco social mores in Spain with its graphic depiction of male-male love-making.
‘A star is someone who's always acting in front of everybody.
It's impossible to me.
You have to be brilliant all day.
I am not brilliant.
I have my shit, my wrong things to show too’
‘I had to sacrifice a lot of things in that movie.
You can't think about morality when you are doing a movie like that.
I thought, what's worse: to be the lover of some guy on screen, even see the relationship in bed, or to shoot somebody else on the screen?
Children can see Arnold Schwarzenegger killing people.
I'm not against that, I just don't like the people who are against [showing homosexuality].
It was very courageous to do that role.
Sometimes morality in our society is a little bit strange, don't you think?’
BANDERAS GREW UP in Picasso's hometown of Malaga in southern Spain, now a much-maligned package tour destination.
His father was a secret policeman with border duty and his mother a schoolteacher.
Despite his obvious sex appeal — to both men and women — Banderas insists that he has never considered himself particularly attractive.
Shy and introverted as a schoolboy, he recalls suffering the same teenage romantic disappointments as everyone else.
‘When I was 13, I declared my love for a girl in the street, putting my knees on the ground,’ he recalls.
‘I told her I loved her.
But she kept walking, didn't even see me, like I was the Invisible Man.’
As a young teenager he enrolled in drama school, his passion for acting excited by watching a performance of the musical Hair in the mid-Seventies.
‘I remember I'd lie in bed at night crying.
I thought to myself, my mother's a teacher, my father's a policeman, my brother's studying economics.
What am I going to do?
It's very difficult for a guy from Malaga to think about being an actor.
It's far away from me.’
His proudest moment during this period was not related to the theatre but to football, specifically to his team winning the Malaga Cup.
‘It was very nice to find each other so happy, to win something so important at that age,’ he recalls wistfully.
‘It was incredible.
I thought everyone was going to recognise me on the street,’ Now his favourite leisure activities are watching television —‘I call it my sofa therapy’— and having friends over for dinner.
Among them are Spanish actress Angela Molina and directors Almodóvar and Geraldo Rivera.
Mambo Kings has added a new coterie of gringo friends, among them his Mambo Kings co-star Armand Assante, who plays César Castillo: ‘He's become almost my brother.’
Also Arne Glimcher who, in addition to producing and directing movies, is founder of New York's Pace Gallery, and painter Julian Schnabel, whom Glimcher represents.
‘Schnabel gave me three of his paintings,’ says Banderas.
‘We became friends very quickly because I think we think in the same way.
And he's crazy enough to be my friend.
I don't like people without a sense of humour, and he has lots.
To understand life today, you have to have a great sense of humour.
If you do not, you're going to die.’
If the big money stars to pour in, Banderas, who had the chance to view Madonna's impressive art collection — Frida Kahlo, Diego Rivera, Picasso — when he visited her Hollywood home, says he wouldn't mind hanging a Picasso of his own.
‘He was born in the same town as me,’ he says.
‘He was one of the best because he was a breaker, he broke every structure in painting.’
Would he like to carry on that legacy in cinema?
‘I think with Almodóvar we did an incredible job in that way, breaking things.
Destroying everything that went before in Franco's times.
During Franco, it would have been impossible to do Law Of Desire .
We did it right after he died.
Maybe in the future I will do more things like that.
But you have to feel it.
I have to have an excuse to do something like that.
Maybe I have to go back to the theatre.
Theatre is more revolutionary than the movies.
Movies are held back by money.’
The actor is obviously saddened by the prospect that his career is carrying him away from Spain.
He hangs on to the hope that he will work with Almodóvar again, but Hollywood and a coterie of internationally-acclaimed directors are now pounding on the door.
As Banderas struggles to come to terms with the choices being offered him — remaining a serious but relatively obscure actor in European films, or accepting the international stardom Hollywood dangles seductively before him with its accompanying riches and loss of privacy — the roles currently being offered seem eerily appropriate.
Japanese director Nagisa Oshima wants him for the lead in Valentino , a movie which will explore the destructive effect of fame on silent screen stars.
He has also been asked to play the lead in an Italian mini-series about the early life of Mussolini, a story which traces the Italian dictator's transition from humble socialist mine worker to the power-mad founder of the fascist Blackshirts.
Banderas is holding off making a decision until he sees what juicy roles Hollywood has to offer.
‘This country is really extraordinary,’ he says, once again sounding like Nestor Castillo.
‘I would like to work here again.
The United States are part of my dreams because I grew up with its music, fashion, Burger King!
Everything was coming from the United States.
‘And the people are very generous here.
The style of life, the quality of life I like very much in this country.
A lot of people came from all over the world here, and that makes it absolutely different from any other country.
In Spain everybody is Spanish.
Here you can find people from Russia, Dutch, Chinese, Africans.
To me this country is like a gift.’
He also clearly likes the sensation of standing in line for a movie in LA and having admirers come up to congratulate him.
‘To be recognised 8,000 miles from your land is magical,’ he says.
‘That's what cinema gives us.’
Still, he finds the star system ‘a little bit crazy’, at least compared to the relatively nonchalant manner in which well-known actors are treated back home.
He professes to not be ready for that.
But if he decides to go the Hollywood route, he may not have a choice.
‘An actor is someone who plays a role, tells a story,’ he explains, ‘and a star is someone who's always acting in front of everybody.
You know the kind of energy you have to expend to be that?
It's impossible to me.
You have to be brilliant all day.
I am not brilliant.
I have my shit, my wrong things to show too.
I'd like to be a star for five minutes, but I don't want to live inside a limousine, I don't want to have body guards.
But I understand that here maybe it's dangerous to walk alone if your name is Madonna or Michael Jackson or Kevin Costner.
People can't even come up and ask for an autograph.
the hard way
It's plain and stiff, takes at least six months to wear in properly and doesn't come with designer Day-Glo flower attachments.
It looks best worn casual and scruffy, but everyone seems intent on continually dressing it up.
And it's selling.
Fashion workwear, the authentic, hard-wearing utility stuff, is not about to go away.
Indeed, by far the most surprising thing about the whole workwear-as-fashion issue is that, despite now being a fair few months down the workwear/style line, there are still the doubters, the sceptics, the fashion-aware bods who hiss ‘hype’ at the mere mention of moleskin.
The cynicism is understandable, mind you.
The attention paid to authentic workwear style on fashion pages, much of it in this magazine, has not been matched so readily on the nation's streets.
Those that put the burgeoning ‘utility workwear’ talk into the same dumper reserved for ‘the urban soldier’(head-to-foot camouflage?
Are we talking Michiko or Millets?) could be forgiven.
Wrong, but forgiven.
The fact is that the clothing (Carhartt and its ilk) and the footwear (Blundstone, Red Wings, Georgia Boot)— traditional US, Canadian, Australian and even Japanese labels producing clothing for the outdoor worker — have only recently gained proper agents to represent them around Britain.
Roger Wade, co-owner of the Boxfresh label and now handling UK fashion sales for the Carhartt brand gives an insight into the emergence of workwear: ‘For probably two years there were only really bits and pieces of names like Carhartt being worn — it was a very small thing, but it was being worn by the right people.
There wasn't any huge promotion or hype about the whole workwear thing as some people are suggesting, because it was all about a few people picking up on it and then promoting it off their own back.
It sounds naff, but it really was something coming off the street at a very cult level.’
Since workwear, for want of any better term, isn't really new in this country at all(American denim brands like Lee and Levi's are hardly passing fads) and since the more recent brand arrivals here have been worn for years in the US and Australia, hype accusations are a little misguided.
The current embrace in Britain of utility clothing and design is best traced back to the Eighties baseball thing — the period when genuine US clothing brands, from workwear to sports names like Russell Athletic, began turning up in shops like London's Passenger and The Duffer of St George.
Workwear shoes and clothing were being shipped in to Britain by a handful of people and then being worn and talked about by a few dozen more.
The people who can really lay a claim on hipness as the first to promote the workwear cause, though, are the Authentic Americana Nuts who want their lives to resemble Happy Days ; the readers of the small ads in a magazine like the biker title Back Street Heroes ; and Scottish rig workers, who have been targeted by foreign workwear companies as the natural customers all along.
Rap, of course, is a crucial factor in the current interest.
In the US utility workwear was picked up by street gangs as no-nonsense, functional clothing.
Last year Shawn Stussy openly embraced the straight, utility clothing sported by many rap groups.
It is no coincidence either that members of the Boo-Yaa Tribe appear in UK adverts for Carhartt: they've been wearing the gear for ages.
The US gear filtering into Britain has been joined by Australian, European and Japanese workwear, of which the most notable brands have come from Australia via a group of Notting Hill-based boys calling themselves PIL.
The company formed when, having a laugh in Australia and pretending variously to be leading London DJs and models, they picked up on Blundstone boots and Hard Yakka moleskin clothing and got the go-ahead for UK importing.
A PIL shop is soon to open opposite Michiko Koshino in Neal Street.
Established fashion names have also looked to workwear for inspiration: Stussy's heavy army-type hooded tops.
Michiko's biker and military moves, CP Company's beautiful woollen donkey jackets, Nottingham-based G-Force's heavy jackets with huge utility zips, Chipie's ‘Work’ line, Union Steel's reworkings of Fifties rancher jackets.
The comment voiced from apparently everywhere is that workwear represents a move away from Eighties designer flash: away from all the heavily-labelled, non-hard-wearing, too-clever-by-half, over-styled garbage.
A fair point, maybe, but one that smacks of the kind of social-comment spuriousness spouted by many fashion editors who ought to know better.
But won't workwear always be confined by its own limitations?
Consider the following:(1) The clothing comes in a fixed number of style and colours (if you can stretch to calling sludge brown a colour), and surely even the most puritanical will lust for something new after a while.
(2) When the clothing lasts far longer than even the best quality jeans, and costs no more, how will the agents maintain a business based on clothes bought near enough once in a lifetime?(3) Is anyone stupid enough to want to wear heavy-duty, fur-lined, withstands-bloody-cold-arctic-conditions clothing in the summer?
Talk to the people now committed to handling workwear brands for Britain and Europe, and you get convincing answers to all of the above, and more.
Certainly workwear has its limitations, but there remains a lot of potential to promote its many strengths to an expanding audience.
Already Carhartt is being sold alongside Timberland (itself an authentic US brand that has found far wider appeal following a cult introduction) in shops like Leeds' and Manchester's Aspecto.
At PIL, currently dealing with Blundstone, Terra, Royer and Hard Yakka and now looking for more names, co-director Peter Caplow is adamant that things are still in their infancy.
‘The most striking thing is that despite all the talk there is still not much clothing around yet.
Now is the right time for something even bigger to happen, and we're looking to broaden the whole idea of workwear into a promotion of quality, utility clothing: the slogan at PIL is going to be Function as Fashion.’
Caplow is aware of the problems of selling a long-lasting product (business advisors have warned him against workwear's long-term potential), although, like Roger Wade at Carhartt, he thinks the workwear brands can break out of their cult status.
‘The people wearing Hard Yakka now might not be wearing it in 1994, but the product has a wider appeal than a fickle, professionally-trendy minority.’
Similar sentiments are voiced by Peter Leonard, the man responsible for introducing Chevignon to the UK, who has recently switched his allegiance to US workwear names.
As well as Red Wings boots, Leonard is dealing with Woolrich hunting jackets (nice Elmore Fudd gear in red-and-black checks) and Lambert work gloves.
‘There is a wealth of material that needs picking up still,’ he says.
‘People don't want a Euro-processed thing, they want stuff that is comfortable, reassuring, honest and masculine.
The workwear stuff will last over here.
If you look at Chevignon's Trading Post in Paris, you've got the authentic American workwear selling alongside established brands like Replay and Diesel.’
Indications of the lasting potential of workwear comes with the news that the traditional companies are now opening up to new design suggestions coming from the UK.
While Hard Yakka is making ranges in moleskin exclusively for the UK at PIL's request, the Boxfresh crew is now drawing up design suggestions for Carhartt in the US.
‘We're looking at pre-washes to make the stuff a bit softer when you first buy it, and really funky colours,’ says Wade, swooning over the thought of Carhartt in P-Funk purple.
New brands, of course, will keep coming our way: there are plenty more classic labels from middle-of-nowhere towns out there, each with their own distinctive symbol.
The truly exciting prospect, though, is workwear taking it a stage beyond its booming club and hip hop customer base.
Workwear on the terraces, anyone?
The big jeans names are already aware of the authentic newcomers, and are beginning to realise that the original utility styles they updated and bastardised over the past 30 years are the current fashion winners: watch them scramble to regain their own heritage.
The truth is that, like the traditional denim jean, workwear will strike a chord with those who want a certain amount of style without the risk of being labelled a fashion fool.
Sporting your quality, functional threads, you're always going to be safe from scorn.
The risible Fulham farmyard set might have worn rugged outdoor gear for years, but remember, the Boo-Yaa Tribe never wear Barbour jackets.
Burn, Hollywood Burn.
As most of us watched the Rodney King verdict and its horrifying aftermath on TV, journalist James Ryan and photographer Andrew Macpherson drove separately into South Central LA to record their views of the riots; meanwhile, KRS-One, Heavy D, NWA and other rappers give their comments
Los Angeles 11pm, Wednesday April 29: Driving home past the movie studios that line Melrose Avenue, Chuck D's angry rap bounces around my head:‘For all the years we looked like clowns.
The joke is over, smell the smoke.
From all around.
Burn Hollywood burn.’
But I wasn't smelling the smoke.
Or seeing the flames.
I feel distant, removed and confused.
I have just spent several hours glued to the television at a friend's house, watching in horror as incomprehensible events began to unfold in South Central Los Angeles.
When the verdict came down over the radio earlier that afternoon, I thought it had to be some kind of misunderstanding — a joke.
I'd seen that 81-second tape dozens of times on TV.
We all had.
How could any jury — white or black — acquit the cops who had beat Rodney King senseless?
It didn't make sense.
My next thought was that there were going to be a lot of other pissed-off people.
Not the kind who write letters to the editor to complain about injustice.
An image flashed through my mind of thousands of angry, shouting blacks carrying torches through Beverly Hills.
The protest I envisioned for that brief moment was relatively peaceful though, kind of like a pro-abortion march on Washington.
It was, of course, a white, middle-class response that didn't,couldn't take into account a far deeper anger bubbling just below the surface in less-privileged neighbourhoods of my placid, palm tree-shaded city.
Most of the TV reports were being filed from the relative safety of City Hall, where hundreds of police protected that towering symbol of urban authority, or from helicopters flying above the fray.
It was all too sanitised to instill understanding.
Why were they burning down their own community?
Why weren't they parading through Beverly Hills, through Hollywood, through Westwood: the enclaves of the privileged whites?
‘The main reason these riots started was police injustice.
But as the trouble escalates, media coverage concentrates on the riots themselves and not the injustice that caused them.
The focus is moved away from what people are really outraged over, so that the main issues on TV and radio were ‘stopping the violence and increasing the peace’.
The most important issue was the injustice and violence of the actual verdict.
If we allow this thing to become about stopping the violence on the streets, once the violence stops we'll think we've solved something, when in reality we've solved nothing.
We need to concentrate on what our goals and objectives are now, while we have the energy.
If we can do that, without deviating, then maybe we'll never have to deal with this problem again’— Speech, Arrested Development
‘I knew it was coming.
I really think this is just the start, to tell you the truth.
The only way to solve it is for something to be done to those four officers, something done to the Korean lady who shot the girl, something done to the Compton policeman who killed those two Samoan brothers…
We want to see shit happenin'.
We still don't get no respect.
Why do they make laws to abide by if they can't abide by ‘em?
So why should we?
It was stupid to burn our own neighbourhoods, though.
They shoulda taken their asses to Simi Valley and destroyed stuff out there’— Eazy-E, NWA
11.30PM Driving west along the Santa Monica freeway — which divides north Los Angeles from south, the haves from the have-nots — to my left, flames everywhere illuminate the midnight sky.
To my right, everything is peaceful.
So far.
I exit at Vermont Avenue and plunge to ward the screams of sirens in South Central.
For the next three hours I witness a surreal nightmare of racing fire engines, caravans of police cars with blue and red lights flashing, a few looting bands, but mostly residents in bathrobes and curlers, gathered in silence to watch corner markets go up in smoke.
It was an ugly neighbourhood to begin with.
Every other block, a building is in flames, burglar alarms ring unanswered, supermarket parking lots are carpeted with the messy afterbirth of nascent revolt.
Although I'd followed the progress of the King trial in the papers, it was only then that it began to hit home what a symbol he had become for the suppressed majority of my city.
While I reacted to the general violence and inhumanity of the assault, they were thinking: it could have been me.
When the jury robbed him of justice, they took it personally.
A slap in the face that erased what little dignity and faith in the system they had left.
Twenty-seven years after the Watts riots, nothing had changed, and a new generation was lashing out in blind rage.
1.30AM Caught up in the lawlessness, I fly through red lights and police cordons, feeling a sort of empowering exhilaration like that of the rioters.
I stop to take pictures of graffiti on the walls of a looted gas station/minimart and notice an abandoned 24-hour donut shop.
The door hangs off its hinges, the cash register ripped from its electronic umbilical cord.
It takes every ounce of self-restraint not to go in and grab a handful of glazed donuts, tempting me in their neat little rows, glistening under fluorescent lamps.
2.30AM Outside a gutted supermarket, I stop to talk to a group of young men pelting two carloads of police with pilfered eggs.
One of them, large and powerful, comes up to me and wants to shake my hand.
He stares hard into my eyes looking, I think, for a sign of fear.
When there is none, he loosens his grip and turns away.
Armed with my camera and reporter's credentials, I have a false sense of security.
But riots, unlike war, have no established rules of conduct.
2.45AM The point is brought home when a band of looters turn their anger on me.
As 12-ounce cans of vegetables bounce off the side of my car, one of them smashing my rearview mirror and another sailing with surprising accuracy through my open car window and striking me on the shoulder, I decide to call it quits for the night and return in daylight.
In my fear and confusion, I turn left instead of right, however, and drive deeper into South Central than before.
Fuck!
I take a deep breath and head back into the eye of the storm, careening down side-streets when police barricades and fire hoses block the main avenues.
3.30AM I pass under the Santa Monica freeway and breathe a sigh of relief.
But, by now, the violence has crept north, and I stop and watch in amazement as a Newberry's drugstore at Venice and Western literally explodes before my eyes, a mushroom of smoke and flames towering 200 feet into the night sky.
I get back into my car and make a quick tour of Hollywood and the trendy shopping district of Melrose Avenue and North La Brea.
Still virtually untouched.
I fall asleep to the drone of sirens and helicopters overhead.
THURSDAY, NOON No need to return to South Central.
Overnight, the violence has spread to within a mile of my house.
I cruise Vermont and Western Avenues through a thick haze of smoke, observing unchecked looting and sporadic fires in discount furniture stores and electronics outlets by the local, mostly Hispanic residents.
I hear on the radio that there was limited looting in Westwood, but Beverly Hills and other white enclaves toward the ocean remain untouched.
LA in flames: panorama shot of the city (above); and messages from a graffiti artist and a Korean shopkeeper (left)
Left: San José State students sing the black national anthem and protest the King trial verdict
‘The Los Angeles Riots were obviously based on built-up frustration.
Anything could have sparked the riots, it just happened to be the injustice of Rodney King's trial that triggered it this time.
The US justice system is not based on right and wrong, it is based on black and white.
Any time you have something such as the Rodney King incident on video tape for the entire nation to see, and the jurors somehow arrive at a verdict of not guilty, it is obvious that the system is not based on truth or justice at all.
The anger of the people (especially African-Americans) is totally understandable, but they shouldn't have destroyed their own communities to express their anger’— Heavy D
Above: police form a line across the street from 150 demonstrators at the Federal Building in San José
‘I was tear-gassed yesterday.
I was beaten.
The military blocked everyone in on campus and the police announced that they could shoot you without asking questions.
The police tear-gassed all the university dorms: people had asthma attacks and a girl had her wrist broken.
Again, like back in the days of the civil rights demonstrations, it's just another attempt at turning events around and shifting the focus from the real issues at hand’— Arrested Development's Aerie Taree, resident on campus at Atlanta University, itself placed under curfew after demonstrations against the Rodney King verdict
1PM Hundreds of looters stream like ants out of the giant Sears (‘Where America shops!’) department store at Western and Santa Monica, carrying TVs, racks of clothing, fishing rods, anything and everything, on foot to their homes.
Two dozen boys in blue arrive in full riot gear.
I fear there will be a lot of split skulls, maybe a dead cop or two.
The NWA song ‘Fuck The Police’ sinks home: ‘Some people have the authority to kill a minority.’
But the cops exercise restraint, and the huge crowd gathered to watch the spectacle laugh and chant as unfortunates caught red-handed inside individually beat a hasty retreat.
3.30PM A  siege mentality grips the white communities.
In the Sixties, the Watts riots never left Watts.
This is different, scary.
An ex-girlfriend has borrowed a gun.
Others have fled town.
I call one friend who says he's stocked up on supplies for the evening in anticipation of the dawn-to-dusk curfew announced by the major.
I think maybe I should stop at a supermarket.
But in the yuppie neighbourhoods there are queues hundreds of persons long waiting to file in.
I decide to try the three corner stores closer to home.
Too late.
They are all being looted.
Hispanic men, laughing, carry out cases of Budweiser.
A nervous mother, children in tow, scurries away with a jumbo size package of Pampers.
I get a sickening feeling in my stomach.
This is no longer about Rodney King.
It's an income redistribution to make up for 12 years of Reagan and Bush in which the rich got richer and the poor got poorer.
These people are going into the familiar local stores where they shop and are walking out with the American dream they could never afford on a minimum wage.
At least for this brief moment, the anger, the powerlessness, the humiliation of being poor is replaced by euphoria.
4.15PM After the  hundredth charred building, I become numbed to the destruction and find myself only stopping to photograph the ironic and unusual: a rental outlet called ‘Hot Videos’ up in flames, men carrying couches and lamps through the shattered window of a furniture store next to a large inviting sign: ‘Come in for real bargains’.
5PM Determined to get some food and a six-pack, I drive around aimlessly through Hollywood looking for an open 7-Eleven or corner market that hasn't been burned.
No luck.
All charred, looted or locked up.
6PM I spot a mini-mail with a Radio Shack at Melrose and Vine that miraculously has not been burned down.
A priest from a church across the street is standing guard.
Two hours earlier, a caravan of a dozen cars had pulled up, Father Palacios tells me.
Young men of all races, mostly Hispanic, had piled out, and set to work.
He had talked them into leaving.
They left behind a ten-gallon can of gasoline.
6.30PM Across the street, four burly white guys — all packing pistols — stand outside a liquor store.
A pick-up truck and two other cars have been parked against the windows.
It is, in all probability, the last business open in a three-mile radius.
I buy my six-pack and some chocolate chip cookies.
Bogie, the beer-bellied proprietor, says he feels it's his duty to stay open.
Besides, it's the best way to protect the store from looters.
‘I'm waiting for the National Guard so I can go home,’ he jokes.
(The National Guard had been called out within hours of the looting yesterday afternoon, but bureaucratic muddles — bullets hadn't arrived — had kept them from being deployed.)
6.45PM I hear on the radio that business owners in nearby Koreatown, one of the areas hardest hit, have armed themselves and taken to the roofs.
As the sun begins to set, I drive along Vermont gazing up at the eerie silhouettes of young Korean men armed with M-16s, machine pistols and infra-red binoculars.
I feel disoriented.
This can't be Los Angeles.
An elderly victim of the riots (left); the community clean-up afterwards (above); arrests (bottom)
7.30PM With a group of friends, I hold a post-curfew vigil of the escalating violence and fires.
The death toll has risen into the 20s, an estimated 4,000 businesses are gutted.
Surprisingly, less than 500 people have been arrested in the first 24 hours of the riots.
That many were arrested in San Francisco in two hours when the violence threatened to spread there.
10.30PM I drive home along smoke-shrouded streets, deserted except for policemen in riot gear guarding key intersections.
Some stores along trendy Melrose, still virtually untouched, are guarded by their owners, luxury cars pulled up on to the sidewalk to block the entrance.
FRIDAY, 10AM The curfew seems to have done its work.
Only a few hundred fires remain and the looting seems to have abated.
Most businesses, including much of Hollywood, have shut down for the day.
Thousands of National Guardsmen have been deployed.
In the worst areas, they have set up machine-gun bunkers in supermarket parking lots to prevent further looting.
Armoured personnel carriers rumble down streets that are normally home to Mercedes and convertible BMWs.
FRIDAY, NOON I make another driving tour.
Businesses still undamaged make a plea to looters: ‘Black-owned’, or ‘100 per cent hermanos (brothers)’.
One Korean grocer has hand-penned cardboard signs in each of his windows: ‘We join the call for justice’.
FRIDAY, 3PM President Bush has announced he will send in 5,500 federal troops to supplement the 2,800 National Guard on duty.
Too much, too late in the game — a typical over-reaction by an insensitive authority.
Rodney King comes out of his year-long seclusion to plead for sanity: ‘We'll get our justice.
They've won the battle but they haven't won the war…
We've got to quit.
We've just got to.’
Again, too late to have an effect.
SATURDAY, AM Neighbourhood clean-up patrols gather by the thousands to sweep up the mess.
How many, I wonder, were caught up in the looting frenzy themselves and are now attempting to make amends?
The toll in what will go down as the worst rioting in US history is incomprehensible.
More than 50 lives lost — almost all black or Hispanic, a third shot by police.
Another 2,000 maimed and wounded.
Four thousand fires.
Ten thousand businesses reduced to ashes or looted.
Many of the stores in my neighbourhood are gone.
I get a call from a sobbing friend: her century-old craftsman house has burned to the ground.
I drive over to take a look.
Nothing remains but the brick chimney and stone porch.
I realise that I had been less than a block away, watching the drugstore explode.
Could I have done something?
Could any of us have done anything?
Should we have seen it coming?
Unlike Watts in segregated 1965, it was all there.
Laid out plain as day for us white folks by the angry artistic voices of our ghettos.
SATURDAY, PM Bush will fly into town to score some political points.
Like other politicians, he is calling for solidarity and cooperation to quickly rebuild our damaged inner city.
There will be a federal judicial inquiry into the King case and police abuse.
The riots are an expensive lesson for all.
But yes, we see you now.
In this election year, what was previously ‘theirs’ to worry about is now ‘ours’.
But where was the resolve a year ago, and where will it be a year from now to address fundamental inequalities that date back to slavery?
As Ice Cube Summed it up in a simple four-word news release: ‘No justice…no peace’.
‘It doesn't shock me, the beating or the verdict.
This is what America is about!
Our schools, churches and media try so hard to cover this up, but this is what America is and will always be about.
The question is: are you still proud to be an American?
Do you stand on the side of justice or on injustice?
The law has treated not only Rodney King with no respect, but also the people with no respect.
This is a time to make up your mind which side you are on: America or the people?
This is a time when entertainers should shut up and allow the black leaders of the community to take a stand and make a change.
This is their call!
This is not the call of the entertainers or the edutainers.
We, everyone, should organise and revolt from where we stand’— KRS — One
futura shock
Executives on treadmills, video horror, techno art, S&M and William Gibson.
Welcome to the 21st century Saturday night out
Shaking his fist, spluttering incomprehensibly, the middle-aged man behind me has definitely lost it.
Perhaps it's not surprising.
Around him five huge video screens hammer out a coordinated assault of atrocity footage, fast-forward surrealism, weird underwater bondage, faces twisted in deathly grins, all cut to a rumbling soundtrack of industrial noise.
Penned in by the subliminal surrealism on the screens, knocked out of the way by the mobile cartoon tableaux that slice aggressively through the audience (mini-stages dragged around at high speed), people don't quite know where to look or go next.
However, they know enough to avoid the angry man, now getting angrier by the minute.
Maybe he's annoyed because he can't quite figure what all this has to do with what the programme describes as ‘the cyberspace experience’, maybe it's because a minute ago he was nearly run over by a 30-foot-high mutoid metal minotaur, but he looks about ready to chin someone.
Rather than leave him in pace, the minotaur, video monitors blinking in its belly, hydraulic arms swinging over the crowd, turns round for a second go…
Welcome to The Memory Palace , the main event of Art Futura ‘92, Barcelona's techno-art festival.
A collaboration between cyberpunk author William Gibson, British video-makers Buzz and members of the confrontational Spanish theatre group La Fura Dels Baus, the chaotic multi-media spectacle is being tested out prior to transferring to the Seville Expo, where it will open later this month at the Spanish Pavilion.
It's the first chance everyone has had to work together with the technology, and it shows.
Yesterday a fuse blew and all the screens went down in the middle of the show.
Tonight, things are a little manic, but at least everything's working.
Afterwards, Art Futura director Montxo Algora looks relieved.
‘We're trying to develop a new kind of show, so obviously there are problems.
The typical kind of modern spectacle, like a modern rock concert, has reached its limits.
Now we need to go for a more direct experience, feed in the kind of energy you get at raves, for example.
This show is a kind of extension of club events I did in LA a few years back which used computer graphics, big projections, dance music and crowds.
I'm still not sure if it will work.
It's definitely a risk.’
Around 18 months ago, Algora was contacted by the organisers of Expo 92 who wanted to do something with virtual reality at Seville, but didn't know what exactly.
Algora managed to sell them his idea for a multi-media show about VR, and The Memory Palace was born.
Various artists who'd worked at Art Futura in the past were contacted and invited to contribute.
The result is best described as a collision rather than a collaboration between a selection of international techno artists.
Members of La Fura Dels Baus came up with the violent cartoon ‘performance’— executives running manically on huge treadmills, hyper-fetishistic female fatales staging S&M routines, gold-painted bicycling centaurs and the metal minotaur.
Buzz's Mark Neale and Grant Fee put together the bulk of the visuals (a series of routines structured round archetypal themes such as love, speed, fear and the like, and according to Gee ‘all supposed to reflect this idea of Montxo Algora's that emotions are what will save us in virtual reality’.
In addition computer artists Karl Sims, Rebecca Allen and Julia Hayward have provided animated speculations about the digital landscapes of the future which fill up the latter part of the show.
In theory the whole thing is supposed to find some coherence in the text, which William Gibson wrote specially for the show.
On the phone from Canada, he jokes that one of the reasons he got involved was to get over the abortive attempts by Hollywood to film one of his scripts.
‘It was a relief to work on something chaotic and non-linear, because Hollywood is just so grotesquely linear.
And it was nice to do something where, whether the fuses blow or not, there is a reasonable chance that it will be performed.’
His text is an elegant meditation on technology's colonisation of human consciousness, on the inevitable evolution into virtual worlds and its social and psychological consequences.
Though it's dotted with snappy slogans, the whole thing is less slangy than before, and is best described as cyberpunk prose poetry.
‘It had to be kept simple so it could be translated into different languages (the show will tour Europe in the autumn), but it is dangerously close to the P-word,’ giggles Gibson.
‘I tried to go over the fiction I'd done, pull out the subtext and put it in a form that you could give to an audience at a world's fair at the end of the century.
It's your basic post-modern dread and ecstasy, I guess.’
In a way, the show marks the next step on from the post-industrial carnivals that have been developed over the past ten years.
It takes the cyberpunk circus routines of Archaos and gives then a high-tech edge.
It adds a narrative structure to the destructive anarchy of the shows put on by Mark Pauline and Survival Research Laboratories.
On that level, it's an enjoyable show, an appropriate alternative to the futuristic spectacles promoting technological confidence which usually feature at Expos and world fairs.
If there is a problem, it's that, while all the individual elements make sense, put together they generate an exhilarating overload of 24K sound and post-industrial fury which is in danger of signifying nothing in particular about cyberspace or anything else.
In addition,The Memory Palace fails to deliver the ‘computerised environments’ and ‘cyberspace experience’promised in some of the advance hype.
‘The hype has been a problem,’ comments Buzz's Mark Neale.
‘This isn't really ushering in anything new.
It isn't interactive, it isn't an ‘environment’.
It's actually the end of a lot of old technology.
We're combining old stuff, cinemas, theatre, to gesture at the next wave of technology.’
In that sense,The Memory Palace is exactly the kind of show you'd expect Art Futura to produce.
The Barcelona festival is the most enjoyable, experimental stop on what Gibson jokingly calls the ‘virtual rubber chicken circuit’, a global network of theoretical conferences, trade fairs and arty think tanks which has developed over the last two years to tap the millennial fascination with virtual reality.
In the absence of functioning technology, people have obsessively tried to imaginatively invent it in advance, to anticipate the cultural apocalypse it will bring.
The Memory Palace is a part of all this, a multi-media folly designed to reveal in advance some of the contours of the synthetic landscapes of the future.
‘Probably, what unites everyone on the project is the desire to conjure a kind of intensity,’ says Mark Neale.
‘Gibson talked about VR being like freebasing TV ads, and if the show has anything to do with cyberspace, it's about that idea.
We want to get that kind of intensity.’
At the moment the show may be a little too chaotic, but you can still get a sense of what Neale means.
As he says, the best way to sharpen things up is through repeated performances.
By the time The Memory Palace reaches the UK at the end of the year, it could turn out to be a real blast.
stupid & contagious
Bart Simpson was a proud under-achiever, but he was just the start.
Babe-obsessed boys like Bill and Ted, Wayne and Garth and MTV's Pauly Shore might once have been dismissed as metalhead wastoids, but now they're big box office in a country seemingly intent on celebrating the stupidity of its youth.
What is wrong with these people?
Sean Penn as Jeff Spicoli
American adolescents.
Sure we already knew they were spoilt, shallow, greedy, ignorant, insular, gross and psychotic.
But that's not all.
What these kids are, is STUPID
Après Spicoli,le deluge .
Anyone who knows anything about anything ought to agree that Sean Penn's career peak was his generation-defining portrayal of Jeff Spicoli in 1984's epochal Fast Times At Ridgemont High .
The fried brains, the sun-bleached looks, the tie-dyed duds, the slurred intonation, the language — Spicoli walked it like an entire demographic talked it: incomprehensibly.
In common with all former Rolling Stone scribbler-turned-screenwriter (then director) Cameron Crowe's male leads, Spicoli was possessed of an inner sweetness, resilience and generosity of spirit which belied his zonked outward appearance.
With a shrug, he shrugged off alien concepts such as responsibility, maturity, ambition and commitment.
His world of wants revolved entirely around brews, babes, bands and the beach.
His philosophy was neatly encapsulated by the gents from Spinal Tap: ‘Have a good time — all the time.’
These words to live by have summarily impacted universal perception of American adolescents.
Sure, we already knew they were spoilt, shallow, greedy, ignorant, insular, gross and psychotic.
But that's not all.
What these kids are, is STUPID.
Stupidity is coming pretty close to being a national currency in the US.
The current warm-weather soundtrack of choice for discerning numbskulls is Ugly Kid Joe, a quartet of stoned surfers who've risen to power on the Young Dumb Fun ticket in a way that critically-defied combos like The Ramones never managed.
UKJ's premier fist-pumping anthem ‘Everything About You’ catalogues a litany of the group's dislikes — the countryside, the trees — climaxing with the declaration that what Joe hates most is…everything about you!
This slab of syncopated stupidity is receiving the heaviest of heavy MTV rotation and can be seen to fullest advantage bookending slurred appearances by that station's in-house West Coast wastoid, Pauly Shore.
Pauly has a daily show — afternoons when his audiences are staring slack-jawed out of classroom windows, after midnight when it's vacation time and Mom ‘n’ Pop can't keep 'em reined in any more.
It's called Totally Pauly , and what you get is this gangling, scarf-draped, tendril-haired, mumbling, stumbling doper addressing the camera — and, by extension, us — as ‘Bud’, accosting strangers on the street, cruising chicks (‘buff nugs’, to use his parlance) on the Strip, or making field trips to beauty pageants, pig farms and rodeos.
Completely directionless and improvised, Shore acts like he's just coming off some Quaalude-fuelled lost weekend.
He'll leave an uncomfortable, elongated pause in a sentence, then start up unexpectedly with a fragmented ‘ma-AY-jor’.
It works
Relocate it to the UK, give, say, Craig Charles his head, change Cali to Scally — and you'd be left with dead air.
Shore, though, embodies his audience's apathetic aspirations and airbrushes their self-image.
‘Guys say, ‘That is me, someone I wish I was,’ he says.
But as much as Pauly the character reflects LA youth's sun-dried degeneracy, the man himself is a driven individual.
Progeny of a stand-up vet and the founder of LA's fabled Comedy Store (‘I was born and raised around Kinison, Arsenio, Dice and Roseanne’), the onus was on him to locate a means of slaying the crowd on his own terms.
After initial catastrophe, he stopped, took a look at the lazy lukeheads around him, then modified their subsistence into schick.
His jokeless act consists of long, arcanely-enunciated, pause-dotted ruminations on his mom's new boyfriend (‘…some guy that sits around my mom's pool and sponges off her.
You know, kinda like a bigger version of me…’) and what happens when you pull out but the condom stays in.
Once again, it works.
‘The language thing just came up.
A year ago, I started doing the ma-ay-jor.
The pausing thing, that's all improvisation.
The freak thing, that's comedy from growing up, anyone who does that is copying me.’
The stage act led on to his cable slot (of his fellow video lizards, he remarks, ‘They make me look good’), and now to the resumption of Shore's big-screen career.
While his early career included a degree of blink-and-you'll-miss-him support work (‘Did you see Phantom Of The Mall?
I was in that scene with Morgan Fairchild when she…’), this summer will see him seizing co-starring laurels in a motion picture entitled Encino Man .
Nutshell it for us, dude: ‘There's these two loser kids from the Valley.
I play this guy Stoney, I'm happy I'm a loser.
My pal Dave (pudgy Sean Astin) wants to graduate.
He's cleaning pools to make money.
I'm sitting by the pool chilling, munching on a bagel.
He hits a block of ice.
There's a caveman frozen inside it.
We clean him up and the caveman makes us look cool.
People see us and go, ‘Who're the geeks with?’’
Cinema-goers emerging into the night following a presentation of the aforementioned work may, at one time, have been justified in the belief that the film would be available on video by the time they got home.
Not now.
Not since the surprise smash hit of the year cast a rosy glow over Shore's vehicle.
Not since they started calling it another Wayne's World .
WHEN COMEDIANS MIKE MYERS and Dana Carvey debuted a couple of Myers-written characters on American TV comedy bedrock Saturday Night Live some years back, recognition bells rang all over America.
Maybe not every mid-Western male metalhead ran a cable access show from the basement of their mom's suburban home, but the shaggy hairdos, the caps, the plaid shirts open over logo-sporting T-shirts were all too familiar: every home had one.
Wayne, Myers' big-hearted, ever-beaming eponymous front man with his verbal calisthenics (‘Bogus.
Bogi’) and female-flattering platitudes (‘She's a babe.
She's babelicious.
She comes from Babelon.
If she was President, she'd be Baberaham Lincoln’), and Carvey's Garth Alcar, the ultra-introverted, computer-superliterate second banana, impaled the national consciousness in a way unseen since SNL 's Belushi/Aykroyd/Murray glory days.
Everyday conversation became a minefield, peppered by sentences boobytrapped by Wayne's trademark deflationary suffix, ‘Not!’
(‘I really enjoyed being with you.
Not!
’) Recognition was not only rife among the wee folk.
Soon genuine celebrities descended from on high and began showing up on the show.
John Goodman, Tom Hanks, Aerosmith, Candice Bergen and Bruce Willis all made the effort to come off like good sports, gamely responding ‘What?’ to Myers' dopey ‘Fagssaywhat’.
The most memorable guest slot was Madonna's royal visit, which inspired a mind-mushing fantasy sequence based around ‘Justify My Love’ featuring Garth writhing around in those pointy bras, and culminating in a screen kiss between Wayne and the hardest body in showbusiness.
‘It was great,’ recalls Mike Myers of the mingling.
‘I was really nervous because I'd never kissed anybody and she was really nice.
Surprising how an innocent kiss like that can be…’
Suddenly he drifts off into a momentary reverie, gradually descending back to earth.
‘I don't know, it was just a real private moment…’
As an irregular five-minute sketch,Wayne's World hit unequalled comic highs, but when word of a spin-off movie became flesh, the general reaction was one of bafflement.
A hundred million dollars (and rising) at the box office later, the reaction is still bafflement.
Any theories, Mike?
‘I've been doing this character since I was 12 years old, and I used to talk like that.
I did it in kitchens at parties to make the girls laugh.
I just tried to write what it was like for me in Toronto, growing up and hanging out, the suburban adolescent heavy metal North American experience.
I care deeply about the comedy in the movie, that it's well-executed and fresh.
If I've touched a chord in any way, then that's gravy and that's great.’
He would seem to have touched a power chord — what was predicted as a two-week movie is still drawing in American crowds for, reportedly, fourth visits.
Most critics' cavils concerned the attempt to shoehorn a plot around Myers' modest premise.
Oily major-cable snake Rob Lowe attempts to lure Wayne and Garth on to his network, all the while conspiring with a venal video-arcade owner who really wants to use their show as a Trojan horse into adolescent spending power.
Will they sit back and watch their dream be diluted?
You'll care as little at the climax (in fact the three climaxes — the tragic one, the Scooby Doo happy one and the moral-at-the-end one) as you did at the inception.
But, save for a risible romantic subplot revolving around Wayne's relationship with a lite-metal Cantonese warblette, the hit-gag ratio is right up there.
A big reason for the Penelope Spheeris-directed film's success is that in a period crowded with pictures nowhere near as smart as they think they are — Paul Verhoeven's lumbering, botched, thrill-free Basic Instinct , Robert Altman's unbelievably over-exalted The Player — it's the only fun in town.
But, as Wayne's World gears up for international release to what could be a largely uncomprehending audience, you have to ask if the film isn't too insular.
Myers, who spent a couple of years living in London's Shepherd's Bush and Ladbroke Grove, thinks not.
‘There's maybe one or two references that are specifically cultural or culturally specific, but there's guys in Botswana who are hanging out with their friends having fun and wanting girlfriends.
British audiences are real bright.
They get stuff.
They get irony.
Sometimes it's hard to do that in the USA.
There's a really wide band of what a British audience will react to and laugh at.’
It's a sentiment Pauly Shore sort of echoes.
‘There's a Scottish guy in this bakery I go to and he tells me they love me in Scotland.
I'm a big cartoon.
I'm fun.
I've been backpacking in Europe, I love it there.
I need it like heroin.
IT COULD BE THAT the British audience will have been acclimatised to Shore, Myers and Carvey through the path-clearing work done by the Bill And Ted movies.
Excellent Adventure went belly-up in auditoriums but was reanimated in a healthy video afterlife which led to Bogus Journey , the some-would-say superior sequel achieving respectable box office figures.
Conceived independently of one another(Wayne was created by Myers, Bill and Ted by Ed Solomon and Richard Christian Matheson), the two duos share not only linguistic similarities (both teams use the call and response, ‘No Way!’
‘Way!’), but also remarkably sunny dispositions.
These aren't the morbid denizens of the void we know so well (from other Penelope Spheeris movies), these are no sallow-skinned satanists.
I never felt alienated and was never suicidal,’ retorts the always chipper Myers.
‘I just like to have fun and I like to hang out with people who like to have fun.
People who were able to make their own fun, didn't rely on store-bought fun.
That's what the movie's about; even though you're stuck out in the suburbs and it's really really boring and generic and homogenous, you can still manage to squeak out some fun.’
The operative word there, I feel, is fun.
But is fun all there is?
Hasn't the interminable media-suckled quest for instant gratification resulted in the infantilisation of a generation?
Wouldn't you agree that American kids — and especially the American kids you portray in your movie — are stupid?
‘Well, I would,’ says Myers, ‘except that hopefully there's a lot of smart stuff in the movie, like the Cantonese subtitles scene.’
Mike's referring to the magic moment where he woos lissome oriental love interest Tia Carrers in textbook Cantonese.
His  guttural utterances are accompanied by erudite subtitles.
While referring to Wayne's persistent ex-girlfriend (Twin Peaks' Lara Flynn Boyle, very funny), his subtitles read: ‘The irony is, I feel partly responsible for her self-nullifying behaviour.’
Myers continues: ‘Hopefully, it's not that we're stupid, it's that we're naive and uninitiated.
Not that we're idiots, we're just very comfortable in being very blissful.
If that's being an idiot then I guess I'm an idiot, and I'll be a happy idiot because I like travelling light and having fun.
That doesn't mean you disregard adult commitments and disregard that there is some really shitty stuff going on in the world right now.
But I mean, at a certain point, you gotta lighten up, y'know…’
Pauly Shore, for his part, is militant in his defence of these children that, in his eyes, I spit on: ‘This generation has it pretty tough.
Older people had it easy: they didn't have a problem with sex, they didn't have to wear rubbers so you won't die.
It's scary getting the Aids test.
I've had sex with girls and not worn a condom and I won't do it again.
One thing, though, I will not come in a condom.
When I think I'm going to come, I pull out, pull the rubber off and ejaculate over the girl's chest.’
Shallow?
Politically uninformed?
What was I thinking of?
Returning to that ejaculating thing though, do — I couldn't help wondering — the recipients always enjoy it?’
‘Some do, some don't.
But if they're going to be with me, they know they're going to get the spray.’
Shore talks about his ‘wood’(guess) a lot, which is the ma-ay-jor differentiating factor between him and the Bill and Ted/Wayne and Garth axis.
These guys are holy innocents, in love with their worlds and their words.
They're not angst-ridden outsiders and they exhibit no signs of the burgeoning self-importance, self-pity and self-aggrandisement we became so used to during John Hughes' years as Tycoon of Teen.
Wayne has far more things to obsess him than himself.
A media melting-pot, his every utterance, nuance and action has its genesis in some — usually Seventies-era — movie, TV show, commercial or record.
Myers willingly admits to being a media junkie: ‘We had a lot of teacher strikes in Canada so we had a lot of time to hang out, more time than sense.
I was just obsessed with culture.
I spent a lot of time listening to records and just hanging out with friends.
One of my favourite B-52s songs is ‘The Deathbeat Club’ and I used to have a deadbeat club.’
The activities of this collective inspire much of the movie's looser, plot-free moments.
‘In the movie we drive an AMC Pacer with flames on the wheel wells, but the car we had back then was a Dodge Dart Swinger; it's sort of like a Vauxhall Viva.
We used to drive around to the end of runways.
A friend of mine was into astronomy, we used to set up his telescope and look at the stars.
We'd drive to different towns around Toronto — road trips, you know, just hanging out and listening to tunes in the car, drumming on the dashboard.
That was my thing, 'cause the dashboard we had had such a cool snare sound.’
Myers may be mining his adolescence for material, but at the same time he's giving a continent's youth big-screen justification for its own sedentary existence.
With a bunch of others voices inside him clamouring to be heard (Dieter — the clipped-toned Kraftwerkian presenter of German youth show,Sprockets ; the maniacal owner of the Scottish gift shop, All Things Scottish — motto, ‘If it's not Scottish,it's crap !!!’), does he feel, the inevitable film sequel notwithstanding, that Wayne's just about past his sell-by date?
‘No.
If I ever felt like that I just wouldn't do it.
You can really be a snake eating its own tail and drive yourself nuts with, ‘Will people like this or that?’
Of course I worry about that because I'm a human being, but that can make you paralysed.
All you can do is be as honest as possible and go, ‘Are you bored with doing this?’
And I'm not bored yet.’
Pauly Shore, meanwhile, with a bunch of future film projects, a talk show, a rock album (‘My album's gonna be called after me.
My full name's Paul Montgomery Shore.
PMS.
Do you like that?’) and maybe a sitcom in the pipeline, is beginning to get irked by associations with the horizontal community whose indulgences, dress code and dialogue he reflects.
‘I don't just sit back.
I'm neurotic and shit — I'm Jewish.
I worked hard to get the best job in the world.
I  weaselled my way in.
But I'm not that guy on TV.
For one, I don't know how to fucking surf that good.
I'm a sponge.
I used to wear an Afro.
And I'm not from the beach.’
Maybe not, but he puts words in the mouths of people who wish they were.
We're not short, this side of the Atlantic, on reasons to hurl disdain in these kids' direction.
There's the musical racket in which they take sanctuary, the limbo in which they live, their password language and their excessive capacity for indulgence.
Sound at all familiar?
Take a look in the mirror, and see who you're calling stupid.
TEN MINUTES IN THE MIND OF
Q & A michael clark
What do people at clubs and parties say to you when you tell them that you're a dancer?
Fuck me!
Do they say that as an exclamation of surprise or invitation?
As an invitation
What are the two most irritating things journalists say about you?
First, they still call me the enfant terrible of British dance, which I think is a bit easy, really.
It just seems lazy.
And I'm 30 years old!
Second, there's the whole ‘post-modern dance’ stuff.
All this post-this or that is so lazy.
It's as if there's nothing new.
If there weren't new and interesting things worth saying I wouldn't bother to carry on with my work
When did you realise you were gay?
I always say that I am not gay, I just love one man.
His name is Stephen Petronio — can I name him?
It would be great if I could include his name here
Did you learn to disco dance?
Yes.
I have to say though that it's usually very embarrassing to see a group of professional dancers dancing in a club — because they are trained to be self-conscious, they can't let go of themselves.
This is especially true of New York, for some reason
Why did you start going out and getting out of it?
Well, I used to just stay in my house all night and lock myself in my room and think.
Then one night I went out and I met this DJ from Taboo, which was a club at the time.
I learned from him that you could just go out, and have a really good time getting out of it.
I used to think going out was like a balance to work, so if I was working hard I would go out to balance that
Do you go out as much as you used to?
No, I go out very rarely now.
I wanted to prove it was possible to have a good time without getting off my face.
I am looking forward to going out again — if I stumble across something good, I'll go.
The last time I was going out seriously was around the time of Shoom, which was very exciting.
I liked the experience of being in a room full of people you didn't know, and knowing by the end of the evening you would all be bosom buddies
Do you miss the flamboyance of the Eighties?
No.
I feel I have changed since then.
Although I'm not being like one of these people who does everything and then tells everyone not to do it.
I had a good time!
Is there no relation between club and professional dancing?
They say that when people get into formation dancing in clubs, then the avant garde starts to improvise, and vice-versa.
But I think people just react to what is around them.
In Modern Masterpiece there is the idea of people being taken over by a force greater than themselves and dancing themselves to death, and that seems to tie in a bit with what is going on
What is the most important theme in Modern Masterpiece? 
Revolution.
Not just in the political sense, but also in the sense of cycles between all opposites — like life and death, good and bad, and ugliness and beauty.
The element of risk is also important.
These days we are always talking about safety as if being safe is a virtue.
I've always believed that risk and danger are important in terms of art.
I think people appreciate that
Is it still possible to shock audiences at dance performances?
Obviously
Have you ever been arrested?
Once, in about 1985 I think, for being drunk and disorderly.
I'd been out and I was out of it sitting in this shop doorway having this conversation with myself.
When I looked up there was this policeman and said: ‘Look, look, that's me!’
He just said ‘Yeah, yeah, sure’ and arrested me.
But I am constantly in trouble with the law, because I always kiss my boyfriend in public and we could be prosecuted for that.
We could be prosecuted for kissing in my front room if the curtains were open and someone looked in and took offence
What's it like being on the road with your mother?
Bloody marvellous.
Because she's good in earthquakes and she makes a great cup of tea.
And she's one of my dearest friends.
What book are you reading at the moment?
Scum Manifesto by Valerie Solanas [a feminist separatist tract by the woman who shot Andy Warhol in 1967].
It's extreme, but I'm not surprised some women would feel like that.
As a man, I feel very female myself in lots of ways
Is Mark E Smith as grumpy as he appears to be?
Much more so.
But he's also much more lovely.
He couldn't be the one without the other, because that's his nature
Which Sex Pistol would you like to have been?
Myself.
I am a Sex Pistol
Are you a pretentious fop?
No…
I'm a portentous flop
What's the strangest place you have ever woken to find yourself on a Sunday morning?
Between the sheets of every Sunday newspaper
Where would you most like to find yourself on a Sunday morning?
In Stephen's arms.
Whenever I wake up in his arms when we are together I feel surprised because he is so beautiful
Michael Clark was talking to Richard Benson