

Dear Reader,
This month, we have two great reasons to celebrate.
The first is that spring is in the air, so it's time to dust away the winter cobwebs and treat yourself to a new look!
We've put together a fabulous selection of new hairstyles to give you some sparkling inspiration.
Secondly, we've just heard that more of you than ever before are buying Hairflair so a big THANK YOU to you all!
Beautiful golden curls coloured with Beige Dore from the Wella Colour Touch semi-permanent range.
Curls were achieved with Wella High Hair Styling Cream and held in place with Form and Finish Spray.
Created by Jennifer Cheyne at Cheynes of Edinburgh.
what's new
•HAIR •BEAUTY •FASHION.
Silvikrin may not be the first to introduce a two-in-one shampoo and conditioner, but they have certainly made it worth the wait.
Silvikrin 2 in 1 has all the qualities of other 2 in 1's and more — it defies build-up.
It has been found that regular use of some 2 in 1's can cause ingredients to build up on the hair shaft which may affect the results of a perm or colour.
Silvikrin's easy-to-use formula has been designed to suit all hair types; normal, dry/treated, fine/flyaway and frequent use at £1.19/200ml and £1.69/300ml.
‘There are many quick and inexpensive colouring ideas that can really help to make you look and feel vibrant’ says the experts at Vidal Sassoon.
Before you spend out on a perm or colour, all stylists, tinters and permers at the Sassoon salons will be happy to give you a free consultation — prices for comb-on colour start at £24.50.
Perms cost from £43.
Call  for more details.
Go for gold — it's the ultimate hair accessory and it's now available at London's newest salon.
At Naïm, House of Hair & Beauty you can treat yourself to solid gold highlights!
Different shades of superfine, 22 carat gold leaf are painted onto the hair during the highlighting process.
And for extra glamour, each client is given a pot of Gold Leaf gel to add sparkle to special occasions!
Gold Leaf highlights start at £150, available exclusively at Naïm.
Call  for details.
If you use a home perm then you'll be familiar with Fashion Style Extra Care perm.
At only £2.99 for a full head perm or £1.99 for part perming.
Fashion Style offers great value for money with outstanding results.
Look out for the new formulations in colour-coded packaging:
Grey:Formulated to add gentle body and waves to colour treated hair.
Red:An intensively conditioned formula for bouncy curls on hair that is hard to wave.
Blue:For casual curls and waves for normal and easy to wave hair.
SPRING SKIN
Wave goodbye to the cold weather and get glowing with our skin-care favourites
For a natural healthy look to your skin this spring try new Moisture Tint Self-Tanning Base from 2000.
Available in six shades at £10.50 for 40ml, Moisture Tint is a triple-action cream that will nourish your skin, add a soft shade of colour and create a long-lasting glow.
If you like to wash your face but find soaps too harsh and drying, try Neutrogena's new Facial Cleansing Bar.
The mild cleansing formula has a neutral pH and high rinsability, so it won't leave behind any surface residue that may irritate your skin.
The Neutrogena Cleansing Bars are available in five variants for £1.99.
Many natural oils contain valuable ingredients that not only keep us healthy but also improve our skin.
Seven Seas have researched these oils and created two saving formulations.
Avocado Oil and Passion Flower Oil have been specially developed to care for your skin from within.
Seven Seas Health for Beauty Avocado and Passion Flower Oils are available from leading chemists everywhere at just £3.99 for one month's supply.
If you've neglected your legs during the winter and are planning to get them out for some spring sunshine then check out the new Stripwax from Jolen, £3.95 for 36 strips.
As well as being kind to your skin, regrowth is slower and finer and the wax has a slight exfoliant effect by removing dead flaky cells, leaving it clean and glowing.
A couple of minutes a day with a good handcream is the key to smooth, soft hands.
Roskens Ultracare 3 Handcream is a light, protective cream containing glycerin for healthy skin.
Ultracare 3 is quickly absorbed into the skin and forms a protective grease-free barrier.
Available in two sizes from Boots and other leading chemists nationwide.
there is a new addition to the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range — Mint Balm Spray Gel.
The natural properties of Mint Balm help to hold moisture so you can achieve a firm hold without stiffness.
Spray Gel can be used to add body and volume by spraying onto wet hair before drying or applied to dry hair for extra lift to your style.
Bain de Terre products are available at over 300 professional hairdressing salons nationwide.
Telephone  for your nearest stockist.
STYLE FILE
Ever thought you could have fun in the red?
Well you can — check out these sizzling styles!
VIDAL SASSOON'S RIBBON COLOURING
EVENING STYLE BY SCHUMI
SCHUMI'S CORKSCREW CRAZY LOOK
BY FRAN CAPELLI, AUSTRALIA
MASSES OF CURLS FROM ROBERT CHAMBERS
MAHOGANY MANIA FROM ESSANELLE
SHORT COPPER STYLE FROM ZIG ZAG
HIGH SHINE FROM BOB'S HAIR CO
RED HOT HAIR FROM TERENCE RENATI
CENTRE-PARTED STYLE FROM 350 SALON
RICH RED TONES FROM VIDAL SASSOON
PROFESSIONAL COLOUR BY SCHWARZKOPF
SUPERB CROP FROM THE SYNDICATE
VIBRANT SHADE BY SUYO HAIR & BEAUTY
COLOURED WITH WELLA KOLESTON 2000
BY SIMON RATTAN FOR BAIN DE TERRE
FACE-FRAMING STYLE BY JOHN YOXALL
HI-TECH HAIR & BEAUTY
You almost need a chemistry degree to understand today's high-tech toiletries.
But the good news is, with the aid of these space age products, it's possible to be prettier than ever before.
So look to the future and suss out the science of beauty.
Lydia Ascroft takes a technical look at the world of hair and beauty.
THE PRICE OF BEAUTY
Cosmetic companies are always seeking new ways to solve our problems, and it seems we're always willing to hand over our money in the hope that these products and their magic ingredients will do the trick.
But unfortunately, whilst the upmarket brands spend a great deal of money on new research to produce improved products, before long the cheaper brands will often follow and eventually incorporate the latest technology in their toiletries too.
So whilst many innovative cosmetics will be costly, you don't always have to pay a high price for high tech beauty buys.
Of course, pseudo scientific claims also make great advertising copy — that's not to say these products are just clever gimmicks.
Many have very real benefits but do try to separate the hype from the facts and be objective if you want to spend your money wisely.
FUTURISTIC FACIAL CARE
Now that skin care experts know sun exposure hastens the wrinkling process, the addition of sunscreens in moisturisers is one of the most significant skin care advances.
And since UVA rays are the culprits, and these can penetrate even on dull, cloudy days, it's wise to wear some sort of sunscreening agent all year round.
Check out the Nivea Visage range of moisturisers with sunscreens.
Also, as we grow more concerned and more aware of our environment, products that aim to defend our skin against pollutants are increasingly popular too.
It's believed that pollution can form substances in our body known as free radicals which speed up ageing.
Revlon's Ecologie range, therefore, has what they've called an Environmental Protection System, and contains vitamin E, said to help protect our bodies against free radicals.
Alternatively, try Boots No 7 Defence 15, £8.15/50ml, with a Sun Protection Factor of 15, which contains oils and silicone fluids to provide a protective mantle over the skin which repels airborne pollutants!
Basically, most moisturisers serve a simple purpose — to sit on the surface of your skin where they seal in and prevent the moisture from escaping.
But some of the latest claim to go a step further and act on the cells deep inside your skin.
Whether this is a good idea or not, and whether there are any actual, visible benefits in the short or long term is a matter of great controversy.
But if you'd like to put them to the test, we've put together a list as a brief explanation os some skin care jargon and products that incorporate the latest technology.
LEARN THE LINGO:
Lipids — these exist in the top layer of your skin and fill the spaces between the skin cells, like mortar in a brick wall.
They act as a barrier, holding in moisture.
Lipid loss occurs as a result of using harsh skin care products and damage from the elements.
Some moisturisers claim to be especially helpful at repairing this loss and strengthening your skin.
Try Boots No 7 Replenish, £8.15/150ml, a lipid facial firmer.
Ceramides — a major component of lipids.
Elizabeth Arden's Ceramide Time Complex Capsules, claim to repair lipidic content and so create younger looking skin.
Now available in a formula especially for use around the eyes, £27.50 for 60 capsules.
Liposomes — tiny bubbles so small they can penetrate deep into your skin so the nourishing and moisturising ingredients contained within are released where they're needed most.
Vichy's Temporalia, £12.75/30ml, is a liposome formula that benefits your skin in three ways, past, present and future.
Firstly, it contains special nutrients that will effectively stimulate skin cell activity and so repair past damage.
Secondly, it moisturises and protects your skin and finally, it contains vitamin E and sunscreens to help in the battle against ageing.
Liquid crystals — these are able to store ingredients such as vitamin E and release them slowly into the skin for prolonged benefits.
Synergie Bio Contour Eye Gel, £5.99 and Vichy's Restructure Eye Contour Gel, £14, both use liquid crystal technology.
Natural Bio-proteinic Concentrate — an ingredient patented by L'Oréal and used in their new Plenitude Active Wrinkle Control Cream, £6.29/40ml.
It claims to supply all the nutrients needed to reactivate skin cells and so restore firmness and elasticity.
COSMETIC WIZARDRY
What matters now is that your make-up cares for your skin as well as colours it.
Performance has been improved too so your cosmetics should be easier to apply, last longer and look better than ever.
Here are some of the new developments to look out for.
Advanced foundations — Max Factor's High Definition Foundation, £5.49, contains moisturisers and sunscreens but the difference is that it contains smaller than ever coloured pigments.
This gives a very natural look but effectively conceals imperfections too.
Also worth trying is Clinique's Workout Make-up, £13.50 with SPF6 and a special ‘slip agent’.
This makes it glide on smoothly, but then evaporates so the foundation clings like a leotard to your skin and lasts even in hot weather or if you go swimming.
Lipsticks from the lab — Elizabeth Arden has recently introduced Lip Spa, £11.50, the first lipstick they say to contain water, nature's best moisturiser.
Until now water has been incompatible with the traditional lipstick formulation of oil and waxes.
Revlon's Moisture Lipstick, £6.95, contains chronospheres which, it's claimed, continuously release the colour, shine and moisturisers so it lasts without staining and feels smooth and comfortable.
Likewise, Boots No 7  Moisture Active Lipcolour, £2.90, contains micro-entrapped hydrators.
These are like tiny sponges which continuously release moisturisers.
H'eye tech — mascara is the one make-up item few women would be without and we've come a long way since the days of mascaras that smudged or flaked around the eyes.
Today's formulas are far more sophisticated, right down to the perfect brush design.
Bourjois' Cil 18 Heures Mascara, £3.79, for instance contains an ingredient called a hydrophobic polymer which improves the mascara's resistance to water, whilst Lancôme's Definicil Mascara, £12, has a brush made of a substance called Rislan designed to be extra gentle on your lashes.
RoC have patented the brush design of their Intense Colour Mascara £7.25.
The bristles vary in length so some separate the lashes and others comb and curl.
LEARN THE LINGO:
Colour micronization — means the colour pigments and other powdery ingredients in the make-up, traditionally a large and irregular size and shape, has been made smaller and more uniform for a softer product texture and more even colour application.
Like small balls, they roll and glide onto your skin.
Colour enrobing — coating the pigments with special ingredients so they have an affinity with the skin and repel water, making them moisturising and longer-lasting.
Clarins is just one of many make-up ranges that now use both these techniques.
Revlon's Custom Eyes eyeshadows, £3.95, are also made using powder-coating technology.
Non-comedogenic — means that the product has been tested to ensure it doesn't block your pores and cause blackheads.
Many moisturisers as well as cosmetics now claim to be non-comedogenic.
COLOURMATCH COMPUTER
Cover Girl have come up with a computer to help you select the most flattering shade of make-up.
You simply press the touch-pad which corresponds to your hair colour and the one which corresponds to your skin tone.
Within a matter of moments, the computer will indicate which of the three shade-groups you suit, from Warm to Cool to Neutral, and you can choose your products from the corresponding colour sections on display.
COSMIC HAIR CARE
As the fashion for hair has moved away from the hard, artificial post-punk era towards more natural styles, the emphasis has been on hair care products that promote softness and shine.
So not only do styling products  have additional conditioning ingredients but there's a whole new array of products such as serums to mend split ends and slick down frizz, and curl boosters to encourage bounce.
LEARN THE LINGO;
Panthenol — used in many hair care products, this vitamin B derivative is excellent for making hair more elastic and shiny.
The new range of Cream Silk products are enriched with Panthenol Pro-Vitamin B5.
Keratin amino acids — a type of protein found in hair.
Products containing keratin such as Clynol's Apres Colour Bath and Balsam, around £7.95 each from Clynol appointed salons, claim to help rebuild battered hair and improve its resistance.
CAT Protein Network System — a conditioning treatment developed by Redken.
CAT stands for cysteic acid treatment, a type of protein to help repair and protect damaged hair.
Similar technology is used in Redken's Vector Plus conditioning perm.
Contact  on  for details of your nearest Redken appointed salon.
Polymers — there are various types, such as silicone polymers which cling to the hair with effective conditioning benefits.
Silvikrin use a special blend of polymers in their Active Care styling range and explain that these polymers consist of string of carbon which link together to form a coating on the hair to protect it but will wash away easily so they don't build up and dull shine.
You may also hear polymers described as cationic, amphoteric polymers in their Energance range for permed hair give added resilience and suppleness whilst FreeStyle Mousse for Sensitive Hair, £1.89/100ml, contains cationic polymers for their ability to hold the hair in place.
Oxidisation — the physical and chemical reaction that takes place when your hair is exposed to daylight.
It fades hair's natural pigment and the process is accelerated in colour-treated hair.
L'Oréal's Rayonnance range for colour-treated hair contains a UV light filter which coats the hair to protect against oxidisation.
Wella's Anty-Oxy is a professional treatment for use after tinting or colouring — from salons only.
Three examples of hair seen under the Redken electron microscope.
Good condition, bleach-damaged and perm damaged
All styles the Bain de Terre styling team
HAIRFLAIR COMPETITION
WIN A LUXURIOUS TWO-NIGHT VISIT FOR YOU AND A FRIEND AT HOAR CROSS HALL HEALTH SPA RESORT!
relax and enjoy…
Hidden away deep in the Staffordshire countryside is Hoar Cross Hall — Britain's newest and most luxurious health spa resort, set in a stately home.
The Grade II listed building was built by Sir Hugo Meynell in the 1860's for his wife Emily Charlotte, and it's this historic and romantic background that really sets the scene for a relaxing break.
SPA THERAPY
Recognised for its healing, therapeutic properties for centuries, water is the basis of many treatments at Hoar Cross Hall.
You can pamper yourself with Marine Algae Hydrotherapy baths with underwater massage to relieve tired muscles, Blitz baths to boost circulation and Seaweed Envelopments to help reduce cellulite.
And it's not just aching limbs and excess flab you'll be fighting — a couple of days at Hoar Cross Hall will relieve the stress and strain of 90's living too.
Every conceivable body treatment is available at the health spa, including the Hoar Cross Hall Good Enough to Eat Facial and Aromatherapy Massages.
If you want the chance to sample these delights for yourself, enter our competition today!
FIRST PRIZE
One lucky winner and a friend will spend two nights at Hoar Cross Hall in a luxury Master Bedroom.
Your prize includes all meals plus full use of all Spa facilities — hydrotherapy pool and whirlpool, steamroom and sauna, badminton, croquet, tennis, boules, 9 hole golf improvement facility and bicycles, exercise classes and gymnasium.
If that's not enough to keep you occupied, you'll each be treated to one Body Salt Scrub, one Thalassotherapy Massage Bath and a choice of either G5 Massage or Back Massage with Infra Red.
RUNNERS-UP
Hairdresser to the stars and current hairdresser of the year, Trevor Sorbie has designed a superb hair care system.
Our ten lucky runners-up will receive two fabulous products from this range — Sorbie's luxurious Riche Conditioner, and his latest styling product — Hot Shapes.
The complete range is available at all major branches of Boots around the country priced at £3.65 each.
HOW TO ENTER
HOAR CROSS HALL/HAIR-FLAIR READERS DISCOUNT
Special day programmes at Hoar Cross Hall include a Special Relaxation Day at £33; Beauty Treat Day at £68 and Top to Toe Day at £88.
Mention this feature when booking and take this coupon with you on the day and you'll be entitled to a £10 discount!
Readers who book residential accommodation will be entitled to £20 discount per person, per night.
Call  for more details.
This special offer is valid until July 31st 1992.
Relax and unwind in the sumptuous surroundings of Hoar Cross Hall Health Spa in Staffordshire
SHE'S GOT WHAT IT TAKES
Last November; we began our search for The Most Beautiful Hair of the Year in conjunction with Supersoft.
We expected a big postbag but nothing could have prepared us for the fantastic response we received!
After a fabulous day in a London hotel with the six finalists, our prestigious panel of judges made their final decision.
THE FINALISTS
THE JUDGES
We put together a team of prestigious judges from the world of fashion and beauty.
They were .
Each girl was interviewed by the judges and her haircare routine discussed.
Our judges were looking for a healthy shine, superb condition and fabulous movement and after much deliberation, Louisa Nicholson was chosen as overall winner.
She's seen here enjoying a celebratory glass of champagne with Supersoft brand manager, Sue Pardoe.
After dinner, all six finalists were treated to an evening at the West End award-winning musical The Forbidden Planet and each of them took home a Supersoft goodie bag, full of luxurious styling and finishing products from the range.
THE NEXT DAY
After breakfast in the hotel, Louisa was whisked off to a London Studio to meet photographer Paul Mitchell and the styling team.
Alex styled Louisa's smooth, sleek bob into three alternative looks, each emphasising the fact that she really does have the most beautiful hair in the world.
Louisa soon got into the swing of the photographic shoot and posed for the camera like a true professional model!
Louisa will hold the title for one year so keep on conditioning because we will be on the lookout for a new winner!
Alex from the MacMillan salon blowdries hair into sleek bob
Sammy Jackson chooses natural shades for Louisa's complexion
Purple silk washed blouse from Fenwicks, London W1: bustier from Flying Down to Rio, tulle skirt from Linda Booker, both at Hyper Hyper, jewellery from a selection at Fenwicks: black dress with pearl collar and green satin mac from Fenwicks, W1.
Supersoft styling and fixing products were used on all three stunning finished looks.
From a swinging, vibrant bob to dramatic curls and a beautiful smooth, evening style, the range enhanced the fabulous natural colour and condition of Louisa's hair.
How to create the look of luxury
Glamour is the buzz word of '92, hitting us between the eyes from glossy magazines at every turn.
To help you recreate those luxurious looks of the 40's, we got together with BaByliss and Silvikrin whose haircare appliances and styling products can bring dazzling styles to your fingertips.
Sleek, sexy styles need body and bounce and what better way to achieve this than with heated curlers — they've been a girls best friend for decades.
Before curling, we applied Silvikrin's Active Care Firm Hold Styling Mousse (£1.99/150ml) to damp hair.
As well as volumising hair, its conditioning formula adds protection.
Next we curled hair with BaByliss Soft Curlers (£27).
These innovative curlers need no clips or pins so they're easy to use and kind to hair.
After 15 just minutes curlers were removed and hair was brushed into a sleek bob with amazing movement and body.
Ultimate glamour make-up
This look was achieved with products from the Max Factor range.
Complexion:High definition Liquid Foundation in Perfect Ivory and a touch of Erace concealer in Ivory was set with Creme Puff in Translucent.
Cheeks:Lightly dusted with Single Blusher in Nutmeg.
Eyes:Shaded with Eyeshadow Duo in Sea Spray, emphasised with Kohl Pencil in Black.
After applying individual false lashes to strengthen the look, they were slicked with 2000 Calorie Mascara in Jet Black.
Lips:Lined with Lip Liner Pencil in Rich Red and filled in with Moisture Rich Lipstick in Paprika
Nails:Diamond Hard Nail Enamel in Paprika 
Mix masculine chic with the sleekest styles
Curling tongs are an asset when it comes to home styling but they're particularly vital for creating the glamorous styles of the 40's.
We used the BaByliss Volume Tong from their Professional Range (£17.95).
It has an extra large barrel which makes it perfect for giving lift, shape and volume to hair.
We wound hair down the length of the barrel to form spiral curls evenly over the entire head and because our model's hair was long, fine and very straight, we then applied Silvikrin's Maximum Hold Hairspray from their Active Care range (£1.52/300ml).
After just a couple of minutes when the spray had dried, we brushed out the curls into these beautifully smooth, sculpted waves.
Black linen suit with white trim by Warehouse; black leather gloves by Cornelia James.
Black pinstripe waistcoat by Monix; black trousers by Arabella Pollen; tie by Sam Fisher; earrings by Adrien Mann
STYLE COLLECTION
SEXY!
HIGH SHINE HAIR
THE CLASSIC BOB
SHORT & SHARP
HIGH DRAMA
Soft, feminine styling incorporating beautiful ringlet curls falling delicately onto the shoulders.
It was created by David Roles at the Neo Hair Design Studio in Manchester
NEW SHAPES •NEW COLOURS •NEW CUTS
Soft, delicate curls on shoulder-length hair achieved by the Schumi styling team in London
SEXY!
After being set, hair was dressed into barrel curls
Mahogany salon used their duo perming technique to achieve this look
John Perrs used Schwarzkopf's Silhouette styling range to create these tumbling curls
Mahogany U.K. cut underneath layers shorter to achieve this textured look
Fabulous forties hairstyle
A heavily layered style with lots of forward movement
Long hair was permed and styled with products from the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range
Another classic set, this time styled with a 90's feel
Sexy blonde style
Soft ‘feathering’ on long hair flatters a small face
Full, flattering look achieved by setting hair on rollers
A short, strong style cut to frame the face
Long hair has been spiral permed and diffuser dried for this look
Ultra sexy peek-a-boo style.
Big curls are emphasised by beautiful condition
A very curly perm has been shaped away from the face
The Spa Therapy range from Bain de Terre was used to maximise condition — from salons only
Beautiful long permed hair — ask your stylist about Bain-de-Terre's Spa Perming and Spa Therapy
Regular trims are essential to maintain one-length bob shapes.
Hair by Bain de Terre Spa Therapy
These glorious corkscrews are enhanced with conditioning styling products by Mo Nabbach at M & M Hair Academy
HIGH DRAMA
Ocean Boulevard's Retro-Wave perming technique creates maximum body without tight curl or frizz
This softly layered bob has been teased back from the face and dressed with wax
Hair has been permed and styled using the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range from professional salons
Geno Ventti's casual evening styling is perfect for long straight hair that's fine in texture
Stephen Way and Jeanne Braa are two top stylists who used the Paul Mitchell luxury haircare range
A touch of the avant garde from leading Manchester stylist
Clynol's Salon Formula range is a firm favourite with Paul Falltrick at the Falltrick salon
Niki at Group Montage in Sheffield used Clynol's Salon Formula finishing products on this style
Up-to-the-minute set styling from award-winning stylist Guy Kremer at his salon, French Connection
This classic bob has been softly layered and highlighted through with delicate copper tones to add warmth, shine and movement
Not for the faint-hearted, this intricate style is high on shine and was created by Guy Kremer at French Connection
HIGH SHINE HAIR
Enriched with Wella's Colour Touch, hair was sleekly styled
Superb and exciting styling from Zotos, manufacturers of quality professional hair products
Thick, voluminous style, reminiscent of forties filmstars
Interesting combination of full-bodied curls and slick styling.
By the 350 salon styling team
Tousled curls emphasised with styling glaze to add shine and definition
Beautiful condition achieved with Clynol's Corregin Active Shampoo and Conditioner, from salons only
Brain at the Brian Andrews Hair Studio used Wella's Blondor Gelee Bleach to create this effect
Strong, asymmetric shape on a dark bob created by George at Paterson S.A. in Edinburgh
Pretty adaption of a classic bob created by Mo Nabbach at the M & M Hair Academy
To restore hair to its former glory, it was tested with Bain de Terre Recovery Complex which revitalises dry hair
This pretty long bob has been slightly curled to add sexy movement and body.
Created by Geoff at Sean Hanna
THE CLASSIC BOB
Clynol's new Color Mousse was used on this sharp bob.
By Mark Abbott-Compton at Mac & Co
Margaret Nabbach at M & M Hair Academy has achieved a beautiful sheen to this tousled bob
Sultry style on fabulous dark hair by the Mane Street Artistic Team in Bournemouth
Peter Dawson used Caramel brown tones and Vidal Sassoon's new Ribbon colouring technique
Curly bob-shaped hair has been softly styled by Bruce Hunter for The Cut Above
Thick hair has been styled into this strong shape by Norman Ellis at Options
TiGi Gel Gloss was used to add a sensational gloss to hair.
By Vicky at Lawrence Anthony
This straight bob has been kept in maximum condition with the Bain de Terre Spa Therapy range
Clynol's Viton Direct Keeler adds a boost of colour.
By Steven Burgin at the Ashleigh salon
SHORT & SHARP
‘Haircuts in '92 will be much sharper’ says the Reds styling team in Dublin
Short, graduated style, texturised with Wella's High Hair Wax.
By Brian Andrews Hair Studio
Superb shine and movement achieved with styling products by Dominique at Marc Young Associates
A combination of precision cutting and soft layering by the Aveda styling team in the USA
Hair has been styled with Sculpting Wax from Clynol's Salon Formula range.
By Bruce Hunter
Delicate style for one length hair.
This cut really makes the most of thick hair By Day & Night
Terence Renati used Schwarzkopf styling products to create this wonderful layered look
High Hair Volumising Mouse from Wella was used by Mane Street of Bournemouth to create this look
A jagged edge finishes off this dramatic style which was created by David Aumonier in Belfast
GREAT GROOMING FOR MEN — WE CHECK IT OUT
THE MEN'S ROOM
According to Boots, the male toiletries market is currently worth a staggering £216 million!
There was a time when your hairdryer or moisturiser would mysteriously disappear and you could be pretty certain of catching your man red handed — pinching your beauty products!
Not any more.
Gone are the days when guys thought it was girlie to be groomed, the new man of the 90's makes a noise about the fact that he knows how to look good and what's more these guys now have more beautifying products than old socks!
A CLOSE SHAVE
Ancient Egyptians used to hack away at their beards with bronze knives.
Men and women have the same number of hairs on their face — 15,000!
Roman  legionnaires used pumice to keep their faces smooth
On average, a man spends an incredible 3,500 hours of his life shaving more than 27 feet of whiskers!
The Daniel Rouah Barber Shop and Skin Care Salon is one of London's best.
This acclaimed Barber feels that men are a neglected species and in his ‘men only’ beauty salon Daniel offers a multitude of manly treatments.
You can make an appointment from a modest hair cut to a manicure, aromatherapy message, pedicure, skin care programme, shaving lesson, facial, and even an eyelash perm.
Call Daniel on .
For environmentally-friendly men, The Body Shop does the business.
Their Mostly Men range with its distinctive packaging is a superb collection of men only products.
Look out for Mostly Men Shaving Cream, £2.20/100ml and cooling Aftershave Gel, £2.30/50ml.
Most shaving products now contain moisturising properties but for the really sensitive man, Wilkinson have formulated Skin Solutions.
It's designed to protect and soothe even the most sensitive male skins and prices start at £2.45.
Alternatively for the man who prefers to dry shave, the latest in electric shavers comes from brand leaders Phillips.
The HS980 shaver costs £99.95 and has unique rotary heads and ‘minutes left’ feature.
Phillips have also put together a Man's Guide to Skin Care — you can obtain a free copy by writing to .
WATER WORKS
It's here, it's called Thirsty Camel and it's the first spring water for men!
Of course this doesn't mean that any woman found drinking it will turn to stone but it is designed to appeal to the real men of the nation.
Thirsty Camel offers men a macho mineral water with a hint of humour.
Available at selected venues across the U.K. 
ALL TIED UP
‘A well-tied tie is the first serious step in life’— Oscar Wilde.
Well-tied yes, but dull — no way!
These are the latest designs from the Tie Rack.
Any guy wearing one of these has got to be fun.
TIE FACTS FROM THE TIE RACK
Two thirds of men say they choose their ties to impress their wife or girlfriend
A massive 81% of all men said they ‘want to be alone’ when shopping for ties.
75% of British men say that straightening your tie in public is a sign of nervousness.
According to a survey carried out by Brylcreem, 43% of British men say they have sensitive skin.
 BREATH EASILY
Bad breath is one of the biggest turn offs so most men are pretty keen to keep theirs smelling sweet.
There is a huge range of good toothpaste on the market and an ever-growing selection of mouthwashes — look out for Macleans Active Mouth Guard.
For those unexpected close encounters, breath refresher capsules can be a real life-saver.
Amplex Capsules are refreshing in Original or Ice Mint Flavours.
Toothbrushes are becoming more technically advanced and the revolutionary Braun Oral B Plaque Remover gets top toothbrush marks.
It has been developed in conjunction with leading dental experts and a two minute brush with the Oral B is equivalent to six minutes with an ordinary toothbrush.
BE A BIG SOFTIE
Thick Skinned?
It seems so.
Men's skin is thicker than woman's and ages at a slower rate.
In fact, men's wrinkles only start to show from their mid-thirties.
Even with this infuriating advantage, more and more men are realising the importance of a good skin care routine and are insisting on quality skin care products.
Hollyhocks is a collection of cosmetics designed specifically for the man who doesn't need a macho image — the whole range is based on English country garden flowers.
You'll find delights such as Midsummer Night's Dream, a fabulous foaming bubble bath and shower gel scented with strawberries and roses plus Florabunda, softening hand and body lotion for men.
Call free on  for a catalogue.
Clinique, well known for their superb skin care products have formulated Skin Supplies For Men.
This 3-step regime is designed to give male skin a fresher, healthier look.
Prices range from £4.95 to £11.45.
From RoC comes Pour Homme, a range of high performance skincare products which include Wrinkle Treatment with Liposomes.
For the sporty guy, Slazenger All Over Body Kit is ideal — its refreshing and great value.
SPLASH IT ON
Aftershave is worn by men and loved by women.
The smell of a certain aftershave can bring memories flooding back of those special times and wonderful moments.
There are some fabulous fragrances around — we love the new Davidoff Cool Water Collection.
For the classical man, Polo from Ralph Lauren is deliciously chic and if it's a designer label you want, there's Armani and Eau Savage by Christian Dior.
Spring prediction for men from Paul Mitchell: ‘Body fitness and great hair, plus a growing interest in skin care.
This is the new man of 1992’
HAIR CARE
The man of '92 is no longer happy to use any old product on his hair.
He now insists on his own shampoo, conditioner and styling products and as a result, the male hair care market is ever-increasing.
For example, you wouldn't consider hair dryers to have a gender but it seems that they do and masculine black is popular with the boys.
Some good ones to look out for are the 1940's style Retro Dryer from Clairol, £24.95.
And for the man on the move the BaByliss Travel Pro Dryer is ideal at around £20.
For great grooming, Kent the hairbrush experts have a classic collection for men, from shaving brushes and hairbrushes to beard and moustache kits.
One of the most common problems that men have with their hair is the lack of it.
Unfortunately, there is no miracle cure for thinning hair but there are some very good treatments around.
Scalp stimulants can help to revitalise dormant hair follicles by increasing the blood flow to the scalp.
Some can also help to strengthen thin and weak hair whilst others help hair look fuller and healthier.
Look out for successfully tested treatments such as Nutrasome Enrichment Shampoo, £7.90 from Revlon or Foltene deep conditioning scalp stimulant.
A pack of 10 phials costs £19.95 and is available by mail order from Foltene,.
For a totally natural treatment for hair and scalp problems the Haar Sana range is ideal — call  for information.
Most men like to wash their hair every day so shampoos like Vidal Sassoon's Wash and Go are always a popular choice.
If you like a real tingle, try The Body Shop's Ice Blue Shampoo which contains stimulating peppermint oil and costs £1.60/60ml.
For dual-purpose products, Paul Mitchell Systems have a superb range of natural shampoos and conditioners.
All of their shampoos can be used as an all over body wash and The Conditioner from Paul Mitchell has wonderful moisturising properties which make it super to shave with.
Available from Paul Mitchell appointed salons nationwide.
For budding James Deans everywhere, Cossack Mega Firm hairspray should keep any quiff in place!
And for a great range of hair grooming products for guys, look out for Silvikrin's Active Care, this range of styling products is popular with boys in the bathroom.
It has a light, fresh fragrance and there is something for every style.
Hair loss is quite normal and most people lose between 100 and 150 hairs every day
We took two hunks and, with the help of a carefully selected team of experts, made them even hunkier!
Rob is 22 and does voluntary work with young offenders in Sudbury, Nr Colchester.
When we decided to treat Rob to a make-over, he'd just decided to get rid of his curly bob and wanted something sleeker — fabulous timing on our part, don't you think!
Stylist Guy Kremer cut Rob's hair very short into the nape of the neck using the ‘scissor-over-comb’ technique.
To maximise the natural curls, Guy used a slick Cossack Hair Gel for Men (£1.85), a no-flake formula which gives firm hold and washes out easily.
To transform Rob into a sexy Jason Priestly look-alike hair was dried back from the face and held in place with a light application of Cossack Hairspray (£1.76).
It gives long-lasting hold without stiffness or stickiness.
USEFUL TIPS
Short cuts need regular trims — every 4–6 weeks is ideal
Don't over-do the gel.
Squirt it into your hand, rub your palms together then run them through your hair, ensuring even distribution.
For a totally natural effect, squirt your hair-spray above your head and let it fall gently onto your head.
Guy starts on the transformation from long to short
Half way there and the precision cutting is visible
Guy uses the ‘scissors-over-comb’ technique on Rob
Simon is an 18 year old student at Winchester and keeps his hair in a neat, easy to care for style.
All he needed on the day was a quick trim and some great grooming products.
Because Simon's thick hair has good, natural movement, Guy chose Cossack's Styling Spray (£2.13).
Its a pump-action, easy to use product that can be sprayed onto wet or dry hair, making hair manageable and adding natural-looking control as well as versatility.
double take
This collection of two styles from one show day-to-evening-wear transformations.
Here are some for short, medium and long hair.
A classic bob was curled on large rollers to create a soft, natural look then slicked with Wella's Moulding Glaze as an alternative.
Alizarin Colour Touch by Wella enhances shine and movement.
Another bob, this time cut to jaw-length with a heavy fringe.
Hair was piled high on the crown leaving a heavy strand to expose the ear.
Beautiful blonde hair was permed with a Herb Flower Perm then set first on medium then on large curlers to achieve these contrasting styles.
Our model's naturally blonde hair was lifted to a stunning light golden shade with Herb Colour No 10 in Fixcolour.
Hair was permed with Bain de Terre Acid Wave for Bleached Hair then left to dry naturally.
Before tying back, Flax Seed Styling Gel was applied.
Hair has been spiral tonged and each curl separated with wax.
For the second look, it was backcombed then piled high, leaving the sides to fall wispy.
Dramatic curls were achieved by setting hair on medium-sized rollers and Herbs styling mousse.
After removing rollers, fingers were used to loosen curls into ringlets.
For a more glamorous style, hair was brushed out after it had been set.
The Bain de Terre Therapy range was used to create these two simple styles.
Herbal Ribbon Gel was used to slick hair and add gloss without making it stiff and sticky.
As an alternative, alcohol-free Herbal Styling Mousse was used to add fullness, volume and body.
Products are only available from salons.
Naturally straight, black hair was set at the crown on small curlers then gelled into two different shapes.
A combination of Herb colours was applied.
Long hair has been gently backcombed at the crown and softly curled for a natural effect.
After setting hair and achieving plenty of body and movement with styling products, hair is much more manageable and easier to put up.
HOT OFF THE PRESS
APRIL FOOL
The Children's Society is adopting April 1st — traditionally a day for jokes and jokers — for the launch of its national two week April Fun Campaign.
Crowds of celebs are having to have a laugh and raise loads of cash for children.
There are lots of events going on so don't miss out on the fun and help them raise £2 million from April 1–12 — for further information and a funpack, write to .
BEEHIVE CRAZY!
The first event of the year for The General Association of Ladies Hairdressers was launched by Glemby at the L'Oréal Technical Centre on 30th January.
Melissa, one of the lead singers of pop group Voice of The Beehive was the star guest of the evening — she's seen here being styled by Joseph from the Glemby salon in Selfridges, London.
MOVING ON
After 25 years in Rosemary Lane, Thatch Hair Technique has moved to a new prestigious salon in St Albans Walk, Carlisle known as Sweaty Betty's!
They now call themselves S.B. International and they're a TRESemmé appointed salon — call  for details and appointments.
BEATING THE BLUES
Despite the recession, the hair business goes from strength to strength.
Clifton's top hairdressing salon, Bendrey Sinclair of Regent Street, has just appointed their 12th member of staff, Tracey Morgan (above), boosting their numbers by over 100% since the opening two years ago.
Meanwhile, Gallery Hair Design in Hungerford, which opened six months ago with just two stylists, now employs six and has enjoyed publicity in both consumer and trade press.
DIARY DATE
Make sure you're free on May 24th and 25th for this year's Afro Hair & Beauty 10th Anniversary Exhibition.
Sponsored by Dyke & Dryden, it's at The Business Design Centre in Islington, London N1 and tickets cost £7 for adults and £3 for children under 12.
There will be loads going on, with make-overs, hair and fashion shows and loads more.
Call  for more information.
FRANCHISE NEWS
If you're interested in a hairdressing franchise, the fifth U.S. Franchise Trade Mission to the U.K. takes place on 6th and 7th April at the U.S. Embassy.
Their aim is to meet potential master licensees and joint venture partners and two franchises on offer are Fantastic Sam's International Inc, and Magicuts Inc, For more details call Mrs Mickey Boxer or Stephen Lynch on  or fax them on 
PATCH WORK
T.V. hairdresser Andrew Collinge had his work cut out for him on 23rd January.
He was knee deep in cabbages at C&R Hutchinson's Fruit & Veg stall in New Covent Garden to publicise Hasbro's latest Cabbage Patch Kid collection.
Called Crimp 'n Curl, these cuddly cuties have hair that's just waiting to be styled.
Available from all good toy shops from April priced at £38, Crimp 'n Curl comes with  its own curling iron and crimper.
SOAP BOX
If you watch Brookside, you'll have seen Barry's new girlfriend Angela hard at work in her new hair salon.
Look closer and you'll see the TiGi Linea haircare range and Toni & Guy posters dotted about the place.
Problem is, the products are so popular with the cast that they keep disappearing from the set!
Watch out next month when Hairflair's Hellena Barnes chats to actress Hilary Welles who plays Angela.
celebrity interview
SARAH LANCASHIRE
Raquel is the bright young thing in Coronation Street.
From Miss Betabuys to the most sought after lodger in The Street, she is now the Belle behind the bar at the Rovers Return.
Hairflair's Hellena Barnes talks to Sarah Lancashire who plays Raquel.
NAME:Sarah Lancashire
Age:27
HOME:Manchester
WHO'S YOUR FAVOURITE HAIRDRESSER?:
It's not really ever one person that does my hair but my favourite salon is Constantines in Manchester.
WHICH HAIR PRODUCTS DO YOU USE?:
I always wash my hair with Wash & Go and condition it with Flex conditioner from Revlon.
WHO DO YOU THINK HAS GOT GOOD HAIR?:
My closest friend actually, she's got really straight, red hair — it's the most beautiful hair I've seen.
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF THE CURRENT HAIR FASHIONS?:
I'm not really a great follower of fashion.
I like adaptability — that's the reason I always keep my hair long, so that I can get lots of different looks with it up or down.
WOULD YOU LIKE TO CHANGE YOUR STYLE?:
Having just said all that — if the part I played allowed me to change my style I would probably have it all cut off — I'd love to try a short style.
WHICH MAKE-UP AND HAIR ITEM WOULD YOU BE LOST WITHOUT?:
For my face it would be mascara and blusher.
For my hair, it would definitely be my Carmen rollers.
DO YOU LIKE TO BUY EXPENSIVE HAIR AND COSMETIC ITEMS OR DO YOU THINK CHEAPIES ARE JUST AS GOOD?:
Cheapies are fine — I have been using them for years!
HOW DO YOU RATE YOURSELF LOOKS WISE — OUT OF 10?:
Oh God — truthfully I would have to say 5 out of 10.
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH YOUR HAIR?:
Yeah I am, but I do wish it was in better condition.
Because I've had my hair highlighted regularly for the last ten years it gets really dry.
IF THERE WAS ANYTHING YOU COULD CHANGE ABOUT YOUR LOOKS WHAT WOULD IT BE?:
I'd like to change my skin colour.
Everyone thinks that an English Rose complexion is nice but I'd love to have olive skin.
WOULD YOU HAVE YOUR HAIR SHAVED OR COLOURED IN A REALLY WEIRD WAY FOR A PART?:
No way — definitely not.
ARE YOU A FAIRLY HEALTHY PERSON?:
Yeah I think so.
I lead a very chaotic life and spend a lot of my time running around like a maniac so that keeps me fairly fit.
DO YOU HAVE A SPECIAL BEAUTY ROUTINE?:
I use soap and water, I never cleanse or tone but I do use moisturisers and I never, ever go out in the winter without make-up.
Actually, I've got a beauty tip for Hairflair readers — try Vaseline on your eyelashes.
It stops them from dropping out and makes them look longer and thicker — I think it really works.
WHERE DO YOU SEE YOURSELF IN FIVE YEARS’ TIME:Hopefully in work — yes, I'll be very pleased if I'm still working!
HOW DID YOU GET YOUR BIG BREAK?:
I auditioned along with everyone else and was lucky enough to get the part.
DO YOU LIKE RAQUEL, THE CHARACTER YOU PLAY?:
I didn't in the beginning but I do now, she can be funny although a bit bitchy at times.
AS THE NEW BLONDE BEHIND THE BAR, DO YOU THINK THAT YOU WILL BE SEEN AS A YOUNG BET LYNCH?:
No, I don't think so.
I am a real big fan and Bet Lynch is something of a heroine but I don't think there are any similarities between Bet and Raquel.
ANY HINTS ON HOW THINGS ARE GOING BETWEEN YOU AND DES?:
Sorry Hellena, I can't tell you that because I haven't got the faintest idea myself!
NEXT MONTH: HILARY WELLES
Brookside's Hairdresser, Angela 
CURL FREEDOM
Endless styling possibilities for girls on the go who love curls!
WORKING GIRLS
Keeping up appearances at work is paying off — a recent survey has revealed that women now account for 26% of managerial posts — a figure that's trebled since the late 1970's.
We know looks aren't everything, but there's no doubt that a well-groomed image will win hands down when it comes to first impressions.
To maintain your top-to-toe perfection, you need the right tools.
You should always carry make-up savers such as powder, lipstick and concealer and keep an emergency grooming kit in your drawer — manicure set, spare tights/stockings and hairstyle revitalisers.
Clairol's new Free Curl Cordless Styling Brush (£17.95) is the ideal speedy styler — it's stay-cool, protective cover means you can store it safely in a drawer or bag, even immediately after use.
HIGH FLYERS
French chic, Italian glamour and Spanish style — British women will face some fierce competition in the beauty stakes in 1992.
So, whether you're spending a stylish weekend in Madrid or two energetic weeks on the Costa del Sol, don't let the side down!
Keep your hair looking its best night and day worldwide with Clairol's Free Curl cordless combination Brush and Tong (£19.95).
This versatile gas powered styler heats up in minutes and because The Civil Aviation Authority has O.K.'d it in checked-in luggage on aeroplanes, you really can style your hair anywhere you like!
NIGHT OWLS
If you come alive as the sum sets, you need fast, reliable styling products that will transform ‘daytime hair’ into high style evening wear.
Going out straight from work often means a fast re-style on dry hair so revitalising mousses and sprays are essential.
Clairol's Silver Shot (£19.95) is a small, compact hairdryer that won't take up loads of room and it has all the advantages of its bigger, professional-style counterparts.
Complete with diffuser and concentrator nozzle attachments, it's perfect for creating quick, sexy scrunched looks or more structured styles.
And with the dual-voltage facility, you can tuck this neat styler in a corner of your case and look great at home or away!
NEW TECHNIQUES
cover up!
If something goes  disastrously wrong with your hair and you need a new look NOW, why not wear a wig?
The great news is, they're THE hippest accessory of the minute so if you've got something to hide AND want to impress your friends, fake it in fabulous style!
For this look, the wig was given a weave and spiral cut to break up the basic exterior shape.
It was then ‘freeze-dried’ and gently backcombed into shape.
This wig, with a short exterior shape, has texturised longer layers.
It was ‘freeze-dried’ and sections of hair were separated to create this style.
A pretty, asymmetric bob has been precision styled to maximise the smooth, shiny finish.
Styling gel was applied to the ends which were then finished with a twist.
Hair was razor cut into a long bob and heavily tousled into shape.
To soften the outline, the fringe area was sectioned into ‘kiss-curls.
All wigs were cut and styled by David Roles at Neo Hair Design in Manchester.
To ‘freeze-dry’ his wigs, David simply applies gel to the wigs and places them in the freezer for 30 minutes!
AFRO UPDATE
STYLE WISE
More stylish, more chic, more exciting than ever before, this spring afro hair takes on a totally new shape!
Three fabulous styles by Desmond Murray (top right), all created using the Paul Mitchell Systems range.
Call  for details of your nearest stockist.
Hair has been elegantly styled with height and volume.
Hair and make-up by Terry Jacques.
Short, layered style, tapered around the ear for softness.
Tight, curly perm has been shaped into a voluminous chin-length bob and enhanced with colour
Subtle copper highlights through the front layers enhance this shape.
This heavily layered shape has been dramatised with bleach.
SHAPE UP
Whether you choose a short, relaxed style or go for curls, there are some fabulous shapes for everyone.
Short, forward sweeping styles suit all face shapes and can be enhanced with a touch of colour — a new shade will emphasise the movement and texture of a cut.
Try Dark & Lovely in shades of Fiery Auburn or Golden Bronze to really liven your style!
Their special moisturising formula ensures great condition, too.
If you want volume, then a weave is the answer.
The Unique Interlocking hair Weaving System is a process which involves sewing processed human hair onto the client's own hair without having to use braids, twisting or gluing and can eliminate the problems of thinning hair.
For more details, contact the Ultimate School of Hairdressing on .
The Expressions salon in Hammersmith also offer a weave-on service and prices are £80 for straight hair and £90 for curly hair.
EXPRESS YOURSELF!
A brand new salon has opened in the BHS shopping complex at Charing Cross Hospital in Hammersmith.
‘Expressions’ is the only salon in the area that caters for Afro-Caribbean and European hair and employs top cutters and colourists in each field.
From now until May 14th 1992, Expressions is offering Hairflair readers a fabulous discount offer — so treat yourself today!
Prices will be as follows:
Steams and finish, £6.00
Cut, Relax and Finish, £19.99
Cut, Tint and Finish, £14.99
Cut, Blowdry and Finish, £7.99
Dark & Lovely colourant enhances shine and movement of a cut
Dramatic precision cutting and clever colouring by Ebony
Vibrant bouffant shape created by the team at Zig Zag
Long hair has been styled into a beautiful.
Don't forget to take this issue with you when you go.
This offer is available for all Afro-Caribbean and European hair services.
Call  for an appointment.
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
How to make short hair work for you.
six of the best
A new hairstyle is enough to give you a new lease of life but there aren't many of us who can afford to go to the hairdressers every week — let alone every day.
Short hair is surprisingly versatile and, as these styles prove, you can give yourself a new look virtually every day of the week!
A high, centre-parted crown and sweeping fringe ring the changes on short hair.
Styling wax and extra strong mousse were used for this look.
Achieve a sixties feel by gently backcombing hair at the crown.
Use styling glaze to slick hair neatly onto the face.
Left: To create extra body and volume on short hair, a combination of scrunch drying and strong hold mousse at the roots is the key.
Right: This strong style was created by moulding and separating strands of hair.
It's finished with TiGi's Hold and Gloss spray to enhance the luxurious shine.
Short layers are ideal for creating styles with forward movement.
This casual style was scrunch-dried with firm hold mousse.
Add a touch of royal style to short hair — this look is especially good if you're trying to grow your hair.
The textured effect was achieved by finger-drying hair with extra-strong mousse.
gift box
we have over 500 fabulous free gifts to give away this month!
5 free
Spring is in the air and it's the perfect time to start preparing your body for those glorious summer months.
With the BaByliss BodyToner Plus you can treat yourself to wonderful massages and get back into shape at the same time.
Its superb massaging fingers will tone up problem areas such as hips and thighs and also help to stimulate your blood supply.
The BaByliss BodyToner Plus has two speeds — one for ultra gentle, soothing massage, the other for a full, stimulating treatment.
We've got 5 fabulous BodyToners, worth £35, to give away to Hairflair readers.
So, if the thought of  baring your body this summer gives you nightmares, send your name and address on a postcard to  
40 free
Treat your hair to a salon-look with a new Style Brush from G B Kent.
The six new brushes are specially designed to salon standard, so you can create professional styles at home.
Each brush has a snazzy gold handle with a rubber neck grip to give you a firm hold as you style.
We have 40 all-round brushes with ball-tipped quills (third from the right) to give away, each worth around £4.95.
Send you name and address on a postcard to  
50 free
If you've read our fab feature — the Men's Room, then you'll know that when it comes to great skin care, shaving and shaving products play a vital role — that's why Wilkinson Sword have designed Skin Solutions for men.
The range is a mixture of pre and post shave formulations which keep skin soft and smooth, and includes After Shake Soother for sensitive skin.
It usually costs £5.95/100ml but we have 50 to give away.
Send your name and address to  
50 free
Lank or naturally oily hair is often difficult to care for — whilst it needs thorough cleansing, overdoing it can lead to more problems.
Volumizer Shampoo from TiGi has a wonderful deep-cleansing formula and is enriched with European Collagen, Vitamin E and Panthenol which makes it ideal for lifeless hair.
Used in conjunction with a moisturising conditioner, it will give your lank locks the best of both worlds.
We have 50 bottles to give away.
Send your details on a postcard to   
5 free
If you like to sensational style of the 40's and 50's, then you'll love this.
From Clairol comes the new Retro hairdryer, designed with all the elegance of the era and the performance of the 90's.
The Retro has 1400 watts of power and comes complete with a detachable concentrator nozzle which makes it perfect for creating those sleek, glossy looks.
We are giving away 5 Retros, worth £24.95, absolutely free.
All you need to do is send your name and address on a postcard to  
150 free
We all know how beneficial a moisturising routine can be for the skin but how often do we think about moisturising our hair?
Within the VO5 range there is now a superb moisturising styling mousse with protective properties which make it ideal for dry or damaged hair and perfect for creating soft, natural styles.
We are giving away 150 cans of VO5 Moisturising Mousse, worth £1.69.
Send your details to  
200 free
With gloss and shine being the key words for this season's styles, intensive conditioners are becoming increasingly popular.
That's why we are giving away 200 tubes of Silvikrin's Intensive Conditioning Treatment.
The protein and vitamin-packed formula works by forming a protective barrier around your hair and is so easy to use: simply shampoo and rinse your hair with warm water, apply Intensive Conditioning Treatment evenly and massage through from roots to tips.
Leave for 2–3 mins, or more if your hair needs it, then rinse off with warm water.
If you'd like to try it, send your details to  
50 free
If you are looking for a ‘friendly’ shampoo that is gentle enough to use everyday, then Gridelin Rainwater is definitely one to try.
From Cosmetics To GO, this pot of purple gel shampoo  is made with totally natural ingredients and contains almost 50% real rainwater — and because rainwater is softer than tap or spring water, it leaves your hair feeling light, full of body and static-free.
Gridelin Rainwater Shampoo normally costs £2.50 for 200ml but we've got 50 tubs to give way.
Send details to  
closing date for offers is thursday 9th april
COMPETITION WINNERS
ravishing readers
Back in November we ran a competition to ‘Put You In The Picture’.
Since then, several lucky Hairflair readers have been along to the Feature You studios in London for a fabulous make-over and photographic shoot — with some stunning results…
Our first winner was Debbie Moseley and when Debbie told the guys at Feature You she would like to do modelling but thought she wasn't good enough, they decided to prove her wrong and set to work on a dramatic transformation.
Debbie has very fine hair and she is growing out a perm so a strong mousse was used and a reverse combing technique to achieve extra fullness for this amazing new look.
Alex Liddel from London was one of our runners-up.
Alex is a natural beauty and she rarely wears make-up so Fiona applied soft colours for a natural look.
Alex's hair was gently scrunched-dried to compliment this wonderfully casual look.
The second winner was Kerry Russel.
Kerry's hair had been recently cut but she decided to go for another snip when she arrived at the studio.
David Barron graduated the sides and back and used a gel setting technique to give Kerry this pretty day style.
If you would like information on Feature You, you can contact David Barron on  or call in at one of his salons.
Their main studio and office is located at   and they will be offering on-the-spot make-overs and photo sessions.
Feature You's larger studio is also based in Muswell Hill and will be geared for more in-depth make-overs as well as model portfolio sessions and training for hairdressers.
PRACTICAL HAIRCARE
hair in a hurry
Fill your bathroom with the latest time-saving products and you'll never be late for those important dates!
Who said two into one won't go?
The latest trend in shampoo/conditioners says it will!
Cutting down on conditioning time doesn't mean cutting down on conditioning, so check out your chemist or salon to see what's new.
Sarah used Silvikrin's brand new 2 In 1 for dry/treated hair.
Its moisturising formula is ideal for natural curls or for permed hair as both hair types tend to be dry and it costs £1.19 for a 200ml bottle.
Complicated tonging and endless blowdrying is out if you've only got minutes to spare.
If your perm is past its best and needs pepping up or you've got naturally curly hair that lacks oomph, look for special ‘body-building’ styling products such as firm-hold mousse.
Simply towel-dry hair thoroughly and apply a decent sized blob (according to the length of your hair).
Either let your hair dry naturally or give it a quick blast with a diffuser/dryer.
Sarah used Silvikrin's Revitalising Mousse from their Active Care range which refreshed her curls beautifully.
Designed to bring out hair's natural movement, it emphasises curl shape and formation.
A 150ml can costs £1.99 from chemists.