

EXCLUSIVE THUNDERBIRDS ARE GO!
EXCLUSIVE Fashions worth £1,000 to win and save 20% when you buy from FASHION Extra Collection EXCLUSIVE Iris Bishop disc offer Brand new brother KH864 punchcard machine
Dear Readers
There should be a treat for everyone among the host of special features in this Christmas issue.
To begin, there's a super competition with £1,000 of clothes to win and a generous 20% discount offered as an introduction to buying from the Fashion Extra catalogue range of fashions for size 14 plus.
There's an intarsia chart of that amazing craft, Thunderbird 2, with a pattern sized to fit ‘second-time-around’ fans as well as young new ones.
Our Christmas party sweaters for big and little girls are scattered with all the motifs of the season and what could be more delightful than Wendy Phillips' teddies, kissing under the mistletoe?
Iris Bishop brings her countryside celebration calendar to a close with her December design and offers, exclusively to MKM readers, the whole year (12 monthly designs) on disc.
Turn to page 88 for details.
I leave you to enjoy all these and more but not before all of us at MKM have wished you a ‘Happy Christmas’.
NEWSLINE
Walk-in yarn shop
A new venture for Uppingham Yarns is their new ‘Exhibition Trailer’— a mobile walk-in shop designed to travel between clubs and organisations, taking a selection of the Uppingham Yarns stocks to every venue.
The Trailer is ‘bookable’ and can travel within a 100 mile radius of Uppingham.
Club organisers who book this mobile yarn store will receive 2 ½%; of the total sales for that visit (excluding VAT).
Although it is not possible to carry all the bargain lines offered by the company, the Trailer will stock many of Uppingham's repeatable ranges and special yarn requests can be ordered by prior arrangement., The prices of all items sold in the travelling shop are inclusive of VAT and may vary slightly from the prices charged in the warehouse.
Clubs are still invited to continue to visit the warehouse by the usual arranged bus trips.
Anyone who is interested should telephone for details of availability.
A minimum of 35 feet must be allowed for parking the Trailer and towing vehicle, so make sure you have the appropriate facilities before contacting: Uppingham Yarns Ltd..
For what's new
Do you need help with your new Brother electronic machine?
Diane Bennett's tuition tapes are now available for Brother 910,950/950i and 965 machines.
Sit down at your machine with a cassette player and knit, following Diane's clear and helpful explanations and in just a few hours YOU will be the master of your machine!
Something you don't understand?
Rewind the tape and repeat that section — it's as easy as that!
There are three tapes for each model.
Tape 1 covers basic programming including all-over patters, motifs, the variation switches and lace, Tape 2 is more advanced and includes more about motifs and lace and unusual stitches and Tape 3 covers the ribber and double bed colour changer.
The tapes are just £5.25 each from your local dealer, or you can order direct from Diane Bennett .
Bond Bags
Peggy La Riviere is well known for her wide variety of made-to-measure knitting machine and accessory covers and cases.
Bond owners might like to know that they can use her Knitmaster Chunky ribber-carrying cases for their machines — the bags are the perfect size for the Bond Classic.
The price, which includes P&P is £15.20.
Peggy is also willing to take orders for slightly longer bags to fit the Elite plus extensions.
For more details of these and the full range of covers, cone ladders and blocking cloths which Peggy offers, please write to La Riviere,.
Chunky Leaflets
Spectrum are now publishing hand knitting pattern leaflets.
One of the first sets includes four baby designs for Chunky knitting.
Leaflet number 7071 shows a stocking stitch sweater with garter stitch and cable trimmed sleeves; leaflet 7072 offers a lovely textured sweater in knot stitch round necked cardigan and sweater pattern; leaflet 7073 includes instructions for a classic stocking stitch round necked cardigan and sweater pattern; leaflet 7074 features a textured coat with hood.
All patterns are written for 46–56cm/18–22 inch chest and the garments are knitted in Spectrum's Chunky which comes in 100 gram balls.
Look out for these leaflets at your local Spectrum stockist.
Keeping Warm
The 1992/1993 Angora Thermal Clothing catalogue contains a range of practical ‘thermal’ items which are guaranteed to keep out the chill!
You'll find gloves, mittens, hats, snoods, balaclavas, scarves, socks, stockings, slippers, waistcoats and back wraps as well as leg, knee and wrist warmers — all made from the light soft, natural fibres produced by the Angora rabbits of the Orkneys.
ORKNEY ANGORA
‘Orkney Angora’, the company which produces these essential thermal accessories, is a small family-run croft business based on one of the northernmost Orkney Isles.
The idea started in 1982 when William and Elizabeth  Sichel established the cottage industry from the ruins of a derelict croft.
the idea has now blossomed into a successful mail order business with customers from both the UK and overseas.
For catalogue and current price list please send a large SAE to Orkney Angora,.
Out and About
If you are in the Manchester area and looking for something to do, the City Art Gallery in Mosley Street might be well worth a visit.
Exhibitions of a variety of paintings and decorative art collections are a regular feature, with an on-going programme to suit all tastes.
Of particular interest to anyone who hobby relates to the designing or making of garments is the costume collection at Platt Hall.
Apparently, the collection is growing rapidly and features garments from the mod eighteenth century to the present day.
Designer Gina Fratini has donated one of her amazing ‘originals’ to the collection — a frothy pink evening dress which she designed in 1978!
Other ‘designer’ garments on show illustrate the work of Jean Muir, Piero de Monzi, Mariano Fortuny and Paul Poiret.
Further items on display include a large bound pattern book from Lockett, Crossland & Co of Strangeways, which dates back to 1952, containing over three and a half thousand samples of printed cotton fabric together with listings of the client firm for which it was produced.
There are many sewing samples, framed fashion designs and other trade catalogues on view.
The Gallery of English Costume is at Platt Hall,.
Admission is free and the Gallery is open Wednesdays to Sundays between 10am and 5.45 pm.
Stretch Fabric Paints
Here's the chance to be creative on fabric and knitwear with an exciting new range of products recently introduced into the UK by the yarn company F W Bramwell & Co Ltd.
‘Jones Tones’is a colourful range of washable,stretch fabric paints suitable for application on t-shirts, knitwear, Lycra, Lingerie, and shoes.
The paints come in a choice of twenty four ‘enamel’ tones, plus a further selection of ranges and finishes including five ‘Glitter’tones — Gold, Silver, Copper, Plumberry and Turquoise — all ideal for party wear if you want that bit extra sparkle!
What's more, the paints act as an adhesive so you can combine sequins and glitter in with your design.
These paints are  extremely flexible and stretchable; they stay soft and do not crack; they are non toxic and can be diluted with water for fabric dye.
As well as being fully washable, the paints can be tumble dried.
If you do not feel creative there are two further ‘Jones Tones’ accessories to help you.
The first is an art board which comes with a design printed on it — all you have to do is place your garment over the top of the board and trace off the design before painting it.
Alternatively, you can select one of the iron-on transfer designs — these can be used on most fabrics.
You then have a choice of using the paints to complete the picture or the range's own iron-on foil.
There is a wide choice of designs and motifs and these are available in black or white and gold glitter/black.
For your nearest stockist please contact F W Bramwell & Co Ltd,.
Time to Learn
Here is another gift idea with the children in mind.
If you'd like your kids to learn how to tell the time, treat the younger members of the family to their own watch from the ‘Flik Flak Teaching’range.
These are available in a variety of bright colours with co-ordinating wrist bands.
The watch face consists of two different coloured hands — the shorter, red ‘Flik’ hand rotates around the inner circle of numbers (1–12) to indicate the hour of the day whilst the longer, blue ‘Flak’hand ticks around the outer circle of numbers (marked off in fives up to 60) for the minutes.
On the ‘Child's Play’range, the inner circle is marked off into four different coloured sections to show how long a quarter of an hour lasts.
The watches in this range are priced at £14.50 (rrp) and come with a colourful cardboard play clock for practice.
Flik Flak Teaching alarm clocks are also available for around £12.50.
For the older children there is a choice of ‘Paradise’animal theme watches with dolphins, elephants, lions or zebras decorating the straps and watch faces, or ‘Champion’watches featuring motorbikes, racing cars, space rockets and Big Foot.
These cost around £16.50.
All watches in the Flik Flak ranges are Swiss-made with quartz accuracy and are water and shock resistant.
This looks like a good item for your Christmas shopping list!
Get stuffing
With Christmas coming up, there will be plenty of activity amongst knitters and needleworkers to create their own collections of gifts and toys for family, friends and charity events.
Whether it's a knitted or fabric item, suitable fillings will be required so we thought we would tell you about a couple of products from Abbey Quilting Ltd, a company which specialises in wadding and filling products for craftwork.
Their range includes a fine, natural Kapok which makes an ideal filling for soft toys and other items.
Kapok is a natural products obtained from the soft vegetable fibre found inside the pods of the Kapok tree ‘Ceiba Pentandra’which grows in tropical climates.
It is non-toxic and does not require any processing which is harmful to the environment.
Its durable qualities and lightweight characteristics make it a very economical filling with the added advantage of less danger risk from heat and fumes than some other fillings when ignited.
In addition, Kapok tends to mould well, even into the smallest objects, without the problems of lumpiness.
It is available in 250 gram and 400 gram bags as well as 20 kilogram bales, to suit individual requirements.
For the man-made option,‘Cumulus’is a luxury 100% ‘Hi-Loft’ Virgin Polyester fibre which is highly suitable for a variety of filling applications including cushions, upholstery and toys.
Again, this is a very soft filling, white in colour, which is completely washable.
It is available in 325 gram bags or as 10 or 20 kilogram bales.
Cumulus can also be supplied as Thermguard wadding in roll form (ideal for cot quilts, coats and sportswear) or in Combustion Modified form to compile with BS5852 (Source 2).
Look for these products in your high street stores or write for stockists and further information to Abbey Kapok & Fillings,.
Mini Vac
We told you earlier this year about the Mabbott & Griffith Mini Vac (January issue).
This is the time of year when we all rack our brains to think of the perfect Christmas present, so if you are planning to look for something a bit different for the machine knitter in the family, this could be the ideal gift.
The Mini Vac is an attachment which can be used in conjunction with your household vacuum cleaner.
It consists of a two and a half foot length of narrow clear plastic tube which is fixed to your cleaner by means of an adaptor.
The tube connects to a set of hard plastic extender tubes which assist the cleaning of hard-to-reach areas.
to the end of these, one of the three cleaning heads (a choice of one crevice and two brush tools) can be attached for the job in hand.
An airflow adjuster ensures that the suction power is controllable.
The Mini Vac is very reasonably priced at £10.95 to include p&p and is ideal for cleaning dust and dirt off knitting machines as well as a variety of home and office equipment including typewriters, computer keyboards, video recorders, answering machines, stereos and so on.
For more information please write to .
DEAR ANNE...
Don't keep your ideas, suggestions, experiences, criticism or praise to yourself.
Share your thoughts with other readers by writing to Anne at Machine Knitting Monthly, 3 Bridge Avenue, Maidenhead, Berkshire SL6 1RR.
STAR LETTER
Dear Anne,
As I have learned so many tips over the years from your readers, I thought they might be interested in my method for working buttonholes.
I have demonstrated this knitting technique at my local knitting club and now the members refer to it as the ‘Sylvia Glenister buttonholes’!
Yours sincerely, Sylvia Glenister, Ferndown, Dorset
Thank you Sylvia for the trouble you have taken.
We are most impressed by the ‘Glenister buttonhole’ samples and think that you deserve a FREE subscription to Machine Knitting Monthly for your efforts!
For the benefit of other readers, who cannot fail to produce the perfect buttonhole band by following these easy to understand steps — here are Sylvia's ‘Star Letter’ instructions:
1.
Work out how many stitches the band requires by measuring the jacket front against the needle bed.
2.
Cast on using the weaving brushes or waste yarn, then change to main yarn.
3.
Knit 8 rows MT.
4.
Work out how many buttonholes you need, allowing three stitches at each end of the band.
5.
For the band knitted for the club demonstration, six stitches were used for every buttonhole with ten stitches between each one.
6.
Bring forward 6 needles and leave 10 needles in WP (working position).
These buttonhole stitches will be referred to as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Repeat all along the row.
7.
Using a spare length of the SAME colour yarn, knit stitch 1 by hand.
Cast off stitches 2,3,4, and 5.
Knit stitch 6 by hand.
Loop the yarn across to the next set of 6 stitches and repeat until all buttonholes have been worked.
8.
WITHOUT BREAKING YARN, come back along the row, continuing to knit stitches 1 and 6 by hand and casting on by e-wrap over stitches 2,3,4 and 5.
9.
Knit rows MT.
10.
Knit 1 row on largest tension for the foldline row.
11.
Knit 8 rows MT.
12.
Pick up the 4 e-wrap stitches all across the row and place on to needles.
Knit 1 row.
13.
Repeat steps 6 and 7 once.
14.
Hook up ORIGINAL cast off line of stitches.
15.
Knit 8 rows MT.
16.
Pick up ORIGINAL cast on edge of band, making sure it is even.
17.
Hook up jacket front edge with WRONG side facing Knit 1 row on the largest tension and cast off.
Cast on with waste yarn.
Change to main yarn.
Knit 8 rows main tension.
Knit 1st, cast of 4st, knit 1st (by hand)
Knit 1st, E wrap 4st, knit 1st (by hand)
Knit 8 rows main tension.
Knit 1 row loosest tension (fold row).
Pick up E wrap stitches.
then repeat line one.
Pick up original cast off stitches.
Knit 8 rows main tension.
Pick up first row of main yarn.
Release waste yarn and hook up to jacket front in the usual way.
Dear Anne,
I was so pleased to see the advert for the Minitex Knitter (July MKM), because I once had one!
It was my first machine, bought in 1952 after the birth of my second child.
I wanted a Knitmaster, but my husband insisted that this must be a better buy, although I don't think I paid more than £42.00 for it.
That bar in the illustration, had to be lifted up and over at the end of each row to deposit the stitches on to the needles — a great opportunity to drop stitches, which I did most of the time!
I only kept the machine for a month and then sold it (I often wonder how the lady buyer fared), after which I bought a Knitmaster 3500.
Then followed the 4500, the first ribbing attachment — which worked on some days and not on others (on the latter I would give up and stop knitting for the day!).
I then went on to an Orion double bed, followed by a pink Passap; I still wanted a single bed for speed — we ran a guest house and I was deprived of all knitting during the summer months.
So I got a Pine Star — I don't remember anything about that one except that the needles were selected with a handle which rang a bell.
I went back to the Knitmaster with a 302, then a 321 and through the gamut until I had one of the first Electronic 500 models; still with that, I bought a push button Brother for the lace, then the 840, and 910 and finally the 950i — now I have that and the Passap Duomatic 80.
I think I have changed machines more times than my husband has changed cars!
I do sometimes get asked  how many machines I've had and although I haven't actually counted them up, you will see that it is quite a few!!
Dear Anne,
Here is another tip for people with ribbers who want to make a nice, neat edge.
Select needles on both beds and knit the zigzag cast on row.
Put both ribber levers to holding position and knit the first of the three circular rows with the ribber needles in hold position.
Return the ribber levers to normal and complete the knitting.
When finished, pull the little loop at the left of the cast on and the first row will tighten up very neatly — the yarn from the holding position row pulls through.
Dear Anne,
In the face of thumb joints with developing arthritis, I decided to lash out and treat myself to a Silver Reed punching machine, PM10.
It is proving a delight to use; on my fist attempt I punched two cards in quick succession without making a single mistake and with no strain to my hands — despite the instructions for the punching being written in Japanese only!
I have always used a magnetic board and marker to follow the chart and found that I didn't even have to look away from it whilst punching, thus speeding up the whole process considerably.
I use a punchcard roll and began by punching out the customary two rows of holes for the overlapping join, only to find that the first row stretched the plastic slightly, giving a wavy edge.
On this occasion I simply punched out an extra row of holes and cut away the damaged edge.
However, then I hit upon the idea of finishing the card by punching out four rows of holes and cutting between them, so that two rows remained on the blank roll ready to make the start of the next card when required.
This completely eliminates the problem without wasting any card!
Dear Anne,
I recently tried knitting a sweater in four ply acrylic, using a slightly different style pattern from my usual choice.
However, when the garment was completed I didn't like it and took the decision to unpick the whole thing.
As I unravelled the yarn, I wound it loosely around a single bed headboard, knitting the ends together as I went along.
This produced several long skeins of yarn.
I steamed the skeins, using my In-Ex steaming kit.
I didn't need to use any weights as the skeins were heavy enough to pull out the kinks.
I then hung the skeins outside on the washing line to allow the fresh air to blow the yarn dry.
When they were completely dry I looped the skeins over two kitchen chairs, thus leaving my hands free to rewind the yarn on to cones.
I now have a new sweater and a clean conscience!
Dear Anne,
I was recently given a Knitleader as a gift.
I wanted to use different coloured pens to mark out various patterns on the same sheet as I could only afford to buy one sheet at the time.
I know that Brother supply a black pen with the Knitleader and it is also possible to buy three other colours from them.
However, I use an overhead projector in the course of my job and the pens we use are washable, so I thought these might be a suitable substitute.
I was recently down at my local stationers looking for the projector pens when I spotted a pack of ‘Berol Washable Juniors’.
These are fine tipped pens but ‘Berol Infants’ are another option with a broader tip.
The pens come in a wide range of colours and when tested on the Knitleader sheet the markings were clear and washed off easily with some damp kitchen roll.
I thought other readers might find this information useful!
Dear Anne,
My husband has just solved a knitting mystery!
Watching me wind two strands together on the cone winder he exclaimed ‘Ah, now I know what ‘k 2 tog’ means!’
We pay £5 for every letter we publish, provided it has not already been accepted or published elsewhere, plus a year's subscription to the magazine for a Star Letter.
SIMPLY SILVER
My subject is still colour changer but this month I'm moving on to its use in double bed knitting, in particular for double jacquard which is easier than you may think.
Liz Norton
Both the YC-5 and YC-6 can be used for double bed knitting.
On the YC-6, the yarn brake and the colour changer arm must both be set to the double bed position.
If you've not used the colour changer before, or not used your ribber for more than welts, it is wise to start by using the colour changer just to knit striped plain rib.
Double jacquard is usually knitted on a full needle rib arrangement (all needles on both beds in working position, ribber on half pitch), using a fine yarn (2-ply or two strands or 2.30s) on a standard gauge machine.
So again if you're unfamiliar with this yarn and needle arrangement, start by knitting stripes in full needle rib.
The YC-5 colour changer was supplied with cards pre-punched for knitting double jacquard.
The YC-6 doesn't have cards with it, though you can buy pre-punched cards separately.
Of course you can also punch your own.
The first time I heard two experienced knitters talking about punching cards for double jacquard.
I decided it all sounded so complicated that it wasn't for me.
It was years later that I realised I really would have to tackle it, but I found it was much easier than I had expected.
All those years of possible double jacquard knitting missed, because I thought it would be too difficult!
So stay with me and have a go.
The principle behind double jacquard is really very simple.
On the main when you knit two colours in a row (that is Fair Isle) you are able to thread both colours in one row with one pass of the carriage.
The ribber connecting arm can only hold one yarn, so only one colour can be knitted at a time.
Therefore, the pattern stitches and the background stitches have to be knitted on two separate rows.
Instead of setting the main carriage to Fair Isle, it is set to slip, so while the pattern stitches are knitted the background stitches are slipped and vice versa.
this is the simple idea or principle behind knitting and punching a card for double jacquard.
It gets a little more complicated when you realise that the colour changer is at one end of the needle bed, so that you can only change colours every two rows.
Let's see how we knit double jacquard in just two colours.
The routine for knitting double jacquard is to start with the carriages at the right and threaded with the background colour.
The main carriage is set to slip and the ribber to knit (both set levers on 1).
Knit one row to the left, change to the pattern colour and knit two rows, change to the background colour and knit two rows, and so on, changing colours every two rows.
On the first row, you knit the background stitches for the first row of the original pattern, on the second row you knit the pattern stitches for the first row of the original pattern; row 3 is the pattern stitches for the second row of the original pattern and the fourth row the background stitches for the second row of the original pattern.
(By the ‘original pattern’ I mean the pattern as designed for single bed knitting,not as punched out for double jacquard; the double jacquard card is of course moving on at every row.)
While the main bed is knitting the pattern, the ribber bed (on this basic setting) knits every needle on every row.
With the RG1 Ribber Carriage, you can knit what is often known as bird's eye Fair Isle.
This carriage can be set to knit alternate needles on the ribber.
You must be sure to have an even number of needles on the ribber bed, since the carriage selects every second needle.
If you have an even number of needles, after two rows every needle has been knitted once; whereas if you have an odd number of stitches, then the same needles have been knitted on both rows and will go on being knitted on subsequent rows so that eventually the carriage jams.
A third alternative is available if you have the SRP60N ribber.
The carriage of this ribber has an extra control, the autoset lever.
This lever has two positions, 1 ‘and 0, and if the autoset cam driver is positioned in its holder on the left of the ribber, it will change the autoset lever from 1 to 0, or 0 to 1, every time the carriage goes into the colour changer.
The autoset lever overrides the set levers when they are on 1 (but not when they are on 0).
If the autoset lever is on 0 (and the pick knob on —) the ribber carriage slips even when the set levers are on 1.
This means that the ribber only knits every two rows, so the knitting has a single colour on the back instead of stripes.
All these fabrics, knitted with the different ribber settings, can be called double jacquard, but they are different.
Double jacquard is a group of fabrics rather than one fabric.
Now let's return to punching cards for jacquard, as I believe that until you can punch your own cards you're not in control of your  knitting.
As we've seen, row one is background, rows two and three are pattern, and row four is background.
After four rows, you've knitted two twos of the original pattern.
The easiest method for punching a card for jacquard is to forget the background rows to start with, and punch only the pattern rows.
These are punched on rows two, three, six, seven, ten, eleven, and so on.
Start by punching row one of the original pattern on row two of your jacquard card; row two of the original pattern on row three; miss two rows on the card you're punching, and punch row three of the original pattern on row six; row four on row seven, and so on.
check card is supplied with the colour changer.
It is striped in orange and blue.
The blue stripes show the pattern rows, the orange background rows.
When you've punched out the pattern rows, place the check card behind your newly punched card and check that only blue is showing through the holes.
Now punch the background rows.
This is easy!
On the first row, punch any position that isn't punched on row two.
On row four punch any position that isn't punched on row three.
On row five punch any position that isn't punched on row six, and so on.
Finally, you have to mark your card to show when to change colour.
If you're only using two colours and have used a Silver blank card, the rows are already marked for you.
The rectangles drawn around the row numbers indicate the rows on which you knit with the background colour.
If you are using more than two colours, you will need to mark the rows yourself.
The rectangles will still mark the background rows, but you can of course change with background as well as the pattern colour.
Although you are changing colour every two rows, usually as long as long as you are changing between just two of your colours, the card isn't marked.
You mark the card when you want to start a new colour.
As we saw last month, the row you are knitting is five rows down inside the card reader so, to mark the card, locate the row on which you want to change colour, and then count up five (not including the row on which you want to change colour) and mark the card.
This m arks when you actually want to knit the new colour.
The pre-punched cards are marked on the previous row as well, to tell you to push the button on the colour changer for the new colour.
(this is usually done when the carriage is at the right, when there is one more row to knit before changing colour).
Locating the row on which you want to change colour can be difficult, as visually the car doesn't bear much resemblance to the knitted, original, design.
Use the check card to help you distinguish between pattern and background rows.
If it's the pattern colours that are changing, it is helpful to mark the changes before punching the background rows.
All that remains to be said is Happy Christmas and good wishes for a New Knitting Year!
MASTERCLASS
STARLIGHT AND SILVER, GLITTER AND GOLD DUST
Christmas lights and trees sparkling as the wind catches the branches — the old magic works every year.
Now is the time to knit those charming small presents and decorations and to create your own Christmas magic.
Mary Dowse
Mostly very cheap and quick to knit, this year most of mine use something you'll have plenty of — empty cones!
Usually it's quite a problem to know what to do with them, though they are often in demand for decorations at your local primary school, but between you and your knitting club friends there will be more than enough for everyone.
Cones tend to come in two shapes — some, either cardboard or plastic, with a pointed top and others with a gap of about one to one and a half inches at the top.
You can use either but the latter are perhaps easier for my first idea — Christmas angels or other Christmas figures.
For each of these you will need one cone and a papier-mâché or other cheap other cheap ball for the head (paper-mâché ball are available at most craft shops).
Stick the ball firmly to the top of the cone.
If you want to hang the decoration up, first make a hole through the ball with a knitting needle or metal skewer. then I like to spray the whole figure with gold or silver paint so that my added ‘clothes’ can be a delicate and fragile as I wish.
I then knit a piece of lace fabric just wide enough to stretch round the base of the cone and long enough to cover it.
Sew this into a tube over the cone.
fix it firmly at the vase with a few stitches or a spot of glue and pull it round the ‘neck’ by winding a thread round it (you'll have a few small folds here).
Paint the eyes and mouth on the ‘face’ and your angel is then ready for wings and halo.
|The easiest ‘wings’ are made of a rectangle of nylon net, tightly gathered in the centre to form two wings.
Sew this to the back of your knitting.
As these are decorations and not toys, you can use glass or pearl-headed pins to make the halo, either pushing them right into the head like a wreath, or half-way in so that the halo stands away from the head.
you can add all sorts of decorations, ‘jewels’ round the neck, sequins on the wings, sequins stuck closely on the head to simulate a cap of curls or you can even make the wings from gold or silver ‘leaf’sprays.
If you know that small children are likely to handle the figures, avoid the pins and stuck on sequins and use scraps of tinsel for wreath or halo.
This idea can be used for all kinds of Christmas figures.
you could make a complete Christmas stable scene with shepherds in ‘homespun’ knitting, angels, the three Kings in bejewelled lace, Mary in a blue robe and white veil and Joseph in brown or dark green.
This could be very beautiful and perhaps even destined for your local church.
If you haven't time to make all the figures yourself, a group from your knitting club might get together to make these as a shared gift.
Once you begin you'll discover all kinds of variations of your own.
If you want to paint the heads in more natural colours do this before making the figures.
Stick the balls on knitting needles so that you can hold them easily while you're painting and then stand the knitting needles in a jar so that the heads can dry safely.
I also like to use cones as decorative holders for greenery and flowers.
Holly, ivy, mistletoe, real flowers and gilded artificial or dried sprays all look lovely hung on a wall or suspended from ceilings or in windows.
For this purpose I line the cone first with kitchen foil and then cover the outside with knitting, tying the point very firmly and finishing it with a tassel or small ‘frill’.
Then I knit a rouleau strip to attach to the sides of the cone so that it can be hung up.
You can fill it to overflowing with dried or gilded flowers and leaves or put some damp oasis inside the cone and use fresh holly, ivy or mistletoe.
It will all look so much nicer than bits of tied drying holly tucked into picture frames.
You can also make a lovely Christmas garland this way.
Use a strip of knitting as long as you want for your finished garland, sewn as you go so that you have a covered cone, about six inches of knitting unsewn, another cone—as long as long as you want your garland to be.
Fill each one with holly or Christmas leaves and flowers and you have a wonderful garland to drape your staircase or hand on a wall.
Try too one richly decorated cone filled to over-flowing with mistletoe as a change from the inevitable ‘bunch’.
I have also been experimenting with more knitted ‘jewellery’.
I still make necklaces from strips of knitting with beads or marbles sewn in at intervals and they are still very popular, whether ‘wooly’ for sweaters or lurexed for evening wear; but |I have recently been trying very simple macramé to knot several strips decoratively together and maybe add a few beads or jewels and the results can be quite spectacular.
If you haven't tried macramé, there are lots of ‘How to’ books at your local library.
You will probably become an addict and spend much time over the Christmas holiday on fringes for stoles and scarves as well!
You don't really need to knit ‘tubes’ for your ‘jewellery’as simple strips roll like anything!
You could even cover a cone with macramé for a really exciting special flower holder.
Now for some small and very practical suggestions for last minute presents.
For knitters, a cone covered with a simple shaped piece of knitting and given a hanger, can be hung near the machine as a pretty and extremely useful container for small tools and accessories.
I've used an uncovered one on a piece of string for ages, but a decorative one would be much nicer.
There is also one present very dear to the hearts of my family as we are terrible ‘glove-losers’ and can never find a pair to keep our hands warm.
fingerless mittens are an ideal solution as you can keep them on all the time even when shopping and paying at the checkout.
They can be very elaborate, with a separate little piece for the base of each finger, but a very simple pair works just as well and takes only minutes to knit.
All you need for each one is a piece of knitting beginning with a hem at the wrist, wide enough to go round the hand and long enough to reach easily to the base of the fingers.
Make the seam with a hole for the thumb and sew together between the fingers.
Decorate as much or as little as you like.
It is quite amazing how warm these little covers are and you don't have to keep pulling them on and off, so they won't get lost!
A pair of these, with a simple matching scarf in a lovely colour, makes a quick but most acceptable present.
Have a wonderful Christmas.
SINGER SPECIAL
SYSTEM 9000 SCREEN TO FABRIC RELATIONSHIP — Part 2
In Part 1, George discussed the stitch pattern options provided by the Singer 9000 program.
He pointed out that a design could be drawn using one option and knitted using another.
Now he tells us how.
George le Warré
Remember that once a design is either drawn on screen or recalled from the disk into the working memory, it will remain in the working memory as long as the controller remains switched on, or until you erase it from the screen with the ERASE DRAWING option from within the FUNCTION menu in the menu bar at the top of the design screen.
By taking advantage of this facility, we can draw one pattern in a basic design option (such as Fair Isle as we have done) and then use it for many different types of knitting.
We can see this by now selecting Fancy Patterns from the TYPE OF KNITTING menu.
Our pattern will return of course, as we did not erase it or switch off the controller.
the design screen is slightly different.
Look at the right side where the colour palette is displayed.
Colour one remains in the large box above the palette bar, but colours two, four, six and eight are now all displayed as black.
Figure 1.
This time, our pattern will be displayed with all that was originally designed in the second colour, transcribed to black on the screen.
Figure 2.
When you now leave the design screen and select KNITTING from the main menu, the design will be sent from the controller to the machine as a fancy stitch, meaning slip, tuck or whatever.
the actual way it is created will depend on the carriage setting.
If you choose slip with the 0 key, then what was black on the design screen will be the slipped stitches.
The background colour will select to knit normally and the black areas will create the tucks.
Now from the main menu select Lace.
the screen is the same as when selecting Fancy Patterns, with the design shown in black on the background colour.
The difference will occur when you quit from the screen showing  the pattern for lace and then select knitting.
Now only the black areas on the design will select needles on the back bed of the machine.
the background colour will be ignored completely, so that the lace pattern may be made using the garter/lace carriage or the transfer carriage, using any of the lace knitting techniques in the manual, or by dropping the stitches from the back bed after every two rows, to form release lace.
Now return to the main design screen by selecting the option Norwegian from the Design and Creation option.
Our pattern will be displayed as we originally designed it in the Fair Isle option, but we are about to make some changes.
fill in the design with other colours to make a new pattern as shown in figure 3.
Notice that for this type of work, you must have the background colour covering THREE rows of squares at the start as shown, or any ODD number, three, five, seven, nine and so on.
This is because we will commence knitting with the carriages at the right and be knitting the first row of background colour to the left.
The design is read by the controller and transferred one row at a time for each colour, so we need this odd row to start.
All subsequent sections of colour for the background must be designed in multiples of two, but the last section, where the upper portion of the pattern will join the first section, must also be an odd number.
This is in order that when the top and bottom of the pattern join, we are once again knitting in multiples of two.
figure 4 shows a four-colour design made from our original design.
It can of course be drawn in the Fair Isle option as is shown here.
But after drawing and before knitting, you must quit then select 4-Colour design from the menu.
When the pattern is displayed from within this option it will appear as shown in Figure 5.
Notice that the controller has automatically doubled every horizontal row of the design.
This is because the way that these patterns are read is by knitting two rows of each colour, starting with colour one, then colour two, then colour three before moving on to the next line of the double length pattern.
The 3-Colour pattern option operates in much the same way except that it knits colour one, colour two, colour three and colour four before moving on to the next pattern line.
Norwegian, three-colour and four-colour designs all make use of the colour changer, but if you do not have this accessory they are still possible if you use the jacquard claw that comes with the machine.
This is by no means as quick and easy as using the colour changer, but at least the designs are a possibility.
SPOTLIGHT
KNITTING IN ROMANIA
‘We can all do more than we have done and not be a whit the worse.
It was never loving that emptied the heart, nor giving that emptied the purse.’
‘Of all the things I was taught at school, this sticks in my mind more that anything,’ said Christine Cooper when she wrote to tell us of her reaction to an article in MKM. that was last spring when we published a newsletter from Christine Morey telling of her adventures in Romania.
Her very personal ‘aid programme’ has been to take knitting machines, yarn and teaching skills to provide a means of earning a living for people trapped by the present poverty of their country.
Christine's campaign has had enormous impact and we are proud that our report of it has had some impact too.
As you read this article, Christine is due to be in Romania again.
When she told us about this visit, she hoped it would be centred around a seminar, funded by the Romanian government, at which tutors would be trained to teach machine knitting to young people whose chances of employment near their own homes were otherwise remote.
with her determination, we feel sure this hope will be realised but, meanwhile, here are some highlights from her summer newsletter to bring you up to date with this amazing story.
‘My fourth visit to Romania, in June, took me on a return visit to Brasov then to Siret, within walking distance of the Russian border.
It was a good walk into the girls’ orphanage at Codlea and see about 30 of them happily at their machines under instruction from a tutor I had taught last year.
Before, they had produced some good samples but this time they were able to show me some fine quality knitwear including knitted underwear.
There are three exciting new ventures under way here.
Firstly, Ilie Peter, the director of the orphanage, plans to find room in his house for a machine knitting school for about ten handicapped people at a time.
Then my friend in interpreter, Diana, hopes to do something similar at her home in Brasov.
Those pupils who cannot afford a machine will be able to rent one and Diana will teach them how to produce knitwear for their families and for sale.
The third opportunity is offered by Cristina, a Brasov businesswoman with her own workshop and retail shop.
Her scheme is to teach machine knitting to a number of people, including some handicapped, who will then be able to sell their garments in her shop.
Statistics can be merely cold facts but these represent the great generosity and warmth of the machine knitting fraternity in the UK.
I've actually received 126 machines — 102 of which are in Romania and the others in transit or waiting to go — and 118 large bin bags of wool as well as a large consignment from Bramwell's. thanks too to TNT, the national transport firm and Machine Knitting News and Machine Knitting Monthly for carrying my ‘Romania advert.
Whilst we cannot change the world, we should not lose sight of the fact that we can change someone's world.
In Brasov, 90 people are now knitting regularly, with more to follow through the three schools mentioned above.
Do you remember the Anneka Rice challenge when she and her team transformed an orphanage in Siret, North East Romania?
I took the seven hour road journey to Siret with my friend Diana.
I find it difficult to put what I saw into words.
Perhaps it's sufficient to say that Diana, herself a Romanian, was deeply shocked and did not realise that children were living in such awful conditions in her own country.
there are over 500 children living in the orphanage with ages ranging from three to twenty plus, many suffering from mental or physical illness.
It was only possible for us to teach four girls and five teachers.
The girls were very bright with one nine-year-old working on her machine from six in the morning to six at night — so we did manage to make some progress.
I would describe our time in Siret as being able to see just a few rays of light in a very dark week.
Thank you for making all this possible.’
We all have the utmost admiration for Christine's work but what of Christine Cooper and her letter?
Well, this Christine is from Haslington Machine Knitting Club and when she read about the plight of the Romanians she resolved to do something about it — but what?
This was decided by a phone call from Sue Hunt, organiser of a charity run at daughter Sally's school, Sandbach High.
Sue just happened to mention that she had been to an orphanage in Brasov and Christine realised it was the same one that Christine Morey had written about.
Sue said a lorry from the area would be going to Brasov and without stopping to think, Christine asked if she would like to take some wool.
Of course was the answer was yes so Christine asked her local paper,The Guardian , to print an urgent plea for wool.
With the help of Haslington and Sandbach Knitting Clubs it took just ten days to fill 18 large bin liners and two machines were donated as well.
Christine is continuing her collection and asks us to tell all knitters in the Crewe/Stoke-on-Trent area that two wool shops near you have offered to collect full or part cones in good, clean condition.
So, as Christine Cooper says, ‘…have a spring clean, go back to your March 1992 issue, read the article on page 39 and see if you can help these people help themselves.’
If you would like to help, the shops to contact are:
LATCH ON
DESIGN
Could you be a designer?
I know I couldn't, I haven't got an original idea in my head.
Having said that, I rarely, if ever, follow a written pattern line by line.
Joan Lafferty
All my garments are knitted using that excellent attachment, the charting device — Knit Leader, Knit Radar/contour, knit copy, knit tracer or knit driver.
So, having drawn out my basic shapes, I can fill them with whatever takes my fancy, or possibly the fancy of a customer.
A lady I knew many years ago designed knitted suits and so on at the drop of a hat.
‘My mind is buzzing with ideas, I can't get them knitted fast enough’ she told me.
My mind does not buzz that way.
Words, yes, knitting designs, no.
Another designer, this time a man, told me there is no such thing as a really new design, only a bit taken from here and something else added from there.
Now we are getting rather more into my line of territory.
I have had a Brother 850 (and latterly 850i) since they first appeared in this country.
So obviously I have the ‘Stitch World’ book with pictures of all the patterns that are built into this machine.
Just lately I have made a conscious effort to really look at the book.
Of course I have looked at it in the past, many, many times.
This time I studied it in good sunlight, because some of the colours are so dim or so dark that one can hardly see what the pattern is all about.
In spite of all my previous ‘looks’ I found one or two that I cannot remember seeing before!
So this has been my first step towards designing something different.
For a start I decided to work from number one.
This is a Fair Isle pattern in blocks of two colours.
Having a ‘purge’ on the cones in my cupboard I used an acrylic ‘angora’type of yarn for the background (putting a strand of sewing cotton with the yarn for the welts).
I also had odd ends of three cones of that random yarn that was so popular a number of years ago.
With a little juggling I managed to get each section of the garment starting with lilac, shading to blue then to a yellowish pink.
At the end of the day I thought it looked very attractive, but whether it will catch the eye of a customer when I display it on the craft stall is another matter.
This brings to me another point when it comes to designing.
I have very little idea of how to blend colours.
I blame my mother for this.
Although she was an accomplished water colour artist, she had no dress sense at all.
I well remember going with her to buy a new hat (we all wore hats in my young days).
She said something like ‘I've got brown shoes, and a blue coat, so I think I'll have a red hat’.
It is any wonder I have no colour sense?
Again using Stitch World I have had some success with patterns in tuck stitch, with certain needles out of work.
(Numbers 284 and 288 are a couple.)
These have made very nice baby coats in white and one of them has actually sold!
Because they are white I had not occasion to exercise any choice of colours, but I can scarcely knit everything in white.
The colours of garments printed in books and magazines probably influence whether we like the garment or not.
I can't stand pink, so any jumper knitted in pink is rapidly passed over, so far as I am concerned.
I'm sure I'm not alone in this sort of discrimination.
If only one stopped to look at the shape of the garment and the stitch used, it might well be just what we have been looking for!
So if we alter the colour are we designing our own garment?
Hardly!
But if we alter the length of the sleeves and the shape of the neck we are getting a bit nearer to our own design.
This reminds me of the story about the old lady who boasted she had been wearing the same pair of stockings for twenty years — one year she knitted new feet on them and the next new legs!
there are courses on design advertised from time to time.
I once attended one such two day course with the idea that I would be able to find out what makes a designer ‘tick’.
The first morning we spent weaving with every other needle, laying the wool across by hand! this put me off right away, because we were using punchcard machines, so nothing would have been easier than to slip in Card 1 and go ahead with our weaving without any trouble.
In the afternoon we have to draw a design.
Unlike my mother I cannot draw anything but the curtains, so I was bottom of the class at this.
The second day we had to knit our design.
At the teacher's suggestion I then found myself colouring some swing tickets at happened to be in my knitting bag and attaching these to a very poor piece of knitting.
I recognised it as an apple tree, but no one else did.
Even had it been the best apple tree anyone could knit I cannot see that I would hang swing tickets on it (so badly coloured with felt tip pen that the Infant's class would be ashamed of the work!).
In all fairness I saw some beautiful work from other members of the class, so obviously there was some virtue in the course, but not for me.
I have, however, experienced ‘design’ from the other side, as it were.
I was working for a yarn firm who had just gone into the marketing of coned yarns — unfortunately they did not stay the course.
The system started with a designer who drew the garment, noting details of trimming, colour and suchlike.
then a pattern writer created a ‘workable’ pattern from the drawing.
Finally I came in as a ‘check’ knitter, making the garment to the written instructions to see that there were no errors in them.
I was not very keen on this bit, because I could immediately see where the pattern could have been better written.
Remember this was many years ago, so the magazine in question was a general craft magazine, not one especially written for machine knitting — those were very thin on the ground at that tine, in fact there was only one in this country.
the magazine had the final say on the format of the finished pattern, so I found myself having to pass over things like ‘Take off on a hand knitting needle’ when I knew full well that it would be much easier to ‘take off on waster yarn’.
Of course, all magazines have their own format, which makes life much easier for the knitter who uses their patterns regularly, because she gets to know exactly how it will be laid out.
However, there is no mention of hand knitting needles these days!
Although I did not entirely enjoy my time as a ‘check knitter’, I learned one valuable lesson.
Fir the first ‘garment’ I was issued with four different colours and instructed to knit four-inch stripes in two plain, two purl rib to make a scarf.
I soon found that different dye lots knitted to different sizes, so that stripes in the dark colours needed four rows less than the lighter ones to make my four inches.
(There were no charting devices at that time — neither were we expected to ‘think’ in centimetres!)
I have just knitted a jumper for my daughter, who has an ‘eye’ for fashionable and unusual garments.
She chose one form the Rowan/Brother Designer book.
Since I was working from this book I read the introduction more carefully than I had done previously.
this states categorically ‘…design is not something that is added as an afterthought’, Which just confirms to me in my opinion that I am no designer!
So can design be taught?
I suspect any successful teaching is only improving on a natural bent.
Since I have no such talent, I am going to concentrate on what is easiest for me.
I know a fair amount about how the machine works and I have made myself slow up when it comes to finishing off (I have to be very careful to inspect all seams, knowing my friend's beady eye will be on the work!).
Now it is back to ‘Stitch World’ and since I have no original ideas I am practising adapting the built-in patterns.
The diagrams in the back of the book are being ‘pepperd’ with little boxes cutting sections out of the overall pattern, while the margins are getting filled with the co-ordinates to instruct the machine.
So maybe I am adding things on as ‘an afterthought’, but, if I can't be a designer, I am trying to be a good technician.
CLUB LINE
News of clubs and classes in our postbag includes an invitation.
Teign Machine Knitters welcome visitors to the area who are missing their knitting to join them for an evening.
It sounds like an idea that could catch on.
NEWTON ABBOT
A kind invitation is extended by Tricia Lewis, secretary of the Teign Machine Knitters.
She writes, ‘If anyone is visiting the South West and feel they need a knitting ‘fix’, they would be very welcome to visit us.’
Should you have the chance to accept her invitation you will find the club at Newton Abbot Community Centre, Kingsteignton Road, Newton Abbot, Devon, on the second and fourth Friday of the month at 7.00 pm.
You can contact Tricia Lewis on 0364 42570.
GADEBRIDGE
The Masterknit Knitting Club has moved to St. Peter's Church Hall, Gadebridge, where is meets on the second and fourth Wednesdays of the month.
Member Mary Godfrey had taken to verse to invite newcomers to join them:
Have you a knitting machine
Under your bed?
Unboxed, unused,
Thinking it's dead?
We're a small happy club
At Gadebridge we meet
Twice monthly, on Wednesday,
So it's you that we seek.
We drink tea, eat biscuits
and have a good chat
But most of all, really,
We learn this and that.
About machine knitting
And how to cast on,
To increase, to decrease,
Do necks and so on.
Our machine knitting knowledge
With you we would share
So come round to meet us
We really do care.
Please get that machine out
Give Yvonne a ring
You're so near that first garment
And the smile it will bring.
If that tempts you to join, the Yvonne to ring is .
ISLE OF WIGHT
The Wight Passap Knitting Club have asked us to publish details of their meetings which take place between 10.30 am to 12 noon every fourth Thursday at Aureol, Victoria Avenue, Shanklin, Isle of Wight.
The organiser is Mrs. ‘Andy’ Levick who can be contacted on 0983 840710. she is assisted in the running of the club by Doris Coutts.
Visitors and holidaymakers who suffer from machine knitting withdrawal symptoms are welcome at the meetings!
WORCESTER PARK
Members of the Worcester Park Machine Knitters Club have been busy knitting items for the Special Care Baby Unit at Kingston Hospital in Surrey.
Garments, blankets and shawls were knitted specially to fit the tiny babies in the Unit.
The yarn was donated by King Cole Ltd, Yarn-a-Rama, Yeoman Yarns and T. Forsell & Sons Ltd — members also contributed a selection of their own yarns.
An amount of £30 was raised through donations and sponsorship and this was handed over together with the knitted gifts.
As a bonus, a wool/chenille jumper will be raffled for the Hospital Scanner appeal.
For their next project, the Club are busy knitting for a competition organised by the Stroke Association.
The entries will be auctioned to raise funds after judging.
this is an active club, established some three years ago, which meets regularly twice a month for discussions and demonstrations.
If anyone is interested in joining, please contact the Secretary .
STOURPORT-ON-SEVERN
J. Howard, Secretary of Areley Kings Machine Knitting Club, has contacted us with a change of details.
The club was formerly known as the Grey Green Knitting Club of Bewdley, Worcs, run by Mrs Marjorie Dickens and now has a new organiser, Mrs Elsie Bispham, who can be contacted on 0746 861545.
The club now meets on the first Tuesday evening in the month from 7.30 pm to 9.30 pm .
OVERSEAS
We've news from a knitting club in Canada — the New Toronto Knitting Club, which meets on the second Friday evening of each month at the Sewing and Knitting Circle,.
Owners of all types of knitting machine are welcome,.
Club members are interested in linking up with a club from England, to share machine knitting ideas and problem solving.
If this request appeals to any club over here, please write to Christine Judd at the above address.
BURGESS HILL
New details from the South Down Machine Knitting Club inform us that afternoon meetings will be held on the second Monday in the month between 2 pm and 4 pm.
The venue is the Sidney West Centre in Burgess Hill and new members are welcome.
Please telephone Gillian Lindsey for more details .
MIDDLESBROUGH
We received the information too late to publish details of a fund-raising fashion in our last issue of MKM.
This was to be the sixth show organised by the Priestfields & Ormesby Knitting Club and this year they were hoping to use the proceeds to boost club funds as well as make a donation to Kirkleatham Special School in Redcar.
We're sure club members will have worked very hard to make this event a great success and hope all went well on the day!
The Club started some time ago and has had as many as thirty members in the past but now numbers have dwindled to fifteen.
If anyone in the Ormesby area would like to join, meetings are held on Monday evenings at Southlands Leisure Centre, from 7.30 pm to 9.30 pm — do go along to find out more.
PETERBOROUGH
The Purldrops Machine Knitting Club had re-elected the committee for the next year with Carole Porter as Chairperson  and Jackie Scott as Secretary.
The Club meets at Brook Street College with evening meetings from 7 pm to 9 pm.
Contact Carole or Jackie on the above numbers if you would like to know more about the club.
SURREY
Club/workshop evenings are being organised for machine knitters to gain ‘hands on’ experience in a friendly atmosphere.
All are welcome at The Barn  on the last Thursday in every month from 7.30 pm to 9.30 pm where organisers Mrs. Eileen Slater and Mrs. Amy Rowland will make you feel at home.
COURSES
An intermediate level machine knitting course will commence in January at the Wilson Marriage Centre .
For full details please contact the tutor, Linda Broomfield 
Linda also runs other machine knitting courses at the Harwich Centre  — contact the above address for more information.
East Grinstead Adult Education Centre offers the following machine knitting courses:
Stage 1 — Thursdays
Stage 2 — Mondays
These are ten week courses which run from January to March.
A Beginners one day course is scheduled for Saturday 6 march.
All enquiries — please ring 
Machine Knitting classes in Northumberland take place at the following times and venues.
Please contact the appropriate centres for more information or ‘phone Joan Stevens .
Cramlington High School (Mondays 7 pm to 9 pm).
Seaton Delaval Astley School (Wednesdays 7 pm to 8.45 pm).
Blyth Ridley High School (Thursdays 7 pm to 8.30 pm).
The following details of courses were sent to us recently but we were unable to include them in an earlier issue.
If there is one of interest in your area, please contact the appropriate person to find out the full details and whether places are still available.
Machine Knitting Classes run by Sylvia Jay  at the following venues:
Wanstead House (Monday evenings 7.30 pm to 9 pm).
Parkside Community Centre,(Thursday afternoons 1.30 pm to 3.30 pm).
Pier Training Shop,(Friday afternoons 1.15 pm to 3.15 pm, with  crèche facilities available).
Machine Knitting courses run  by Barbara Laird at colleges in the Luton area as follows:
Barnfield (Tuesday evenings 7 pm to 9.30 pm).
Elstow (Wednesday afternoons 12.45 pm to 3.15 pm).
Putteridge (Wednesday evenings 7 pm to 9 pm).
Dunstable (Friday mornings 9 am to 11.30 am).
Barnfield (Friday afternoons 2 pm to 4 pm).
Mrs. June Ham runs classes in the Portsmouth area.
Details are as follows:.
Beginners (Wednesday afternoons 1 pm to 3 pm).
this is also suitable as a refresher course.
 Créche facilities are available.
A Knitting Workshop (Wednesday evenings 7 pm to 9 pm).
For knitters with some experience who would like to learn more techniques both on and off the machine.
these evenings will be geared to student requirements and ideas.
CUT AND SEW WORKSHOPS
1993 dates for Pam Turbett's Cut and Sew workshops are now available and as these courses are always very popular, make sure to book your place early.
Here are some details of what Pam is offering:
8–12 March 1993:A residential Cut and Sew course at the Old Rectory  (information and booking details from Ginny Williams-Ellis).
This is a one week course which provides the opportunity to learn a variety of Cut and Sew techniques as well as‘hands on’ experience in the making of a waistcoat.
5 April 1993:A talk on Cut and Sew techniques at a venue in Par, South Cornwall.
If any other clubs in Devon or Cornwall would like Pam to organise a visit or workshop round this time, please contact her as soon as possible .
5 May 1993:A talk to the Harrogate Knitting Club.
This will be the start of a one month Scottish tour which Pam hopes will take her as far north as Nairn.
CREATIVE INTARSIA
CHRISTMAS DECORATION
Terry's theme is seasonable but his ideas are not for your living room or Christmas tree — they are for your partywear.
Terry Armitstead
Everyone, I'm sure, has a ‘little black dress’ type of pattern, by which I mean a perennial favourite that gets made up in different yarns and colours over the years for various celebrations, parties and so on.
This is the type of garment that always looks good as soon as you put it on and makes you feel comfortable and at ease, whatever the occasion.
Of course, yours may not necessarily be a dress.
It may be a jacket or a top and skirt, but I'm sure you know the one I mean!
To convert this basic pattern to this year's special Christmas-party outfit, I have designed a motif, based on Renaissance embroideries, to be incorporated in it as a ‘decoration’.
You can use either the border version, the single motifs or a combination of both.
The whole border motif will fit on a mylar sheet (actually 58 stitches to one repeat) if you don't mind the long floats at the bottom.
Alternatively, you can knit the whole thing as an intarsia, thus minimising the length of the floats.
But for the best of both worlds (smaller floats and speed of knitting) do the first 12 rows as an intarsia and the rest with the mylar sheet!
The border would look equally stunning around the bottom of a jacket, top, or skirt.
Please allow a  few rows, normally about one inch, between the hem of the garment and the beginning of the border.
This gives a visually lighter effect than if the border starts directly after the hem.
Both the border and the single motifs can also be used upside-down to give a solid edge at the bottom and an irregular edge at the top.
the single motifs can be placed almost anywhere; the centre-back of a jacket just above the hem, just above the cuffs on the sleeves, just below the shoulder seams on both sides of the jacket fronts or centre-back/centre-front of a skirt just above the hem.
For a really spectacular effect, add sew-on gemstones, pearls, sequins or embroidery to enhance the richness of the result!
I have chosen to knit the sample in black chenille with four ply gold lurex (from Texere Yarns) for the motif.
then I have embellished it with red and blue gemstones and a drop-pearl (from an old earring) in the centre.
It's always worth keeping an odd earring, when you've lost its partner, for just such projects.
For those of you who haven't used lurex before, this is a good opportunity to have a go.
If you don't fancy knitting the entire motifs in lurex, then try knitting it or them in a plain colour and combine a fine lurex thread with the background colour.
This will have a subtly sparkling effect, which gives such a lift to plain colours that you'll wonder why you haven't used it before.
You've heard about the ‘jitter-bug craze’, well once you've caught the ‘glitter-bug’ you'll be hooked!
QUESTION TIME
No one has all the answers but with all her experience in Club Class, Pat has most of them.
Pat Coulston
Firstly, I would like to share some ‘difficulties’ that have arisen in class.
the subject of the exercise was a top, knitted in two strands of Hobby yarn.
A pattern was provided and, of course, there was a recommended tension of 31 stitches and 46 rows to ten centimetres.
We were examining the homework, sorting through the usual kind of difficulty but there was nothing to amiss, until we came to a light green garment.
Knitted in stocking stitch, the fabric was very loose and open, had been well steamed and was therefore very, very floppy.
this gives a good effect for a cool summer top and should look fine, but on the garment, everything was wrong.
The armholes looked too short, the sleeves didn't look as if they would fit and the bust size was nowhere near the size that was required.
The conversation that followed went like this, as far as I can remember.
Me: ‘What stitch size did you use?’
K (knitter): ‘Stitch size 7 on a Brother’.
Me: ‘What tensions did you get?’
K: ‘Um, I don't think I can remember.’
Me:(Thinking that it should all be written down as one is taught), ‘Did you use the pattern given?’
K: ‘Um, well, not exactly.’
Me: ‘What did you do?’
K: ‘Well, I saw a pattern in lace which I liked, so I decided to use it, but I knitted it plain instead of in lace and the recommended stitch was size 7.’
The moral of this tale is that to knit a garment to the correct size, it is vital that you make a tension swatch and try to match the result to the tension the designer of the pattern has given.
Lots of knitters say, ‘I get the stitches right, but don't worry about the rows’.
Well, this is better than nothing, but you must remember, it is not just the length to the armhole because this must match with width of the sleeve head.
If you increase this armhole length, increase the width of the sleeve head too.
We have a member at the Club who is wonderful at alterations.
Whenever anyone makes something too long, she snips one edge of the knitting, then snips the other edge on the same row and pulls out that line of knitting.
she then ‘picks up’ the open stitches (a fine circular needle is wonderful for this), returns these stitches to the machine and knits a new rib (going downwards) or whatever is required.
Q I am intending to make some garments as Christmas present for the family.
I would like to make useful things, such as jumpers, cardigans, or big floppy tops for the youngsters.
Do you have any guidelines, as I don't want to do lots of work, only to find they don't like them?
A Having four kids of my own, I know exactly what you mean about the youngsters!
I think the worst thing you can do is to ask parents for measurements — as this can lead to problems.
If it is possible, it is far better to persuade the parent for friend to lend you one of the youngster's favourite garments.
You can then turn the garment inside out(for greater accuracy) and take the measurements for yourself.
Bust, depth of welt, welt to armhole, depth of armhole, length of sleeve.
this also applies if you are going to make a suit.
Make sure that you measure a skirt belonging to the recipient, in which she feels happy.
As for colours, you will have to accept the help of a relation or friend, who knows best their daughter's/son's/friend's's taste.
I am always fascinated by the little test I frequently do with my girls, I go through MKM and Modern Knitting and ask them to give marks, out of ten, for all the garments.
I am constantly surprised by their choice.
Actually it's a bit disturbing to find the things to which I give ten, they just ignore!
(Thank goodness for magazines that cater for all tastes.)
You can do the same for children and see the sort of things they pounce on (ohh, I do like that).
Remember too, when knitting for children and busy mums, garments must be machine washable!
Remember also, the pitfalls for children of ‘tickly’ yarns (I hate that jumper, it tickles), of necks being too tight (I'll never wear that thing again) when ears have almost been severed off at bedtime!
Don't forget to send a little of the yarn with the garment, in case of accidents, plus a spare button when they are used.
Do make sure the welts are not floppy.
there is no excuse for this, even with a single bed double rib.
On the single bed, do a 2×1 rather than rather than a 1×1 rib and remember on completion of the piece knitted s-t-r-e-t-c-h those ribs.
Knit them at a stitch size as low as the machine will comfortably knit.
If you use a ribbing attachment, again, knit at the lowest stitch size.
If using three ply, either knit the welt with two strands of the yarn but a higher stitch size than usual, or, add a strand of matching sewing cotton — this does help.
It is useful to use that very fine elastic on the zig-zag, the two circular rows and the following one.
When using this fin elastic, thread it up through the feeder  as usual, but do not take it through the tape-up spring (the antennae at the end of the tension wire).
This will prevent it from getting caught up.
Alternatively you can feed the elastic through the carriage from the floor.
Q Could you tell me what equipment you use for ‘Blocking and Steaming’ your work?
This list has grown over the years.
1
The first priority is a good steam iron with lots of holes for the steam.
Also on the market is a wonderful steam press made by Passap, called the Topjet Vario.
This is steaming with a difference.
The water is contained in a clear plastic tank and the steam comes down the thick tubes from the tank to the iron.
You can iron normally, or, by depressing a button, with steam.
The iron can also be held at an angle for a more intense jet of steam.
2
I have a good wide ironing board, covered with one of the Riviera blocking cloths.
These are wonderful as they are drawn out in centimetres or inches.
On my board, it is easy to put this on and remove it, so the girls do not ruin it for me!
I use the ironing board mostly for skirts that have to be steamed to the length required.
3
Two blocking boards.
The smaller one is about 80 centimetres by 92 centimetres and the large one is about 94 centimetres by 124 centimetres. both boards are covered by a thick blanket, which is sewn into place and on both I have the Riviera blocking cloth.
the smaller board is especially good for all the flat work, that is, tops of suits and so on .
4
Tape measures with centimetres and inches on the SAME side (I'm still not 100 per cent into centimetres!) and a metre stick.
5
Lots and lots of binding wires, long and short.
To me, blocking would be impossible without them.
They go up the sides, top and bottom or the work where needed.
The work can then be spread out to the measurements required on the blocking board and just a few pins are needed to hold the wires into place.
The edges are then completely straight.
6
Long and short glass headed pins.
7
Lots of different coat hangers for holding the finished work.
8
Lots of blunt ended needles for sewing up.
9
Neckline templates of all shapes and sizes for the ‘Sew & Cut’.
Small sharp scissors for the neckline cutting.
10
Soft muslin cloth for the odd time I don't want the work to get too hot.
11
An In-Ex Steaming Kit.
I wouldn't be without this for the world and use it, or parts of it for different jobs all the time.
By the way, they have just brought out some new publications.
A new Shadow Pleated Designs Book (which contains some fascinating culottes) plus a couple of new tops and separate skirt patterns.
If you want details, the address is .
I think that is about everything — but I must say that each time is as important as the next and I use them all.
Q I have seen some lovely patterns for tuck plus lace.
Have you any tips to help me or warnings of difficulties that strew my path?
A Yes there could be one difficulty but once warned of it there should be no problem at all.
If you are using a Brother machine you need to take care when you are going from lace to a tuck stitch row and vice vera.
As you are going to tuck you will be on KC.
This means that the main carriage must be right away from the main bed, on its extension rails, as you go to use the lace carriage.
The same the other way round.
The lace carriage must be sitting outside the main bed, on its extension rails.
The reason is as follows:
Imagine that you have just finished a tuck row.
As you take the carriage to the right, so the patterning band at the back goes to the right with it.
If the carriage stops short and is still connected to the band, when you then try to take the lace carriage across, the band cannot move and it will snap.
So, always, dump the carriage and the lace carriage on to the extension rails, so that no accidents can occur.
I always teach new knitters to do this when they first start on lace, then they use the extension rails automatically and the problem will not arise.
PICTURE KNITTING
UNDER THE MISTLETOE
The second of Wendy's delightful ‘teddy’ designs for Christmas has two little bears kissing under the mistletoe.
Teddy can also line up with a party balloon and there's a heart motif to complete a picture to knit and give with love.
Wendy Phillips
A kiss under the mistletoe is something we all expect at Christmas and teddy bears are no exception.
For this design knit the single teddy starting on the seventh stitch to avoid knitting part of the balloon.
For teddy's friend knit the same pattern in reverse leaving just one stitch between the noses; position the mistletoe centrally above the bears.
I wanted to make one bear a boy and one a girl so decided to dress them.
the trousers (13 stitches × 12 rows) are appliqued in position with two blue straight stitches making a dividing line between the legs.
The red braces are Swiss darned and a red check bow has been stitched under the chin.
The girl's pink and white candy stripe skirt (26 stitches × 15 rows) was removed on to a length of yarn so that the top could be drawn up and stitched in position around the waist; the sides and hem of the skirt were then stitched down and a pink bow was added.
Finally I used five centimetres of narrow lace which I gathered and stitched around the neck to form a collar.
For the mistletoe I Swiss darned the berries with white and stitched a red ribbon t the stem.
The row of teddies with balloons is simply a 22 stitch repeat pattern.
The rows of hearts can be knitted continuously either in a single colour or with the colour changing every 11 rows as I have done.
Have fun with your festive teddies and have a wonderful Christmas.
Program area in green box for single teddy to reverse.
Program area in purple box for single heart repeat.
Use these two stitches, from heart, as a repeat pattern to make candy stripes for skirt.
Swiss darn in red for braces.
TEACH-IN
As I write this article (in July) I am in the throes of finishing my new ribber video, ‘English and Fisherman's Rib’.
Finishing a video always means long working hours and I get totally absorbed by it as the following anecdote shows.
Ann Kite
Recently my husband, despairing of me ever emerging from my room and cooking his dinner, offered to make some baked beans on toast.
When I did emerge to eat, he remarked gloomily that he'd managed to stick them to the bottom of the pan.
I replied, ‘Yes, you have to heat them on a low tension!’
I then went on to ask him to ‘edit the dog’(sounds ominous), I meant of course‘feed her’.
I'm glad to say that the beans were edible, the dog did get fed and I'm sure that by the time you read this the video will be finished, in fact I'll probably be working on the next one.
However, I thought you might share my amusement at the thought of baked beans at a low tension!
Last month I wrote about the carriage controls on both the main bed and the ribber.
I suggested some simple exercises, to be done without knitting on the machine, that showed what effect the tuck and slip controls had on the needles and how we could set the carriages to slip or tuck in one direction and knit in the other.
Now we're going to put that knowledge to work.
We shall knit a welt and look at ways of improving the looks and finish.
We'll start with the basic knit one, purl one rib (K1, P1).
One a standard gauge machine use a three or four-ply yarn, or a
Chunky yarn on a Chunky machine.
Arrange the needles as in Figure 1.
Use 60 needles on a standard gauge machine, 40 on a Chunky.
The pitch lever is on P.
The basic cast-on sequence when using the ribber is not one row but four — zig-zag row and then three circular rows.
I call the first row a zig-zag row as the yarn must zig-zag between the beds, that is, go from one needle on the main bed, to one on the ribber, to one on the main and so on .
this happens automatically with a 1×1 rib, but when we come to the 2×2 ribs we have to take steps to make it happen.
Calling the first row the zig-zag row emphasises this point.
For the zig-zag row and the circular rows, the stitch tension is usually as tight as you can make it.
That's tension 0 on both carriages on standard gauge machine.
On chunkies, there's an even lower tension than 0.
On the Brother 260 ribber it's marked by a star while on the Silver and Knitmaster Chunkies it's labelled R on both carriages.
In addition, Brother ribbers (standard gauge and Chunky) have a slide lever.
The II setting gives the firmest stitch.
Here's my table for the basic cast-on sequence.
1
Set both main bed and ribber carriages to knit (Figure 2).
Knit one row at cast-on tension.
2
Insert the comb and weights.
The comb should be symmetrical about the centre of the machine.
Add two large weights; these too must be symmetrical on the comb and I like them lined up with, or outside, the edge of the knitting.
3
Set the carriage for circular knitting (Figure 2) and knit three rows.
Watch the knitting as you do this.
You should be able to see that one bed knits on each row.
(There shouldn't be any yarn crossing over the comb.)
4)
Reset both carriages to knit (Figure 2).
Change to tension 2 on both carriages.
On Brother machines, put the slide lever to 1 
Knit 20 rows of rib.
Watch the knitting as you do this.
Is the tension on the stitches equal?
Notice the edges especially.
If one edge looks looser (or higher) than the other, stop and check the comb.
Is it hanging free?
It is level?
If one end of the comb is higher than the other, it cannot do its job of pulling down evenly on the stitches.
If the comb isn't level, it may be because you didn't put it in symmetrically, or that the weights aren't positioned symmetrically, or it's caught on the ribber, or you tied the end of the yarn to the clamp when you started.
When using the ribber, I never tie the yarn end to a clamp or any other part of the machine, it's so easy to forget it, so it pulls the knitting up and the comb with it and soon the machine jams.
(Because I don't tie the yarn to the machine, I hold the end instead, beneath the machine, for the first few rows, while maintaining enough tension to help the edge stitch (knit.)
The correct use of the cast-on comb is vital.
It must be symmetrical and it must hang free.
When you knit with the main bed alone, the sinker plate does more than hold the yarn; it holds the knitting back against the machine while the needles move forward.
this means the stitches go behind the latches and are then knitted off.
If the sinker plate wasn't there the knitting would come forward with the needles staying in the hooks of the needles, so even if some yarn was laid on the needles the stitches wouldn't be knitted.
When you knit with the ribber, there's no sinker plate and the connecting arm forms an arch.
It can't hold the knitting back (or down).
So the comb and its weights have to pull the knitting down.
(This is where the Passap differs.
Beneath the equivalent of the connecting arm it has strippers, which push the knitting down, that is ‘strip’ it.)
If your garment is to be knitted on the main bed only, then after knitting the welt and transferring all the stitches to the main bed, you must remove the ribber comb and weights, cover the ribber and place the knitting outside the ribber.
The main beds of the Silver Knitmaster, Brother and Toyota machines are designed to knit with the knitting hanging at right angles to the machine.
This is  how it hangs if you have a main bed only.
When you tilt the main bed, to add a ribber, you must also tilt your knitting (by bringing it over the ribber) to maintain the correct angle.
Having it inside the ribber can cause problems, from dropped stitches on lace to knitted-in floats on Fair Isle.
It's also harder to handle the knitting when increasing, decreasing and so on.
Talking about weights, I was taught always to use the minimum number of weights which enable the machine to knit correctly.
In twenty years of knitting, I've found no reason to discard this principle.
Apart from anything else, it's usually the easiest way to knit.
For stocking stitch knitting on a standard gauge machine, this often means no weights and, for pattern knitting, just the claw weights.
The Chunky machines sometimes need more weights.
However, I've never yet had to use the ribber weights to make the machine knit, when using the main bed only, on any machine.
One of the problems that I get asked about frequently is how to reduce the waviness at the cast-on edge of the rib.
This arises because of the way the knitting pulls in when you take it off the machine.
If you remove the piece of rib you've just knitted from the machine and then compare its width with the width of the needles in working position, you'll see what I mean.
The situation can be improved by gently easing the edge into position with your hands and steaming the welt.
However, I think it's best done by changing the cast-on sequence.
My favourite way is to introduce what might be called a ‘gathering row’.
there are two ways of doing this.
I first came across Method One in a Knitmaster manual.
This method is suitable for Knitmaster, Silver and Brother machines.
METHOD 1
Follow the basic cast-on sequence above for steps one and two.
Before going on to step three, insert the following steps:
a) Disconnect the ribber carriage from the connecting arm and pass it across the ribber bed (all the ribber stitches drop off).
b) Pass the ribber carriage back to join the main carriage and connect to the connecting arm.
c) Without changing the carriage setting, knit one row.
Check that all the stitches on the main bed have knitted.
you may need to move the needles back a little by hand to knit the stitches off.
d) Carry on from step three of the original instructions.
After removing the comb, you'll see you have a row of loops (Figure 3).
these are the ‘gathering’ thread.
After removing the knitting from the machine pull the ‘gathering’ thread at the side of the knitting away from the end, so that the cast-on edge of the knitting is gathered into a smooth flat edge.
Don't pull the thread right through at this stage.
When the edge of the knitting flat, steam it to set it; if it's wool you can even press it — just the very edge, not the whole rib.
Then pull the gathering thread right through (see Figure 4).
If it breaks don't worry, the edge of the knitting won't come undone, but do remove all the thread.
METHOD 2
This method I found in Kathleen Kinder's Book of the Ribber, Volume 1.
It's suitable for Silver, Knitmaster, Brother and Toyota machines.
Again, follow the basic cast-on sequence for two one and insert the comb.
You can knit row one at the usual cast-on tension, but I prefer to increase the tension to three on one of the carriages.
This makes the gathering thread more obvious.
You can change the tension on either or both of the carriages, though I tend to be lazy and change only one!
If you have a Brother machine and change the ribber tension, put the slide lever to I as well.
After knitting row one, change to the usual cast-on tension.
After inserting the comb, there are four more rows (rows two to five) to knit.
They are based on the circular setting, but on the first of the four rows (row two) the ribber must tuck.
So the sequence after inserting the comb is:
Row 2 — Ribber tucks, main bed knits.
Row 3 — Ribber knits, main bed slips.
Row 4 — Ribber slips, main bed knits.
Row 5 — Ribber knits, main bed slips.
This sounds complicated, but the easiest way to approach it is, at row two, to set the carriages as if you were going to knit circular knitting, ensuring that it is the ribber that will slip on the next two.
So if the carriages are at the right, you must set them for an anti-clockwise circle, if they're at the left, for a clockwise circle (Figure 2).
Then, before knitting two 2, put the third control on the ribber (the pick knob on Silver and Knitmaster machines, the tucking lever on Brother and the centre lever on Toyota) to the tuck position.
I wrote about these controls last month.
Knit row two with the carriages set like this.
the tensions should be on the tightest cast-on tension possible (see above).
Now, before knitting row three, return the tuck control on the ribber to the slip position, and knit three more rows.
These are normal circular rows.
Finally, set both carriages to knit and using tension 2, knit the rib.
On removing the knitting from the machine, the welt is ‘gathered’ and finished as for method 1.
Both these methods work for two reasons.
First, they enable you to ‘gather’ the knitting in, second, the ribber comb is held by the gathered thread row — this row is eventually pulled through and doesn't form a permanent part of the welt. the second row to be knitting is, when the hem is finished, the first row of the welt.
Since this row doesn't hold the comb, it is less stretched, so therefore firmer, than the first row of a welt knitting in the basic, or conventional way.
Both these methods for improving the cast-on edge are taught on my video Course No. 7C.
Finally, a reminder about circular knitting given in figure 2 will only work so long as there isn't a punchcard in the card reader.
If you have a punchcard in, the cam lever on the main carriage has to be changed between slip and stocking stitch (depending on whether you want the main carriage to knit or slip) on each row of the circular rows.
I wrote about this last month.
Next month I'll be writing about the 2×2 ribs.
Happy Christmas!
I hope you find time for some knitting.
ANIMATIONS
Norma Steinberg
The Giant Panda
An animal known throughout the world for its cuddly, teddy bear looks and the very real threat of its extinction.
The panda was first seen by Western eyes in the mid-1800s.
From then on it became big game and for fifty years the only ones to leave China were dead.
In the 1920s the first cub was taken to America and the love affair with pandas began.
They are solitary creatures who would happily spend most of their lives either eating or sleeping.
The population is now reduced to living on the lower slopes of the western highlands which is one of the most beautiful areas of China.
Not only does bamboo grow in abundance but also birch, cinnamon, laurel and cherry trees.
During the spring and summer the meadows are carpeted with brilliantly coloured flowers.
Although this may seen like an idyllic setting, the fact that the panda's natural habitat has been reduced to this area is enough cause for alarm.
It is thought that the panda once roamed over much of China but due to human development the areas where they can exist have been greatly reduced.
This in itself is why the panda's survival is becoming more and more dubious every year.
So, why are pandas reliant on bamboo?
Their actual digestive system is that of a carnivore and so bamboo is an unlikely foodstuff to choose.
It  is hard and lacks nutrients and yet is the panda's staple diet.
A panda will eat meat if the opportunity arises, but it seems the attitude is not one of a hunter — the effort seems to great when the sun is warm and a cosy spot for a nap is just round the corner.
So it seems that over the years pandas have learned to enjoy food which was in great abundance.
A strange phenomenon of bamboo is that, dependent on which variety, after so many years it flowers and then dies.
This can be up to 120 years, but in the most common bamboo, the flowering occurs every 70 years.
In 1970 a large area of bamboo flowered and died resulting in many deaths through starvation in the panda population.
Because their environment had been reduced the pandas had no alternative but to remain where there was no food.
There is much talk about what is being done to save the panda.
Many attempts have been made to breed them in captivity, however, there are flaws in this idea.
The panda is a shy creature, not used to being in contact with other animals, particularly humans.
Amongst the panda community there are many social hierarchies, subsequently when captive breeding takes place there can be no allowance made for this.
The world's great love of the panda could be causing a lot of the damage.
Instead of dealing with the problem of a shrinking environment, for many years, scientists have wanted to protect the panda by taking them away and intervening with modern and more effective methods.
However, there has been very little success with captive breeding and few of the cubs which are born survive past the first year.
Now at last attention has been turned to the real problem.
The Chinese government is looking at ways to protect the panda's home from further destruction.
One can only hope that we, as the panda's worst enemy, can somehow right our wrongs and have finally learnt how much we have to lose.
WORKING NOTES ON THE SWEATER
In Chinese art the image is not a replica, but a representation or a symbol for what is real.
This means that the work is highly decorative.
I wanted to capture the element of art for its own sake.
I wanted the garment to seem feminine even though it is made out of a yarn as heavy and warm as pure wool.
By using cords I managed to create a curvilinear band which is unusual in the sense that no two bands would ever be the same.
I tried many ways of joining the cords, but found that the best is to use a latch tool and catch a loop at the back of one cord and pull through a loop from the other cord.
Continue in this way until you have made the required length of band then, by unravelling the cord to this point, you can pull the end of yarn through your last loop and so tie a knot.
The bands can be as deep as you like and the whole time you are creating a unique structure.
I took the garment pieces off on waste yarn.
To join the band, I first picked up the sweater piece with right side facing and then using a three pronged latch tool I picked up the band.
Then I pulled the stitches of the band through those of the garment, and cast off using a latch tool.
One could regard the front of the sweater as a canvas, the only limitation is your imagination.
It is only by experimenting that we can learn new and interesting textures.
You don't need to be a first class embroiderer to create something beautiful and at the same time have lots of fun.
On my sweater I have included Swiss darning, knots (for the small white flowers), long stitches to create the ferns and large white flowers.
I added the Chinese writing as an afterthought, a completion to the picture, it reads ‘the giant panda’.
I hope that some of these ideas will inspire you to create.
The sweater is very simple and yet with a little time spent you can produce a complex looking garment.
Consider the sweater your canvas, a needle as your paintbrush, the bands as your frame and enjoy the freedom of experimenting.
WORKSHOP E6000
CREATION 6 THE PC-TO-CONSOLE TRANSFER
Previously we were looking at the way in which the colour order for pattern is decided by the Creation 6 program and took a pattern all the way through to the ‘Knit a pattern’ menu, ready to transfer directly across to the machine console.
Later, we shall be looking at the actual transfer of the pattern, which is relatively simple.
But before we do, there are one or two more things that the Creation 6 program can do for us regarding visualising the actual knitted fabric and seeing how the design is treated by the console on receiving the computer information.
George le Warré
As you know, when we design on the screen, the design area is divided up into a grid 180 squares wide and 250 squares high.
The horizontal squares each represent one stitch — 180 squares for 180 needles (although the machine actually has 179 front bed needles).
the vertical 250 squares DO NOT represent the same number of rows of knitting.
Each vertical square can represent one, two, four, six or eight rows of actual knitting, depending on the knitting technique you are going to be using with the design.
they appear as squares on loading the program for designing, for ease of use and because this also avoids the problem of having to have several different proportional grids in the memory for different knitting techniques.
Why proportional grids?
Well, as you know, it is almost impossible to have a piece of knitting that is exactly the same measurement across 40 stitches and 40 rows., Only rarely does this happen with certain yarn types and stitch patterns.
Most often, the number of rows gives a smaller measurement compared to the number of stitches.
For instance, the HEIGHT of 40 stitches may be 80 millimetres, but the WIDTH will perhaps be 128 millimetres.
This means that to obtain the same measurement for height and width the proportion of stitches to rows will be different.
With most other designing systems, from punchcards to electronics an ‘average’ proportion such as three to five, or five to seven for instance is used, sometimes making the drawing of shapes a bit of a problem.
Suppose we want to knit a circle as part of the pattern.
On a proportional grid, we would have to draw this as an egg-shaped, so that when knitted it would appear the correct shape.
Now, different knitting techniques work on different proportions of stitches to rows.
What is a good average for two-colour work, will be hopelessly wrong for four-colour, because we are knitting double the number of rows to obtain the correct pattern, so the additional rows knitted will change the measurement of 40 rows in millimetres.
Luckily for us, this was taken into account when the Creation 6 program was developed and, instead of having numerous proportional grids available for designing, we have the basic one of squares.
This is then converted in the console to a proportional grid by your swatch measurements, if you are using the Form section of the console program and by entering the knitting technique.
As the technique and so on is entered, the grid becomes ‘elastic’ and is stretched to the correct proportions so that the shapes are all kept as drawn.
A circle will knit as a circle not an ellipse, a square, a square not a rectangle and so one.
At first, all of this may seem unimportant and a bit irrelevant.
but believe me it is very necessary for keeping your pattern correct.
Nothing is more frustrating than designing a pattern and taking hours to get it right only to find that, when it is knitted up on the machine, the whole thing is either squashed almost flat, or stretched lengthways so as to be almost unrecognisable as the original design, which can happen on some design systems.
So, Creation 6 takes care of this for us by working on an elastic grid, allowing us to design in proportion and then making this a proportional pattern within the electronics to keep the design proportions correct.
With Creation 6 you can see on your PC screen the effect that the proportional grid will have on your design regarding both the knitting techniques and swatch size as well as what happens when swatch measurements and knitting techniques are combined.
Look at Figure 1.
This is a very simple and basic two-colour design.
It does contain very definite geometric shapes that need to be knitted in proportion to keep the pattern correct.
the design is based on squares, but if it were knitted without proportional adjustment, the whole thing would be incorrect and pulled out of shape.
See Figure 2.
Draw any design you like on your Creation 6 design area.
Try to include some elements that are of a geometric type, such as a circle, diamond and so on.
To start with, just make this a two-colour design as shown in my example Figure 3.
Now look at the icon bar at the left of your screen.
At the top just below the left-hand mouse icon, there is box CM.
Notice that this also contains a small rectangle in the lower right corner, denoting that this icon has a sub-menu.
Take the cursor into the CM box and click the right mouse button.
A new sub-menu appears.
See Figure 4.
The box containing the figure 1 is white and the rest black with white figures.
This is normal.
The 1 box is the heading for entering the number of millimetres equal to 40 rows.
This is entered by deleting the three Xs at the bottom of the sub-menu and replacing them with your millimetres number, in this example 30.
Do this now.
Now click the mouse button on the 2 box.
It will change from a black background to white and three more Xs will appear at the bottom of the areas.
Delete these and enter your measurement for forty stitches, in this example 120.
The 3 box is for entering a technique, which we will do later.
The 4 box is where you would enter a cast on number.
The box with the question mark —?— operates only with boxes 3 or 4 highlighted and calls up the technique numbers or cast on numbers as lists.
When you have entered the measurements for rows and stitches, click the mouse button anywhere within the black area of the submenu box.
The box disappears, but you have now set the proportions of your pattern with regard to your own swatch measurement.
Next time George continues with the explanation of proportional grids.
OH brother
A BRAND NEW PUNCHCARD MACHINE
Recently the big news has all been about the latest electronic machines and computer programs for them.
the advances made have been very exciting but not every knitter wants to go too ‘high tec’.
For those who prefer the familiar punchcard machine, there have also been plenty of advances and now we report on the latest of them, the Brother KH864.
The exciting news for Brother punchcard fans is the recent introduction of the brand new KH864 knitting machine.
The popularity of the 24 stitch models remains and the KH864 brings together all the familiar functions which punchcard owners have come to expect.
This is a standard gauge machine which can produce all the standard stitch patterns including tuck, clip, weaving, Fair Isle and plating.
the addition of an optional lace carriage provides further scope with a choice of plain and fashion lace, woven lace, tuck and lace and Brother's exclusive fine lace.
All the usual ‘standard gauge’ yarns can be used on this needle bed, giving a wide choice of all those favourite cotton, wool and acrylic textures in two, three and four ply thickness as well as fine double knit.
Patterning facilities are versatile — the KH864 has a special feature for automatically knitting single motifs or blocks of pattern by using motif cams.
Automatic end needle selection is another bonus which insures that knitted edges are always neat and tidy.
Further knitting potential can be increased with the addition of one or more of the Brother knitting accessories.
For example, a whole range of plain and purl patterns, moss stitch and rib formations are possible with the KG89 Garter Carriage — The KH864 features a built-in rail to accommodate this popular attachment.
For those who like to use their own design ideas, the KL116 Knitleader charting device is another option — this allows the knitter to work from a full size pattern outline.
Basic block shapes are provided in a range of sizes for all the standard styles and these can be adapted to fit the individual figure.
No pattern instructions are involved as the shaping is worked by following the outline row by row.
The initial requirement is a tension square in your own choice of yarn and stitch pattern and the stitches and rows are used to set the Knitleader to work to the appropriate measurements.
This accessory offers complete freedom of choice!
There are many other attachments which can be added to the KH864.
Once the basic knitting techniques are mastered it is well worth buying a KR850 Ribber attachment to create a professional finish to all ribbing.
The addition of the ribber offers a wide range of double bed fabrics and textures which cannot be produced on the single bed — one of which is double jacquard.
This and other double bed patterning can be enhanced by the use of a colour changer — Brother have one for the double bed (the KR900) as well as one for single bed knitting (the KHC820A).
A colour changer will appeal to anyone who likes to use a lot of colour or different yarn textures when pattern knitting.
Other accessories include the KA8210 Intarsia Carriage (for all picture or multi-colour designs without floats); the KA8300 Transfer Carriage for quick manoeuvring of stitches from bed to bed; the KA8310 Linker, which has a whole host of applications for both practical and decorative finishes and the KE100 Motor Drive for those who need a little help!
You'll find the new Brother KH864 at your local dealer now — make sure you get along there to give it a test drive!!
We regret that this article on the KH864 means we have not been able to bring you Diane Bennett's regular feature.
We're sorry to disappoint you but Diane will be back as usual next month.
Meanwhile, see the advertisement on page 93 for her books and tapes.
SINGER WORLD
LACE ON THE FRENCH ELECTRONICS
I would like, in this article, to clear away any myths or false impressions people may have concerning lace on the Singer/Superba machines.
Gwen Merricks
I have found these machines to be the most versatile on the market in the production of lace.
The Japanese machines will knit lace from specially produced and marked cards and this involves using the lace carriage for many transfer rows in between two knitted rows with the main carriage.
The cards are marked in such a way that stitches are transferred from right to left on some rows and from left to right on other rows, so avoiding a bias.
On Singer/Superba machines, stitches are not transferred from side to side, but instead from back bed to front bed.
the front bed is set into the correct position by moving the intermediary lever to the 1/4 pitch, or transfer position.
The needles are then slightly offset.
Although special lace patterns are provided, they are not necessarily needed.
It is possible to produce lace from any stitch design, including those meant for Fair Isle, which of course means that you could knit a cardigan or jacket in Fair Isle or jacquard and then knit a lace sweater using the very same stitch pattern to supplement it.
Some of my favourite lace patterns are:
2331 — Sheet 2, patterns 2 and 5.
624 — Pattern numbers 4, 17 and 18.
9000 — Pattern numbers 96 and 251 (see sample 1).
600/611 — As these are small pattern repeats, I have many favourites on this model.
All of these are Fair Isle of jacquard patterns.
Also, an alternate needle pattern produces beautiful mash lace very easily.
The ‘double rows’ function is used to produce lace and therefore thought must be given, when choosing a stitch pattern for lace, to the height of the pattern (row repeat) which, when the ‘double rows’function is applied, could produce a larger, bolder pattern than you had anticipated.
It is great fun experimenting with these patterns and producing some really interesting samples.
When knitting lace, the front bed becomes the ‘main bed’ and, after knitting the rib, all stitches should be transferred to the front bed, using the 1/4 pitch position and the transfer carriage from left to right.
Remember to knit a loose row first before using the transfer carriage.
Alternatively, holding the cast on comb against the front bed, use the single bed cast on method to provide the stitches on the front bed.
Once all the stitches are on the front bed, bring into working position all the corresponding needles on the back bed (these are slightly offset).
Choose your stitch pattern and apply the function ‘double rows’.
The electronic box settings are as follows:
2331/2310, all light scanning machines  9000 On the Main Menu, choose Lace.
Choose your stitch pattern and apply ‘double rows’ and ‘all over pattern’quit and No. 4 Knit.
SAMPLE 1 9000 Pattern No 251
The carriage settings for all models are the same.
B.B. Cancel Key and Needle Return Levers in Neutral.
F.B. V. Key and Needle Return Levers in Neutral.
Because the front bed is now the main bed, the main tension is set on the front carriage.
The tension for the back carriage is roughly half that of the front carriage.
Now, as you take the carriage across, the yarn is looped over the selected needles on the back bed, while being knitted on every needle on the front bed.
On knitting back to the right hand side, the loops into fully formed stitches, as this is a repeated row.
Place the transfer carriage on the left hand side and, firmly pushing down, slide the carriage across to the right hand side.
the stitches are now transferred to the front bed.
This process is then repeated and never varies throughout your pattern: two rows with the main carriages and one row with the transfer carriage.
The stitches are always transferred from back to front, not side to side, so I have never encountered any problem with bias knitting.
Another thing which I like about Singer/Superba machines when knitting lace, is the wide variety in the thickness of yarns it is possible to use on them.
In France, from where the machines originate, double knitting is mostly used for lace.
I have used various four  plies , three  plies , two  plies and even 2/30s singly, successfully.
A vertical panel of lace is also very easy to knit.
As lace can only be produced where there are needles on the back bed in working position, by simply removing a block of needles on the back bed, lace will only be knitted on the remaining needles.
Try a sample of lace over 60 stitches, then remove all but the remaining centre 20 back bed needles.
Continue with your sample.
The result is an easy panel of lace with no cams to put on to the needlebed or dials to be moved (see sample 2).
TALKING POINT
LET'S ALL CHEAT…
Why do something the hard way when you can save time and temper by doing it an easy way?
Next time you are struggling with stubborn cables, try this easy way.
Shelagh Hollingworth
LEARNING NEW METHODS
The name of June Shaw, of Lakemba, in Australia, really deserves to be picked out in gold for the way she drew my attention (and that of all our readers) to an easy way of making cables.
She did not claim to have invented it herself, in fact, she thought we might have already come across it.
I hadn't, June, so I thank you from the bottom of my heart.
Recently I was faced with trying to make a cable on my chunky machine.
We all know how sometimes the stitches stubbornly refuse to be crossed and these definitely had a mind of their own.
The yarn I was using was cotton, a double knitting weight and not the best for cabling at any time and I did need to have cables, since I had sketched them into my design.
When you have shown a sketch that has cables, leaving them out is a bit like leaving out the sleeves.
I did not just give up after one attempt.
I tried various methods, although I was a bit limited because I only have two-pronged transfer tools for that machine.
It was only when I was almost in despair that I recalled having seen a letter written by a knitter from overseas, about an easy way to make cables and it seemed a pleasant way to take a break by referring back a few months until I found the letter from — you've guessed it — June Shaw.
It was in the February 1992 issue and it looked a bit complicated but so do most things before you actually have a go.
What really attracted me to the whole idea was that June said: ‘Personally I think it is the greatest thing since sliced bread.’
Whatever you think about sliced bread (for myself, I detest it), we all know the expression meant we didn't know how we managed before it existed.
Anything that good appeared very inviting.
It seemed a bit risky to begin on the main pieces of work, so I made a separate swatch.
This later proved a very good idea because the finished panel drew in, in the same way as regular cable panels and I needed to know by how much.
We always beg you to make swatches before you start and designers are no different, making a swatch and learning something new can save a lot of heartache.
SETTING UP THE PANEL
the cable that was demonstrated in the magazine was a little like a lobster claw cable, or could perhaps be described as a three-way plait.
this was the very cable I have formerly been trying to make without success.
This consists of three lots of three stitches.
for the first crossover you take three stitches from the left and cross them with the three centre stitches.
After four rows, you cross the stitches from the right with the three centre stitches.
Even with side stitches taken out of work it had been more than my machine and yarn wanted to tackle.
Since there was no picture with June's letter I was not aware that I would end up with the cable I was looking for.
Following her instructions to the letter, I took the centre stitch and transferred it to the adjacent needle.
I then counted three needles each to the right and left and transferred the next stitch to adjacent needles as well, leaving the empty needles in non-working position.
This was as shown; although June says that you can work with other combinations of stitches.
I felt that it was no time for living dangerously.
I continued knitting until I had about twenty centimetres, eight inches, and removed the stitches from the machine.
Later I realised it would have been wiser to have made a stitch on the empty needles and worked a couple of rows before finishing.
That was all very simple.
Now cam the time to make the magic cable.
It can be quite difficult working at something with needle and yarn with your eyes glued to a diagram but this I had to do.
I could see from the diagram how the back of the work should look, what I was not prepared for was how the front of the work could look.
It seemed all wrong that I had horizontal loops across the face of the work.
since I am one of those people who do something the wrong way round, if there is the slightest opportunity, I also inserted the needle incorrectly the first time only spotting my mistake when I read on and found that I could not follow the next instruction if my needle was at the back of the work.
CHEATING THE CORRECT WAY
Here is my slightly longer version of June's method, with pictures of both sides of the work and the finished cable.
thread a tapestry needle with matching yarn.
With right side of work facing and leaving a loose end, insert needle from front to back between the loops at centre, four rows from the start of the panel.
* Take needle behind work and bring to the right side through loops at left, four rows higher.
Insert needle on same row between centre loops, from front to back, take needle behind work and bring to front between loops at right, four rows higher.
Insert needle on same row at centre as before * Repeat from * to * until end of piece.
the yarn on the front of the work is horizontal and on the back it is at an angle.
Now comes the fun part.
Take the loose ends and pull gently until the cable forms.
You may need to adjust it at the centre on long pieces since the ends tend to pull rather tightly to start with.
Once you are satisfied with the evenness, secure the ends.
If you think the side loops are a bit obtrusive you can rib up the stitches with a latch tool.
You will not need to do this on the central loops because these disappear when the cable is pulled into place.
This method is magic and it helped me out just when I needed it.
I was working on a basic cable pattern, but now I'm wondering if there are other clever cables to be made this way.
One day when I have time to spare I must experiment with this method.
Is it cheating?
No, I don't think so.
After all, there are hand knitters who would have us believe that we are cheating merely by producing knitting on a machine.
SILVER SCENE
We have a mixed bag on the theme of motifs this month, beginning with a query from my post bag.
Liz Norton
Mrs Brenda Mitchell of Shipley, West Yorkshire, wrote asking if it is possible to change the width of a pattern saved on a memory card.
she gave the example of a hedgehog pattern which she had used on a sweater.
The hedgehog itself was 19 stitches wide and she had saved it as a 23-stitch pattern repeat.
This allowed four stitches between hedgehogs if they were knitted as a band or series of bands on a sweater.
Mrs Mitchell wants to know if she can increase or decrease the width of the pattern, in order to get complete repeats of the pattern on a sweater that is a different size to the one she used her 23-stitch repeat for.
As she says, you can do this if the pattern is on the mylar sheet by adjusting the pattern width dial, but since she saved the hedgehog she has erased the mylar sheet.
The Design Controller doesn't have a program written especially for changing the pattern but I've spend some time wondering if any of the programs could be used for this purpose, even if they weren't originally intended to be; however, I've had no success.
The only solution I can see is in future to save any pattern of this sort as a variety of widths.
This, of course, will use up space on the memory card, but in practice you probably wouldn't save too many versions of the pattern, as too many stitches between the repeats will lead to long floats on the reverse side of the knitting.
This suggestion won't help Mrs Mitchell with her hedgehog of course and I'm sorry about that, but she may have helped the rest of us to avoid the problem.
It's the kind of thing you don't think of until it actually happens to you.
At least, I don't!
I'm sometimes asked about using the right hand side of mylar sheets for patterns.
The EC1 Pattern Controller has two pattern width dials, one for the left and one for the right of the pattern, so with this equipment you can of course use the right of the mylar sheet just as you use the left.
It is also possible though to use the right side of the mylar sheet on older machines for motif patterns, though not for all-over patterning.
Draw the motif at the right.
Put the pattern width dial to 60.
Position the point cams to indicate the position of the motif.
With the No.2 left-hand light on, on the 580 and right-hand light on, on earlier models, position the N1 cam in line with the right-hand point cam.
If the pattern is facing the other way and the No.2 right-hand light is on, on the 580, or the left-hand light on, on earlier models, then line the N1 came up with the left-hand point cam.
Figure 1 shows how this works.
The mylar sheet has two motifs on it, ‘A’ on the left and ‘B’on the right.
The solid lines mark the edge of the mylar sheet, the dotted lines the boundary between the two motifs.
The diagram shows how the pattern would be repeated if the point cams were at the edge of the knitting, as viewed from the purl side of the knitting.
When the No.2 left-hand light is on, on the 580 (right-hand light on earlier machines), motif ‘A’ lies to the right of the N1 cam, motif ‘B’to the left.
The point cams mark the edge of the pattern knitting and are positioned so that there is only space for the ‘B’ pattern to be knitted.
When the No.2 right-hand light is on, on the 580 (left-hand light on earlier machines)(Figure 2), the ‘B’ motif is to the right of the N1 cam, so the N1 cam is lined up with the left point cam and again  the point cams limit the pattern knitting to one repeat of the ‘B’motif.
I suggested starting by setting the pattern width dial to 60.
I assumed that the ‘B’ motif was drawn against the right-hand edge of the mylar sheet, that is with the right edge of the motif on the sixtieth stitch of the mylar sheet.
In fact it stops short of the edge of the mylar sheet, say on stitch 56, then set the pattern width dial to 56.
You can of course save a motif drawn in this way on a memory card.
Both patterns ‘A’ and ‘B’will have to be saved.
To use patter ‘B’ the programming will be the same as when it is on a mylar sheet.
Finally, as this is the Christmas issue, I'm finishing with a little quiz, which I hope you will find time to do just for the fun of it over the holiday.
I've taken the pineapple and banana pattern and knitted it using various buttons and changing the position of the point cams.
(As this was a programming exercise I didn't ‘wrap’ the edge of the motifs.
I still had to use the yarn separators though.)
Can you work out how to program them?
Sorry, no prizes.
Answers below.
In the meantime, Happy Christmas!
DUOMATIC UPDATE
Hand-transfer patterns can be fun for a change and, used over small areas, are not too time consuming.
Try one of these ideas instead of a rib for welts.
Hazel Duignan
In spite of having two electronic machines as well as a punchcard model, I still really enjoy working with patterns which require a manual transfer, when I have time.
I expect that experienced knitter will have tried most, if not all, of these but I know that there are lots of new knitters who have not.
You do not need a new up-to-date machine, a Pink Passap Duo 5 will knit these as easily as will the Duo 80 or the E6000.
All you need is a transfer tool, some yarn and a bit of time.
Firstly, some fancy edgings which can be used instead of the usual welt.
If you are using a Pink Duo 5 reduce the stitch size by approximately ½ when following the instructions given.
1.
Push up needles for full needle rib.
You will need groups of three needles for the pattern so choose a number divisible by three, then add one stitch at each end for a seam.
Handle down.
Orange strippers.
Set lock to N/N stitch size 2 ½/2; ½, knit 1 row.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 3/3, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 3 ½/3; ½, knit 1 row, ** Transfer stitches marked 1 and 3 to needle 2 (see Diagram 1) all across the row.
The finished row should now have one needle with the seam stitch, one empty needle, * a needle holding two stitches, then two empty needles *.
From * to * is repeated across the bed finishing with one needle holding two stitches, one empty needle and then the seam stitch.
Leave all empty needles in working position and knit 4 rows **.
Repeat from ** to ** four or five times then continue knitting in full needle rib.
This edge is shown in Sample A and is lovely for baby clothes.
If you wish you could continue with one or two panels of the three stitch pattern, right to the top of the garment.
This edging can also be used for a fancy collar.
2
Push up needles for full needle rib.
this pattern needs multiples of thirteen stitches, plus seam stitches.
Handle down.
Orange strippers.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 2 ½/2; ½, knit 1 row.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 3/3, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 3 ½/3; ½, knit 1 row.
Follow instructions in Diagram 2 and knit 2 rows between transfers.
See Sample B. You can repeat the transfer rows as many times as you wish before continuing in full needle rib.
There are many variations possible when knitting this kind of edge.
Following the same instructions over twelve, instead of thirteen, needles so that there is only one knit stitch between each scallop is one variation you might like to try.
If you find that you get ‘lost’ while knitting and transferring, mark the centre stitch which holds the three stitches by bringing a pusher from the blocking rail as a marker.
3.
Cabled rib is very attractive and can be used to good effect on an otherwise plain sweater.
See Sample C.
Arrange needles for 1×1 rib over required number of needles.
Handle up.
Orange strippers.
Using 4 ply yarn, set lock to N/N stitch size 2 ½/2; ½, knit 1 row.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 3/3, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 4/4, knit 1 row.
Handle down.
Transfer as Diagram 3 using heels of stitches to ill the needles.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 4 ½/4; ½, knit 3 rows.
* Cross stitches 1 and 2 with stitches 3 and 4.
Knit 6 rows *, repeat.
Finish with 3 knit rows.
If you find that it is difficult to knit after the stitches are crossed, push up the back bed needle marked X on the row before the transfer the release the loop from this needle and put the needle into non-working position.
This will give you a little extra yarn for the crossover.
It is especially useful if you are knitting with a very soft yarn which breaks easily or with a yarn which has no stretch.
I have not used this method for the sample in the photograph as I have used King Cole Anti-Tickle wool which cables easily without the extra yarn.
There are, as you probably know, almost endless variations of cabling on both single and double bed.
I shall include just one more, as shown in Sample D.
4.
Push up needles for FN rib.
Handle down and orange strippers.
Use 3 ply yarn or 2 ends of 2/30s acrylic.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 2 ½/2; ½, knit 1 row.
Set lock to CX/CX, stitch size 3/3, knit 2 rows.
Set lock to N/N, stitch size 3 ½/3; ½, knit to where you want to begin the pattern.
Consult diagram 4 and * transfer stitch 1 of each group to needle 4, in front of stitches 2, 3 and 4 which should then be replaced on needles 1, 2 and 3 (easier than it sounds).
Knit 6 rows * Repeat from * to * as many times as required.
Although single-bed transferred lace might prove tedious, a small panel would be fairly quick to knit, so here is one to try out.
5.
Knitting in stocking stitch with a 4 ply yarn, transfer as Diagram 5 and you should have a lace heart to wear on your sleeve.
Knit two rows of stocking stitch between transfers.
If you decide to design your own lace pattern, do remember that you must transfer to both left and right rather than in just one direction or you may finish up with a definite bias in your knitting.
It is possible to knit a bias strip of mesh lace to use as a collar.
Transfer alternate stitches and knit two rows of stocking stitch throughout, always transferring in the same direction.
Join the short ends together t make a circle and with the right side of the lace to the wrong side of the neck edge, sew in place then turn the lace band over to the right side of the garment.
All this is a far cry from the usual tuck ribs and jacquards which the Duomatic knits so beautifully.
However, if it is right that a change is as good as a rest, you should now feel rested and ready to cope with anything.
TALKING TOYOTA
PARTIAL KNITTING, PART 1
Master the art of partial knitting and you can shape your garment as you knit, smoothly slope a shoulder, add a flare or curve a hem.
Shelagh Hollingworth
One of the popular reasons for buying a knitting machine is to be able to knit very quickly.
Without doubt even the novice can do that, since just by moving the carriage to and fro metres of lovely smooth knitting can be produced with very little effort.
But after a while straight pieces of knitting cease to be satisfying and we progress to shaping, which speeds up the making-up process and also saves on materials.
It doesn't take very long to master shaping methods and fairly soon the shaping can be hand-tooled with scarcely a check to the actual knitting while we attend to it.
In the same way it is possible to learn further shaping methods to produce garments not only quicker to make up but with the actual machine-made shaping as a feature of the completed garment.
PARTIAL KNITTING TECHNIQUE
This method of knitting whilst shaping is so important that you might like to keep suitable time entirely clear to master the basics without interruption.
It will cover many kinds of shaping for a huge variety of subjects and once learned will save you a good deal of time in making up and garment fitting.
Moreover, when you try it out for yourself you will wonder how you ever managed without it.
As the manual tells you, by holding certain stitches in holding (E) position and knitting the remaining stitches in sequence you can work shoulder shaping, neck shaping, sock heels and toes and even a shaped hemline on skirts, while most attractive full skirts can be made on the same principle.
The words partial knitting do sound very technical to new knitters but if you are familiar with hand knitting you will discover that partial knitting is what hand knitters term ‘knit to so many stitches, turn and knit back’, although, of course, doing it by machine takes a fraction of the time.
As with hand knitting it is necessary to ‘wrap’ the last stitch with the yarn to avoid leaving a hole.
This is how to do it with a few extra explanations to help you understand why you are making the movements — realising why levers move often helps to set the method in the mind.
Work a few centimetres/inches on a fairly wide sample of stitches, ending with carriage at the right ready for the next row.
Put both side levers to I is for knitting with the carriage those needles in working (B) position, while others are in E, holding position.
The carriage will then slide across those you do not wish to knit.
Needles to be brought into holding position must always be at the opposite side to the carriage.
* At the left edge, bring a group (five is a good number) of needles out to E position by hand and knit one row towards the left.
The stitches in B position will knit and those in E position will remain under the carriage.
The yarn, following the path of the carriage will now be lying across the needles in E position.
Raise the yarn slightly and take it under the first needle in E position, that is the E position needle nearest to the knitting.
One the way back the yarn will be wrapped around this needle and will prevent a hole from being formed.
With the carriage at the left, bring a group of needles at the right side edge to E position and knit one row towards the right.
Again you will see that the yarn is lying over the E position needles.
Take the yarn under the E position needle next to the knitting so that it will wrap around that needle on the return.
Repeat from * as required.
If you have 60 stitches on your sample you might like to repeat the method twice more at each side.
This gives 30 stitches at the centre with 15 stitches at both ends holding (E) position.
You can tell from the slope that this is a typical shoulder shaping albeit in miniature.
If it were full size you would have shaped the shoulders on a garment with no trouble at all and have a lovely neat edge for sewing up or grafting.
You will not want to leave the needles in holding position so you must learn how to return them, since this will give you the reverse of the shaping.
The carriage is at the right.
As before, any shaping must be conducted at the opposite end of the knitting to the carriage.
Push the E position needles to D position (where the selected needles come to), sometimes called upper working position and knit one row to the left.
Put the side levers to O, conveying the message that you now want all the stitches to knit.
Now knit back towards the right and all the needles will knit back to B, working position.
That is all that is required for plain partial knitting, side levers at I will permit knitting needles at B working position and side levers at O bring holding position.
Do pay attention to the note at the bottom of page 38 in the manual, which suggests that you ensure that the yarn is not caught round any of the sinker hooks when you take the yarn and wrap it around the needle in E position next to the knitting.
You are also told not to take the carriage too par past the knitting as this would alter the tension.
It could also make loops, which, although they could be sewn in during making up, would spoil the smoothness of the work which is the main purpose of partial knitting.
PARTIAL KNITTING IN  PRACTICE 
The sample piece showed how useful this shaping can be in forming a sloping shoulder on a garment.
When you reach shoulder shaping in a pattern it will generally instruct you in the time-honoured way to ‘cast off’ as group of stitches at the beginning of the next given number of rows.
Shoulder stitches can be removed in a variety of ways.
Knitters who have not practised the partial shaping may be casting off one stitch at a time as they were first taught to do or casting off in this way to retain a firm shoulder seam.
They may even ignore the shaping because they intend to cut and sew.
With all these elements in mind the best thing that a designer can do is tell you to cast off the stitches and leave the method to you.
But once familiar with partial knitting you will probably find it very helpful to be able to partially knit along the top edge to produce a slope at each side leaving the centre stitches for the neck edge.
Once you have completed with shaping you are still left with more than one option for completing the top.
Back neck stitches can be run on to a few rows of waste yarn and removed leaving you with a set of shoulder stitches on each side.
If you want to graft the two sets (front and back) of stitches together then each set of shoulder stitches can be run off on to waste yarn and you are left with three separate groups of stitches all on waste yarn.
Do not make the mistake of putting the two sets of shoulder stitches back to working position and running the whole lot together on to waste yarn as this can be a nuisance when you need to unravel parts of the waste yarn while you join the shoulders together.
Once you have placed the centre stitches on to waste yarn you can return each set of shoulder stitches to working position and cast them off in one action.
This is not only quicker than casting stitches off in small groups but it also gives a neat edge without the stepped edge that usually occurs.
to cast off in small groups but it also gives a neat edge without the stepped edge that usually occurs.
To cast off the set of stitches, return all the stitches to working position, work one row at main tension followed by one row at tension 10 and cast off all the stitches in one line.
A sloping effect in knitting is useful in other places too.
If you look at the lower edge of a cloth dress or skirt, it frequently has a sloping hemline.
Indeed, a skirt cut across straight at the lower edge would have a distinctly odd look, rather like a box.
It is to avoid that boxy look that skirts are rounded at the lower edge, especially if the skirt is formed of panels.
To create a curved hemline you will have already made the hem itself and the curve is formed by reversing what you have already learned in sloping for the shoulders.
In other words the slope will dip rather than rise while you continue to knit at the centre.
This is the method.
Calculate by how many rows you want the curve to dip.
If in doubt, it might be as well to look at a pattern for fabric or to measure the amount of depth on a hemline that is already a favourite.
It will not be very much, a natural curve is generally about two centimetres, three-quarters of an inch, since more than this could cause a wavy effect.
For a test piece cast on the usual 60 stitches and allow for 30 stitches at the centre and three groups of five stitches at each side to form a curve.
this will be quite a pronounced curve but shows the procedure very aptly.
Knit a hem in the usual way in stocking stitch ending with the carriage at the right.
Bring 15 stitches at both side edges to E holding position.
You will gradually bring these needles back to working position to form the curve lower edge above the hem.
Put aside levers to I for partial knitting, since some of the needles will remain in holding position.
* At the left push five needles from E to D position and knit one row, from right to left.
you will find that the set of five needles has been drawn back to B working position.
As before, draw the yarn under the first needle in E position nearest to the knitting to prevent a hole.
It will wrap around this needle on the return journey.
On the right (the opposite side to the carriage) bring five needles to D position and knit one row to the right.
Take yarn under the needle in E position nearest to the knitting.
Repeat from * until the remaining stitches are in working position.
You will see that you have worked six rows on the centre 30 stitches at the same time, bringing in five stitches at a time at alternate ends on every row.
Your curve is just six rows deep.
The curve should be proportionate to the width.
Six rows forming a curve over 60 stitches is rather abrupt, the same number of rows would suit 120 stitches equally well, in which case you might work 60 stitches at the centre, with the 30 stitches at each end being returned to working position in a series of three sets of ten stitches.
The picture shows how unobtrusive this type of curved knitting can look.
Once all the needles are back in working position is time to put the side levers at 0 for plain knitting on all needles.
Take particular note that putting the side levers to 0 will bring needles in E position back to B position.
When you have picked up stitches, for example to knit on a neckband, or when picking up to make a sideways knitted front band, if the edge is a bit rough it is a very good idea to bring the needles holding the picked up edges or stitches out to E position before knitting across with the side levers at 0.
The carriage will knit, bringing the needles back to B position as it does so.
INSPIRATIONS
COUNTRYSIDE CELEBRATION
For the last seasonal design in this series of ‘Countryside Celebration’, I have returned to the woodlands.
At this time of year, the twigs, branches and tree trunks are emphasized by a fall of snow, with a reflection in the stream beneath.
IRIS BISHOP
The ivy leaf border of glossy green leaves makes a wonderful contrast to the bare trees, growing in the hedgerows and undergrowth.
YARNS AND COLOURS
Use good strong contrasts in colour for this design, using white for the snow, as background to the trees, and pale green for the ivy leaves.
White chenille is ideal for the ‘snow’ and a shiny or lustrous yarn for the pale green to mirror the glossy surface of the ‘ivy leaves’.
For the dark contrast colour, use a matt yarn in black, dark green, brown or other dark colour.
LANDSCAPE DESIGN
Knit welts etc. in black (or other dark colour).
Starting at row 1 of the design, knit in Fair Isle as follow: Rows 1–30 = pale green in feeder 1 and dark colour in feeder 2.
Rows 31–120 = white in feeder 1 and dark colour in feeder 2.
Continue in plain knitting with dark colour.
IVY LEAF BORDER
To use the ivy leaf border on its own, knit rows 1–30 of the design only.
To repeat the border (as illustrated) knit 2 plain rows in dark colour between repeats and reserve the direction of the motif on each repeat.
COUNTRYSIDE CELEBRATION
Iris Bishop Disc Offer
With December we come to the end of Iris's calendar celebrating the countryside in all its seasonal moods.
We know these designs have been extremely popular and we have good news for owners of Brother electronic machines with disc drive as Iris has now produced the whole series of 12 designs on disc for your machines.
the Countryside Celebration disc is at present available exclusively to Machine Knitting Monthly readers and can be ordered direct from Iris Bishop, including postage and please give the number of your Brother machine when ordering.
For knitting details you will need the equivalent issue of Machine Knitting Monthly , but if you have missed any don't worry as back issues are available.
The series runs from January to December 1992 and you can order using the coupon on page 85.
DESIGN COLLECTIONS
Iris now has most of her design collections available on disc.
To date the disc range includes Borders and Yokes,the Kids and Pot Pourri Fair Isle books and the Spring/Summer and Autumn/Winter collections.
The discs are suitable for Brother electronic models 940, 950i, 965 and 270 with disc drive.
They are available from local stockists or cost £5.95 including postage direct from Iris Bishop at the address above.
YARN THICKNESS GUIDE ABBREVIATIONS & NOTES
MOCK RIB
Used for welts, cuffs, neckbands and other edges on single bed machines without a ribber.
Push the number of main bed needles given in pattern to working position.
Push every alternate needle back to non working position for a 1×1 rib or every third needle back to non working position for a 2×1 rib.
It may be necessary to reduce this number by one needle at one or both edges to keep rib even.
(Increase the stitches after the mock rib has been worked to give the same number as the pattern.)
Using main tension and waste yarn, cast on and knit a few rows ending with carriage at left.
Set row counter at 000.
Using at least two full sizes tighter than main tension, knit the number of rows given in pattern for rib.
Using three full sizes looser than this tension, knit one row.
(This loose row gives a neat fold like.)
Return to two full sizes tighter than main tension and knit the same number of rows as before.
Push empty needles from non working to working position and makes a hem by placing loops of first row worked in main yarn evenly along the row.
Make sure that each empty needle holds a loop to prevent a row of holes across the work.
Unravel waste yarn after work has been removed from machine.
After garment has been blocked to size, insert a metal welt bar or thin, clean piece of wood through the hem and pull firmly downwards to draw stitches of mock rib closer together.
Set the stitches by steaming lightly on wrong side, if pressing instructions permit.