

The inheritors of Mannheim's legacy
Mannheim had set out a project for the sociology of knowledge that opened up a potentially stimulating area of sociological inquiry.
But those who read his work, and might potentially have taken up the challenges it provoked, generally modified the project in ways that made it unrecognizable.
In this chapter I will look at some of the literature that addresses itself to Mannheim's sociology of knowledge — these writers are the inheritors of his work in the sense that they have read and responded to his ideas.
There is no straightforward coherence in this literature except in the use of the phrase ‘sociology of knowledge’ and in the reference to Mannheim's work as a formative influence.
There is a potentially much broader field of work which could be construed as the sociology of knowledge.
Many sociologists have addressed the relationship between ideas or beliefs and social structure and process but I shall not attempt to consider theories that more or less imply a sociology of knowledge perspective.
To do so would be to broaden the potential range of literature to most of sociology and much philosophy and history besides.
The aim here is to consider the traces of a Mannheimian tradition which responded to his particular account of the relation between knowledge and society.
From sociology there are attempts to adopt and adapt Mannheim's perspective and attempts to more or less ‘begin again’.
From philosophy concern has focused on the philosophical underpinnings of the sociology of knowledge as well as its implications for philosophical study.
As a scholar Mannheim has attracted considerable attention both from commentators interested in the structure of his ideas and from those moved by the possibility of such a bold project as the sociology of knowledge.
This interest has kept the Mannheimian tradition alive if not exactly thriving and it seems as if every few years there is a revival of  interest.
In 1984 for example, Stehr and Meja suggested that there was something of a renaissance of the sociology of knowledge (Stehr and Meja 1984: 4).
Whether that renaissance ever really occurred seems very doubtful a few years on — the issues at the centre of Mannheim's sociology of knowledge continue to be debated but usually with little reference to his work.
I shall comment firstly on those who dealt with the sociology of knowledge from a philosophical perspective and then consider the responses from sociology.
I will go on to look at some developments of the Mannheimian legacy, in particular the work of the social constructionists and at the end of the chapter I shall comment on some aspects of Mannheim's project affected by this series of responses to his work.
Much of the work of those who inherited Mannheim's legacy lost sight of the project of the sociology of knowledge he proposed.
The broad reasons for this were the difficulties in adopting his ontology of social being and knowledge and his espousal of ‘relationism’.
In most of the work I shall discuss here a central position is maintained for the knowing subject as the intending actor who enters social situations.
Tied to this is a faith in the competence of epistemology to evaluate different forms of knowledge such that the ‘scientific’ and ‘rational’can be distinguished and privileged as superior forms of knowledge to the ‘ideological’.
THE PHILOSOPHICAL RESPONSE
As we shall see, much of the early response from sociology wanted to off-load the epistemological ‘freight’ that the sociology of knowledge appeared to be carrying.
Most of the responses from philosophers were not interested in simply repossessing the epistemological freight, they were keen to stop the whole project in its tracks.
The philosophical critique, in varying ways, attempted to undermine the project of the sociology of knowledge by pointing to its at best doubtful, at worst vacuous, epistemological basis.
For philosophers, Mannheim's project was somewhat threatening.
It not only dared to enter the domain of philosophy by offering a critique of epistemology but also brought with it the heresy of relativism.
Worst of all, the sociology of knowledge challenged the special field of philosophy as a purely cognitive activity in which the application of logical thought could generate knowledge true in all contexts.
The task of philosophy itself became somewhat downgraded if, like all other knowledge, it was socially determined.
Grunwald, for example, writing originally in Germany in 1934, argued that the sociology of knowledge was founded not in a secure epistemology but in a metaphysical assertion of the relationship  between knowledge and social being.
This he derisively referred to as ‘sociologism’ and distinguished it from the true activity of sociology, the study of social action.
Grunwald argued that since the foundation of the sociology of knowledge was ‘axiological’ rather than a science with an epistemology, it could not engage in empirical research.
In a way this was not such a radically different view from Mannheim's because the sociology of knowledge was sociologism in the sense that it held that truth was only ‘true ‘for’ certain groups of men’(Grunwald 1970: 238).
The sociology of knowledge was not founded on an epistemology but this meant only that its empirical analyses could not be interpreted according to a pre-established system.
Relativism is not an attractive proposition to anyone, least of all philosophers, because everything becomes so uncertain and transitory.
A recent commentator, Martin Hollis, even fears that it leads to the ‘social destruction of reality’(Hollis 1982: 83).
His argument with relativism is much the same as was Grunwald's:
Relativism asserts the view that everything given — this word being taken in the widest possible sense — can be grasped only in perspectives; but this proposition itself is supposed to be valid absolutely, not just for one perspective.
In each proposition it advances, relationism is thus obliged to contradict its own thesis.
(Grunwald 1970: 239)
Grunwald claims that relationism ‘turns out to be an illusion’ while Hollis claims it is ‘just for the birds’.
Both find that life, and of course the activity of philosophy, is untenable without some standards of absolute truth, the canon of ‘reason’, which can generate knowledge that can be held to be true regardless of perspective or context.
The strategy adopted for the defence of absolutism and reason is firstly to protect philosophy from the intrusion of the sociology of knowledge and secondly to assert that there is simply no other way than having the absolute standards of reason.
Grunwald wrote of the ‘unwarranted pretension’ of the sociology of knowledge (1970: 241) and Hinshaw of its ‘definite encroachment’into the realms of epistemology (1973: 233).
But there is no super-ordinate epistemology which demonstrates the existence of reason; its foundation is, of course, axiological too.
Even with the benefit of centuries of debate Hollis can think of no better way to support reason than a grand axiological claim:
The other way, then, is to place an a priori constraint on what a rational man can believe about his world.
(Hollis 1982: 83)
In trying to limit the domain of the sociology of knowledge, to keep it from intruding into philosophy and from making unjustifiable empirical claims, Hinshaw's review suggests that its real concern is with pragmatics, ‘the relationships of signs to their users’(Hinshaw 1973: 237).
Hinshaw makes a distinction between the ‘cognitive’ and ‘evocative’contents of knowledge suggesting that the ‘truth’, at the semantic and syntactic levels, can be considered in isolation from the social basis of knowledge in so far as it can be shown to be cognitive rather than evocative.
While Mannheim's programme is concerned with the relationships of signs to their users it is however based on the idea that the cognitive, because of its presuppositions, is rooted in the evocative.
It is for this reason that the sociology of knowledge is effective as a critique of epistemology which purports to be a purely cognitive activity.
A more substantial rejection of the sociology of knowledge came from Karl Popper.
He has approached it as an example of a much more general position in the debate about the possibilities of knowledge which he called ‘historicism’ characterized by a presumption about the nature of history:
it denies that the regularities detectable in social life have the character of the immutable regularities of the physical world.
(Popper 1957: 5)
The historicist position, Popper tells us, insists that any regularities of social life are dependent on historical changes in cultural life.
He locates the origins of the sociology of knowledge in the work of Hegel and Marx, whom he regarded as the philosophers most prominent and influential in the historicist tradition.
Popper has two arguments against the sociology of knowledge.
The first, and political argument, is that historicism ‘desires’ not only to predict change but also to control it by centralized large-scale planning.
In this the sociology of knowledge follows what he calls a ‘reactionary prejudice’ of Hegel and Engels that asserted that freedom could be gained by knowledge about the determinants affecting social being (Popper 1966: 223).
The second, and methodological, argument against historicism was that it was not ‘rational’, or at least that it fostered irrationalism and mysticism (Popper 1966: 216).
The problem with the sociology of knowledge is that:
It overlooks the fact that it is the public character of science and of its institutions which imposes a mental discipline upon the individual scientist, and which preserves the objectivity of science and its tradition of critically discussing new ideas.
(Popper 1957: 156)
Popper argued that a non-relative form of knowledge was available through scientific method which was rational and not determined by the history of culture.
The scientific approach to knowledge involved the free criticism by scientists of each other 's work, combined with a basis of information through observation and experiment.
The public character of scientific knowledge depended on the interpersonal and critical debate between scientists.
Critical rationality could not be a property of individuals; it was a product of a certain set of social relations.
Political power could create the institutional framework necessary for free criticism, including things like laboratories, periodicals and congresses.
In other words the limits on the knowing subject's cognition are such that it has to be mediated in a social and discursive context for anything like truth to be achieved:
In short, the rationalist attitude…is very similar to the scientific attitude, to the belief that in the search for truth we need co-operation, and that, with the help of argument, we can in time attain something like objectivity.
(Popper 1966: 225)
The claim for the public character of science as a mode for generating critical rational thought was an argument against the need for the sociology of knowledge; with a certain social and political context, the non-cognitive effects on knowledge could be eradicated.
But the public character of science is more complicated and less benign than Popper's theory hoped (see Chapters 7 and 8).
The lack of an epistemological foundation for the sociology of knowledge did not seem to all philosophers to signal its failure.
Arthur Child wrote a series of articles between 1941 and 1947 on various philosophical aspects of the sociology of knowledge (Child 1941a; 1941b; 1942; 1944; 1947).
He attempted to find an alternative grounding for the project in a theory of mind because without it he argued that the ‘postulational scepticism’ of Grunwald and others was an effective criticism.
To accept the empirical demonstration of the social determination of knowledge one first has to accept the postulate that knowledge is socially determined.
Child's solution is to propose a prior social theory of mind similar to that proposed by Mead:
If mind itself has a social origin — if, that is, it arises through the process of communication — and if thinking consists at bottom in the manipulation of generalized attitudes taken over from the social  group as a whole, then there can be no question of the social determination, in some sense, of knowledge and thought.
(Child 1941b: 416)
This task of completing the sociology of knowledge with a social theory of mind is taken up by Goff (1980), who draws together features of Marx's and Mead's work.
Goff sees the problem in terms of the ontological and epistemological assumptions involved in approaches to sociology.
While sociology, and the sociology of knowledge in particular, are rooted in a social conception of man, the critique has come from positivism which is rooted in an individualistic, asocial, conception of man.
Goff points to the contradiction that ensues when sociology attempts to take on the methodology sanctified by positivism for use in the natural sciences:
a contradiction that is entailed in their uncritical importation of a methodology developed in relation to another subject matter entirely.
(Goff 1980: 111)
Child and Goff are persuasive.
However, I have argued that Mannheim's sociology of knowledge is based on a social conception of human being; he is extremely careful not to reduce thought to individual minds and not to conceive of a group ‘mind’ based on the prior conception of individual mind (Mannheim 1936: 2, 44).
The effect of this is to decentre the subject by locating social being in the social practices of groups.
The danger in utilizing a theory of ‘mind’ to solve the problem of grounding the sociology of knowledge is that it depends on concepts that relate to individual and inaccessible behaviour —‘thought’, ‘consciousness’, etc.
These concepts require self-reflection for their meaning to be grasped, which necessarily leads to an ontology privileging the individual as a knowing subject.
I wish to argue that the insertion of a concept of social practice into Mannheim's account of social being can in effect provide a ‘social theory of mind’ without reasserting the primacy of the individual.
Child was unusual amongst philosophers proffering a critique of the sociology of knowledge in accepting limits to philosophical analysis that the sociology of knowledge has attempted to overcome:
The sociologists of knowledge…may well have come to erroneous conclusions; but they have at least attempted in some measure, to solve the philosophical problem that results from the existence of competitive social-world [theoretical]systems.
(Child 1947: 28)
Other commentators (Hartung 1952; De Gré 1970 [though written in 1941]; Horowitz 1961) tended to the position we have already seen adhered to by Grunwald and Hinshaw; that the sociology of knowledge was illegitimate when it refused to recognize the primacy of epistemology in dealing with validity and competition between knowledge systems.
Child was of course accepting a degree of relativism which was usually an anathema to philosophers.
Perhaps the most important issue raised by Child was the methodological problem of imputation (Child 1941a; Child 1944 — see also Hartung 1952).
Simply put, the sociology of knowledge, to proceed with empirical description, must impute specific ‘knowledge’ to specific groups.
How, given Mannheim's refusal to reduce knowledge to the specific ideas of an individual or to use a category of ‘group mind’, can this be done?
Child's solution was to suggest that ideology can be imputed when it is ‘affiliational’, that is when members join a group which is organized around the content of an ideology (Child 1944).
But Mannheim was referring more to the form of knowledge — the meanings out of which ideas could be constructed and understood — than to the substance of particular ideologies.
Since these presuppositions that are the basis of knowledge are not normally recognized at the conscious level, an individual does not normally ‘affiliate’ to them with a conscious and intentional act.
Mannheim compared the meanings given to social being to the givenness of language and it is difficult to imagine the individual ‘affiliating’ to their first language, exactly because of its givenness to the individual as part of social being.
A more recent review of the issue of imputation in the sociology of knowledge by Alan Scott suggests that the problem is with seeing knowledge/ideology as separate from the social grouping to which it has then to be linked by imputation.
He argues that the sociology of knowledge must address the process of group formation since this involves the interaction between group identity and belief.
Scott points out that social groups are ‘symbolic/ideological formations’ and the outcome of ‘purposeful and discursive action’(Scott 1988: 51).
This is a more useful way of linking knowledge to social group than Mannheim's own rather mechanical separation of ideas from utterances and utterances from empirically constituted social groups.
Scott's point that groups are formed through discursive action and the sharing of knowledge, as well as other social practices, supports the link between knowledge and social processes that will be established in this book.
The threat that the sociology of knowledge posed to philosophy did not apply equally to all types of philosophy.
As well as the acceptance by Child of a valid philosophical position for the sociology of knowledge, Jacques Maquet suggested that it was only a threat to those philosophers who saw humans as provided with a spiritual nature that entailed the possibility of transcending economic and social determination through a theoretical ‘faculty of the true’(Maquet 1973: 100).
More recently Susan Hekman has interpreted Mannheim's role as a forerunner of ‘anti-foundational’ social science in that he substantially rejects epistemological grounding for sociology.
What Mannheim provides is a ‘groundless philosophy of social science’(Hekman 1986: 79) that provides a link with modern hermeneutic, critical and structuralist approaches.
Maquet, like Child, brought the philosophical debate about the sociology of knowledge down to differences in philosophical positions, differences due to different ontologies of social being and of knowledge.
These commentators implicit that the differences are irreconcilable within philosophy; they are beyond analysis or logic precisely because they are prior to the application of philosophical methods.
Though irreconcilable, these differences are none the less very much at the centre of philosophy's concern with the possibilities or ‘knowing’.
THE RESPONSE FROM FUNCTIONALIST SOCIOLOGY
It is with the publication of Ideology and Utopia in an English translation in 1936 that the sociology of knowledge begins its uncomfortable incorporation into the discipline of ‘sociology’.
This discipline was more particular in the English-speaking world than in European academic circles where the distinction between sociology, philosophy and history was blurred.
In Britain, while there was little institutional separation of sociology, there was a sociological tradition deriving from the work of Herbert Spencer.
But it was in the USA that sociology was emerging as a separate discipline both academically and institutionally.
The struggle of American sociology to establish itself as a distinct ‘scientific’ discipline dominates the early reactions to Mannheim's work.
In 1936 Alexander von Schelting reviewed the German edition of Ideologie und Utopie in an American journal, marking both its impact on the English-speaking sociological community and the, then forthcoming, English translation.
His comments were uncompromising:
Yet Mannheim's fundamental views on the problems of ideology and the sociology of knowledge cannot be accepted, because of their basic lack of logical and epistemological consistency and their incompatibility with empirical facts.
(von Schelting 1936: 664)
Von Schelting's principal problem was with the difficulty of maintaining the possibility of a social science in the face of the sociology of knowledge because Mannheim had destroyed ‘its objective, impartial validity’(von Schelting 1936: 666).
While disputing the basis of Mannheim's critique of the limits of epistemology, von Schelting did tolerate the idea that there is some social basis of knowledge.
However, he insisted that this could be distinguished from the cognitive validity of knowledge.
Von Schelting's most powerful criticism was that the sociology of knowledge undermined its own basis — it was apparently making a claim for its own truth that it argued was not available for knowledge in general.
Mannheim's reflexivity, his willingness to tolerate the limits of any claim to truth in his own work was unrecognizable to the epistemological scientism of American sociology.
This scientism took as axiomatic that systematic and reasoned study, its methods reflected upon and sanctified by epistemology, could generate ‘truth’.
The interpretation of Mannheim's project that von Schelting initiated set the scene for its incorporation into mainstream functionalist sociology.
The sociology of knowledge was deemed to have a role in grasping the social basis of knowledge but this task was to be clearly distinguished from any comment on the validity of knowledge.
The latter was properly the business of epistemology and to be excluded from the scientific practice of sociology.
There was a fundamental difference between Mannheim's understanding of the status of knowledge and that of American functionalism but because of the respect for the ideas generated in the European tradition of sociology and the importance of the topic of ‘knowledge’, the sociology of knowledge was incorporated into American sociology by what Stehr and Meja refer to as a process of ‘normalization’(Stehr and Meja 1984: 6).
This process involved the shedding of ‘the epistemological baggage with which it was freighted at its inception’(Coser writing in 1971, quoted by House 1977: 222n).
In effect this meant accepting that the sociology of knowledge must not concern itself with the truth of knowledge being studied but analyse the ‘norms of thinking’ for the participants under study:
we can say generally that whatever is regarded as a truth functions as a norm of thinking,[and]imposes upon the conscious agent who recognizes it a distinctive selection and organization of some data of his experience.
(Znaniecki 1970: 310)
This gave the sociology of knowledge a specific task in studying the sociological features on which systems of knowledge were dependent  but the critical edge and the proposition of relationism had disappeared.
Znaniecki was able to introduce a ‘conscious agent’ and ‘norms of thinking’with which to investigate the socially inscribed function in relation to knowledge of individuals (as in The Social Role of the Man of Knowledge — the title of Znaniecki's 1940 book).
Knowledge was returned to the individual knowing subject so that it could be analysed (regardless of its truth or falsity) as a product of the ‘norms’ within which the individual must operate.
At the same time scientific method could protect the individual from the effects of social norms, thereby providing a context where they did not determine the content of thought.
What the sociology of knowledge became concerned with was the social processes that interfered with the production of true knowledge.
Merton for example discusses the social role of the intellectual in public bureaucracy — the ‘technological’ wing of social science where the social function of the individual introduces a bias which becomes apparent to the objective scientist.
He differentiates between the production of knowledge within the constraints of a bureaucratic context, with its practical demands for public policy, and the academic context of the ‘unattached intellectual’ for whom knowledge production is relatively unaffected by institutional constraints (Merton 1957: 218).
The difference for Merton between the European variant of the sociology of knowledge (i.e. the Mannheimian project) which considered the total structure of knowledge and the American variant which studied isolated fragments available to masses of people, was both in the object of study and the way it would be studied (Merton 1957: 441).
The Mertonian project was intended to distinguish the social processes that generated scientific knowledge from those that distributed information with bias and distortion.
The study of communication was to be a scientific project with research techniques and attention paid to the reliability of empirical data.
The lack of these features in Mannheim's project were the basis for Merton suggesting that the American variant was better (Merton 1957: 446–9).
It could be compared with chemistry because of its systematic techniques such as content analysis but the European techniques of interpretation had no such systematicity.
This positivist and functionalist adaptation of the Mannheimian legacy did not so much stand Mannheim's programme on its head as turn it inside out.
Merton's interpretation of Mannheim's project; as doomed to fail while it continued not to differentiate between scientific and other types of knowledge, was probably very influential.
The fact that Mannheim considered as ‘knowledge’ the presuppositions which  constitute the world-view of a social group and consequently affect all knowledge seemed to escape Merton who categorized knowledge as ideas that ‘perform different functions’(Merton 1957: 497).
Merton was dismayed that Mannheim distinguished between ‘cultural science’ and ‘exact science’; for Merton they should be treated as similar forms of knowledge because they are based on equivalent epistemologies.
None the less, he did con firm that there was a place for the sociology of knowledge — provided it lost its ‘epistemological impedimentia’(Merton 1957: 508).
Consistent with his view that science was a special form of knowledge potentially free of social determination, Merton initiated the sociological study of science.
This was to be a form of the sociology of knowledge that had off-loaded the epistemological baggage by operating within epistemologically established categories.
Merton proposed a study of the ‘reciprocal relations between science and society’(Merton 1957: 531).
That is, sociology could study the effects of science on social structure and the effects of the social context on the operations of science.
But by definition, science itself was not considered as penetrated by social context; if it was it would no longer be science, at least not ‘pure science’:
Science must not suffer itself to become the handmaiden of theology or economy or state.
The function of this sentiment is likewise to preserve the autonomy of science….
The exaltation of pure science is thus seen to be a defence against the invasion of norms which limit directions of potential advance and threaten the stability and continuance of scientific research as a valued activity.
(Merton 1957: 543)
The sociology of science was to articulate the ‘ethos of science’(Merton 1957: 552–61) that guaranteed the exclusion of non-theoretical factors in the practice of science.
The task of the sociology of science was to study the social context that permitted science to proceed according to the norms of this ethos.
Merton, for example, was clear that totalitarianism was more likely to foster an attack on the ethical independence and institution of science than was liberal democracy.
But there was no room in his account of the sociology of science for a review of the meanings that constitute the presuppositions of science even in a liberal democracy.
This was an issue for epistemology; sociology presumed that the epistemology of science which gave rise to its norms of practice had eradicated the influence of presuppositions on the form and final content of scientific knowledge.
Merton's proposals for the  sociology of science are so limited as to be unrecognizable in terms of Mannheim's formulation of the sociology of knowledge.
By according a special priority to the practice of science, the relationist and perspectival impact of the sociology of knowledge was made redundant.
Znaniecki's response to the sociology of knowledge dates from 1940 and Merton's is from a similar period — a later functionalist response was that of Parsons in 1959.
While Parsons maintains a special epistemological prerogative for science, his interest is in the operation of Values' in the field of knowledge.
With a typically Parsonian neologism, ‘value-science integrate’, he expresses a connection between values and objective knowledge.
Values, he argues, select problems and attach significance to items of knowledge and so constitute a basis of meaning that is tied to the social function of knowledge.
Parsons compares his value-science integrate with Mannheim's ‘general’(as opposed to particular) conception of ideology.
The value-science integrate was socially situated in that the values were seen as specific to a given social structure.
But Parsons protects the special nature of science through a distinction of levels of selection.
The ‘primary selection’ achieved by values in the value-science integrate does not distort knowledge content.
There is a secondary selection that leads to distortion and produces what Parsons calls ‘ideology’.
The thing which links but separates these two modes of selection was of course the epistemological primacy of empirical science:
The criterion of distortion is that statements are made about the society which by social-scientific methods can be shown to be positively in error, whereas selectivity [i.e. primary selectivity]is involved where the statements are, at the proper level, ‘true’, but do not constitute a balanced account of the available truth.
It is clear both secondary selectivity and distortion in an ideology violate the standards of empirical social science, in a sense in which the value-science integrate does not.
(Parsons 1967: 153)
In other words science is seen by Parsons to be free from social determination as long as it is not penetrated by secondary selectivity or ‘ideology’.
The critique of epistemology involved in Mannheim's sociology of knowledge is again being firmly rebutted.
Parsons holds that the sociology of knowledge should be concerned with the value-science integrate and distinguished from the study of ideology which should be a problem for the sociology of culture.
This means that the sociology of knowledge is to be predicated on the distinction of true and false knowledge, a stricture that Mannheim sought to avoid.
Like  Merton, Parsons highlights the sociology of science as a study of the cultural threats to the maintenance of objectivity and impartiality in scientific practice.
Similarly, he proposes the study of ideology in relation to the professions; ideology is seen as the interpenetration of distortion into processes of applied knowledge.
The predominant response to Mannheim's proposals for the sociology of knowledge in the English-speaking world was to incorporate it into the programme of ‘scientific’, functionalist sociology.
There were exceptions however.
C. Wright Mills's 1940 review of the ‘Methodological Consequences of the Sociology of Knowledge’ disagrees with earlier responses (e.g. those of von Schelting, Grunwald, Merton and Parsons).
Drawing on a cultural relativism implied in the work of Dewey and Pierce, Mills finds Mannheim's relationism quite ‘tenable’(Mills 1940: 322n).
Far from attempting to dismiss the epistemological baggage from the sociology of knowledge, Mills argues that the production of knowledge, including philosophy and epistemology, takes place in discursive contexts.
These have the social features of a specific group of participants with a shared intellectual history, regardless of any particular methods for generating knowledge (Mills 1940: 324–5).
This approach is consonant not only with Mannheim's project but also with the way that knowledge will be construed later in this book.
THE RESPONSE FROM HISTORICAL SOCIOLOGY
C. Wright Mills's interpretation of the role and relevance of the sociology of knowledge was not however one that received much support.
Other responses that seemed sympathetic to Mannheim's perspective doubted its role as a foundation for sociological work.
For example, Wagner explicates Mannheim's project in terms of his historicism but concludes that for an inquiry into ‘the sociological aspects of ideologies and of knowledge…it might be advisable to select a theoretical basis less dependent on historicistic presuppositions than that offered in Mannheim's system’(Wagner 1952: 321).
The most important exception to the functionalist incorporation of the sociology of knowledge was the comprehensive review of the field by Werner Stark.
Stark however was keen to distinguish knowledge from ideology and in this he differentiated himself from Mannheim's position which he regarded as too dominated by Marxism (Stark 1958: 104).
Instead his theory of social determination transformed the Kantian ‘a priori’, the human capacity to reason, which then filled a role similar to Mannheim's presuppositions available to social being.
The ‘social  a priori, were associated with the value system of the society and the ‘seeker after knowledge’ was located firmly within society and its value system (Stark 1958: 107).
There is however also a connection with Parsons's concept of ‘primary selection’; in both Stark's and Parsons's accounts the social basis of knowledge is determinative of the topics of knowledge rather than the content.
Stark not only claims that the value-facts are a priori to rational cognition but also claims that the ‘axiological system’(the social a priori) only determines what is to be selected for knowledge.
He is very clear that the orientation of the human mind to the natural world is consistent and not subject to social determination (Stark 1958: 166).
This leaves him free to claim also that scientific objectivity can lead to the discovery of truth (Stark 1958: 126).
This argument puts epistemology beyond the realm of the axiological system — exactly the opposite point from that which Mannheim made with his critique of epistemology.
For Stark there is a systematic and progressive development in the natural sciences organized by the desire both to understand and to dominate nature.
The truth produced by science is universal —‘In the sciences the truth is always the truth’(Stark 1958: 167).
While he did not propose any form of relativism, Stark did suggest that, unlike the natural sciences, the human sciences have yet to grasp the absolute — that which is ‘universally human’.
But the sociology of knowledge was to have a bridging role in the progress towards a scientific truth that would lead to a revelation of human essence (Stark 1958: 209).
Though Stark's understanding of the sociology of knowledge was both more detailed and more sympathetic than that of the functionalist commentators, it owes little to Mannheim.
Stark admitted the influence of Scheler, the phenomenologist who wrote on the sociology of knowledge.
Scheler was anti-positivist and opposed to the ‘cult of science’(Hamilton 1974: 75) which would appear to be at odds with Stark's position.
Scheler's phenomenology was based on a metaphysical hierarchy of values orienting the human being.
Frisby points out that Scheler's phenomenology was at odds with Husserlian phenomenology in its dualism of spirit and drives (Frisby 1983: 31) and that there is little ‘sociology’, in the sense of an explanation in terms of social formation or social structure, in his sociology of knowledge (Frisby 1983: 33).
It is because of Scheler's assertion of a metaphysical, philosophical anthropology with no basis or interaction with sociological categories that I have chosen to ignore his contribution to the sociology of knowledge.
Mannheim's comments on Scheler's position seem to be justified in their irony:
we might say: according to our view, God's eye is upon the historic process
(i.e. it is not meaningless), whereas Scheler must imply that he looks upon the world with God's eyes.
(Mannheim 1952: 178)
Though Stark does not seem to share Scheler's ambitious project completely, he is willing to import the essentialist and absolutist components of Scheler's work, derived from their shared Catholicism (Hamilton 1974: 87).
THE RESPONSE OF MODERN SOCIOLOGY
There have been a number of other reformulations and reinterpretations that have done less violence to Mannheim's legacy than did the early sociological and philosophical responses.
Neisser (1965) and later Eriksson (1975) engaged in methodological excurses exploring how the sociology of knowledge could become scientific.
Gurvitch (1971) produced a classification of different types of knowledge, though not supported by empirical analyses.
Frisby (1983) and Jay (1974) have described the Marxist reception to the publication of Ideologie und Utopie in German, which sought to distinguish Mannheim's project from the theory of ideology.
More recently however, Abercrombie has suggested that the theory of ideology could fill a lack in the sociology of knowledge by linking ideology/knowledge with the social process rather than merely with classes or social groups:
The critical Marxist position, then, takes ideology as a concept formulable at the level of the mode of production, considered as a set of underlying structures, rather than at the level of class or social group.
At this underlying level, ideology functions as a condition of existence of the economy.
(Abercrombie 1980: 174)
Abercrombie sees this modern, critical theory of ideology as an advance on traditional Marxist accounts that were in terms of base and superstructure.
While it needs to be developed in terms of the production of ideologies by class formations, he regards it as a corrective to the view, often attributed to the sociology of knowledge, that a particular ideology belongs to a class.
Abercrombie's work is not alone in its attempt to salvage the sociology of knowledge in recent years.
Shmueli for example argues that ‘relationism’ deserves more credit than it traditionally receives and that  a ‘dynamic synthesis’can lead to a new type of objectivity in the social sciences (Shmueli 1977).
Bouchier undertakes an analysis of ‘radical ideologies’ in the USA and Britain in the light of Mannheim's comments on utopian ideologies (Bouchier 1977).
Kettler (1975) builds on his earlier work (Kettler 1967) that explored Mannheim's sociology of knowledge as a perspective within sociology, by arguing that Mannheim's work was consistently within a tradition of liberal political theory.
House suggests that the reliance on rationality leading to objectivity that dominated early responses was out of date:
Mannheim's message is that it is time to move from a Newtonian to an Einsteinian social universe.
There is no Truth, nor any unambiguous criterion for agreeing upon what constitutes correct knowledge about society.
Knowledge, rather, is an emergent of an interactive process between a collectivity of subjects and the objects that constitute their environment.
(House 1977: 220)
These works are often engaged in relocating and reinterpreting Mannheim's work on the sociology of knowledge after the assault it received from functionalist sociology and philosophy when it was first introduced into the English-speaking academic community.
This task has been both theoretical and investigatory.
Work by Kettler (1967; 1975), Frisby (1983), Kettler, Meja and Stehr (1984) and Loader (1985) has explored original German writings, studied and translated unpublished notes and lectures (e.g. Mannheim 1982; 1985) and criticism to build up a fuller and more subtle context in which to understand Mannheim's sociology of knowledge.
THE RESPONSE FROM INTERPRETIVE SOCIOLOGY
Perhaps the most innovative exploration of Mannheim's work, both in scholarly terms and in the light of contemporary sociological theory is by A.P.
Simmonds (1978).
I have already disputed Simmonds's account of interpretation based on authorial intention (see Chapter 2), but his account of the sociology of knowledge both as a hermeneutic and a critical theory is most interesting.
He argues that the sociology of knowledge is a hermeneutic approach aimed at understanding rather than evaluation and as a critical theory it creates a level of communication and understanding across different perspectives.
The synthesis that the sociology of knowledge attempts is not, he stresses, a harmonic synthesis in which contradictions are eradicated and differing perspectives merged.
It is a dynamic synthesis that the sociology of  knowledge aims for, a context in which critical debate can continually reformulate the problem and its resolution:
Thus the hermeneutic moment makes critical thought possible; as long as the phenomenon of ‘talking past one another’ is not overcome, criticism remains imprisoned in a solipsistic self certainty, and the consequence of this condition
(whether it take the form of cynical passivity or dogmatic and manipulative activism) cannot but be destructive of a genuinely emancipatory praxis.
(Simmonds 1978: 184)
Simmonds's interpretation of the sociology of knowledge is derived from contemporary work by Gadamer, Appel and Habermas.
Susan Hekman (1986) has also built on the links between Mannheim's sociology of knowledge and Gadamer's hermeneutics.
She argues that they can constitute a new perspective for the social sciences and goes on to show a continuity with the anti-positivism and rejection of the knowing subject in structuralist and post-structuralist approaches to understanding.
THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE
A major problem with the Mannheimian proposals for the sociology of knowledge is that they utilize a conception of social being that does not easily fit with an account of individual human beings.
So, for example, Stern questioned whether Mannheim's account of consciousness was adequate.
If the dependency of thought on social situation is asserted then
something is indirectly asserted about existence, about the situation.
Now, from the outset, consciousness or self-interpretation, etc. must conversely be taken into account as contributory factors in existence in the situation, etc.
(Stern 1930 — quoted in Frisby 1983: 207)
If Mannheim's programme for the sociology of knowledge is not to have the nihilistic effect of reducing consciousness to the material content of history, then some degree of agency must be permitted to the human individual to affect both the production of knowledge and the process of history.
Peter Berger, like Child and Goff, brought the social psychology of Mead to bear on the sociology of knowledge which emphasized the role of socialization in constituting individual identity; ‘psychological reality is an ongoing dialectical relationship with social structure’(Berger  1970: 374).
Berger's ‘socialized’ conception of human being was a principal feature of his main contribution to the sociology of knowledge written together with Thomas Luckmann —The Social Construction of Reality (1971).
Following the phenomenological approach of Schutz, Berger and Luckmann began by establishing a knowing and intending subject in a social context of meaning that was common to all consciousness.
There were ‘spheres of reality within which consciousness could operate (i.e. distinguish, recognize) and there was one sphere that was common to all:
Among the multiple realities there is one that presents itself as the reality par excellence.
This is the reality of everyday life.
Its privileged position entitles it to the designation of paramount reality.
(Berger and Luckmann 1971: 35)
There are other ways in which human beings experience life (religious experiences, or sensual experiences for example) but the mode that is most common to most people is the sphere of everyday life.
The flow of everyday life provides a context in which individual human consciousness usually operates.
The sphere of everyday life is experienced as ordered and consistent which is because it is shared with other people and what is shared is, precisely, knowledge of everyday reality:
Most importantly I know that there is an ongoing correspondence between my meanings and their meanings in this world, that we share a common sense about its reality….
Common-sense knowledge is the knowledge I share with others in the normal, self-evident routines of everyday life.
(Berger and Luckmann 1971: 37)
It was to this common-sense knowledge that Berger and Luckmann directed the sociology of knowledge.
They regarded as ‘ill-chosen’ the focus of the traditional sociology of knowledge on intellectual history and theoretical thought (Berger and Luckmann 1971: 26).
While different perspectives might be characteristic of different groups, a realm of knowledge utilized by all is that of everyday life.
It is in terms of the common-sense meanings and presuppositions of everyday life that other sub-versions of reality are socially constructed.
In approaching the common-sense knowledge of the everyday sphere, their position claims that language plays a crucial role:
It can, therefore, be said that language makes ‘more real’ my subjectivity not only to my conversation partner but also to myself.
This capacity of language to crystallize and stabilize me for my own subjectivity is retained
(albeit with modifications) as language is detached from the face-to-face situation.
(Berger and Luckmann 1971: 53)
It is through language that ‘typifications’ are generated in micro-social situations and become habituated with continuous usage.
When typifications are shared reciprocally by typical actors then they become institutions (Berger and Luckmann 1971: 72).
This process constitutes an objective social reality for individual consciousness.
The meanings and typifications of institutions are unquestioned in the course of everyday life for the people who use them.
Berger and Luckmann equate the institution as a social form with ‘knowledge’, as a body of truths about reality that guide everyday life (Berger and Luckmann 1971: 83).
It is into this context of historically constituted institutions making up ‘reality’, that the individual is socialized.
Institutions provide a context for individuals to take on ‘roles’ in which their actions can be recognized as meaningful by themselves and others.
The network of institutions constitutes a ‘stock of knowledge’ available to members of the society.
Socialization involves giving the individual access to the stock, both learning some of its contents and how to gain access to further contents.
The role of consciousness in the socialization process is not clear; socialization, at least when it is successful, appears to take the form of filling a ‘tabula rasa’.
There seems to be no place in successful socialization for creative interaction that produces new meanings.
Holzner (1972) put forward a theoretical position for the sociology of knowledge that has many similarities with that of Berger and Luckmann — both texts derive their conception of ‘everyday life’ from Schutz.
Holzner however describes the cognitive processes of the individual, borrowing both from cognitive psychology and from the phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty.
He describes the individual interacting with the social world by filling roles that constitute an identity for her:
The most prominent orienting devices remain the symbolically defined frames of reference of social roles, which are integrated by the constant process of the individual's or the group's construction of his own identity in the context of the world as he or they know it.
(Holzner 1972: 45)
For Holzner the process of socialization is important for ‘orienting’ the individual but so is the perception of consensus and, in times of crisis, the authority of a charismatic leader.
He also gives some emphasis to channels of communication and their control; the flow of information that is interpreted by individuals according to their frame of reference.
Holzner goes further than Berger and Luckmann by describing two ‘foci of reality construction’ beyond that of everyday life — specialized knowledge and ideological knowledge.
The former are organized around the activities of work that give individuals and work communities a specialized knowledge not available or necessary in everyday fife.
Ideologies are constructions of reality that serve to support claims to power or authority (Holzner 1972: 144).
Both Holzner and Berger and Luckmann at the level of theory, describe processes by which knowledge is produced, laying an emphasis on the social form of the production and the functionality both for the maintenance of a stable social structure and the needs of the human being.
The problems with both of these theories can be discussed in terms of the attribution of agency.
The knowing, interacting subject is taken as a fundamental unit of society that has faculties of cognition and the ability to intend.
But the description of society progressively erodes the agency of the individual who is inserted into a socially given context of institutions and roles.
The structure of society is presumed to be functional for its members since it is derived from the sharing of their human attributes.
This in turn describes the function of the individual in relation to society — any agency attributed to the individual is subordinated to the maintenance of social structure.
The individual not only operates in a social context but also is determined, to the extent that she is a social being, by that context.
Moreover, social process is described in terms of a philosophical anthropology, of human attributes of individuals, attributes that are prior to any consciousness or action:
While the social products of human externalization have a character sui generis as against both their organismic and their environmental context, it is important to stress that externalization as such is an anthropological necessity.
Human being is impossible in a closed sphere of quiescent interiority.
Human being must ongoingly externalize itself in activity.
This anthropological necessity is grounded in man's biological equipment.
(Berger and Luckmann 1971: 70)
This account, in spite of beginning with the faculties of the knowing subject, leaves no room for an account of the individual as creative — as having any autonomy of agency.
Sociologically this leaves a gap in the account of social process, of the effects of politics or the ability of groups to acquire power.
The phenomenological account of a philosophical  anthropology or an ontology of human being, centres the human individual as a subject that is subject to the functions and processes of society.
The conception of social determination introduced by the social constructionists is a much more total determination than that entertained by Mannheim.
This is because social being is located in the individual human being and not merely in the set of presuppositions given in the social context to the individual.
The consequence is that Berger and Luckmann and Holzner describe not only human being but also society on the basis of phenomenological introspection; society is constructed in their description in accord with their image of the ‘human’.
For all its drawbacks as a theoretical base for the sociology of knowledge, the social constructionist accounts do suggest the importance of common-sense knowledge, of knowledge in ordinary social interaction rather than theoretical or scientific knowledge.
They locate the category of ‘knowledge’ in a social context rather than an epistemological one; it is not the validity of knowledge but how it is used that is of importance to the sociology of knowledge.
The constructionist accounts also stress the central role of language and communication in the social process of knowledge.
The conception of knowledge as everyday communication through language points to the empirical domain that I will argue the sociology of knowledge should study.
CONCLUSIONS
The disciplines of sociology and philosophy are threatened by Mannheim's proposals since, in his account, they are the formal and scientific disciplines whose topics mean they are the most likely to be affected by non-theoretical factors.
It is then not surprising that much of the response to the sociology of knowledge is a defence of these disciplines that incorporates the common-sense proposition that social context can influence the form and content of knowledge.
While both the philosophical and sociological responses to Mannheim's work was critical and did not exactly embrace the sociology of knowledge as an exciting new project, it has been recognized as a promising new area for development.
The philosophers may have been generally unsympathetic to what they saw as an encroachment on their territory, while the sociologists have done their best to incorporate or adapt Mannheim's project to fit with a paradigm in which they were already working.
The crucial difference between Mannheim and most of those who picked up his work was in an attitude towards epistemology.
For those  sociologists keen to establish the scientific credentials of sociology, both the attempt to comment on epistemology as knowledge and the attempt to found an empirical subject on relationist methods seemed impossible.
The philosophers claimed both the privilege to attend to epistemological questions and the privilege of epistemology to be the sole locus for debate about what was ‘true’ knowledge.
The inheritors of Mannheim's legacy were precisely those academics interested in substantive knowledge and the processes, epistemological and sociological, by which ‘true’ knowledge could be produced.
Yet despite the social processes described by the sociology of science or by critical rationalism, achieving ‘objectivity or ‘rational truth’ relies on an existential transcendence that Mannheim saw was too constricting for the study of knowledge.
What neither the philosophers nor the sociologists seemed to grasp was that Mannheim was interested in a different aspect of knowledge than they were, one which was far more radical than merely arbitrating between truth and falsity.
He was concerned with the presuppositions underlying knowledge, the meanings used to create it.
He was far less concerned with the ‘facts’, with the accuracy or applicability of substantive knowledge — these things were important in so far as they indicated the perspective which lay behind them.
The project of Mannheim's sociology of knowledge can be summed up as the attempt to study the relation between knowledge and social structure.
In this context knowledge can be understood as the presuppositions shared by members of a social group and as the meanings through which their action and experience are mediated — as a whole it may be recognized as the perspective of the social group.
Knowledge is not adequately described by epistemology because all knowledge is relational to the social and historical context in which it is generated and used.
The methods with which the relation between knowledge and social groups shall be studied are necessarily interpretative because there are no objective, epistemological criteria which can arbitrate trans-historically on the nature of truth.
The empirical study of knowledge requires a method for imputing knowledge to a particular social group in a given context which remains a contentious area.
The perspectivalism that the sociology of knowledge proposed requires suspending a trust in reason and rationality that is necessary for everyday life and in particular for generating applied knowledge.
Mannheim's relationism seemed to his detractors like a hollow promise, an attempt to have it both ways.
The difficulty with relationism is the limited nature of any claim it makes to generate knowledge.
Unlike, say, Popper's critical rationalism, which aims to produce the best knowledge  at any one time, objective from a multitude of perspectives, applicable in many contexts, relationism claims a much more transitory understanding.
The relational perspective simply explores the social features of any knowledge process, regardless of any claims it might make to be independent of social determination.
Although Mannheim suggested that the pure knowledge of some sciences and mathematics would not be amenable to study in this way, accounts of the social and structural features of even such ‘pure’ knowledge have since been completed (Bloor 1976; Gandy 1973).
The radical consequences of relationism and what it overthrows are neatly described by Loader:
Relationism was the result of the continuation of, and the solution to, the end of existential transcendence
(the utopian will) as well as to existential bondedness (the ideological perception).
It provided the synthesis of ideology and utopia, theory and praxis, by moving to a new kind of historical dynamic.
(Loader 1985: 115)
The relational perspective builds on the contradictions between different types of knowledge; agreement about the truth is never universal.
But universality would be surprising because not only the context of emergence but also that of the dissemination and use of knowledge varies over time and from social location to social location.
That certain types of knowledge can be applied effectively in so many different contexts and can endure is a challenge for the sociology of knowledge.
Even where knowledge appears the same though, there is often a difference in the way it is applied and understood.
The contradiction between knowledges emerges in everyday life which is also a context characterized by the repair of such contradictions.
As the social constructionists have argued, it is through language that meanings are created, sustained, disputed and modified.
This theme will be taken up in Chapter 6 when I introduce the structuralist account of the relation between signification and social process.
While I will argue that structuralism offers a way of understanding knowledge as language that can be related to other social practices without reduction to an individual knowing subject, it is to the Marxist theory of ideology that I will turn to help describe the nature of the relationship.
The theory of ideology offers an account of the role of knowledge in society that enables its analyses to operate as critique.
In pursuing a critical theory of ideology I will be following commentators like Abercrombie and Simmonds, who also felt the lack in Mannheim's schema of a critical edge for the sociology of knowledge.
The origins of the theory of ideology
Of course the social determination of knowledge thesis was not original to Mannheim and the sociology of knowledge project.
The recognition that ideas are not the pure result of cognition but are affected by the human context of cognition, can be traced back through philosophy — Larrain goes back to the fifteenth century to Machiavelli (Larrain 1979: 17).
But it is perhaps in the attempts of Francis Bacon in the seventeenth century that the origins of a concern with social features of knowledge as introducing distortions are to be found.
Bacon's theory of ‘idols’ described influences on the production of knowledge that produced false or distorted ideas.
He wrote of the Idols of the Tribe:
The Idols of the Tribe have their foundation in human nature itself, and in the tribe or race of men.
For it is a false assertion that the sense of man is the measure of things.
On the contrary, all perceptions as well of the sense as of the mind are according to the measure of the individual and not according to the measure of the universe.
And the human understanding is like a false mirror, which, receiving rays irregularly, distorts and discolours the nature of things by mingling its own nature with it.
(Bacon 1985: 277)
He also wrote of the superstition, the human passions and the religious representations that interfered with the observation and application of reason which should lead to knowledge.
These influences are human tendencies distorting the cognition of a person in a similar way to the way perceptions are distorted in a ‘false mirror’.
But such distortions are, at least partly, social in origin; the mechanism of superstition as Bacon describes it, involves a tendency to accept those propositions that have been laid down and established through social recognition and approval.
There is in Bacon's theory of idols an early version of what later developed into the theory of ideology.
His theory connects with  Mannheim's ‘particular’ conception of ideology rather than his ‘total’conception in that it is concerned with psychological processes.
What is most important though is that Bacon was interested in how social and psychological features of knowledge introduced falsification.
This is in contrast to the sociology of knowledge which was designed to be non-evaluative and not to distinguish between false and true knowledge.
The coining of the term ‘ideology’ is normally attributed to Destutt de Tracy whose concern was with the ‘science of ideas’which sought the origins of ideas in human sensations.
While it is concerned with the roots of true and false knowledge, this approach to studying ideology is very different from the social determination thesis and has not endured.
But there has been a continuation of interest in ‘ideology’ and it is in Marx's work that the cause ceases to be found predominantly in psychological processes leading to false notions.
Instead the social and economic relations influencing knowledge are explored so that the ideological process is itself theorized.
It is one of Marx's greatest contributions to philosophy and the social sciences to have pointed out the systematic relationship between knowledge and historical and social processes.
As we shall see, however, Marx did not describe the relationship in any detail — his primary concern was with describing material, economic relations between human beings.
What is more, Marx was not consistent in his account of ideology and while he sometimes seems to be referring to what Mannheim was later to call ‘total ideology’, at other times he seems to be referring to a ‘particular conception’ of ideology with its psychologistic basis.
Mannheim, clearly influenced by Marx's comments on ideology, distinguished these two types and also distanced his use of the term from Marx's.
This was partly because Mannheim did not accept what he read as an overly materialistic account of history in Marx and partly because Marx distinguished ideology as false knowledge from science as true knowledge.
The history of the theory of ideology within the Marxist tradition can be seen as the letting go of the materialist reduction that involved a differentiation between ideology and science as distinct modes of knowing, while retaining an account of ideology as a structural feature of society.
It is this grasp of the link between the contents of knowledge and human social relations that is so important about the theory of ideology.
It enables analysis to address the role of knowledge as power and leads to a critique of knowledge not based on its truth but on how it affects and is affected by social relations.
IDEOLOGY AND CONSCIOUSNESS IN MARX'S WRITING
In The German Ideology (1974) Marx and Engels counterpoise ideology and science.
The former is a descriptive term used to refer to and to denigrate the work of the Young Hegelians who see philosophy as an emancipatory force operating through the criticism of ideas.
The latter term describes a truer form of knowledge based not on ideas as such but ideas about real forms of existence, that is ‘materialism’.
While the philosophers saw ideas and thoughts as that which determined human relations and the course of history, Marx and Engels described a material basis for social and economic relations.
This meant that ideas and thought were not free and independent of the history of material relations:
Morality, religion, metaphysics, all the rest of ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the semblance of independence.
(Marx and Engels 1974: 47)
The concept of ideology here signifies the collection of ideas that are merely the product of thought and that have no material basis.
Whereas the idealists pursued the production of ideas as such, the materialism of Marx and Engels sought to ground thought in a concrete world of practical action.
Whereas the idealists saw the production of ideas and the development of consciousness through critique as the method by which history would progress, materialism sees the reverse; history progresses through the transformation of the material relationships that exist between human beings and between society and the natural world.
From the experience of material relations an abstraction to ideas can be made which will constitute knowledge of the world.
The generation of knowledge from practical activity is the basis of science in contrast to ideology which is based on speculation, ideas generating ideas:
Where speculation ends — in real life — there real, positive science begins: the representation of the practical activity, of the practical process of development of men.
(Marx and Engels 1974: 48)
Marx and Engels' infrequent use of the term ideology in The German Ideology is connected to a much clearer concept, that of ‘consciousness’.
They describe the historical development of consciousness in relation to material activity and mention two crucial stages marked by the division of mental and manual labour.
Prior to the division, consciousness and thought were connected to the process of material behaviour; thought  and action were part of the activity of all human beings.
At the second stage, consciousness became separated from practical action through the division of mental and manual labour.
Marx and Engels suggest that priests were the first ideologists who emerged at this stage.
With the separation of mental and manual labour, thought could aspire to a ‘pure’ form, free from the constraints of practical action.
This form of consciousness aspired to a representation of the world in its entirety rather than just the sphere of practical action (Marx and Engels 1974: 52).
Consciousness is ideological in the sense that in human, historical life-processes ‘circumstances appear upside down as in a camera obscura ’ and the ‘phantoms formed in the human brain are also, necessarily, sublimates of their material life process’(Marx and Engels 1974: 47).
The difference between materialist, scientific thought and idealist, ideological thought is that the former recognizes the determination of consciousness and so returns to an empirical or ‘real’ world of practical activity to generate abstractions.
In contrast, idealist thought supposes a converse determination and disregards the importance of reference to practical activity for the generation of abstractions, thereby remaining ideological.
Materialist thought Recognizes that ‘Life is not determined by consciousness but consciousness by life’(Marx and Engels 1974: 47).
Language, like consciousness, is a function of practical activity or labour and constitutes its extension into a social form.
Language and consciousness emerge simultaneously in Marx and Engels' history of human kind, the former being the material form of the latter.
Both are seen as emerging out of a human ‘need’ to associate with other humans, which in turn leads to increased production, further increased needs and thence to the social division of labour.
Although I have chosen to begin reading Marx's theory of ideology by reference to his concept of consciousness, the material form of consciousness and also of ideology is clearly language:
Language is as old as consciousness, language is practical consciousness that exists also for other men, and for that reason alone it really exists for me personally as well; language like consciousness, only arises from the need, the necessity of intercourse with other men.
(Marx and Engels 1974: 51)
The German Ideology was written during Marx's development of a materialist theory of history and his break with Hegelian idealism.
It is not surprising that the work is therefore based on a critique of idealism and that the concepts used are rather more ‘idealist’ than those Marx  uses in his later work.
This leads to difficulties in deriving a theory of ideology from The German Ideology but it is a principal source since in the later, materialist-oriented theory of capitalist political and economic relations, the concept of ‘ideology’ is marginal and infrequently used.
Furthermore,The German Ideology was a collaborative work with Engels who, as we shall see, retained more interest in the concept of ideology and is responsible for some of the features traditionally associated with it.
However, there is a section in Marx's own Preface to the Critique of Political Economy that illuminates the relationship between thought and consciousness and the material relations of production.
Firstly, there is a restatement of the determinate relationship which here includes a wider specification of consciousness than was used in the critique of idealist thought:
The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in general.
It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being but on the contrary; their social being that determines their consciousness.
(Marx and Engels 1968: 182)
Besides the materialist assertion of the determinacy of being over consciousness this piece equates ‘social being’ with the ‘mode of production’.
This means that consciousness in its ideological form is not merely arbitrarily determined by material relations but is specifically determined by the set of economic relations existing in a given society.
The economic relations are also social relations in that the mode of production signifies a particular division of labour and particular class relations.
This connection between consciousness and the mode of production provides the basis for the theory of ideology; it is through understanding the mode of production and its social relations that the social determination of ideology can be understood.
In the Preface when Marx writes of the ‘social, political and intellectual life in general’ it is equated with his concept of consciousness as a social process.
Further on he refers to the ‘legal, political, religious, aesthetic or philosophic — in short ideological forms’(Marx and Engels 1968: 182).
These are all forms of consciousness that are not ‘practical’ in orientation in the way that a skill or a natural science are.
Their quality as ‘ideological forms’ derives from their orientation to social rather than material relations.
The production of these ideological forms would be by people whose labour is mental rather than material, whose product has effects in a world of ideas and social relations rather than the material world of objects.
Furthermore the raw  materials of such labour would be ideas and not material objects or practical action.
So far the concept of ideology as used by Marx is vague and does not lead to a formula of ideology as being ‘false’ knowledge or untruth.
However, the idealist production of knowledge leads to mistaken knowledge because it is based on an incorrect account of the determinate relation between reality (or social being) and ideas.
There is not the same implication about all knowledge.
The process of abstraction of reality produces the ‘phantoms formed in the human brain' which are also ‘necessarily, sublimates of their material life process’ but which in turn are most significantly ‘empirically verifiable and bound to material premises’(Marx and Engels 1974: 47).
While the process of constructing abstractions in consciousness is doomed to fail as a representation of reality there is the possibility of testing the contents of consciousness by referring to an empirical reality.
It is only in this way that ideology can be distinguished from science.
While the former resists the comparison with an empirical reality the latter is epistemologically founded on such a comparison.
So too is materialism which is their reason for positing it as a rightful successor to idealism as the method for understanding history.
If the failure of the ‘ideological forms’ lies in the operation of an idealist epistemology, the specific instances of ideological forms (religion, aesthetics, the law, politics, philosophy) that Marx mentions, seem doomed only to the extent that they depend on an idealist epistemology.
But what is it about these forms of thought that is ‘idealist’?
Both the law and politics for example are concerned with material relations albeit mediated by social relations.
The law deals with social relations surrounding the management of material relations between individual subjects (violence, property ownership, theft, rights and obligations to act) and politics deals with the regulation of the material relations between members of the polity and decisions about collection and distribution of shared material (taxes) on its behalf.
The issue is about the epistemological basis of the categories and relations that these ideologies describe.
From where does the law derive its categories of the ‘person’ and ‘property’and politics its categories of ‘shared material’and the ‘polity?
If the answer is that they are idealistic categories generated through consciousness of ideal relations then the idealistic basis of these specific examples of ‘ideological forms’ can be understood.
But the problem then lies in Marx and Engels' implication that there is an epistemological alternative in materialism or science.
Are the categories of science any more real, any more observable than those of law or politics?
It is even more difficult to grasp as non-idealist  the categories of dialectical materialism; ‘capital’, ‘labour’ and ‘value’.
The categories of both science and materialism are abstractions from reality, they are the products of consciousness and as such must be, to follow Marx and Engels' rubric, ‘sublimates of their material life process’.
The only distinction that they offer between ideology and science is that the latter is ‘empirically verifiable’.
If it can be accepted, as empiricists do, that the process of empirical verification involves a separate and distinct process of consciousness than that of generating the ideal categories in the first place, then there is a basis for distinguishing between ideology and another form of knowledge, ‘science’.
There is a further problem of distinction inherent in Marx's concept of ideology.
It presupposes an ontological difference between ‘material relations’ and ‘social relations’.
The histories of science and social science demonstrate that empiricism is not so easily applicable to the latter as to the former.
Empiricism is a consistent and even dominant approach in the natural sciences while a much more contentious and variable approach in the social sciences.
This of itself does not create an ontological distinction; why should social relations be less ‘real’ than material relations?
The difference between material relations and social relations is that knowledge can transform the nature of social relations but knowledge can transform only the specificity of material relations.
This means that the application of empirical verification has a different effect in these different types of relations.
Part of the manifestation of social relations is as knowledge, shared by human beings and used to inform their actions.
Relations in the material world can exist independently of consciousness and are not necessarily affected by it.
Consciousness can however manipulate material relations, for example with technology, because of their very consistency and invariability.
I am arguing that the process of creating abstractions at the level or shared consciousness — knowledge — is a social process.
The ‘reality’ in knowledge is constructed in social relations whatever the knowledge refers to.
This means that the activities of material science (conductivity physics or dialectical materialism) are social actions and are manifested by social relations in so far as they produce knowledge.
This means that the categories available to these forms of thought are generated in the same way as those available to the law and politics though their practical application may have a different type of effect in the world.
There is then a fundamental problem with Marx's empiricist epistemology.
It lies with his distinction between a form of consciousness directed to ‘practical’, ‘material’ or ‘real’activity and a different form of consciousness that is directed to social relations and is  taken as constituting ideology.
The problem is an epistemological one; the different forms of consciousness cannot be evaluated for their ‘truth’ value on the grounds of the topic of consciousness or its location in the mode of production.
It is important to stress that this dispute with Marx does not extend to his analysis of the mode of production or to the significance that he gives to knowledge as a relation of production.
1 am merely rejecting the possibility of transcending the constraints on ideology by adopting a materialist approach.
Marx's own, very limited, account of ideology describes its inability to represent real relations because of its generation as abstract ideas and its origin in particular social relations.
In this book I will argue not only that these are indeed constraints on the form of knowledge but also that they are constraints on all knowledge which should be seen as ideological in the sense in which Marx uses it.
Marx's own use of the term is tied up with his critique of idealism and it is not surprising that when in his later work he turned his attention to a materialist analysis of the capitalist mode of production, the term and concept of ideology occurs infrequently.
Moreover when he does refer to ideology it is not to develop the concept or incorporate it into his analysis of capitalism but to refer back to the tyranny of ideas and the emptiness of idealism (e.g. in the Grundrisse , Marx 1973: 164).
ENGELS AND FALSE CONSCIOUSNESS
It is not in Marx's own writing that the idea of ‘falseness’ in ideology occurs and it is perhaps surprising that the notion of falseness is attributed to him (e.g. Hirst 1976: 385; Lichtheim 1967: 18).
It is in the work of Engels that the concept of ideology is associated with ‘false consciousness’.
For example, in a letter he wrote:
Ideology is a process accomplished by the so-called thinker consciously, it is true, but with a false consciousness.
The real motive forces impelling him remain unknown to him; otherwise it simply would not be an ideological process.
(Marx and Engels 1968: 700)
This account of ideology is not inconsistent with the account in The German Ideology (which of course Engels co-wrote) but the point that ideology is a product of false consciousness is an extension of the concept that Marx uses.
The ‘falseness’ of the consciousness that produces ideology is not a quality of its location in the mode of production but a quality of the individual's failure to understand the ‘real motive forces impelling him’.
This is a more individualist and  idealist account of ideology than Marx's use in the Preface .
It is also much easier to grasp and epistemologically almost crass; clearly the materialist who does know the ‘real motive forces’ can avoid producing ideology.
At least in Marx's usage, ideology is a part of the structure of social relations and is not overcome by an individual who adopts a materialist account of history.
Engels also credits ideology with a greater role in the dialectical process of history than it seems to have in Marx's determinedly materialist analysis:
while the material mode of existence is the primum agens this does not preclude the ideological spheres from reacting upon it in their turn.
(Marx and Engels 1968: 689)
This poses an interesting problem; while Marx appears to deal with ideology as so much irrelevance (e.g. the work of idealist philosophers), Engels suggests here that the material process that is the object of study in Marx's later work, can be affected by ideology.
It is these two issues of the relation of ideology to social structure and consciousness and the partial determination by ideology that are developed in later theories of ideology in the Marxist tradition.
It is not clear whether they are issues in which Marx was ever really involved; if he had been, then it would seem likely that they would have played a more important role in his later work.
PREJUDICE AND FALSENESS IN IDEOLOGY
The word ideology is a pejorative word; it describes unrealistic, prejudice-begotten thought.
But ideas which are determined by social reality are not, because they are so determined, necessarily erroneous.
On the contrary; determination by — i.e. agreement with — the social basis of life is manifestly a factor making for realism and truth.
(Stark 1958: 53)
While Marx's own writing does not relate ideology directly to ‘false consciousness’ there is in his use of the term a meaning of distortion and a failure to represent ‘reality’while at the same time being determined by material reality.
It is not a psychological concept in that it is a product partly or the process of consciousness and partly of the structure of the mode or production (the division of labour, and the domination of one class by another).
This makes Stark's reference to ideology as  ‘prejudice-begotten thought’ clearly not a reference to Marx's own writing.
Engels in his letters does offer a concept of ideology that is more amenable to Stark's categorization — there is even a sense of morality about ‘false consciousness’ and ‘prejudice-begotten thought’that locates the responsibility for ideology in the individual.
The issues of ‘falseness’ and ‘prejudice’are important because they relate the concept of ideology back to its origins in the work of Francis Bacon and Destutt de Tracy.
Destutt's science of ideas was both a scientific study and an aid to policy making through identifying errors in understanding the ways of the world (Lichtheim 1967: 8).
As Barth puts it: ‘Only success in avoiding false ideas could assure scientific progress’(Barth 1977: 2).
Both Lichtheim and Barth relate Destutt's ‘ideologies’ to Bacon's pursuit of ‘idols’and to the aim of dispelling ‘prejudices’with the application of reason that is stated in the work of Holbach and Helvetius.
Furthermore, both Lichtheim and Barth provide a critique of Marx's concept of ideology that treats it as similar to that of Destutt.
Lichtheim describes Marx's concept of ideology as illuminating the fact that human beings do not have ‘true consciousness’(Lichtheim 1967: 22).
Barth suggests that in pointing to the delusional nature of ideology he is indulging in an  idolatry of science characteristic of his time but equally delusional (Barth 1977: 110).
For both these commentators Marx's concept of ideology fails to be useful because of an overarching problem in his claim to have transcended the problem of ideology by the application of a materialist and scientific method.
But this criticism unfounds Marx's concept of science rather than his concept of ideology.
Marx's contribution is to see ideology as having its origins in the social relations characteristic of the mode of production and not the result of prejudice in the individual.
The process of consciousness involves abstraction and consequently distortion of the reality it purports to represent.
The material being of humans (their location in the mode of production) determines their consciousness (the ideologies they absorb) but the process of determination does not extend to the particular content of ideology, rather to the forms it takes (philosophy, religion, law, politics, aesthetics, intellectual production in general).
IDEOLOGY AND THE MODE OF PRODUCTION
A more recent commentator on Marx's concept of ideology, Jorge Larrain, accepts that the concept is vague and that it has to be worked out from what little Marx wrote (Larrain 1979: 36).
This Larrain does by attempting to understand the concept so vaguely used in The German Ideology in terms of the more specific materialist theory of the Grundrisse and Capital .
This involves trying to grasp Marx's concept not solely by referring to previous conceptions of ideology but by relating it to his analysis of the mode of production.
Larrain's first point is that Marx approaches the concept of ideology on the basis of the contradictory character of social reality ‘which is brought about by the restricted productive forces and the division of labour’(Larrain 1979: 45).
This leads to a characterization of ideology:
Ideology is, therefore, a solution in the mind to contradictions which cannot be solved in practice; it is the necessary projection in consciousness of man's practical inabilities.
(Larrain 1979: 46)
This way of understanding ideology emphasizes both the process of its determination by the sphere of material relations and the process of distortion.
In smoothing over the contradictions in practical, material relations, ideology legitimizes the class structure and the social structure of the mode of production.
The legitimizing effect of ideology is tied to its production by the dominating class.
In so tar as a class dominates social relations it dominates the production of ideology.
Thus the form of dominant ideas is to express social relations in terms of the interests of the dominant classes as if they were the common interest.
Marx and Engels arc indeed clear about the role of the ideas of the dominant classes:
The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas….
The ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominant material relationships, the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas.
(Marx and Engels 1974: 64)
Before a non-dominant class can become the dominant class it has to ‘give its ideas the form of universality and represent them as the only rational universally valid ones’(Marx and Engels 1974: 66).
Asserting the universality of ideas is the way that dominant class interests are maintained — ideology is about power and the continuation of particular class relations.
It is through the representation of the ruling class's interests as the interests of the whole society that any threat to class power is contained (Marx and Engels 1974: 64).
The way that ideology serves the interests of the ruling class, by obscuring the contradictions in the lived relations of the mode of production, is through the generation of ideas and explanations — knowledge.
This knowledge characterizes the contradictions experienced under the capitalist mode  of production as ‘normal’ or as ‘glitches’or ‘hiccups’in a system that is fundamentally sound.
An important feature of Larrain's analysis of Marx's concept of ideology is that it is not directly determined by the material relations of production.
He proposes that the production of consciousness must be seen in terms of two relationships that Marx analyses independently.
One is the base/superstructure relationship that considered alone appears a mechanistically determined one.
The other relationship is that of practice and consciousness that considered alone is the product of humankind's free will.
Together the two relationships take on a more dynamic quality and the determinate relationship is mediated by human practice.
Practice is in turn constrained by how material relations appear to human consciousness, including their contradictions.
It is important to note that the contradictions are not in the appearance of material relations but in their concrete essence.
Larrain is careful to point out that this analysis is his interpretation of Marx's use of particular concepts and that the relations between concepts is not thoroughly analysed by Marx (Larrain 1979: 55–67).
The analysis is useful however because the generation of ideology is not left as a mechanistic determination.
The introduction of human practice as a mediation in the production of ideology explains why it is not a simple reflection (albeit distorted or inverted) that can be decoded to reveal the essential relations of the material sphere.
There is also the possibility of practice expressing the free will of the individual even though it has no other form of expression than the appearances available to consciousness.
As Larrain points out, for Marx a particular form of practice, revolutionary practice, was the only way to overcome ideology:
Revolutionary practice changes the condition within which reproductive practice must necessarily reproduce misleading appearances.
…Revolutionary practice is a conscious, a theoretically informed practice.
(Larrain 1979: 60)
This creates a role for the critique of ideology, not to transcend ideology as Marx's claims for science and materialism in The German Ideology suggest, but to engage with ideology and consequently inform an emancipatory human practice.
The tradition of the theory of ideology has attempted this, though with perhaps little effect on practice.
The tradition has however tended to assume that by adopting a particular perspective (Marxism) it can escape the ideological effect much in the same way as science appears at times to escape from ideology.
I wish to argue, following Mannheim's  relationist sociology of knowledge, that while Marx's account of ideology is a useful introduction to the process of the social determination of knowledge, there is no escape from the form of ideology as the only available context of expression.
This does not rule out the possibility of critique which by investigation of the structure and forms of ideology as materialized expression (discourse), can affect the forms of human practice.
Before considering subsequent developments in the theory of ideology it is worth presenting a summary of the contributions to a theory of knowledge that Marx provides (and Larrain's analysis illuminates).
Marx's concept of ‘ideology’ adds five things lo a general concept of knowledge.
Firstly, ideology is determined by material conditions of existence, which are also determinative of social relations.
Secondly, ideology is a social production and those who dominate social production also dominate ideological production.
Thirdly, ideology is necessarily a distortion of reality insofar as: it is an abstraction, it is socially determined and its production is dominated.
Fourthly, ideology legitimizes social relations and covers over contradictions in the material relations of social being.
Fifthly, the production and determination of ideology is mediated through human practice which cannot be reduced solely to the reproduction of material relations.
The link between ideology and material and social relations is an important feature of the theory of ideology.
That the link is distorted by human power relations and serves human group interests is also important in establishing a link between knowledge and power.
What is dangerous about the theory of ideology is that having described the structural relationship between knowledge and extant social relations, it is presumed that a correct attitude will enable the ‘true’ account of the world to emerge.
LUKÁS — CLASS CONSCIOUSNESS AND REIFICATION
The development of the Marxist theory of ideology after Marx and Engels pursues the logic of Marx's epistemology in two directions.
In one direction was a scientistic development in the work of Engels, Kautsky and Bernstein (Hamilton 1974: 38).
Larrain calls it ‘positivist’ referring to Lenin, Plekanov and Labriola (Larrain 1979: 68).
This line of development underlines the base/superstructure dichotomy and reduces consciousness to a simple reflection of the material base of society.
The pursuit of this economic determinism allowed little, if any, active role to ideology in the process of the development of the mode of production.
It was founded on the scientific validity of dialectical  materialism and relied on the distinction between ideology and science for its own validity.
The other direction of development was a ‘re-Hegelianization’ of Marx's concept of ideology.
Georg Lukács exemplifies the beginning of this development.
As it had for Hegel, consciousness again becomes a significant element in the process of history for Lukács.
His historicist account of the role of consciousness was in turn influential in the development of Goldmann's ‘genetic structuralism’ and the Frankfurt School's ‘critical theory’.
In a straightforward sense Lukács's account of ideology is at odds with the conception of ideology that I am attempting to develop.
However, his work does draw attention to the contents of consciousness and offers an account of their ‘truth’ and relation to specific historical subjects — classes.
Ideology becomes not a mechanistic side-effect of the material relations but a dynamic process that is part of the practice of human beings.
As a student of Lukács, Mannheim was influenced by his treatment of ideology, history and the problem of relativism.
But Lukács's importance here is not so much for his influence on the sociology of knowledge as for his merging of a Marxist conception of the relations between classes with concepts derived from the historicist tradition.
Lukács is described by other commentators (Hamilton 1974; McDonagh 1977-Giddens 1979) as bringing to Marx's ideas a German idealist interpretation that drew on Hegel, Dilthey and Simmel.
Frisby suggests that Lukács's concepts of alienation and reification derive from Simmel's work and in History and Class Consciousness they are put into a Marxist context.
Frisby also points out that Lukács's Marxism avoids consideration of exploitation or the theory of surplus value (Frisby 1983: 84–95).
Lukács neither studied class consciousness empirically nor considered the structural constraints on its development; stratification within the working class, the social reproduction of the labour force and the political legitimation of capitalist domination (Frisby 1983: 93).
His concern was with the consciousness of groups, specifically classes and particularly the proletariat.
This brings the concept of ideology into the centre of his work unlike Marx's writings where it remains peripheral to the account of the material relations of the process of production.
He begins a description of class consciousness by showing the limitations of bourgeois thought as an explaining away of the existing order of economic relations and an assertion of the immutability of institutions (Lukács 1971: 48).
Lukács describes how bourgeois thought thus transforms history into eternal laws of nature that are static and formal and impervious to the ‘real’ nature of history that is to do with relations between men.
The concept of ‘reification’ is, for Lukács, one of the key aspects of the ideological or distorting nature of bourgeois thought.
It refers to the tendency to transform social relations into relations between things.
In classical economics, for example, the structure of capitalist production is described in terms of money and commodities which have systematic relations as things.
For Marx however capital is not a thing but a ‘social relation between persons mediated through things’(from Capital Vol. 1, quoted in Lukács 1971: 49).
The Lukácian reading of history is through Marx's analysis of the mode of production.
It is in terms of the relations between worker and capitalist and tenant and landlord rather than between psychologically given individuals.
In contrast, bourgeois thought demonstrates ‘false consciousness’ because it is thought which fails to recognize ‘the essence of the evolution of society’and fails to grasp phenomena ‘in relation to a society as a whole’(Lukács 1971: 50).
Lukács believes in a ‘true consciousness’ that can grasp phenomena in a holistic and historical way.
The concept of ‘false consciousness’ plays a similar role in Lukács's writing to that which ‘ideology’plays in Marx's.
The form of class consciousness is not however available to historical subjects, such as the members of a class, but has to be derived from an analysis of the totality.
Lukács points out that this is why what appears ‘subjectively’ to be true while:
At the same time,objectively it by-passes the essence of the evolution of society and fails to pin-point it and express it adequately.
That is to say, objectively, it appears as a ‘false consciousness’.
(Lukács 1971: 50)
The understanding of ‘objective’ categories is Hegelian and not the same as positivist or materialist references to ‘objective’.
It enables the analyst to:
infer the thoughts and feelings which men would have in a particular situation if they were able to assess both it and the interests arising from it in their impact on immediate action and the whole structure of society.
(Lukács 1971: 51).
This possibility of inferring is the basis of Lukács's concept of ‘objective possibility’.
The analyst is able to understand in a way that subjects cannot, what is ‘objectively possible’ for a class consciousness at a particular point in history.
This analysis provides the basis for being able to recognize ‘true’ consciousness and distinguish ‘false’consciousness.
The historical location of the class takes into account its power, interests and organizational structure which all determine specific forms of class consciousness.
‘Ideology’ remains a conceptual category for Lukács but is limited to the accounts of material, social relations that distort their true nature.
For example in describing the apparent mastery of economic theory in bourgeois thought as the ‘crassest form of false consciousness’ Lukács says:
From the point of view of the relation of consciousness to society this contradiction is expressed as the irreconcilable antagonism between ideology and economic base .
(Lukács 1971: 64)
Lukács's theory of class consciousness is predicated on a teleology: that the process of history is determined by the development towards truth.
there is a similar teleology present in Marx's historical materialism that says there are a series of economic modes of production that societies must pass through until socialism is reached, when the economic contradictions of all previous modes are resolved Lukács borrows the structure of Marx's economic argument and applies it to the process of knowledge/consciousness/ideology, supporting his own argument with Marx's economic theory.
Indeed Lukács's theory of class consciousness is impossible to swallow (or follow) unless one accepts that Marx's analysis of the material base is a scientifically given truth.
That is, it must be considered as historically transcendent in the sense of being unaffected by the same, historical, process that Lukács describes for class consciousness.
Larrain interprets Lukács as giving a primacy to knowledge: ‘It seems as if thought could change the world’(Larrain 1979: 79).
Lukács makes it clear that ‘knowledge’ here is not of the ‘abstract kind’, rather it is:
knowledge that has become flesh of one's flesh and blood of one's blood; to use Marx's phrase, it must be ‘practical critical activity’.
(Lukács 1979: 262)
He is not suggesting that it is ‘thought’ that is the main determining force.
Both the bourgeois ideology and the proletarian false consciousness are products of particular social relations present in capitalism.
It is only through consciousness in action arising out of the contradictions of the real relations, that any transformation of either class consciousness or economic relations will come about.
Lukács tells us remarkably little about the structure and process of ‘ideology’ or knowledge.
Perhaps this is because his problem is not a sociological one; he is engaged in polemic rather than social theory and  his work is built around an apocalyptic vision of the future of capitalism rather than a series of questions about social phenomena.
His vision leads him to seek a saviour that he finds in the proletariat, albeit heavily cloaked in ‘ideology’.
His interest is in how the proletariat would (or should) speak if the cloak were thrown off.
Lukács's history is spiritual rather than sociological.
What is perhaps most useful in Lukács's account of ideology is the concept of ‘reification’.
This concept refers to the way ideology covers up contradictions and how it legitimizes by treating human social relations as things.
To human beings the existence of exploitative relations of production would be agonizing were they perceived simply as exploitative.
If the form of such relations is in fact reordered at the level of consciousness to appear as an exploitation of things , then the effect is to reduce the sensation of the violence of exploitation and also to legitimize the relations of dominance.
As Frisby points out (Frisby 1983: 94), Lukács is taking Marx's concept of ‘commodity, which describes how social and economic relations are frozen in the material products of capitalism, and extending it to show how by treating social relations as things, their social and economic character is obscured.
What is a fundamental problem in Lukács's account is how an effective analysis can be achieved.
He envisaged an emancipation from reification would come not through abstract reflection alone but through ‘praxis’:
Reification, is then, the necessary, immediate reality of every person living in capitalist society.
It can be overcome only by constant and constantly renewed efforts to disrupt the reified structure of existence by concretely relating to the concretely manifested contradictions of the total development, by becoming conscious of the immanent meanings of these contradictions for total development .
(Lukács 1971: 197).
For Lukács it was the proletariat who were to achieve this praxis.
But his programmatic statement also lays the foundation for a critical theory of ideology and suggests a relevance for the critique of ideology that is absent in Marx's own work.
GOLDMANN
Goldmann developed a humanist form of Marxism that continued a direction of development begun by Lukács, emphasizing the role of philosophy and cultural analysis in understanding the ‘totality’ of history.
Goldmann attempted to recover an Hegelian ‘Subject’ in which history and consciousness are one and his ‘genetic structuralism, analyses a process of social evolution realized in the material relations described by Marx.
His interest in the emancipation of a class subject, as bringing about an historical synthesis, owes much to Lukács's version of Marxism.
Goldmann specifically rejected a Durkheimian approach to sociology, recognizing that the facts are always approached using the researcher's ‘categories and implicit and unconscious preconceptions’(Goldmann 1969: 41).
For Goldmann, any claim to ‘scientificity’ in sociology resides in its reflexive awareness of its own social determination which leads to his interest in the sociology of knowledge.
The recognition of the effects of conscious or unconscious value judgements on scientific theories raises the question of relativism as it occurs for the sociology of knowledge: ‘Are all ideologies of equal value, at least, as far as the search for truth is concerned?’
(Goldmann 1969: 51).
Here Goldmann is opening the question that is closed for Marx and Lukács; is science merely a form of ideology?
Goldmann rejects Mannheim's position as having offered the most traditional and unreflexive criterion of truth by making the free-floating intelligentsia its arbiters.
Instead he incorporates an evaluative criterion by arguing that a value orientation is more appropriate than others if it:
permits the understanding of the other as a social and human phenomenon, reveals its infrastructure and clarifies, by means of an immanent critical principle its inconsistencies and limitations .
(Goldmann 1969: 52)
The value orientation that meets this standard is, he asserts, one based on Marx's analysis of the class struggle.
However, Goldmann suggests objectivity is only available to the individual; by effecting a synthesis of elements of truth from the perspectives of different classes and by preserving elements of understanding already expressed by other thinkers but abandoned under the influence of social, economic or political changes, the individual may be able to ‘arrive in the realm of scientific thought’(Goldmann 1969: 58).
Central to Goldmann's interest in the sociology of knowledge is the concept of ‘potential consciousness’ that he derives from Marx.
As a sociologist, what he is interested in is the knowledge of a social group and as a Marxist he is interested in the ‘maximum potential consciousness’ of a group or class — what it could know and still remain a coherent group.
While ‘real consciousness’ might be what people in a given group actually think, it does not necessarily correspond to what they will do or how they will respond to changes either in their situation or in the information they have.
For Goldmann then, ‘potential consciousness, is  a way of understanding how knowledge is related to social and political change.
He is interested both in the future — how political changes might be brought about through information that stretches potential consciousness and causes a group to transform — and in the past.
His analysis of French literature (e.g. Goldmann 1964), both the studies of classic writers (such as Racine and Pascal) and of more recent literature, is constantly searching for the world-views of the epoch in which the literature emerged:
I want to point out that philosophical, literary and artistic works prove to have particular value for sociology because they approximate the maximum potential consciousness of those privileged social groups whose mentality, thought, and behaviour are oriented toward an overall world view.
(Goldmann 1977: 39)
Although Goldmann accepts the significance of the social determination of knowledge thesis for epistemology he does not pursue its implications for the Marxist concept of ideology.
His detailed studies of great writings involve trying to uncover the world-view of an epoch and the relation between knowledge and cultural creation, but they are neither in terms of the presuppositions given to social being nor in terms of the relation between ideology and the contradictions in the material conditions of existence.
CONCLUSIONS
The account of ideology that Marx offers does not really amount to a ‘theory of ideology’.
It is through an interpretation in the light of his account of class power and the contradictions inherent in the capitalist mode of production, such as that undertaken by Larrain, that his comments about consciousness and the idealist philosophers can be construed as a theory.
This theory of ideology introduces a distorting dynamic in the process of knowledge that is not due to mistakes or faulty thinking but is systematically related to the social and material relations of society.
The analysis of ideology then takes on a critical role by describing the social determination of knowledge in terms of particular social forms that both give rise to the contradictions present in ideology and are legitimized by its content.
The problem raised by the theory of ideology is the analysis of knowledge as true or false, according to its social determination.
This was indeed the origin of the concept of ideology and the thesis of social determination.
Marx's distinction between science and ideology seems crude in hindsight, but the identification of ‘false consciousness’ using a  Marxist analysis is more properly associated with Engels and Lukács.
Both found their analyses in a non-reflexive mode which presupposes the truth of a Marxist analysis of power.
Lukács's concept of reification extends the theory of ideology by showing one of the mechanisms by which it is effective in obscuring class relations.
But his belief in the ability of the proletariat to see through their false consciousness through ‘praxis’, relating knowledge to the material context of action, seems a vain hope — especially with hindsight.
The influence of Hegel's theory of history on both Lukács and Goldmann has denuded the concept of ideology of any analytical power in their work; neither use it to examine the relation between thought and specific conditions of existence.
Despite his association with the sociology of knowledge, Goldmann's work represents a point at which the Marxist theory of ideology is furthest from the project of the sociology of knowledge.
The social determination of knowledge is supported not as a basis for analysing knowledge or ideology but as a basis for disputing with the positivist tendency in social science in order that an idealist and historicist account of the process of history can be recovered.
Although Goldmann does introduce a measure of reflexivity not present in Marx, Engels and Lukács, it is as a characteristic of the sociology of knowledge which allows for a variety of competing perspectives.
Goldmann's reflexivity does not however lead to a ‘total conception of ideology’; he, like all the early Marxist theorists of ideology, does not reflect critically on the ‘science’ or Marxism.
It is for later developments in the theory of ideology that we have to wait for in account that does not raise Marx's materialism to a status such that it cannot itself be analysed as ideology.
A modern approach to ideological critique
Althusser's brand of Marxist structuralism and Habermas's development of critical theory take the Marxist theory of ideology into new areas.
Both work on the tension between science and ideology present in Marx's work and both try to avoid the reduction to class consciousness present in the writing of Engels and Lukács.
Structuralist Marxism and critical theory remain committed to Marx's analysis of the material relations of production but both are concerned to address other aspects of human social life about which Hegel had more to say than Marx.
These modern versions of Marxism are not attempting to reintroduce ‘idealism’ in which thought and ideas are given a central role in the determination of history.
However, they do involve exploring the role of knowledge and ideas in society and do not accept that all aspects of social relations can be reduced to the economic relations of the mode of production.
They address the political processes of capitalism, attempting to understand the part played by knowledge and ideology in the maintenance of the mode of production and its characteristic social relations.
In the hands of Althusser and Habermas, the critique of ideology becomes not just a basis for pouring scorn on the thinkers who have rationalized an exploitative economic and class system.
Their concern is to understand the mechanisms that keep capitalism going and make it resistant to challenges — so that they might strengthen those challenges.
While there are many areas of common ground between Althusser and Habermas, both are very different writers in style and tradition and they do not refer to each other 's work.
Both are influenced by Marx and Hegel but their work progresses in different directions.
Habermas develops the notion of ideology from critical theory's broad concern with culture to an analysis of its role in sustaining rationality and resisting the economic and political crises characteristic of capitalism.
He goes on to develop a theory of communicative action which focuses on the exchange of ideas and meanings in contrast to the exchange of  goods.
Before looking more closely at Habermas's contributions to the theory of ideology I will first consider Althusser's briefer but still significant analysis.
DETERMINATION AND STRUCTURE
In the dogmatic account of the base/superstructure model entrenched in Marxist political theory, Althusser sees both a philosophical failing and the roots of a failure in political practice.
In the Marxist theory of the Second International the economic base is dogmatically described as determining the superstructure (Callinicos 1983: 62).
This had the effect of denying any historical role to philosophy; since philosophy is at the level of the superstructure it is therefore determined by the base.
The work of philosophy had been completed, it was claimed, by Marxist theory's recognition of the material base as the level of determination.
All that remained for theory was to explore the details of determination while avoiding the tendency of bourgeois ideology to obscure determination by the material base.
The materialist ‘inversion’ of the Hegelian dialectic that Marx took over from Feuerbach involves, according to Althusser, an ‘epistemological break’.
Prior to the transformation of the dialectic, Marx's work is under the shadow of the Hegelian dialectic and the transformation brings about a new problematic and the possibility of an emerging science.
However, Marx himself did not philosophize the inversion or discuss the philosophical form of the transformed dialectic (Althusser 1969: 174).
Althusser points out that historically, contradiction alone (the contradiction between the forces of production and the relations of production, the contradiction between two antagonistic classes) is insufficient to bring about revolution.
This is the political failing of a materialist reduction; history shows that it is inadequate to view the determination of events in terms of contradictions in the base.
He argues that there must be an accumulation of ‘circumstances’ and ‘currents’that ‘fuse’into a ‘ruptural unity’that involves not only the level of the relations of production but also the conditions of existence prevailing at the time and the international conjuncture (Althusser 1969: 100).
Althusser's concept of the dialectic involves various levels of social formation that have a ‘relative autonomy’, that is to say, they are to some degree self-determining.
It is the partial intra-determinacy of different levels that prevents reduction to a single force.
The categorial distinction between the ‘levels’, and what constitutes them empirically, is not clear.
However, the base, or economic structure, seems to be one level and the political and ideological seem to constitute two other, superstructural, levels (CCCS 1977).
The fact that contradiction at the different levels can bring about a unity of effect is what Althusser means by ‘overdetermination’:
the ‘contradiction’ is inseparable from the total structure of the social body in which it is found, inseparable from its formal conditions of existence, and even from the instances it governs; it is radically affected by them, determining, but also determined in one and the same movement, and determined by the various levels and instances of the social formation it animates; it might be called overdetermined in its principle.
(Althusser 1969: 101)
It is the overdetermined character of the materialist dialectic that distinguishes it from the Hegelian dialectic.
The latter is a process within one level, that of consciousness, and involves ‘no true external determination’(Althusser 1969: 102).
Althusser describes the distinction between the two dialectics as being in the ‘centres’ of their circles of determination.
There is only one centre in the Hegelian version, the emerging totality of history, but the materialist dialectic because of the different levels of social formation, has a ‘decentred’ quality that leads to its overdetermined process.
The centredness of the Hegelian dialectic Althusser presents as having an ‘internal spiritual principle’ which in its abstract simplicity can only realize itself as ideology (Althusser 1969: 103).
This accounts for the smoothness, the lack of ‘rupture’, end or radical beginning to history in the idealist dialectic.
For Althusser the crucial distinction between Marx's dialectic and Hegel's lies in the relation Marx describes between his concepts.
These concepts (the mode, forces and relations of production) are not the product of a mere inversion of Hegel's concepts of civil society and the individualized satisfaction of needs by ‘Homo oeconomicus ’.
The different concepts are a product of theorizing a different form of determination that is by the mode of production in the ‘last instance’ but includes a relative autonomy of the superstructural levels.
Althusser puts the claim that overdetermination is universal, and not merely applicable to aberrant historical situations, with ironic grandeur:
the economic dialectic is never active in the pure state; in History, these instances, the superstructures, etc. — are never seen to step respectfully aside when their work is done or, when the Time comes, as his pure phenomena, to scatter before His Majesty the Economy as he strides along the royal road of the Dialectic.
From the first moment to the last the lonely hour of the ‘last instance’ never comes.
(Althusser 1969: 113)
The conception of overdetermination is a notable development in the theory of ideology.
It makes meaningful an analysis of the level (or levels) of ideology and relates it in a non-reductive way to the economic base — the mode of production.
Ideology, or the superstructural levels, in Althusser's rendering of the dialectic remains a constitutive part of a process that is characterized by unequal power and domination.
Although his analysis is principally philosophical and occasionally historical the concepts and theoretical relations between them that he develops are relevant to understanding specific instances of ideology.
IDEOLOGY, KNOWLEDGE AND SCIENCE
The problem remains though that Althusser has begun to theorize ideology in a way that is dependent on some other form of knowing being possible.
He wants to grasp the nature or the practice of ideology scientifically and characterizes ‘ideology’ as whole, unified by its problematic and dependent on the social situation in which it occurs.
Moreover, ideology is driven from outside, by the underlying political and economic context (Althusser 1969: 62–3).
He articulates a distinction between scientific theoretical practice and ideological modes of thought:
Theoretical practice falls within the general definition of practice.
It works on a raw material
(representations, concepts, facts) which it is given by other practices, whether ‘empirical’, ‘technical’ or ‘ideological’.
In its most general form theoretical practice does not only include scientific theoretical practice, but also pre-scientific theoretical practice, that is, ‘ideological’ theoretical practice (the forms of ‘knowledge’that make up the pre-history of science, and their ‘philosophies’).
(Althusser 1969: 167)
There is then a sequential and hierarchical distinction between science and ideology; science follows ideology, the discontinuity being marked by an ‘epistemological break’.
Althusser describes the ideological form of Marx's early work as humanist in that it addressed the problem of human nature or the essence of being human.
Marx's epistemological break involved a rejection of this ‘empiricism of the subject’ and the emergence of a new problematic:
a theory of the different levels of human practice 
(economic practice, political practice, ideological practice, scientific practice) in their characteristic articulations, based on the specific articulations of the unity of human society.
(Althusser 1969: 229)
Although this amounts to a transformation of theory and its object it is not clear in what sense it is an epistemological break.
The transformation of the problematic does not necessarily lead to a transformation of the form of validity of knowledge.
If it did it would involve a transformation of the human practices that produce knowledge, that is the transformation of ideological practice into scientific practice.
But this transformation is merely asserted by Althusser's claim of the epistemological break — he fails to describe the transformed practice, that of science, except in terms of what it is not (i.e. ideological practice).
In Reading Capital (Althusser and Balibar 1970), Althusser explores the development of Marx's scientific exposition of historical materialism, stressing the point that the raw materials of knowledge production are not things, not essences of the material world, but concepts and abstractions that are ideological or scientific.
Furthermore, he locates knowledge production at the level of thought, as it were, untainted by the influence of ideology which operates in a practical world (bound by social practices and traditions).
Not only does this sound like a reverse of Marx's critique of idealism but also there is no description of the process of knowledge or its relation to the ‘real’ world.
Althusser rules out epistemology as a solution to the problem of ideology, arguing that there are no guarantees.
The only criteria of ‘science’ we are left with are its ‘openness’and the fact that it takes place ‘entirely in thought’.
KNOWLEDGE AND THEORETICAL PRACTICE
Althusser develops a position that, as Callinicos (1976) describes it, is dependent on the autonomy of theory even though the scientificity of theory is difficult to guarantee if epistemology is rejected.
Impressed by the form of the material sciences, Althusser follows Engels in comparing the development of Marx's ‘science’ with the development of the discovery of oxygen by Lavoisier and the relationship between the planets and the sun by Galileo.
The comparability is that all three were involved in a ‘break; the mutation by which a new science is established in a new problematic, separated from the old ideological problematic’(Althusser and Balibar 1970: 153).
The difficulty with this is that Althusser (and Engels) are convincingly describing a change in  problematic, perhaps even a paradigm shift, but it is not clear that what went on before is contrastable as ideology, as non-science.
It may be accepted that Althusser is describing science by its theoretical practice, its ‘labour of theoretical transformation’, but this is not adequate to distinguish it from ideology as a practice.
It also fails to explain how the theoretical practice of science can be separated for the purposes of knowledge production from other practices that are the hallmark of ideology in Althusser's account.
Geras makes a similar point by emphasizing the idealism inherent in Althusser's separation of theoretical practice (science) from political practice (Geras 1977: 268).
Both in his foreword to the Italian edition of Reading Capital and his Essays in Self Criticism (Althusser 1976), Althusser points out his own ‘theoreticist tendency’ in equating philosophy with science as the ‘Theory of theoretical practice’(Althusser 1976: 124).
This account of science is indeed overly optimistic but at the same time limited.
As we shall see in Chapter 8, the sociology of science does not provide evidence to support his belief in the independence of science from social structures and ideological processes.
His account of ideology on the other hand is much more rewarding, locating it as he does in the presuppositions necessary for social life and avoiding the philosophical consequences of attempting to privilege one perspective.
IDEOLOGY AND STATE POWER
In the essay on ‘Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses’(Althusser 1971: 123–74) Althusser starts to describe the reproduction of the means of production and to articulate the form of the institutions that achieve this reproduction.
These institutions, the Ideological State Apparatuses (ISAs) are listed by Althusser as: the religious, the educational, the family, the legal, the political, the trade union, the communications and the cultural.
The ISAs are distinguished from the Repressive State Apparatus (RSA) in that the former are plural and private while the latter is unitary and public.
The RSA (the government, administration, the army, the police, the courts, the prisons, etc.) functions, at least ultimately, by repression and violence.
In contrast the ISAs function predominantly by ideology and derive a unity through the dominance of ideology by the ruling class:
To my knowledge, no class can hold State power over a long period without at the same time exercising its hegemony over and in the State Ideological Apparatuses.
(Althusser 1971: 139)
The ruling class may be an alliance of classes and the maintenance of hegemony is not the same thing as a monolithic dominant ideology.
This means that the ISAs are one of the sites of class struggle and although there is a continuity amongst the ISAs Althusser suggests that some are more dominating than others in the sense that they play a larger role in the reproduction of the relations of production.
Under feudalism there was a dominant ISA, the Church, which worked in concert with the family.
With the development of capitalism and the shift of power from the aristocracy to the bourgeoisie, many of the functions of the church were devolved onto other emerging ISAs, the most important being the educational.
Pointing to social institutions that are empirically recognizable is a refreshing change in Althusser's style but it is not just the identification of the institutions that is important.
Describing the mechanism by which ideology works is the only way that we can be convinced by Althusser's institutions since he has de fined them theoretically by their functions.
Hirst (1976) takes exception to Althusser theorizing the ISAs as the means by which the relations of production are reproduced.
He disputes the distinction between production and reproduction of the relations of production and argues that Althusser is actually describing the reproduction of the agents of production; human socialized individuals.
Furthermore these economic agents are not necessarily human subjects; capital can be an anonymous economic agent, in the form of the managed enterprise.
Hirst's criticisms point to the inherent functionalism of Althusser's conception of the ISAs.
The state has a function, the reproduction of relations (or agents) of production, that the ISAs fulfil.
The functions of the state and the ISAs are unified by the ruling class and its ideology.
This scheme in which power operates uniformly in direction and function, echoes economistic versions of the mechanics of ideology.
As social institutions the ISAs are ‘driven’ by a force beyond them — the contradictions at the base.
The theory of the ISAs would indeed be very crude if Althusser left it at that but he completes the essay with a discussion of ideology, the mode in which the ISAs function.
Here Althusser attempts to analyse the general form of ideology as opposed to theorizing particular ideologies ‘which in whatever their form (religious, ethical, legal, political), always express class positions’(Althusser 1971: 150).
Ideology in general has no history in the sense that its structure and form is immutable throughout history.
Althusser compares this characteristic to Freud's proposition that the unconscious is eternal.
He offers two remarkable theses that describe this trans-historical form:
Ideology represents the imaginary relationship of individuals to their real conditions of existence.
(Althusser 1971: 153)
Ideology has a material existence.
(Althusser 1971: 155)
The second thesis is perhaps easier to grasp.
‘Ideas’ or ‘representations’do not have a spiritual existence, their existence is material and the materiality of ideology is marked by its existence in ‘apparatuses’and ‘practices’.
The first thesis is more difficult in that it does not express ideology as mere illusion nor as a reflection of real conditions.
The imaginary aspect of ideology is to do with the relationship between individuals and real conditions.
It is interesting to note that an objective reality is presupposed by this thesis — there is a real existence of an individual that is material and is separated from the ideological consciousness of the individual by an ‘imaginary’ relationship.
For Althusser, the ‘real conditions’ are, in the last instance, relations of production and class relations.
The ‘imaginary relation’ is a material one, that is, it is the actions or practices of the individual that flow ‘freely’from her ideas.
Althusser has constructed a subject that is endowed with consciousness which ‘believes’ freely in ideas or ‘forms’ideas freely.
But the actions that must be consequent on those ideas, Althusser asserts are:
inserted into practices .
And I shall point out that these practices are governed by the rituals in which these practices are inscribed, with the material existence of an ideological apparatus .
(Althusser 1971: 158)
These apparatuses need not be major institutions; Althusser offers as examples of ritual practices a funeral, a school day, a political party meeting.
One of the consequences he claims for this theory is the disappearance of ideas ‘to the precise extent that it has emerged that their existence is inscribed in the actions of practices governed by rituals defined in the last instance by an ideological apparatus’(Althusser 1971: 159).
Althusser's thesis is a version of the social determination of knowledge that relies on the socialization of human subjects into ritual practices.
There is implied the possibility of a break in this functionalist account of the determination of ideas, beliefs and actions.
But if ideas can escape the chain of determinacy, what is their form?
The production of discourse, especially scientific discourse, would seem to comply with Althusser's concept of ‘ritual practice’.
The very science that he is, presumably, engaged in can itself be recognized as existing as a practice within three of the ISAs he refers to; the educational, the political and the communicative ISAs.
But Althusser's principal hypothesis is that ‘ideology interpellates individuals as subjects’(Althusser 1971: 161) by which he means that the subject and ideology are mutually constituting categories.
It refers to the fact that subjects do not engage in ideology but are ‘always already subjects’.
Even the unborn child is ‘expected’ and constituted as a subject by its having a name and a sexual destiny thrust upon it at birth by the family and community that expects it.
Althusser's description of ideology in general in the ISA's paper seems to cover all possibilities of discursive action and some cognitive action (believing; having, creating and accepting ideas).
The process of interpellation of subjects involves a ‘recognition’ that constantly transforms individuals into subjects.
Ideology, whether in the form of religious cant or a friendly greeting creates a location for the individual which she/he fills by recognizing it as their place (as a servant of God, as the person hailed).
It is in that recognition (Althusser calls it a ‘mirror structure’) that the subject is constituted.
Moreover, the recognition process is a double mirror structure in that a Subject is also recognized and thereby constituted.
The Subject is the category that marks the place that the individual must fill to be constituted as a subject.
So, the Subject is constituted as a centre of authority to which the subject must be obedient: ‘God’, ‘the boss’, ‘their [i.e. the subjects']conscience’, ‘de Gaulle’, ‘the priest’, ‘the engineer’, ‘thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself (Althusser 1971: 169).
The imaginary relation between individuals and their real conditions is founded in the illusion that the ‘recognition’ is free; what is obscured is the subjection to the Subject that is necessary and unavoidable.
Even in denying the relation, by refusing to ‘recognize’(God, a friend, the law) the individual is recognizing the place they are refusing to fill and thus is still constituted as a subject.
What ensures this is that the ideological apparatus responds (damnation, approbation, incarceration).
The individual cannot disengage with the apparatus.
Althusser has all along promised an escape through scientific practice, an escape that may be brief and ineffective in itself but which leads to a transformation of other practices — especially political practice.
But the conditions of science as a practice which may escape the functional determination of ideology, are not explained.
Althusser asserts that all ideology is ‘centred’ while science is ‘decentred’and his no subjects and no Subject but it remains unclear how science might escape from ideology.
He merely proposes that:
while speaking in ideology, and from within ideology we have to outline a discourse which tries to break with ideology, in order to dare to be the beginning of a scientific
(i.e. subject-less) discourse on ideology.
(Althusser 1971: 162)
The conception of ideology that Althusser offers involves a social determination thesis that avoids mechanistic determination through the possibility of science.
Like Habermas's ‘ideal speech situation’, the fact that scientific practice can never be realized is not the point.
It describes a possibility, endemic to the social form of ideology, that determination is not total and mechanistic.
This is to read Althusser's distinction between science and ideology as being finally not one between equivalent categories.
‘Science’ describes the ideal form that motivates struggle within ideology.
In this sense science is not a sociological category (i.e. one that can be used to describe specific social forms) nor is it an epistemological category (i.e. one that can be used to account for the form or validity of knowledge).
Instead, ‘science’ can be understood as a response to the conditions of existence (material and ideological) that resists the givenness of those conditions.
It is clear that while Althusser compares the ‘science’ of Marxism with the ‘science’of the material sciences, he is not describing the same features as would traditional sociologists or philosophers.
He characterizes science by its epistemological break with ideology, a moment in the production of knowledge not indicated by a new theory of knowledge or a new sociological form.
The moment of the break is not transcendent but it is a breaking free of the determinations of ideology — a moment in which the presuppositions that determine ideology are transformed by a critical response to them.
THE CRITIQUE OF SCIENCE AND CULTURE
The work of the Frankfurt School as a whole can be seen as a critique of ideology.
In developing ‘critical theory’ the writers of this group confronted the social role of knowledge and ideology using a framework for analysis and an approach very different from that of the sociology of knowledge.
Their critique of ideology is derived from the social, historical and philosophical insights of Marx and is concerned with the process of contemporary ideology, although they do not present a theory of ideology as such.
There are two particular knowledge systems that attract the attention of critical theory: science and mass culture.
For Adorno and  Horkheimer science becomes ideological because of the change in the relationship between humans and nature that accompanies it.
As humans liberate themselves from the constraints of nature (scarce resources) through technology, there comes about a domination of nature.
The domination of nature generates a dominating mentality so people dominate each other and accept domination in the name of technological reason and scientific rationality.
While scientific rationality can produce ‘enlightenment’ about nature it also alienates human beings through the social relations consequent upon the domination of nature.
These social relations are specifically class relations that replicate the domination of nature in the domination of one class by another.
Marcuse takes up the theme of domination through the ideological form of technological reason and shows how it is legitimized by the widespread consumption enabled by increased production.
Domination by political repression, the open domination of one class by another, is no longer necessary.
Manipulation of ‘needs’ by both creating them and satisfying them is the process by which social control is effected.
Marcuse points out that:
the technological controls appear to be the very embodiment of Reason for the benefit of all social groups and interests — to such an extent that all contradiction seems irrational and all counteraction impossible.
(Marcuse 1972: 22)
The effect is that the individual identifies herself with an existence which is imposed upon her.
Ideology becomes ‘reality’ as it is absorbed by the individual.
The ideology which both constitutes existence for the individual and imposes social relations upon her is mediated through the culture:
The means of mass transportation and communication, the commodities of lodging, food and clothing, the irresistible output of the entertainment and information industry carry with them prescribed attitudes and habits, certain intellectual and emotional reactions which bind the consumers more or less pleasantly to the producers and through the latter to the whole.
(Marcuse 1972: 24)
This critique of the consequences of science and consumption culture as ideology comes from a method that is ‘dialectical’; there is a two-sided discourse that through the effect of criticism on consciousness changes over time.
The principal object of the critique is an ideological structure  that is ‘one dimensional’(Marcuse 1972: 79) in that it has no reflexive or critical aspects but is uniform in its mode of rationality.
CRITICAL THEORY
Horkheimer in his essay on ‘Traditional and Critical Theory’ outlines the features of a critical theory and its methods.
In rejecting traditional theory as a ‘mathematical knowledge of nature which claims to be the eternal logos’ he suggests that the self-knowledge of present-day man is ‘a critical theory of society as it is, a theory dominated at every turn by a concern for reasonable conditions of life’(Horkheimer 1972: 199).
Critical theory questions not just isolated elements of the society which it takes as its object; it is the whole historical structure which is being criticized.
Thus it questions the values of the existing order of ‘better’, ‘useful’, ‘appropriate’, ‘productive’ and ‘valuable’and is ‘wholly distrustful of the rules of conduct with which society as presently constituted provides each of its members’(Horkheimer 1972: 207).
The thought of the critical attitude is marked by a tension in the identity of the critical thinker with his society.
Such thinkers:
interpret the economic categories of work, value, and productivity exactly as they are interpreted in the existing order…[but]…the critical acceptance of the categories which rule social life contains simultaneously their condemnation.
(Horkheimer 1972: 208)
The ‘dialectic’ method thinks through the contradiction between categories given to the thinker that also subordinate her.
The critical theory that derives from dialectical thought uses the given categories to criticize both the categories and the social structure which generates them.
However, the power of critical thought lies not in any aspiration towards ‘absolute truth’(for which Horkheimer criticizes bourgeois methods) but in its merging of the experience and action of the thinker and the categories available to consciousness.
Bourgeois thought indulges in an abstraction of the process of thinking from the total process of being, thereby reifying thought and setting it above being.
In this way traditional theory ‘explains’ in the absence of experience (i.e. in abstraction) and so merely confirms the ideological categories given to its consciousness.
Scientific rationality for the Frankfurt School involves the domination of experience by purporting to describe and explain it whereas critical theory engages in the dialectic between lived experience and the categories given to describe it.
The validity of critical theory lies not in the adoption of a method, vindicated by epistemology, but in the enlightenment that is successful in generating a political practice that moves towards emancipation, the liberation of human beings from domination.
In a collectively written paper, the members of the Frankfurt School confront the concept of ideology, both criticizing its historical development as a concept and the role of ideology in contemporary society.
The Enlightenment doctrines had included the belief:
that it was sufficient to bring order into consciousness, for order to be brought into society.
However, it is not only this belief which is bourgeois but the nature of ideology itself.
As a consciousness which is objectively necessary and yet at the same time false, as the intertwining of truth and falsehood, which is just as distinct from the whole truth as it is from the pure lie, ideology belongs, if not to a modern economy, then, in any case, to a developed urban market economy.
For ideology is justification.
(Horkheimer 1972: 189)
For the Frankfurt School, ‘ideology’ is a concept to be used in the political interpretation of social forces and is predicated on a Marxist theory of the political history and structure of society.
But there is inevitably a claim to truth involved and the critical content of theory alone is not sufficient to justify its acceptance:
what is required, and what is lacking in the Zeitschrift essays, is a philosophical elucidation of thought on materialist presuppositions, which while overcoming Hegel's idealism, does not fall below the level of insight he achieved.
Habermas attempts to accomplish this through a linguistic reformulation of the philosophical foundations of historical materialism.
(McCarthy's introduction to Habermas 1976: xii)
The early critical theorists (Horkheimer, Adorno, Marcuse) gave an insufficient philosophical basis on which to found the status of critical theory in their essays on aspects of critical theory (the Zeitschrift essays).
To put it simply, in criticizing ideology, critical theory has to establish itself as not prone to the same failings as ideology.
It was left to Jürgen Habermas to establish a more comprehensive account of the basis of critical theory.
The Hegelian tendency in Marcuse's work suggested that contradictions in the conditions of existence could be conquered by raising contradictions at the level of consciousness.
The failure of this approach as a political strategy led to a review of its idealist formulation.
What was needed was a theory of the  material conditions, including social and political relations, that inhibit the emancipation of human beings through their own actions.
HABERMAS
The early work of Jürgen Habermas develops the Marxist theory of ideology in a particular way.
Firstly, the role of ‘consciousness’ as an historical force is reformulated without recourse to Hegelian idealism or historicism.
Secondly, the epistemological problems that such a reformulation generates are confronted without creating a division between ‘science’ and ‘ideology’or ‘true’and ‘false’consciousness.
Habermas's theory involves a reflexive moment that was present but unsatisfactorily worked out in the earlier versions of critical theory.
Thirdly, the way these issues are dealt with is by developing a theory of communicative action.
Fourthly, Habermas develops a theory of the processes of advanced capitalist society that is both ‘critical’ and yet optimistic.
This range of issues dealt with by Habermas extends way beyond the tradition of the critique of ideology or the sociology of knowledge.
But there is an interdependence between the various themes in his work that makes it difficult to deal with them in isolation.
The theory of communicative action is perhaps the crucial and radical component in Habermas's work but it is not a discrete theory; it develops in response to a number of problems both theoretical and empirical raised in a variety of contexts.
This makes it difficult to offer a succinct exegetical account of Habermas's work but I shall pursue three problems to try to present his contribution to the theory of ideology: the problem of epistemology, the problem of ideology and the problem of communication.
I shall also briefly refer to the reformed roles that ideology/ knowledge have to play in Habermas's account of advanced capitalism.
THE SUBJECT AND SIGNIFICATION
Habermas interprets Hegel's early work on the philosophy of mind (the Jena lectures) to offer three dialectical relations that constitute a systematic basis for the formative process of spirit:
symbolic representation, the labour process, and interaction on the basis of reciprocity; each mediates subject and object in its own way.
(Habermas 1974: 142)
The significance of these three relations is that through them subjects are constituted and although the relations have a relation to each other, none is reducible to any other.
Symbolic representation refers to the category of language and is one of the ways that a knowing subject, the ‘I’, is constituted.
Language orders the world of perception and at the same time constitutes a knowing subject that perceives and yet is distinguished from that world.
Labour produces a parallel relation in that ‘it breaks the dictates of immediate desires and, as it were, arrests the process of drive satisfaction’(Habermas 1974: 154).
The dialectic of labour produces a different effect, on a differently constituted subject, than that of language in that it involves subjection to the world of nature.
Whereas the dialectic of language (in its proto-form, a ‘name giving consciousness’) generates a relation from within the subject, labour is a subjection to the causality of nature.
But labour has consequences for consciousness in that rules for instrumental action are developed which enable the subject to have a measure of control over nature through the use of tools.
The third dialectic involves the subject recognizing itself through interaction with other subjects.
The subject is able to constitute itself as an ‘I’, an abstract, self-knowing subject, in an interaction that recognizes an ‘other’ that is a similarly formed subject.
This dialectic means that the constitution of a universal category of subjectivity that includes all other subjects at the same time, is also part of the process by which an individual is constituted, as an ‘I’ that distinguishes itself as non-identical with all other subjects.
The dialectic of the relation of reciprocal interaction is potentially the area of distorted communication but there are tendencies in all the subject constituting relations which contribute to the distortion in relations of reciprocal interaction.
In symbolic representation the tendency ‘indicates an object or a state of affairs as something else’(Habermas 1974: 153) and in the labour process it involves a ‘subjection to the causality of nature’(Habermas 1974: 154).
By adopting this early phenomenology of Hegel, Habermas generates a theory of the knowing subject that is sociological with its reference to the social activities of labour and communication, and yet retains a tension between the individual subject and its location within social formation.
He carefully avoids a Kantian reduction to a knowing subject founded on self-reflection or a Hegelian reduction to a universal subject constituted as the absolute spirit of history.
Either of these two formulations would require a transcendental knowing subject and would constitute knowledge as a special phenomenon abstracted from the material level of human action.
Habermas's knowing subject is materially grounded in the actions of human subjects but there is no  reduction to concrete material relations as in Marx.
He suggests that Marx's interpretation of Hegel (even without the benefit of access to the Jena lectures) produced an account of the formation of the human species that reduces communicative action to instrumental action — labour (Habermas 1974: 169).
Perhaps the most important consequence of Habermas's ‘rediscovered’ dialectics of the subject is that he has distinguished his version of critical theory from any possibility of material determination — even in the last instance.
This does not amount to a rejection of Marx but points to an absence in his work and leaves Habermas free to retain a basically Marxist account of the forces of production and at the same time develop a theory of social relations of communicative production.
THE PROBLEM OF IDEOLOGY
With his account of the three categories, Habermas has also substantially altered the way in which ‘ideology’ can be considered.
The determination by the material base having been displaced, the form of ideology (distortion) can no longer be explained merely by reference to contradictions in the material base although Habermas incorporates Marx's critique of the commodity form of labour as ideology (Habermas 1972: 59).
In developing the critique of political economy as a critique of ideology, Marx retained some aspects of the dialectic of Hegelian critique, but did not offer a philosophical foundation for it within his own materialist system.
This leads to a tendency to reduce the form of critique to the form of natural science which, Habermas argues, would not have happened if Marx had maintained a distinction between instrumental and communicative action.
The failure of Marx to be clear about the epistemological basis of his critique led to a possibility of misinterpretation:
And later Marx never explicitly rejected the naturalistic version of the doctrine of ideology which Engels supplied….
As long as historical materialism no longer saw itself as involved in the objective crisis complex, as soon as it understood its critique exclusively as positive science and the dialectic objectively as the law of the world, then the ideological character of consciousness had to take on a metaphysical quality….
Within this superficial understanding, the correct ideology was distinguished from the false solely according to the criteria of a realistic theory of knowledge.
(Habermas 1974: 238)
The reference to the ‘crisis complex’ is to a further failing in Marx's  analysis.
By accounting for the development of the mode of production in terms of economic relations only, Marx failed to take account of the development of political forces which also have an effect on the development of the mode of production.
These political forces develop, of course, in the dimension of communicative action, the absent category in Marx's phenomenology.
Habermas describes how the concentration and centralization of capital leads weaker parties in the market to assert their claims in a political form.
The same features of the mode of production also lead to the state intervening in the process of commodity exchange and social labour.
Habermas incorporates Marx's critique of political economy but makes ‘ideology’ an effective force in the development of the mode of production.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
In going beyond Marx's analysis of liberal capitalism, Habermas points out that the bourgeois ideology of ‘just exchange’(Habermas 1971: 101) breaks down and with its collapse, political power requires a new source of legitimation.
The development from liberal to advanced capitalism has two characteristics.
Firstly, the state takes on the role of intervening in the relations of production to control the dysfunctional aspects of capitalism; the contradictions of capital that Marx described.
Secondly, the state intervenes in the forces of production by organizing science to generate technology (research and development programmes).
This process Habermas calls the ‘scientization of technology’:.
Thus science and technology become a leading productive force, rendering inoperative the conditions for Marx's labour theory of value.
(Habermas 1971: 104)
In advanced capitalism these two aspects, state intervention and the scientization of technology, create the appearance of social evolution being determined by science and technology.
Politics becomes an issue of solving the technical problems of advancing capitalism rather than the realization of practical goals.
At the same time the imperative of economic growth to minimize the contradictions of capital, creates an apparent dependence on the logic of scientific and technological progress.
Technology serves as a ‘background ideology’ that takes on legitimizing power and Habermas writes of the fetishization of science as a ‘new’ideology.
The ‘technocratic consciousness’ that takes the place of the old bourgeois ideology is not based on collective repression.
Instead there are rewards for privatized needs that occlude any practical questions about the organization of social life.
Marcuse saw a possibility for developing a new, critical, science not dependent on instrumental reason or the ideological form of modern science and technology.
His analysis of the development of instrumental reason, however, was as a consequence of the development of the forces of production.
Habermas rejects this analysis because the level of communicative action can have an impact on the process of modernization that Marcuse ignored.
In Habermas's account, ‘work’ and ‘interaction’are relatively separate processes with the latter not reduced to the former.
The development of rationalization brings about a change in the relationship of these two processes.
This more complex account of the process of levels of social formation interacting is reminiscent of Althusser's theory of overdetermination.
IDEOLOGY AND LEGITIMATION
In traditional societies the legitimacy of political power is maintained through ‘mythical, religious or metaphysical interpretations of reality’(Habermas 1971: 95) including the divine right of those who rule to continue to rule.
They are also interpretations that do not tolerate challenges — either in the form of offences against the king or blasphemy.
Habermas describes this as domination ‘from above’ because the cultural tradition that legitimizes power is generated and passed down through those who exercise it.
Things change when a different mode of knowledge based on purposive-rational action reaches a certain stage of development.
Purposive-rational or instrumental action is governed by technical rules based on empirical knowledge that implies conditional predictions about observable events, physical or social.
This mode of rationality, whether it is applied to scientific or technological problems or to problems of economic production is governed by ‘strategies based on analytic knowledge’(Habermas 1971: 92).
Strategic and instrumental rationality achieves economic growth and at a certain point, for Habermas the point of modernization, the new mode of knowledge challenges the traditional form of legitimation of power.
Capitalism, Habermas argues, replaces the traditional mode of domination from above with a new mode of domination from below — bourgeois ideology.
It is based not on the mythico-religious system resistant to challenge but on the exchange relations of the commodity market including the labour market.
Bourgeois ideology takes over the legitimizing functions of traditional society and thereby keeps power  relations inaccessible to analysis and public consciousness.
This leads Habermas to a very particular formulation of ideology:
It is in this way that ideologies in the restricted sense first came into being.
They replace traditional legitimations of power by appearing in the mantle of modern science and by deriving their justification from the critique of ideology.
Ideologies are coeval with the critique of ideology.
In this sense there can be no pre-bourgeois ‘ideologies’.
(Habermas 1971: 99)
2 Habermas's analysis is more optimistic than Marcuse's.
The emergence of science and technology as legitimizing forces not only signals the transformation of the traditional form of ideology to a modern, rational, form but also signals the emergence of the critique of ideology.
KNOWLEDGE AND INTERESTS
One line of epistemological inquiry leads Habermas to explore the developed forms of knowledge in a way that locates them in terms of his phenomenological grounding of knowing subjects.
This investigation produces what Habermas terms ‘knowledge-constitutive interests’(Habermas 1972: 191).
Habermas reveals three such interests.
The technical, which corresponds to the activity of the nomological sciences, the practical, which corresponds to the hermeneutic sciences, and the emancipatory, which corresponds to the critical sciences.
In developing a critique of scientism (which Habermas regards Knowledge and Human Interests to be) he is not rejecting the epistemological validity of the nomological sciences or the hermeneutic sciences but is trying to orient them in relation to the critical sciences.
It is the scientism of Marx and Freud that has to be rejected and a status found for their critical theories through their interest in emancipation from domination (economic domination and domination of the individual through neuroses).
The importance of his distancing from earlier critical theory becomes clear; ‘science’ as a form of epistemology cannot be dismissed as ideology but a tendency to ‘scientism’can be treated as obscuring knowledge-constitutive interests and as potentially ideological.
Habermas's grounds his own claim to generate knowledge in two ways.
Firstly, he is clearly operating within the area of ‘emancipatory interest’ and maintaining a position within critical theory.
This means that the claim to validity of his work is postponed until its success is demonstrated through its effects in an emancipatory practice.
The process of critical theory in the area of sociology involves a particular attitude:
Critical of ideology, it asks what lies behind the consensus, presented as fact, that supports the dominant tradition of the time, and does so with a view to the relations of power surreptitiously incorporated in the symbolic structures of the systems of speech and action.
(Habermas 1974: 12)
Secondly, Habermas points to a methodological possibility that could have far-reaching epistemological effects.
The structure of ideology, that which has to be got behind, is created by blocks in communication that limit the options between ‘verbal and nonverbal forms of expression’, and between ‘communication and discourse’(Habermas 1974: 12).
The way to analyse ideology is through a theory of communicative action.
COMMUNICATIVE ACTION
Habermas's early work on the theory of communicative action involves establishing the role of a ‘universal pragmatics’, linked to an analysis of the ‘ideal speech situation’ and ‘systematically distorted communication’(Habermas 1970a; 1970b; 1979).
The aim of a universal pragmatics is to reconstruct the rules by which adult speakers are able to:
embed sentences in relations to reality in such a way that they can take on the general pragmatic functions of representation, expression and establishing interpersonal relations.
(Habermas 1979: 32)
The universal pragmatics is an attempt to describe the process by which people interact and establish their identity through communicative action.
But, according to Habermas, implicit within the form of communication are claims to validity at a number of levels: ‘truth’(representing facts; referring to the extended world of nature), ‘rightness’(establishing legitimate interpersonal relations; referring to our world of society), ‘truthfulness’(expression of the speaker's subjectivity) and ‘comprehensibility’(the domain of language).
For Habermas, speech acts or utterances aimed at achieving understanding contain these universal claims to validity (Habermas 1979).
His interest is not (or at least not merely) to analyse empirical instances of language.
The universality of these pragmatic features of communication indicates the possibility of the ideal speech situation or ‘discourse’, when communication is undistorted.
The universality of the pragmatic features of communication means that all communicatively competent speech contains the possibility of the ideal speech situation:
No matter how the intersubjectivity of mutual understanding may be  deformed, the design of an ideal speech situation is necessarily implied in the structure of potential speech, since all speech, even of intentional deception, is oriented towards the idea of truth.
(Habermas 1970b: 372)
Habermas is grounding truth in the particular form of human communication.
The universality of the orientation to truth makes it as much a part of the genetic qualities of human being as the ability to communicate through language.
What is radical in Habermas's proposal is that while the possibility of speaking the truth is enstructured in every utterance, all the other modes of grounding truth become sources of distortion; historical world-view, ideology, scientism, material determinism, reduction to class consciousness.
The validity claims involved in the form of communicative action are given a ‘quasi-transcendental’ status because they are present in communication even if obscured by distortion:
In place of a priori demonstration, we have transcendental investigation of the conditions for argumentatively redeeming validity claims that are at least implicitly related to discursive vindication.
(Habermas 1979: 23)
Habermas interprets the universality of the pragmatic features of communication to be oriented towards the possibility of ‘truth’.
I will argue that such a truth is relational; that is, relative to the social and historical location of the intersubjective action, discursive and practical, in which participants find themselves.
There is a tendency in Habermas's theoretical framework to reduce communicative competence to ‘norms’ which threatens to preclude a critical account of the social production and reproduction of those norms which the critique of ideology traditionally proposes.
Giddens comments that Habermas's emphasis upon the normative components of interaction is ‘surprisingly close’ to Parson's functionalism:
Both accord primacy to the norm in examining social interaction, rather than to power….
I should want to make the case for arguing that power is as integral a component of all social interaction as norms are.
(Giddens 1982: 159)
In the two volumes of The Theory of Communicative Action (1984; 1987a), Habermas reviews the nature of rationality and modernity through a series of dialogues with and reflections on the work of major social theorists — Marx, Weber, Durkheim, Mead, Lukács, Horkheimer, Adorno and Parsons.
As in his earlier work the aim is to analyse the  levels of social process that constitute social formations.
The concept of rationality, which he promotes as a feature of modernizing societies, is tied to the process of communicative action rather than to the subjective and individualistic premises of much modern philosophy and social theory.
As well as providing a means for analysing social process, the rationality of communicative action provides the basis for the understanding of an interpreter of that action:
The interpreter observes under what conditions symbolic expressions are accepted as valid and when validity claims connected with them are criticized and rejected; he notices when the action plans of participants are coordinated through consensus formation and when the connections among the actions of different agents fall apart due to lack of consensus.
(Habermas 1984: 115
The interpreter neither has a special location for undertaking analysis, nor a special method but the reflexive attention to the relation between communicative action and its content.
Just like any other agent engaged in communicative action oriented towards understanding, the interpreter makes claims that have to be supported with reasoned argument.
The context of communicative action is the ‘lifeworld’ that includes culture, society and personality:
The lifeworld is the intuitively present, in this sense familiar and transparent, and at the same time vast and incalculable web of presuppositions that have to be satisfied if an actual utterance is to be at all meaningful, that is valid or invalid.
(Habermas 1987a: 131)
It is through the processes of cultural reproduction, social integration and socialization that the lifeworld is constantly reproduced.
The lifeworld both provides the basis of meaning on which communicative action can draw and it is also a product of the exchange of meaning that constitutes communicative action.
The roots of Habermas's concept of lifeworld clearly lie with the phenomenology of Schutz and Berger and Luckmann (see Chapter 3) but his concept is closely related to a theory of social systems that includes the institutional structure of society.
Habermas is careful to ensure that neither lifeworld nor system are subsumed by the other category but he explores links between them, including the systematic restriction of communication.
It is the set of formal conditions of possible understanding, the rules of discourse, that restrict communication and help to sustain ideological interpretations of the world (Habermas 1987a: 189).
In general though, with the theory  of communicative action, Habermas is withdrawing from critical theory including the critique of ideology which he suggests has ‘become dull’ within an inadequate metatheoretical framework (Habermas 1987a: 202).
He also argues that the increasing fragmentation and differentiation of the rationalized lifeworld of modernity both takes the place of ideology and at the same time makes it difficult to sustain:
In place of‘false consciousness’ we today have a ‘fragmented consciousness’that blocks enlightenment by the mechanism of reification.
(Habermas 1987a: 355)
The proposition that truth underlies the form of communication is not compatible with the sociology of knowledge.
Relationism situates both the form and content of knowledge in relation to its social context and while it avoids a reduction to the social basis of knowledge leaves no space for even a quasi-transcendental truth.
Communication is a social practice and even if systematic distortion is removed, existential determination is not.
Knowledge, as the product of the social practice of communication, is always a product of social being and to some degree determined by the presuppositions given to social being that constitute the possibility of communication.
For both Habermas and Althusser the problem of analysing ideology is bound up with the status of valid knowledge.
This leads Althusser into the unrewarding account of ‘science’ but at the same time his account of the social process of ideology through the concepts of overdetermination and the ideological state apparatuses takes the theory of ideology forward substantially.
Critical theory offers a more optimistic account of valid knowledge through the postponed validity to be derived from emancipatory practice.
Habermas's early analyses of ideology in relation to rationality and legitimation seemed to build on Marx's theory of ideology within a framework of critique.
But he seems to have withdrawn from his earlier commitment to critical theory and become increasing involved in the philosophical basis of communicative action.
Habermas's later work has opened up the way for communication to be studied as a social practice and has identified it as a dimension of social being largely absent in Marx's account.
His early critique asked ‘what lies behind the consensus?’, what ‘supports the dominant tradition of the time’ and proposes an analysis based on ‘the relations of power surreptitiously incorporated’in the social practices including communication (Habermas 1974: 12 — quoted above).
Such a perspective does not require a universal pragmatics for it to proceed with an analysis of the form of discourse as ideology.
From signification to discourse
These ‘structuralists’ may lack a common programme but they do not lack a common ancestry.
It is principally in the genealogy of their ideas that one should look for evidence of their kinship.
(Sturrock 1979: 5)
This is how Sturrock introduces a collection of five essays on Lévi-Strauss, Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault, Jacques Lacan, and Jacques Derrida.
I too will treat this group of writers as ‘structuralists’ and look at some aspects of their work to show how it has created an object for analysis that is relevant to the empirical tasks of the sociology of knowledge.
This object, discourse, is at once an empirical phenomenon recognizable without a particular theory, and at the same time a theoretical object that is amenable to analysis.
As an object, discourse is available on two levels.
Firstly, to a participant (in a discourse, in a kinship system) for whom the object has a reality that can be described and understood.
Secondly, to an analyst (of discourse, of a kinship system) for whom the object has structural features that enable it to be understood in relation to other, similar structural forms.
The analyst describes features that the participant need not necessarily be aware of.
Awareness of these features may even impair the participant's practice but they are features that enable the analyst to understand, in a more general way, what participation involves.
To explore further what the object of study of the structuralists is, I will first follow its development from a common ancestry in the particular approach to language that originates in the work of Saussure and the members of the Prague Circle.
SAUSSURE AND THE SIGN
Linguistics is the study of the mechanisms of language but Saussure breaks with a traditional concern with grammatical rules.
His approach is to study the structure of the elements of language:
Language is a system of interdependent terms in which the value of each term results solely from the simultaneous presence of the others.
(Saussure 1974: 114)
A traditional linguistics which studies the formal properties of a language (its lexicon, phonology, graphology) assumes that meaning is conveyed through correct application of the rules by users.
But for language users, the rules become an issue only when communication breaks down, and even then, language can remain effective communication long after rules have been bent or broken.
By studying the structure of the elements of language Saussure dispenses with the tie between meaning and the exercise of formal rules.
Instead he links meaning and linguistic structure through a concept of the sign in which the signified (the meaning) is only arbitrarily related to the signifier (the phonological or graphological form of the sign):
The arbitrary link between form and meaning is the radical centre of Saussurian linguistics:
The idea of ‘sister’ is not linked by an inner relationship to the succession of sounds s-o-r which serves as its signifier in French; that it could be represented equally well by just any other sequence is proved by the differences among languages and by the very existence of different languages.
(Saussure 1974: 63)
The effect is to focus on the systematic relationship between signifiers that is characteristic of language in general.
This focus is at a deeper level than that of grammatical rules that concern specific languages.
Although the link between signifier and signified is arbitrary, the relationships amongst signifiers and amongst signifieds are relationships of value:
even outside language all values are governed by the same paradoxical principle.
They are always composed: 1) of a dissimilar thing that can be exchanged for the thing of which the value is to be determined; and 2) of similar things that can be compared with the thing of which the value is to be determined.
(Saussure 1974: 115)
The conception of language that Saussure developed is that of a social phenomenon, realized not in the individual act of speaking, but ‘only by virtue of a sort of contract signed by the members of a community’(Saussure 1974: 14).
Although Saussure claims the arbitrary and differential qualities of language as ‘a priori’ they need not appear so for the user.
Indeed, the identification of meaning with the material form of language (words, sentences, speech) is a precondition of ordinary language use; to use language is to trust it as a tool that expresses meaning.
It is of course possible to use language in a premeditated and reflective way consciously to construct meaning.
This use of language is poetic and characterized by the intention being applied not only to content but also to its specific form.
An historical (diachronic) account of the form of language is rejected by Saussure because it implies a less than arbitrary relationship between signifier and signified.
He does however describe language as a form in a constant process of evolution that is not tied to corresponding changes in its meaning or vice versa.
But he denies any law of evolution; the regularity in synchronic linguistics is not a result of evolutionary continuity.
The structuralists adopted Saussure's conception of an analytical object, language, as structured in itself and not reducible to any external structures.
In their hands, structural anthropology and semiology took on the study of the structural form of meaningful systems.
But they did not stop at the analysis of the system of meanings, they used this analysis as a basis for recovering ‘hidden’ meanings — for interpreting what they were studying.
The structuralists looked at meaningful systems within their social context and analysed meaning as structured in a way analogous to language.
The common ancestry of the structuralists lies in the theoretical form they construe for the objects they analyse.
As we shall see, the object for Lévi-Strauss's anthropology and Barthes's semiology is a social form that can be analysed as a language (kinship systems, myth).
But for the later Barthes, for Foucault and for Derrida the object is constituted empirically in language but is treated as a system of signifieds — discourse.
The transformation of the object of study from the system of  signification to the process of discourse involves a critique of the sign and of structure.
It involves the transformation of an object that is meaningful but structured at the level of the signification to an object that is still meaningful but is also structured at the level of the signified.
STRUCTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Lévi-Strauss saw structuralism as playing the same role for the social sciences as nuclear physics had for the physical sciences.
What he means by structuralism is clearly rooted in structural linguistics and he carefully quotes Troubetzkoy to indicate the programme he will apply to anthropology:
First, structural linguistics shifts from the study of conscious linguistic phenomena to the study of their unconscious infrastructure; second it does not treat terms as independent entities, taking instead as its basis of analysis the relations between terms; third, it introduces the concept of system …; finally, structural linguistics aims at discovering general laws, either by induction ‘or…
by logical deduction, which would give them absolute character.’
(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 33; L-S quotes from Troubetzkoy's ‘La Phonologie Actuelle’, Paris 1933).
This programme does not seem so radical in terms of social philosophies to warrant Lévi-Strauss's optimism for its effects.
It is, however, the way he makes a connection between anthropology and linguistics that makes his programme unusual:
Like phonemes, kinship terms are elements of meaning; like phonemes, they acquire meaning only if they are integrated into systems.
(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 34)
What is strange about this is that phonemes are no more than elements of meaning but kinship terms also represent real relationships lived by people.
The type of formal analysis of meaning that Lévi-Strauss was proposing was very different from the common sense of ‘meaning’ available to participants in the social events being analysed.
Lévi-Strauss is not interested in what it means to be party to a maternal-uncle type of kinship relationship.
‘Meaning’ has a much more general significance and the search is for a universal meaning, one that crosses the boundaries of distinguishable human cultures or kinship groups.
What excites Lévi-Strauss about the possibilities of structuralist analysis is its potential for a formalized analysis of meaning.
The  formality of structural phonology lies in the relatively small number of oppositions between distinctive features (grave/acute, voiced/voiceless) that are sufficient to form the acoustic infrastructure of any known language (Wilden 1972: 7).
It proceeds not by attempting to describe the essence of units but by arranging the sound units according to a system of binary oppositions'.
Lévi-Strauss sought to demonstrate that similar oppositions operate in kinship and mythic systems enabling him to compare apparently unlike kinship systems and myths from different cultures and show the structural continuity of mythemes, and kin relationships, across what are, at first sight, very different cultures.
STRUCTURES OF ‘MEANING’
The structuralist is an active agent in the process of analysis, exercising not merely mechanical skills of applying a method, but also interpretive skills in constituting the object to be analysed; the terms, units, relations and structures.
This is not an aspect of ‘structuralism’ made clear by Lévi-Strauss although it is a consequence of one of the features of the method; the ‘shift from the study of conscious phenomena’to the study of their ‘unconscious infrastructure’(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 33 — quoted above).
What structuralism studies about cultural phenomena is something not available (or at least not manifestly available) to the consciousness of people participating in the phenomenon under study.
It needs the presence of the structuralist to interpret from the concrete, the abstract connections, continuities or ‘unconscious structures’:
If, as we believe to be the case, the unconscious activity of the mind consists in imposing forms upon content, and if these forms are fundamentally the same for all minds — ancient and modern, primitive and civilized
(as the study of the symbolic function, expressed in language, so strikingly indicates)— it is necessary and sufficient to grasp the unconscious structure underlying each institution and each custom, in order to obtain a principle of interpretation valid for other institutions and other customs, provided of course that the analysis is carried far enough.
(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 21)
I do not wish to reject Lévi-Strauss's ‘structuralist method’ but call into question the epistemological basis that can be claimed for it.
His importation of a structuralist method from linguistics creates a problem of what is to count as ‘cultural anthropology’.
What is it a study of and to what end?
The structuralism that Lévi-Strauss applies in cultural anthropology seems to be asking the question ‘what does it mean?’— a  very different problematic from that of structural linguistics.
But whose meaning, that of the structuralist or of the participants?
Or is it a universal meaning that is potentially available to all but in practice is available only to the structuralist?
Wilden sees structuralism as a metaphor of the discourse of science which provides the structure which defines meaning:
As a new metaphor of the discourse of science in our culture, structuralism confuses meaning — which concerns survival, with signification — the instrument of meaning….
Meaning — the goal — becomes bounded not by the structure of the context in which it occurs, but by the structure of ‘science’.
As a result, the methodology implicitly becomes an ontology.
(Wilden 1972: 11)
In the analysis of kinship systems Lévi-Strauss treats the kinship units (such as the terms of the avunculate) themselves as signs.
But here the relationship between signifier/signified is not arbitrary.
The point of the analysis is to discover an underlying meaning that makes sensible the apparently arbitrary relationship between kinship elements (or mythic elements) and reality.
This is a very different sort of analysis from structural linguistics that involves not simply exploring the mechanisms of the system but also ‘decoding’ its meaning.
Dan Sperber takes Lévi-Strauss to task for claiming that kinship systems should be regarded as a language with the circulation of women taking the place of the circulation of words:
The structure of a spoken language determines not who says what to whom, but what can be said at all in a given tongue, irrespective of who the interlocutors are.
A spoken language is a code which determines what messages are available for
(among other possible uses) circulation in the social network(s) to which the speakers belong.
By contradistinction, a marriage system is a network, whose structure determines which channels between social groups are open to the ‘circulation of women’.
(Sperber 1979: 23–4)
There is then a double confusion in the connection between linguistics and anthropology that Lévi-Strauss attempts:
1
linguistics may study language but it is not a study of meaning in language, rather of language that can be meaningful
2
kinship systems are not analogous to language in the sense that they are not meaningful systems through which messages or communications are exchanged.
MEANING AND CONTEXT
The study of myths, totemism or magic involves cultural phenomena that are signs and symbols for the participants but are not in themselves lived in quite the same way as kin relations.
However, what constitutes ‘meaning’ for structural anthropology is the discovery of that content of the unconscious human mind operating collectively that determines concrete manifestations of culture.
The discovery of general laws of structure is only the first step in an interpretive process.
Lévi-Strauss makes the final step in his analysis of the Oedipus myth like this:
we may now see what it means.
The myth has to do with the inability, for a culture which holds the belief that mankind is autochthonous…, to find a satisfactory transition between this theory and the knowledge that human beings are actually born from the union of man and woman.
(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 216)
For whom is this a level of meaning?
It seems unlikely to be a powerful statement of meaning for the participants in a cultural context that tells and hears the myth — the myth has its meaning in its content.
To the anthropologist however the myth provides a problem of meaning because in the context from which the myth is considered (i.e. anthropology/western ‘civilization’) the meaning is not obvious.
The context of anthropology is that of a discourse that attempts to generalize and encompass other discourses, such as those of myth-telling.
There is then an attempt to generalize and move towards a universal ‘myth’ that can stand for all the utterances of a similar type in their various discursive contexts.
The context of the discourse of anthropology provides constraints on the form of a statement that will be recognized as meaningful.
So, it is not sufficient merely to reduce all Oedipus myths to one, there has to be a retelling in a different form.
This form has two distinctive features for cultural anthropology (and perhaps all other sciences):
1
the articulation of a problem or problems
2
the expression of abstract and general relations.
These two features reduce the myth to the level of ‘theory’ as far as is possible — that is cultural anthropology removes the myth from the context of its telling and translates (decodes) it into an abstract theoretical language.
As we have seen with the Oedipus myth, the final move in revealing its meaning informs the anthropologist about features of the culture that are beyond the content of the myth.
The need in the  case of the Oedipus myth to resolve the contradiction between two pieces of knowledge that are in conflict can be comfortably taken as the signified that lies behind the significations that make up the various versions of the myth.
Myth-telling can be treated as one discourse and anthropology as another one.
Anthropological analysis need not be seen as the attempt to discover the truth about primitive societies, but instead as the attempt to ‘translate’(or transform) the utterances from one discursive context to another.
DISCOURSE AS THE STRUCTURE OF MEANING
Kinship terms are part of a language and operate as signs with signifiers and signifieds — usage of kinship terms indicates membership of a language group.
But Lévi-Strauss also claims the structure of actual kinship ties as a system of meaning:
What is generally called a ‘kinship system’ comprises two quite different orders of reality….
Thus along with what we propose to call the system of terminology
(which, strictly speaking, constitutes the vocabulary system), there is another system, both psychological and social in nature, which we shall call the system of attitudes.
(Lévi-Strauss 1968: 37)
There are two types of discourse referred to here as constituting the kinship system.
The first is the more formal and apparent and may be considered as a system of nomenclature for kinship relations and rules for its usage.
The second level of discourse is constituted less formally in social and psychological practices that facilitate living within the formal system, including ways of breaking the formal rules.
To give an example, incest may exist simply as a prohibition at the level of the formal system but at the practical level, breaches of the prohibition are explained, joked about or criticized.
In this way the two types of discourse provide a context of meaning for the participants such that kinship relations as practical action can be considered as meaningful.
The act of marriage or recognizing an uncle is both a symbolic act within the formal discourse and a practical act given meaning by the less formal level of discourse.
It is relatively easy to see myths as constituting a discourse that provides knowledge for members of a culture of the world around them.
But Lévi-Strauss is arguing that kinship systems serve a similar discursive role and that they are similarly constructed out of units of meaning.
The prohibition of incest can be found in the utterances within many kinship systems.
Lévi-Strauss explains its discursive role in this way:
The prohibition of incest is…the fundamental step because of which, by which, but above all in which, the transition from nature to culture is accomplished.
(Lévi-Strauss 1970: 24)
It is through the exchange of women in the alliance of marriage that culture and society are founded.
For Lévi-Strauss the incest prohibition is both a communication between human beings of the fact that they are no longer bound only by the rule of nature, and the first content of the rule of culture:
the incest prohibition expresses the transition from the natural tact of consanguinity to the cultural fact of alliance.
(Lévi-Strauss 1970: 30)
Lévi-Strauss considers language itself to be one field of communication and the system of exchange and alliance to be ‘the other field of communication’(Lévi-Strauss 1970: 496).
By comparing different meanings from different contexts he is able to find continuities between meanings and contexts.
In this way he is able to satisfy the desire in his own context, anthropology, to ‘understand’ what is being exchanged as meaningful in strange, alien, ‘primitive’contexts.
I have tried to suggest that what Lévi-Strauss is doing is a form of discourse analysis that both attempts to articulate the rules governing the formation of the type of discourse and interpret the ‘meanings’ of utterances within the particular discourse.
These meanings are analytically generated, constructed from outside the discursive contexts under analysis, that is they are not meanings as used by participants.
While the methods of structural linguistics seem to have some role to play in studying the structure of meaningful systems, they have nothing directly to offer the unravelling of meaning.
The latter is an interpretive task relying on a transformation of meaning from one context to another.
In effect Lévi-Strauss is making structuralism do more work than it is equipped for without considerable development.
But the unravelling of meaning is in practice the rationale for utilizing the structural method; the reduction to universal meanings makes satisfying and convincing the formal description of the structures of myths and kinship systems.
SEMIOLOGY AND MYTH
The work of Roland Barthes can be read in a similar way although both the style of his approach and the methods he uses are different.
For my  purposes here it is convenient to regard Barthes's work as having two phases; the first in which he is concerned with semiology, the second in which he is concerned with discourse.
In the semiological phase his work is inspired by the success of structural linguistics and he seizes upon the possibility of being able to offer an ordered analysis of meaning.
He turns his attention from the production of literary works to the production of ‘cultural artefacts’.
In the second phase the promise of semiology as a method of decoding significant structures is put aside in favour of an account of a discourse wherein meaning is elucidated by moving in and out of the contexts of utterances.
His attention returns to literature (if it had ever really left it) and to the role of the self in relation to discursive contexts.
In the first phase Barthes's approach has similarities to that of Lévi-Strauss: the concern to present methods, to be systematic, to draw ‘structuralism’ from structural linguistics.
But in his second phase the issues of systematicity and method become blurred and the connection with structural linguistics becomes vague.
His role as an interpreter of discursive structures becomes tacitly accepted and the earlier formalism recedes.
Barthes began the move towards formalism with his collection of essays entitled Mythologies (Barthes 1973) written between 1954 and 1956.
His aim was to reveal the ‘naturalness’ with which newspaper, art and common sense constantly dress up a reality which, even though it is the one we live in, is undoubtedly determined by history’(Barthes 1973: 11).
The first step in this revelation was the recognition that ‘myth is language’.
Just as words represent concrete things in the world and the relationship between words in an utterance refers to a relationship between concrete things, so cultural artefacts refer back to the history of culture.
The myths that Barthes refers to are contemporary and different from the myths that interest the anthropologist.
For example they are not necessarily linguistic utterances with beginnings and ends.
Actions and objects are treated as signs that in certain situations form meaningful structures — myths.
Their meaning can be unravelled by paying attention to the structure of signifying elements and interpreting from a cultural context constituted by history.
STRIPTEASE
In Barthes's analysis of ‘striptease’ for example, the cultural context invoked is that of France.
It is not merely striptease clubs in general that provide the context for interpretation, it is specifically ‘Parisian striptease’.
The style of analysis is to answer an unuttered question: ‘What is striptease, in what sense is it meaningful, what are the meanings it involves?’
The answer is not merely a description of the event but a  description of the relationship of signifying elements presented with their decoded meaning, thus:
Striptease…is based on a contradiction: Woman is desexualised at the very moment when she is stripped naked.
(Barthes 1973: 84)
The style has tremendous rhetorical power in that the analysis reveals the obverse of the obvious and yet it is treated as still obvious.
So, striptease is analysed as a statement that moves towards one thing (sex and evil) only to contradict this and move immediately away.
French striptease seems to stem from…a mystifying device which consists in inoculating the public with a touch of evil, the better to plunge it afterwards into a permanently immune Moral Good.
(Barthes 1973: 84)
As the body is laid bare of garments so it is covered with barriers to nudity such as‘exoticism’ in the form of furs, fans, feathers, etc.
Although the clothes and adornments shed through the striptease are signifiers of luxury, legend or romance, their erotic significance is actually separated from the woman:
The end of the striptease is then no longer to drag into the light a hidden depth, but to signify, through the shedding of an incongruous and artificial clothing, nakedness as a natural vesture of woman, which amounts in the end to regaining a perfectly chaste state of the flesh.
(Barthes 1973: 84 — 5)
The rhythmic dancing, the ritual gestures, the professionalism of the stripper all function to de-eroticize the process which for Barthes is a ‘meticulous exorcism of sex’(Barthes 1973: 86).
CONTRADICTORY MEANINGS
Barthes's accounts of striptease, and all the other cultural phenomena on which he writes in Mythologies , imply that these phenomena are meaningful and that there is a ‘true’ meaning to which his analysis aspires.
Often this seems to involve a contradiction of an accepted meaning (the striptease as non-erotic, the jet-man as having gone beyond speed, wrestling as more to do with Commedia dell'Arte than sport, etc.).
By ‘accepted meaning’ I am referring to one accepted by participants in the phenomena — it is clearly constituted for Barthes as an interpretation against which he is speaking.
For example Barthes's account of French amateur wrestling asserts that it is not a contest but  a spectacle and so the outcome (who wins) is not a significant point in the event.
In this example Barthes enlists the assistance of the public and the audience as vindicators of his interpretation:
The public is completely uninterested in knowing whether the contest is rigged or not, and rightly so.
(Barthes 1973: 15)
The spectator is not interested in the rise and fall of fortunes; he expects the transient image of certain passions.
(Barthes 1973: 16)
These are not the accounts given by spectators and it is difficult to imagine them offering such accounts.
But the power and the point of Barthes's account of wrestling, as a spectacle that re-enacts the battle of good over evil with grandiloquence and excess of gesture and act, is that this interpretation is contrary to an accepted one of wrestling as a sport in which competitors demonstrate skill and strength in their progress towards a victory.
The interpretation of wrestling that I treat here as ‘accepted’ is presented in Barthes's own utterance as an absent speech with which he is dissenting — without its existence there would be no need for his interpretation because the meaning of ‘wrestling’would not be an issue.
Barthes's use of spectator and public as interpreting agents is a rhetorical device, redolent of the style frequently used in political speeches (‘It is quite clear to any reasonable/sensible person that…’).
The effect of the rhetorical device on the reader is to ‘give the benefit of the doubt’ to the speaker.
Thus Barthes's account of wrestling does not seem so strange and unlikely as if it were merely his own and there were no alternative account against which his was implicitly juxtaposed.
This issue is of importance for two reasons: firstly, whose meaning is the analysis meant to elucidate?(a problem that arose with Lévi-Strauss); secondly, what is the analyst doing?
These questions were fairly easily answered with respect to Lévi-Strauss.
He clearly was engaged in the analysis of kinship and myth as an anthropologist.
This means that he asked his questions from an existing problematic; each question had a history of answers on which he was able to draw and contextualize his own.
The answers that his analysis might produce were not intended for the enlightenment of participants but for the enlightenment of anthropologists.
This for Lévi-Strauss is tied up with the business of ‘science’, which aims to discover truths that are universal and that can be seen to be a product of their method.
Now with Barthes the answers are not so obvious.
He offers no one problematic of questions or methods in which to ground his analysis.
Clearly some aspects of his approach borrow from literary criticism and his use of the term ‘myth’ suggests there is some borrowing from Lévi-Straussian anthropology.
There is also a connection with the psychoanalytical tradition of interpreting cultural phenomena and personal experiences and a trace of intellectual Marxism that is critical of an existing order and its received interpretation.
THE THEORY OF SEMIOLOGY
Barthes attempts to ground his work in theory in two texts; the article ‘Myth Today’ written after the analyses in Mythologies and published in English with them, and the later Elements of Semiology (Barthes 1969).
In the first of these Barthes creates his own problematic centred around his own idea of myth:
what must be firmly established at the start is that myth is a system of communication, that it is a message.
(Barthes 1973: 109)
Treating speech as the paradigm of communication he says that ‘myth is a type of speech’ but one not confirmed to the utterance of words:
Myth can be defined neither by its object nor by its material, for any material can arbitrarily be endowed with meaning: an arrow which is brought in order to signify a challenge is also a kind of speech.
(Barthes 1973: 110)
Just as words are endowed with meaning by the history of social usage so ‘myths’ gain their meaning; there are no natural or eternal meanings.
The process of myths as communication can be studied in a scientific way:
myth in fact belongs to the province of a general science, coextensive with linguistics, which is semiology.
(Barthes 1973: 111)
Barthes refers to the science of signs, postulated by Saussure as semiology, as a science of forms ‘since it studies significations apart from their content’(Barthes 1973: 111).
He also refers to research since Saussure that has not necessarily attempted to construct a semiology but has ‘referred to the problem of meaning: psycho-analysis, structuralism, eidetic psychology, some new types of literary criticism’(Barthes 1973: 111).
Having gestured to a history for his theory Barthes proceeds to describe the structure of myth by borrowing from the Saussurean distinction between signifier and signified as analytical components of the sign.
The system of myth is according to Barthes ‘a second-order semiological system’(Barthes 1973: 114).
What constitutes a sign in the first order, that of language, is merely a signifier in the second order, that of myth.
Barthes represents the relationship between myth and language as shown in Figure 1.
This introduction of a second order of system drastically alters what is being claimed for semiology.
The issue is one of meaning; Saussure's linguistics and his postulation of semiology is not concerned with meaning itself but with the rules by which meaning is conveyed within the sign.
Linguistic analysis may distinguish cases where meaning is not effectively conveyed but it remains unconcerned with what is meant by an utterance; structural linguistics is not an interpretive study.
Barthes's two order semiology suggests that there is a discontinuity between 2. signified (language) and II.
SIGNIFIED (myth) and it is the elucidation of the latter that his analysis aims at.
The first order of meaning is available to participants but the second order of signification is a ‘hidden’ level of meaning in that it is not readily available to participants (who might believe striptease to be erotic) and needs to be generated by an analyst who knows that it is there and so looks for it.
The move that Barthes makes to a second order signification has important methodological implications.
The second order has to be constructed interpretively while the first order of signification can be constructed on the criterion of meaningful/non-meaningful.
If meaning can be derived by participants in the communication then there must be a significatory system operating and it can be analysed at the level of the first order regardless of what the meaning is.
But the second order depends on the content of meaning for its existence to be recognized.
The second order signification system opens up the possibility of an  endless layer of significatory systems each aspiring to a larger context from which meaningfulness is derived.
Each level has to be constructed interpretively so that the distinctions between levels cannot be systematically articulated.
Finally, after the first order system, the unit on which analysis is based ceases to be a material unit present to the senses (as words, seen or heard) but becomes an ideal, abstract unit created within the mind of the interpretive analyst.
These problems were not strange to the Prague School, who were working on the semiotics of art about twenty years before Barthes.
Mukarovsky states that:
The artifact, thus, functions merely as an external signifier…for which in the collective consciousness there is a corresponding signification
(often labelled ‘aesthetic object’) given by what is common to subjective states of mind aroused in individuals of any particular community by the artifact.
(Mukarovsky 1977: 4)
The ‘collective consciousness’ here becomes a repository for the rules of signification and the signifieds of signs and is connected to Saussure's idea of ‘langue’.
There are of course endless problems for the analyst who wishes to use the concept of the collective consciousness but it does at least involve an attempt to locate the basis of meaning in a social context.
It has the effect too of keeping to the forefront the meanings recognized by participants.
Prague School semiotics deals with signs as first order systems and takes as its aim the analysis of signs and their relations as they are available to participants.
In so far as meaning is a problem for semiotics it is not a question of discovering ‘hidden meanings’ but one of the structure of signifiers that communicate a meaning accepted by participants.
This neither has to be demonstrated nor theorized because meaning for semiotics is not the issue, it is the structure of signifiers that is under scrutiny.
The form in which meaning is dealt with is that of conventional meanings.
Eco says that ‘Semiotics is mainly concerned with signs as social forces’(Eco 1977: 65) which indicates that it is the mechanics of signs that his (and Pierce's) semiotics describes.
Eco has little to say about meaning but is aware of some of the problems of pursuing it:
Every attempt to establish what the referent of a sign is forces us to define the referent in terms of an abstract entity which moreover is only a cultural convention.
(Eco 1977: 66)
Following Pierce, Eco recognizes the problem of ‘unlimited semiosis’, that is that every ‘meaning’ proposed for a representation is itself a representation that has a meaning, etc., in infinite regression.
Unlike Lévi-Strauss or Barthes, semioticians like Eco avoid attempting to interrupt the chain of meaning to discover the universal or hidden meaning.
In the Elements of Semiology , Barthes develops his theory of a second order system of semiosis using Hjelmslev's (1953) distinction between connotation and denotation.
He also introduces the idea of a second version of this two-level system of signification in which:
the first system becomes, not the plane of expression, as in connotation but the plane of content, or signified, of the second system.
(Barthes 1969: 90)
This is the system of signification that he refers to as ‘metalanguage’ and for Barthes, semiology is a metalinguistic description of ordinary language.
Metalinguistics investigates and reveals a hidden (connotative) level of meaning whose coherence is independent of the first (denotative) level.
Barthes's distinction between language and metalanguage depends on a clear distinction between denotative and connotative levels of meaning and yet it is difficult to sustain these as independent categories.
Their relation is far closer than the arbitrary link between signifier and signified so that in some contexts (irony or double entendre for example) connotative meanings are part and parcel of the denoted meaning.
It is arguable that the theoretical trappings of semiology have nothing to do with the interpretations of striptease and wrestling.
Despite creating a theory with a series of levels of semiosis it fails to support the substantive analyses in Mythologies where Barthes's examples show that it is not merely the formal structure of signification that he is interested in.
He wishes to interpret substantive cases and find out what they mean in relation to their social context.
However, from a sociological perspective there are a number of gaps in Barthes's analyses, both at the substantive and theoretical levels.
Firstly, there is no discussion of the link between ‘meaning’ and its social context and, secondly, there is no discussion of the theoretical status of power, ideology or history.
The effect Barthes's substantive analyses have on their readers seems to be at the level of a reinterpretation of phenomena offering a new, plausible meaning.
The plausibility stems from the implicit allusion to ideology; there are historical forces at work in human culture that bring about the obfuscation of meanings that are then hidden.
The reader responds to another example of the truth  emerging as the ‘cloud of ideology’ is dispelled.
The very fact that Barthes does not present his work in terms of a theory of ideology means that the interpretive basis on which he is operating can be withheld from the reader.
But what remains important about Barthes's substantive work is that he points to cultural phenomena in the everyday realm that are (or were) regarded as insignificant — they are, he reveals, laden with meaning and social and political significance.
This is in itself a more political task than that proposed by semiological analysis.
SIGNS AND DISCOURSE
Up to this point the structuralism of Lévi-Strauss and Barthes has been characterized by a formal interest in the structure of signification which has its clear roots in structural linguistics.
I have argued that in spite of the formalism of diagrams, binary opposites, levels and meta-levels, structuralism has really been about a mode of interpretation of aspects of culture.
The concept of structure allows cultural phenomena to be described in a (relatively) context independent way so that general instances can be analysed.
The result is to address the issue of the social role of the signifying system; what is the function of the avunculate kinship relation, the Oedipus myth, the Parisian striptease?
This functionalist, teleological aim is inappropriate for the systematic analysis borrowed from structural linguistics.
But in questioning the way that meanings are structured in social contexts, Lévi-Strauss and Barthes have created a new object for sociological analysis — discourse.
The early structuralists analyse relations between larger elements of meaning than is entertained in structural linguistics.
These elements are constructed from elements in a first order system (usually language) with its own structural properties.
But in the second order system they take on a different set of structural features.
In kinship relations such as the avunculate the first order elements are the family relationship terms of father, uncle, mother, son, nephew.
But at the second order the element of maternal uncle/nephew operates within a different structure.
With wrestling, the ‘opponents’ are not simply themselves but taking on the parts of ‘good’and ‘evil’in a ritual that has a context much larger than the particular match.
In borrowing from structural linguistics the early structuralists took on the task of analysing signs and systems of signification.
But in moving to a second order analysis they looked at the relations between groups of signs in discursive systems.
I will expand on what I mean by discourse in Chapter 10 but here it is sufficient to say that ‘discourse’ refers to the structured features of cultural processes when groups of signs become  signifying elements in themselves.
I have pointed out that the early structuralists treated the discursive elements in their analysis as ‘natural’, as empirically given.
But the interpretations have actually constructed the elements, albeit with some empirical evidence, and a different interpretation may yield different elements and a different type of structure.
In Barthes's later work this plurality of structures and elements becomes a strength of the analysis.
INTERPRETING TEXT
The text is a ‘galaxy of signifiers, not a structure of signifieds’(Barthes 1975: 5) to be approached by the operation of interpretation:
To interpret a text is not to give it a
(more or less justified, more or less free) meaning, but on the contrary to appreciate what plural constitutes it.
(Barthes 1975: 5)
The search for plurality both evaluates the text and yet leaves it intact so that it can yield more possibilities.
S/Z deals with a specific text, Balzac's Sarrasine .
It is however the interaction of ‘texts’ that is the subject of Barthes's book.
Firstly, the text is plural in itself with different sub-texts, and secondly, the reader brings to the text a plurality of texts.
Barthes approaches the ‘tutor text’(Balzac's story,Sarrasine ) and breaks it into fragments which he calls ‘lexias’.
He, literally, interrupts the tutor text to explore the codes working within it.
When he refers to the ‘discourse’ Barthes seems to be evoking the flowing character of the text, suggesting its dynamic, alive nature rather than its stolid, object nature as a text (e.g. Barthes 1975: 44, 51, 58, 178, etc.).
When the text has a reader it ceases to be a mere object and takes on anthropomorphic form; it has a voice or voices (the ‘codes’), it creates its own history (the history of the already-read content), it ‘plays’, ‘creates’, ‘lies’, etc.
The ‘discourse’, then, is the active intertextuality of the texts that occur between reader and tutor text.
Barthes develops an idea of discourse that is evocative of the text as something being read, or being written to be read.
While the text may be mere words on a page the discourse takes on a deeper and more determinative role.
The author has followed a form, that of the narrative, which is a form not of words but of discourse.
It has a history that limits what the characters and the author can do with words.
Although Barthes retains the semiological jargon of ‘codes’ from his earlier work, they serve a different function in the analysis in S/Z .
In the earlier work the analysis of semiological codes led to the discovery of  hidden meaning in the cultural creations of literature, advertising, theatre, sport, etc.
In S/Z the codes are more like ways of speaking that together make up the discourse.
They do not necessarily reveal hidden meanings but do reveal the structured nature of the discourse and its constraints on author and characters — and reader.
Barthes finds five codes operating in the story of Sarrasine: the hermeneutic, semiotic, symbolic, proairetic and cultural codes.
Where a lexia is indicated by Barthes to be functioning within one of these codes it is making a reference beyond its own immediate confines.
That is, the word or words of the lexia are doing more than giving up their meaning as words.
For example, the title of the story, ‘Sarrasine’, is, according to Barthes, operating in both the hermeneutic and semiotic codes.
The title raises a question of what Sarrasine might be: a noun, a name, a thing, a man, a woman?
The question is to be answered later in the story; the title creates an enigma that is to be solved.
The hermeneutic code raises questions, delays their answers and leads to solutions and as such structures in some measure the succeeding narrative.
‘Sarrasine, as a title also works in the semiotic code because in French the structure of the word is feminine — the semiotic reference is to femininity.
The title is, as the story reveals, the name of the principal character who is a man.
Femininity
(connoted) is a signifier which will occur in several places in the text; it is a shifting element which can combine with other similar elements to create characters, ambiances, shapes and symbols.
(Barthes 1975: 17)
Barthes's five codes work both within the text and without it; they refer forward and backward within the text joining parts that are discontiguous.
They also refer outside the text to the cultural and symbolic codes that the reader (Balzac's, if not Barthes's) might be expected to know.
There was in Elements of Semiology and even in Mythologies the promise of a ‘scientific’ method of analysing meaning by developing the methods of linguistics and semiology.
In S/Z there is no such promise and in its place is an attempt to show that texts are structured beyond their structure as language.
As Barthes wrote in 1974, four years after the original publication of S/Z :
I no longer believe — nor do I desire — that Semiology should be a simple science, a positive science, and this for a primordial reason: it is the responsibility of semiology…to question its own discourse…finally, science knows no site of security, and in this it must acknowledge itself as writing .
(Barthes 1988: 8)
By proposing discourse as the object of analysis, Barthes shows that language, when it is used in certain ways (in this instance a story), has levels of structure that operate beyond the level of structural linguistics or even semiology.
THE LIMITS OF STRUCTURALISM
I have taken a particular reading of the work of both Lévi-Strauss and Barthes that emphasizes the influence of structuralist linguistics but points to the progression of these writers' ‘structuralism’ away from linguistic analysis.
This is a result of their field of interest not being in language as such but in cultural forms (myths, literature, etc.).
The relationship between meaning and structure is different for language and discourse.
It is the structure of language that creates meaning — analysis can work back from a recognizably meaningful form to discover its structure.
The structure of discourse is created by the relationship of meanings in utterances.
The relations that constitute the structure exist in the exchange of meanings; their creation, dispersal and variance.
The analysis of discourse cannot then be agnostic about meaning in quite the same way as can linguistics.
Early structuralism was attractive because of its potential for analysis of cultural forms without reliance on a pregiven set of cultural values.
The functionalist tradition of anthropology had interpreted the culture of ‘primitive’ societies in accord with a model taken from the anthropologist's own, ‘civilized’, society.
The presumption was that there were certain universals of social organization, functions that could be recognized in a variety of cultural forms; myths, kinship orders, etc.
The tradition of literary criticism had developed with a comparable aesthetic presumption.
The good books were accepted as good (because they endured, because they were readable and re-readable).
The problem was to explain why.
The structuralist work of Lévi-Strauss and Barthes interrupted these traditions, raising questions about their presumptions and, most importantly, demonstrating a different way of doing anthropology or cultural criticism.
The eventual acceptance of Lévi-Strauss and Barthes by their respective disciplines indicates the value orientations that made their interpretation possible.
Lévi-Strauss accepted the traditional role of anthropology to ‘explain' the differences of alien cultures in ways that make them recognisable as the same ‘underneath’.
Barthes managed to leave the great works of literature intact.
Having killed off the author and dragged all manner of cultural forms into the debate he finally reaffirms the text and its readability.
What then were the limits of early structuralism?
Firstly, there is a tyranny of the signifier; the over-emphasis of the relation of signifier to the signified.
Signs are to be seen everywhere and they all need to be decoded.
To read Barthes's Mythologies is to make going on the London Underground an agonizing assault of messages begging to be decoded; advertisements and dress styles proclaim loudly while faces remain blank and meaningless.
What is oppressive about the emphasis on the sign as a signifier is that human action and the operation of power are overlooked.
The second limit is the essentialism of the notion of ‘structure’(Boudon 1971: 136).
There is an implication that there is one original structure; the one that endows the set of specific signifiers with their meaning.
What constitute the elements of a structure, its units, never seems to be a problem for the structuralists because they are taken as an empirical property of the medium of signification (the text).
The fact that the structure revealed enables analysis to proceed is taken as sufficient evidence of the right elements having been extracted.
Structure becomes a given for analysis and is treated as an essential feature of the object being analysed.
There is a third limit to early structuralism and that is its failure to deal with the historicity of structures.
There is little or no sense of diachrony or process in the work of Barthes or Lévi-Strauss.
Both were escaping from an historicist notion of evolutionary development, traditional to their disciplines.
For Lévi-Strauss the search for universal structures meant that the issue of functional development could be put aside.
With Barthes the situation is more complex.
The politically oriented, even Marxist basis, of his critical and ironic interpretation is obscured and scientized by the structuralist conceptualisation of method.
It is as if he is most careful to avoid reference to ideology because that would imply a determinacy that his analysis would have to confront.
These three limits to structuralism are not the marks of failure.
It is ironically at the points at which Lévi-Strauss and Barthes transgress ‘structuralism’ that their work is most successful; when they produce inspired accounts of the hidden meanings of cultural forms that have been taken for granted.