

GIBBS GOSSIP
WISH YOU WERE HERE
GARTH GIBBS
 HUMORIST Dave Barry has just published a book which anyone thinking of taking their holidays in America might want to read.
Among the tips for tourists in Dave Barry's Only Travel Guide You'll Ever Need, are:
NEW YORK CITY — Follow these common sense safety rules:
1.
Always walk at  at least 30 miles per hour;
2.
Always keep your money in a safe place, such as Switzerland:
3.
Never make eye contact.
This is asking to be mugged.
In the New York court system, a mugger is automatically declared not guilty if the defense can prove the victim has a history of making eye contact.
CALIFORNIA —‘The Nation's Most Populous State,’ with enough uniformed parking wardens in Los Angeles alone to conquer Eastern Europe.
FLORIDA — The major state industries are tourism, bingo and obtaining senior citizen discounts.
The largest city is Miami (official tourist slogan: ‘Maybe you won't get shot’).
Name that buffoon
THEY'RE big names now but even superstars have had to survive stinging snubs on their way to success.
Here is a collection of their rebuffs.
ANNETTE BENING: ‘I was up for the part of a prostitute in Dangerous  Liaisons,the one whose backside John Malkovich uses to write a letter.
I didn't get the role but it's hard to be bitter when it's your bum that didn't get the part.’
TOM SELLECK: ‘Years ago, when I was just barely getting by, I went on The Dating Game a couple of times.
I was always Bachelor No.2 and I was never picked for a date.’
CLINT EASTWOOD: ‘I wanted to have a career as a singer too.
I cut four sides for Gothic Records.
They sold about six copies each.’
A shooting star
EVEN the sophisticated Hollywood audience at the American Cinematheque tribute to Sean Connery, held at the Beverly Hilton Hotel last weekend, were blushing a bit as they watched the raunchy video offerings from Dame Edna and Richard Harris.
Then came this from Billy Connolly:
‘Before Sean Connery, Scotland was a dreary, windswept place populated by gray Presbyterians with haemorrhoids, but when he arrived there was, at last, a Scottish film star doing things that Scottish men love to do — shooting people and shagging the survivors.’
Not all plain sailing
THE gales of laughter that swept through the audience at a private screening of the epic, Christopher Columbus The Discovery, this week herald a rough voyage for the costly £30 million saga due to open here in September.
It stars Marlon Brando, Tom Selleck and the gorgeous Catherine Zeta Jones.
Unknown Greek actor George Corraface, manfully battles with lines like ‘She's a fine vessel — a little top heavy and narrow in the beam’…and with an arched look at his mistress (that's our Catherine): ‘Not unlike someone else I know.’
Boney's tiny part
NAPOLEON Bonaparte's penis is in a velvet-lined box under lock and key in New York.
It was removed after his death and since then has often changed hands.
In 1972 it failed to reach reserve price when it came under the hammer at auction.
Now it is owned by Manhattan surgeon Dr John K. Lattimer, who paid a huge sum for the tiny relic.
The Napoleonic Society of America begged to snap it, but he refused saying: ‘I want it handled with dignity.’
Bong!
Visitors caught lighting up in the space age reception area at ITN's spanking new London HQ are told in no uncertain terms that smoking is NOT allowed.
Unfortunately for smokers neither are no smoking signs.
‘They would spoil the decor’, explained an official.
A MEDICAL newsletter reports how a lawyer and a doctor were having a drink together at their country club, when the medic complained:
‘I have a problem.
Club members ask me all kinds of health questions.
This hurts my practice.
What can I do?.’
‘Just send them a bill,’ replied the lawyer — and two days later the doctor got a bill from him.
Mike's joke goes up in smoke…
Have you heard the one about the EastEnders stars who are forced to provide their own fags for smoking scenes?
It's no joke, according to Mike Read who plays Frank Butcher in the Albert Square soap.
He has been telling golfing cronies in Ireland that the Beeb are reduced to such drastic economies because they are coughing up £10 million a year on Eldorado.
But an EastEnders spokesman reckons its a load of blarney: ‘He must have said it as a joke.
Don't forget he started out as one of The Comedians…’
Oh lord!
Look out Linley
LORD LINLEY had better watch out!
His prospective father-in-law, Viscount Petersham, used to work as a stable lad and was famous for bare fist fighting coal workers on Friday evenings for the week's wage packet.
But that was a long time ago when he lived on his father's stud farm in Ireland.
Now he is more calmly domiciled in Wiltshire to have a luxury apartment in Monte Carlo.
His wealth was last estimated at £100 million.
GRAFFITI
UNDER ‘Chef's Special’ in a Bath restaurant, someone has scribbled: ‘Perhaps he is, his food isn't.’
SPOTTED in the West End, a begging notice stating: ‘Don't embarrass yourself by leaving less than a pound.’
SEEN on a Job Centre wall: ‘Try living in the past — it's much cheaper.’
GARDENING
FIELD NOTE
CHARLES LYTE /XENIA FIELD
FLOWERING grasses in the garden and the seed heads of bulbous plants, like the ornamental onions (Allium), are ready to be cut and dried for winter flower arrangements.
PROP OF THE FLOPS
CHARLES LYTE
PROP up a bed of floppy flowers with steel in plastic Link-Stakes, which link to follow the contours of the plants.
Buy a set of 12, 18-in stakes, with 7-in arms, and 24, 30-in stakes, with 15-in arms for £25.95, including p&p and VAT.
Cheques or POs to: Daily Mirror Link-Stakes Offer, JEM House, Little Mead, Cranleigh, Surrey, GU6 8ND.
Phone credit card orders: 0483 268888.
Allow 28 days.
Toil for the tops in soil
CHARLES LYTE
TURNING an allotment over to making it 100 per cent organic needs lots of toil with the soil.
The quick way is not to use any artificial fertilisers, chemical sprays or dusts.
But the plot fertility would become exhausted and crops would be poorer.
So work at the digging.
First dig out all the perennial weeds.
Then dig in as much organic material as possible.
To start, you will have to rely on manure, but supplement this with your home-made compost.
A compost container is a priority.
A large wooden bin with slatted sides and a removable front is easy to make from timber.
Also have a smaller, well-insulated compost-maker, like a Hotterotter, which generates high heats and produces good compost quickly, especially for mulching.
For the latest in organic gardening join the Henry Doubleday Research Association at the National Centre for Organic Gardening, Ryton-on-Dunsmore, Coventry, CV8 3LG.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
HOPE'S ON THE CARDS
DAVID KERR /LYNN DALY
MIRROR readers who lost thousands of pounds when a holiday company went bust may get some money back.
Holidaymakers who paid by Access or Visa can claim a refund after Land Travel/ Friendly Holidays of Bath crashed on Friday with no assets or insurance.
Credit card customers are protected under section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act.
Each bank has its own rules, but NatWest and Midland say they will be ‘sympathetic’.
All claims should be made in writing, accompanied by copies of receipts.
POWER UP!
SPECIAL
YOU'VE GOT TO HAND IT TO 'EM!
DAVID HANCOCK
IF YOU go down to the beach today you're sure of a big surprise.
For every trendy teenager, who last year could be seen lying comatose in the sun listening to a personal stereo, has suddenly become animated.
But today's beach games aren't quite the volleyball and handball that once kept a generation fit.
Instead, they are more likely to have names like Sonic The Hedgehog, Super Mario Land or Moto X Maniacs and involve little more exercise than pressing buttons.
Hand-held video games are big news this summer for the fashion-conscious.
While Europe is in the grip of the tightest recession for 50 years, games machines like Nintendo's Game Boy, Sega's Game Gear and the Atari Lynx are barely being produced fast enough to keep up with demand.
Sexy
Sega boss Nick Alexander, who hopes to sell at least 275,000 Game Gears this year in the UK, says: ‘I think that hand-helds are really fashion items.
They're a sexy product, they're hot.’
Nintendo are way ahead with the Game Boy as far as sales figures are concerned.
They expect to sell 800,000 of their £70 Game Boys in Britain alone this year.
And the odds are the German on the sun lounger will have marked his spot early in the morning with a Game Boy and a couple of games cartridges.
Because Germany has gone video games mad snapping up nearly three million Game Boys already and with sales increasing rapidly.
Nintendo's machines hit British shops in autumn 1990 but it was last Christmas, when it outsold everything else in sight and picked up the prestigious Toy Of The Year award, that things really took off.
Says a company spokesman: ‘The Game Boy success story is staggering, with 25 million machines sold worldwide by the end of last year.
‘It has trounced the opposition because it is truly portable, with a long battery life, and will fit into your pocket.
There's nothing worse than being on the beach half way through a game when the batteries pack up.’
The third machine on sale in Britain is the Lynx, made by Atari, who started the whole video games phenomenon more than a decade ago.
Technically superior to the others, it was originally also much bigger at 270mm long — a handful rather than a hand-held.
The new slimline Lynx 2 is about the same size as the Game Gear.
Fashion
Around 300,000 Lynx are expected to be sold in the UK this year, bringing the number of owners up to 500,000.
But Atari don't like their machine to be seen as a fashion accessory.
Says a spokesman: ‘Competitors are claiming hand-helds are now a part of fashion, but we don't see it like that.
The Lynx is an entertainment system.
It's called Lynx because up to eight of the machines can be linked so you can play with friends.
Super-hip fashion accessory or just a way of keeping the kids out of the amusement arcades?
Either way, a hand-held video game is a must this summer — if you don't want sand kicked in your face.
POWER!
UP SPECIAL
WIN GAMES GALORE
DAVID HANCOCK
YOU'VE read all about Hand Held computer games.
Now here's your chance to win some of the best on the market.
WE'VE joined up with Entertainment World Corp Ltd to give away TEN Gamegear, TEN Gameboys and TEN Atari Lynx Batman Returns to give away in this super competition.
THE Sega Game Gear is worth £99.99 and with its colour graphics screen is the most fashionable hand-held around.
THE Nintendo Game Boy is worth £69.99 and recently won the Toy of the Year Award.
The Lynx 2 is worth £99.99 and comes complete with a Batman Returns cart guaranteed to keep you occupied for hours on end.
ENTERTAINMENT World run one of the biggest computer games clubs in the country.
The club Console Countdown offers such benefits as  up to 10 per cent discount on hardware, 20 per cent discount on all games, a 50-page free catalogue and updates on all the latest launches and releases.
TO enter this super contest just answer our question and state which Hand-held you would like to win.
Then send your entries on a postcard along with your name and address to: Computer Games Contest, Daily Mirror, E.W.C. Ltd, High Street, Ramsgate, Kent, CT11 9RH.
Closing date for this contest is August 15.
QUESTION: Who makes Game Gear?
You may receive promotional offers after entering this contest.
BEST OF THE REST
LYNX £99.99, Atari
THE most superior hand-held technically, with a 16-bit graphics engine.
Got off to a bad start because of its high price and lack of games.
Now, for £99.99 you get the machine plus the cart Batman Returns.
Aimed at the dedicated games player with crisp graphics and rapid scaling, it's let down by short battery life.
Lynx fans include: Michael J. Fox, Axl Rose, Tom Cruise, Bros.
Poolside rating: * * * * 
LYNX MAN: Cruise
CHEAP 'N' CHEERFUL
GAME BOY £69.99, Nintendo THIS far outsells the rest, and yet technically is the worst of the hand-helds.
It runs an eight-bit 6502 chip, a black and white screen that is not the easiest to see, the battery lasts 24 hours, and it has stereo sound.
But it is cheaper than the other machines and the games are excellent.
Fans include Jonathan Ross, Princes William and Harry and David Bowie.
Poolside rating: * * * 
FAN: Jonathan
THE LIMIT
FERRIED TO FAME
RICK SKY
SOPHIE B. HAWKINS landed her first big break after she was sacked by pop rival Bryan Ferry.
The sexy American singer, at No 19 with Damn I Wish I Was Your Lover, was hired by former Roxy Music star Ferry as a percussionist for a world tour.
But she says: ‘After two months of rehearsing he fired me.
‘I was devastated because I really needed the job.
I cried my eyes out for a night then started  writing my own songs.
‘If Bryan hadn't fired me, I'd probably not be in the charts now.’
DRUMMED OUT: Sophie
MARILLION singer Steve Hogarth was left red-faced when a fan tried to rip his trousers off during a sell-out show.
Steve, 30, was performing at the National Auditorium in Mexico when a female fan jumped on stage and attacked him.
Revealed the star, at No 33 with No One Can: ‘I couldn't believe it.
This girl ripped my shirt off and then went for my trousers.
It took four bouncers to get her off me.’
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OFF LIMITS
THE LIMIT has been congratulated in the official PRINCE fanzine CONTROVERSY for its coverage of his after-show party at the London night-club, Tramp…
ERASURE's ANDY BELL sang Ave Maria at the wedding of his friend Steev of NITZER EBB…
SMART E'S star Tom Orton is hoping his new-found fame will help get him a girl-friend…
SHARON STONE fantasises about stripping naked in Madison Square Garden…
UGLY KID JOE nearly called themselves SWAT — Suburban White Alcoholic Trash.
Bowie in sitcom
TV ROLE IS HIS DREAM
DAVID BOWIE is to play it for laughs alongside funnyman Griff Rhys Jones in a new £1.5 million telly show.
The singer will star as a hot-dog salesman in Full Stretch, a new pop/comedy series now being secretly filmed in London.
The six hour-long episodes are from the pens of TV writers Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais, whose string of top-rated comedies include Porridge and Auf Wiedersehen Pet.
Reveals an insider: ‘The series is based around a failed football star who sets up a celebrity limo service.
‘David Bowie plays a hot-dog salesman who achieves his dream of performing on stage.’
Bowie has already made a name for himself as an actor in a string of top movies, including The Hunger and The Man Who Fell To Earth, but this is the TV break he has been waiting for.
The show is being made by Meridian TV who are taking over from TVS.
It is due to reach our screens early next year.
BIG BREAK: Bowie
MONSTER RAVE TICKETS
CARRY on raving with another great Limit competition.
We've teamed up with XL Records to give away 25 pairs of tickets to the massive Vision rave at Popham Airfield, near Winchester, Hants.
The line-up includes top bands Prodigy, SL2 and Nu-Matic and a string of star DJs.
The all-night bash on August 29 will have three separate arenas, and the main stage, inside Europe's largest circus tent, will feature the original film set from Blade Runner.
The 25 lucky winners in our £1,500 competition will also receive a copy of XL Records' new three-album compilation set.
To enter, simply answer this question: Who had a recent smash hit with Ravin' I'm Ravin'?
Phone your answer on 0891 525 512 by midnight, Wednesday, August 5, leaving your name, address and day-time phone number.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
Your call should cost around the price of a first-class stamp.
JAMES have been forced to scrap plans to release a live album from their recent Alton Towers gig.
The band shelled out £10,000 hiring a mobile recording studio to capture the event — only to find afterwards that gremlins had got into the tapes and ruined the sound quality.
‘The guys are bitterly disappointed,’ says a spokesman.
PAP SNAP
KRIS Kross' Chris Kelly demonstrates to Chris Smith the pitfalls of wearing clothes back to front…his trousers keep falling down.
£10,000 FIZZ OF CYNTHIA'S GOLDEN DAY
JAN DISLEY
HAPPY Cynthia Haslam was wearing a champagne smile yesterday after going for gold — and scooping a £10,000 Mirror jackpot.
The 49-year-old health care manager landed her 24-carat win in our Gold Game.
Now top of her shopping list is a brand new K-reg car.
‘It's absolutely fantastic,’ Cynthia said in Chesterfield, Derbyshire.
‘I've always wanted my own car and I'm thrilled to bits.
It's simply unbelievable.’
Husband Pete, 50, spotted her lucky number 11-18-07-61 in last Thursday's game.
‘He raced to find me,’ she said.
‘We're both delighted.’
Today's game — Page 21
POWER UP!
WIN 30 TOP KITS
HERE'S another chance to win some of the best hand-helds around.
We've joined up with Entertainment World Corp Ltd to give away TEN Game Gear, TEN Game Boys and TEN Atari Lynx with the Batman Returns game in this super competition.
The Sega Game Gear is worth £99.99.
And with its colour graphics screen is the most wanted hand-held machine you can get.
The Nintendo Game Boy is worth £69.99 and recently won the Toy of the Year Award.
Atari Lynx 2 worth £99.99 comes complete with a Batman Returns game guaranteed to keep you occupied for hours.
Entertainment World run one of the biggest computer games clubs.
To enter this super contest simply answer the following question and state which hand-held you would like to win.
Then send your entries on a postcard along with your name and address to: Computer Games Contest, Daily Mirror, E.W.C. Ltd, High Street, Ramsgate, Kent, CT11 9RH.
Closing date for this contest is August 15.
QUESTION: Who makes the Game Gear?
YOU may receive other promotional offers as a result of entering this contest.
PUBLIC OPINION
IT lifted my sorrow when I saw that the Mirror finally shamed the blundering DSS into paying a disabled man's benefit increase after a nine-month delay.
I had been through the same sort of trouble on behalf of my husband, applying for full attendance allowance on March 3.
I rang Blackpool and Birmingham many times without result.
Then my husband died in July at the age of 82.
I had also asked for a chair-lift and a motorised wheelchair, which have not arrived.
It's too late now.
If I had let him go to hospital the cost to the country would have been about £500 a week.
So I can't understand why they are not paying.
You shouldn't have to put up with all this at a time of such sadness.
—.
AMBULANCE service cuts must stop.
My grandmother was taken ill with a burst ulcer and an ambulance was called for her at 10.45, but it did not arrive for two and a half hours.
How can they reduce this service?—
IN nearly every town I visit I see buildings with the sign: To let, Modern Offices.
The skills being wasted on unwanted buildings should be used to prop up houses?—.
HOW CAN top policewoman Alison Halford get a huge pay-out while the other services are so badly treated.
My married son has spent 13 years in the RAF.
Now Government cuts mean he will be released with £5,000 and some qualifications.
But at 30, he will be jobless and homeless, with a family to provide for.
—.
LION LENNIE
I HAD to cry when I saw that blind singer Lennie Peters is fighting cancer.
I have such wonderful memories of his kindness.
I went to see his show in Torquay with relatives who have a disabled daughter.
The joy on her face when he sang our request for her was incredible.
He then met her afterwards and signed a record for her.
Thanks Lennie.
—.
Mellor's smoochie tunes
WHEN bonking minister David Mellor appeared on Desert Island Discs I was surprised at his choice of records.
More appropriate, perhaps, would have been: Bewitched, I Love To Love, Magic Moments, A Fine Romance, I Just Called To Say I Love You, Hello Hello!
Who's Your Lady Friend?,
Who's Sorry Now, and What Can I Say Dear After I Say I'm Sorry?.
SWINGEING 90's
I CAN'T understand why we aren't all better off.
Why can't we all afford our own homes, visit the dentists for treatment and change our cars, as we used to do in the Sixties?
Then, we were plagued with union disruption of industry, the nationalised industries lost millions and inflation was in double figures.
The Tories changed all that.
The former nationalised industries are now making vast profits, the unions have been silenced, inflation is down to four per cent and we don't have the crippling defence burden caused by keeping the USSR at bay.
So what's happened?—.
THE Poll Tax administration bandits are so quick off the mark we should let them handle care allowances and benefit claims.
They might do some good then.
—.
Sophie B. smart
STUNNING pop singer Sophie B. Hawkins was upset when she was given the thumbs down to appearing in a white sumo-style nappy in her new video.
How about doing something really unusual instead — like appearing in a clean feminine dress with well-brushed hair?
It might catch on.
—.
A READER asked what sort of heroes we are producing because Nigel Mansell and Nick Faldo had been pictured crying.
It's no crime so carry on crying and winning lads..
Heading for a fall
One is not amused by the plan to ban horses from future Olympics…
‘PUT A DOG ON A HORSE AND IT WOULD STILL WIN’
HARRY ARNOLD /JOHN JACKSON
BRITAIN'S top horsemen and women were last night galloping towards the greatest tumble of their lives — an Olympic ban.
And Princess Anne, in Barcelona for the current Games, was preparing to lead the fight to save the sport she loves.
Top Olympic official Dick Pound angered riders throughout the world by declaring: ‘All the owners want is a horse that wins an Olympic gold, then sell it and make a fortune.’
Canadian Pound told a breakfast press conference for journalists: ‘The best of riders cannot win without a good horse — you could put a dog on a horse and it would still win.’
The Princess reacted frostily  last night: ‘It would be unwise of Mr Pound to underestimate the skill required to make a horse do anything.’
 Her words carry clout — she is a fellow International Olympic Committee member as well as president of the International Equestrian Federation and a past Games competitor.
Yesterday Mr Pound, right hand man to IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch, was trying to rein in his ‘dog’ comments.
‘I never said that,’ he insisted.
‘Can you see Fido up there?’
But he was unrepentant about the threat to equestrianism.
‘We are going through an examination of every sport and every discipline and every event to see whether they should stay within the programme,’ he said.
Scrutiny
‘I think it's pretty well known that some of the ones that are going to get a particularly close look are the ones I mentioned, either because they are not being competed in by a lot of people in a great many countries, or they are expensive, and so on.’
‘I have nothing against equestrianism,’ he added, but it was his view that the best rider did not necessarily win.
‘The primary ability involved is that of the horse.’
His remarks are devastating for emerging British riders striving to follow the golden trail blazed by legends like Colonel Harry Llewellyn who won Britain's first equestrian gold with ‘Foxhunter’ at Helsinki in l952.
His followers, like John Whitaker, David Broome, Marion Coates, Anne Moore, Richard Meade and Harvey Smith, have become national heroes.
Princess Anne herself is a former three-day event world champion and competed at the l976 Montreal Olympics.
Ex-husband Captain Mark Phillips won gold and silver medals among the British equestrian tally of five gold, four silver and one bronze since l952.
Anne is known to be at loggerheads with IOC president Samaranch and snubbed the opening ceremony in his home city.
Sr Samaranch is on record as saying that equestrian sports, boxing, modern pentathlon, canoeing and Greco-Roman wrestling should be ditched by the year 2000.
That is the very year that Manchester, spearheaded by Anne, want to host the first Olympics of the new century.
Resign
Sporting friends of the Princess were last night predicting that she is so ‘naffed off’ she will resign her Olympic roles if she and her horsey friends are told they are not welcome at future Games.
Major Malcolm Wallace, the British Olympic equestrian team manager, said last night: ‘I'm sure she will do everything in her power to keep equestrianism where it belongs as a strong and integral part of the Olympic movement.’
Speaking at Barcelona's Real Club de Polo where British riders are competing in the dressage, the Major hit back at Pound's accusations.
‘Some horses are sold but many are not,’ he said.
‘A number of people virtually bankrupt themselves to get to the Olympic Games and have to sell the horse afterwards to recover their money.’
The Major, a close confidant of the Princess, added: ‘We have known for some time that some very senior members of the IOC have the knives out for our sport.
‘But I find it very sad that someone as high up as Mr Pound should castigate a sport he clearly knows nothing about.’
The Canadian was unabashed by the furore the attack provoked.
In a remark certain to earn him four more faults from horse lovers, he declared: ‘It probably costs 10 or l2 million dollars to prepare the three-day event course for one day.
One day!
‘Is this sport still relevant?
Is it too expensive to stage?
‘We have never said no to a sport since l896 but now I think the time has come to start.’
Back in Britain, Colonel Llewellyn reacted in typically robust style.
‘This idea is balls,’ he blasted.
‘If they ban equestrian events what are going to put in their place?
Ludo?’
HEROES: John Whitaker and David Broome
THE LIMIT
MAIDEN MENACED
RICK SKY
IRON Maiden were forced to scrap a sell-out tour of Chile after receiving death threats.
The hard rock band were also ordered to leave the country by government officials after religious groups dubbed them ‘Devil worshippers’.
Singer Bruce Dickinson said: ‘We received a string of death threats.
The government and the church obviously thought we were a threat to society.’
STAN'S THE MAN
CAUTIOUS Stanley Mitcham was stunned to find he was a Gold Game winner — because he had never won anything before.
He sounded ‘a bit doubtful’ when he telephoned with his claim for the £10,000 jackpot in Saturday's game with number 10-10-02-13.
Former London Transport storeman Stanley, 68, of Bishop's Stortford, Herts, now plans a holiday.
He and his wife Shirley — who have a married daughter — will also buy a few things for the house with their summer windfall.
WINNER: Stanley
Quick off mark
PENSIONER Pearl Reed, 63, got a letter at her home in Cambridge from a friend three miles away — 15 minutes after it was postmarked.
LIVELY LETTERS
writes: MY HOBBY is coarse fishing, where the art is in the catching of the fish, not eating them.
Each fish is caught, the hook carefully removed and the weight noted before release.
Recently, in an argument over whether this was cruel, I heard that the fish recover completely within two days of their return to the water.
Could you please confirm this?
Some fish seem to recover even faster.
Fish are pretty tough and if anglers are careful they suffer very little damage.
But some are gluttons for punishment.
Most experienced anglers know of fish being caught at least twice on the same day but the tale of Dead Eye Dick, the pike from Sutton Coldfield, takes a lot of beating.
Dick, weighing in at 16lb, is recorded as being caught 27 times in two years.
The fish is distinctive, with a cast to one eye, so the records are precise.
He/she is still in her pond, still being caught and seems to be none the worse for it all.
FERRY
, writes: A FRIEND maintains that about 10 years ago he boarded a train in London, played cards and had a few drinks and didn't leave the train until he reached Paris.
I have a £5 bet that he could not have done so.
He could.
Until 1979 the British Rail over-night sleepers docked at Dover, where the train was shunted on to the ferry, split in two, one part heading for Paris the other for Brussels.
CHINESE
, writes: IN THE Chinese game of mahjongg what is a pung and what is a kong?
When you are collecting tiles to build your ‘wall,’ a pung is three of a kind, a kong is four of a kind, and a chow is a run.
INVADE
, writes: BETWEEN the outbreak of war and the Nazi invasion of the Low Countries, could ordinary people still go there for holidays if they liked?
Yes, with a valid passport, because we had declared war only against Germany.
Adverts continued for holiday trips to France, Holland and Belgium, but no one knows who or how many people took up the idea.
DUCK
, writes: LIKE the duck that warned of air raids in Germany, we had a Manchester terrier who gave us a similar warning.
Ten minutes before each air raid, no matter where he was, he would make a bee-line for the Morrison shelter.
He was never wrong and, sure enough, when the siren started to wail we learned to dive in with him.
His favourite relaxation was to toddle down to the quay and join the Royal Navy patrol boat for a day out.
Perhaps they used him as a mine-detector!
TODAY'S THOUGHT
Death and taxes and childbirth!
There's never any convenient time for any of them.
— Margaret MITCHELL (1909-1949)
YOUR MONEY
TRUCKERS IN A JAM
JOHN HUSBAND
THE High-Street spending slump is bad news for Transport Development, our biggest haulage firm.
TD lorries shift everything from fish fingers to boxes of tissues and when goods don't move in the shops it's bad news for truckers.
Profits in the first half of this year were as flat as a low-loader — rolling in little changed at £16.8 million.
But the firm is still big business.
Its fleet of 3,500 lorries could cause a 30-mile traffic jam.
Also, the group's 100 storage depots have enough space to house 70 Royal Albert Halls.
Mustery of Flight 149
Was SAS on board BA jet hit by Saddam ambush?
‘Large men with short haircuts got on board’
GORDON AIRS /TOM HAMILTON
EVIDENCE was growing last night of a cover-up over a British Airways jumbo jet captured in Kuwait by Iraqi troops as the Gulf War erupted.
Crew members and BA union representatives last night claimed Flight 149 carrying 367 passengers to Kuala Lumpur was a ‘Trojan Horse’ sent in to drop off an SAS squad behind enemy lines.
And now more crucial facts may emerge as BA faces a string of damages actions from angry passengers.
They are suing the firm for allegedly flying them into a war zone at a time when both British and American governments were aware an invasion was taking place.
Iraqi forces were already massing on the Kuwait border when Flight 149 took off from Heathrow at 6.05pm on August 1, 1990 after a two-hour delay.
Now one crew member, who fears dismissal if named, has revealed that about 30 passengers were admitted onto the flight at the last minute.
‘Just before the doors closed several large men with short haircuts carrying their own luggage came aboard,’ he told us.
Tanks
‘They came running on with no boarding passes, and only had hand baggage which they carried themselves.
They sat at the back of the plane.’
The flight landed for a refuelling stop at Kuwait airport two hours after tanks had crossed the border.
Passengers left the plane for 52 minutes while cleaners went on board.
When they returned to their seats Iraqi jets began to strafe the runway and tanks moved in closing the airport, seizing the plane.
Passengers were later used as part of Saddam's ‘human shield’.
BA has dismissed allegations that the plane was used to land SAS men behind enemy lines.
‘This is absolute nonsense.
The story is just not true,’ said BA spokesman Derek Ross.
The  airline has always denied it was aware of hostilities in Kuwait when the flight landed.
But Stephen Brookes of the Gulf Support Group, set up to help families of hostages, believes the story.
He said: ‘Everybody was transferred into the transit lounge and it was then passengers noticed some of them were actually missing.
Actually 12 were unaccounted for at the end.’
Back in England, BA union officials who tried to get more information about who was on board found computer records of the passenger list had disappeared.
A union  spokesman claimed last night: ‘It was incredible.
Passenger manifests are kept for a long time.
These records just vanished.’
But it is the evidence of passengers like Maureen Chappell, 43, which threatens to bring the more facts into the open.
Mrs Chappell, of Stafford, Staffs, was on the flight with her electronics engineer husband John, 43, and their children John, 16, and Jennifer, 15.
She said: ‘About two weeks after we had been held captive by the Iraqis, one of the air crew told us that there were SAS soldiers on board the plane.
‘Certainly we thought it was very strange that our jet was the only plane at Kuwait airport that night and we were the only passengers.
We have done that journey many times and usually it is very busy at that time for re-fuelling.
‘Later when we quizzed British Airways about why they flew in when the war had started we were just stone-walled.’
Lured
Mrs Chappell, whose two children are suing the airline for the trauma, said bitterly: ‘We think we were lured into this — and I would feel very, very angry about it if we only flew in to drop off SAS soldiers.’
She and her two children were freed by Saddam after a month and her husband three months later.
A Scottish passenger is also lodging a claim for damages at the Court of Session in Edinburgh.
All the Ministry of Defence would say last night was: ‘We never discuss the SAS.’
But in the light of the latest revelations, Shadow Transport Secretary John Prescott said: ‘I can't believe this plane was allowed to land at Kuwait after the war began.
There has to be some other reason for it.
‘It didn't have to stop there for re-fuelling — it had enough to land elsewhere.’
Another member of the airline's cabin crew union — again fearful of being victimised if identified — said late last night: ‘There was definitely a military presence on board.
‘There is a lot more to come out about this flight.’
HOSTAGE JET: Did passengers go missing?
ANGRY: Mrs Chappell
SPLINT STAR!
Joyful fan snaps leg watching Linford's win on TV
CLIVE CRICKMER
ATHLETICS fan Shaun Cook jumped for joy when sprint star Linford Christie struck gold…and broke his leg.
Power station worker Shaun, 28, leaped up and down with excitement as he watched the British hero storm the Olympic 100 metres on TV.
But the instant Linford flashed across the line, Shaun cracked a bone in his left knee and crashed to the ground in agony.
Now he has his leg in plaster…and is under strict orders from wife Angela to stay calm when Christie bids for glory again today in the 200 metres.
Tense
‘Otherwise I'll make sure he has a few more broken bones,’ she warned.
Shaun, of Hartlepool, Cleveland, said he was too tense to watch Saturday's great race sitting on the sofa.
But as he writhed on the carpet after the sprint, he was ticked off by 28-year-old Angela for ‘over-reacting.’
And she scolded him for frightening children Adam, six, Louise, four, and two-year-old Carl.
Shaun found no more sympathy when he made a quick dash to hospital.
He said: ‘The nurses thought it a huge joke.’
Shaun — now hobbling around on crutches — added: ‘My leg went the moment Linford crossed the line.’
BREAK DANCE: Shaun
KNEESY WIN: Linford's golden moment
Reined in
COWBOY Jack Fiske was fined £100 for riding his horse without lights at night in Tombstone, Arizona.
THE LIMIT
Great escapers
RICK SKY
THE Brand New Heavies fled a packed concert after a run-in with Mafia-style gangsters.
The London-based band, booked for a gig in Naples on an Italian tour, found the stage too small and insufficient power for their equipment.
Guitarist Simon Bartholomew from the soul-funk group, in the Top 30 with Don't Let It Go To Your Head, says: ‘We told the promoter no way could we perform.
‘Suddenly, these dark-suited guys in shades with giant dogs to frighten us.
We were petrified.
They made it clear the only way we'd get out alive was by going on stage.’
Sultry singer N' Dea added: ‘We played for half an hour, jumped in our van and got out fast.’
QUICK EXIT: N'Dea
WIN a day with Marillion
HERE'S your chance to be a rock star and get lessons from one of the world's top bands.
The Limit has arranged — courtesy of EMI Records — for two readers to spend a day with chart band Marillion in their Aylesbury studio.
The band, at No. 33 with No One Can, will give two lucky winners a music lesson on the instrument of their choice.
You'll be shown how to play guitar, bass, drums or keyboard.
And for runners-up we're giving away 100 copies of Marillion's new album, A Singles Collection (1982–1992), featuring their top-selling hits including Kayleigh and Sympathy.
To enter our super competition simply answer this question: What is the name of Marillion's lead singer?
Write your answer, name and address on a postcard, and send to: The Limit, Marillion competition, 1 Thavies Inn, London EC88 1TL.
First correct entries out of the bag will win.
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
GIROBANK will charge card holders a £12 annual fee from October, but hopes to keep them sweet by insurance for goods that cost more than £50 on plastic for loss, theft or damage.
IT'S HARD TIMES AT NATWEST
NATWEST, Britain's biggest bank, has been robbing Peter to pay Paul through the slump.
The cash it has taken from the likes of you and me has gone to cover its losses caused by firms going to the wall because of the recession.
Bank charges soared and flash new computers were introduced to scan accounts and make sure a chance to charge is never missed.
Unfortunately most of the extra cash grabbed was swallowed up by bad debts.
As our biggest lender to small businesses NatWest has taken a hammering in the recession.
Trouble
And it's not just personal customers who are footing the bill.
Many NatWest jobs are being axed to help balance its books.
Although NatWest's worldwide profits doubled to £211 million in the six months to July, in the UK they made a whopping £74 million loss.
But chairman Lord Alexander warns that the economy is still not out of trouble.
His chief executive Derek Wanless says the super-rich are feeling the pinch too.
SPOT THE DIFFERENCE
PAUL FOOT
‘I'VE always thought he looked like a pig in a safari suit.’
South African journalist Jani Allan, describing neo-Nazi leader Eugene Terre Blanche London's High Court, July 21, 1992.
‘LOOK, the man's a hunk.
It's a rich, earth brown voice.
Sometimes it has the loamy texture of a newly-ploughed field.
Sometimes its a caress of warm corduroy.
I'm impaled on the blue flames of his blow-torch eyes you see.’
South African journalist Jani Allan, writing in Johannesburg Sunday Times, January 31, 1988.
HOW TO KEEP YOUR KIDS SAFE
DESPITE possible dangers, bouncy castle are sure to remain a top attraction.
But here are six tips to reduce the risk of injury and ensure your child doesn't bounce into hospital: AVOID overcrowding.
USE soft gym mats to cover the hard surface at the open front of the castle.
ENSURE there is adult supervision at all times.
ONLY allow children of similar age on the castle at the same time.
MAKE sure children remove their shoes and any other hard or sharp object such as jewellery or buckles.
CHECK the castle is moored securely to the ground and never use it in high winds or wet weather as they have been known to slip over and wet slippery surfaces can be dangerous.
Out to prove his guilt
ON THE RUN TO FREE AN INNOCENT MAN IN JAIL
PAUL FOOT
I'VE heard of prisoners going on the run to prove their innocence, but here's a prisoner who says he's on the run to prove his GUILT.
Nick Moore says he robbed a building society in Derby — but another man, Mick Boler, was convicted of the robbery, and is still in prison.
Nick Moore first wrote to me from Ashwell prison, Leics, in January, where he was serving seven years — for building society robberies in Derby.
‘I know that Mick Boler is innocent,’ he said, ‘because I committed the robbery.’
It is eight months ago that Central Television and I raised this case.
The facts were amazing: BOLER had FIVE witnesses to show he was 24 miles away when the robbery was committed.
NICK Moore had been convicted of two other building societies in Derby in the same month.
A VIDEO of the robbery showed the thief with a plaster cast on his hand — exactly like the one Nick Moore had at the time.
Nick Moore did everything he could to persuade Derbyshire police that he, not Boler, was the robber.
Three weeks ago he went home for weekend leave.
He went on the run.
Last week he phoned my office and told my colleague Bryan Rostron: ‘I am going to stay on the run till they free Boler.
I've been admitting to the robbery for two and a half years, but no one will listen.
‘There are statements from four people who know I did the robbery.
Toni Chambers has made a full statement to police saying I did the robbery.
She rolled around the bloody bed in the money.
‘I've done everything I can possibly think of now, so going on the run is my protest.
I will hand myself in as soon as they free Boler or I am required to give evidence at Boler's appeal.
‘That's why I'm on the run, not for my own benefit.
I want to finish my own sentence, but with peace of mind.
‘I may be a villain, but I am not going to sit by and let an innocent man do a ten-year stretch for something I've done.’
Boler's case grinds wearily to the Court of Appeal.
It is expected to be heard in the autumn.
HOLD UP ON VIDEO: But it was Nick Moore, his hand in plaster NOT Mick Boler (inset)
Peril of the bouncy castles
Party fun leads to a broken neck for Oliver
JILL PALMER
CLIMBING aboard the huge inflatable, Oliver Fabian could barely contain his excitement.
It was a birthday treat he had been looking forward to all week.
Up and down he bounced, with his brothers, Ben, nine, and Joe, seven.
Minutes later the little five-year-old lay in agony — the latest victim of a craze that is claiming thousands of young casualties a year.
Oliver broke his neck.
Doctors reckon it could have been worse, much worse.
He could have been paralysed for life…by a toy which been hired to give him a good time.
Mum Caroline recalls: ‘Oliver was jumping on the bouncy castle with his brothers when suddenly one of them ran in to say Oliver had hurt himself.
‘My husband Rob went outside and found Oliver lying on the floor saying his neck was hurting and he could not move.’
Caroline and Rob raced Oliver to hospital where X-rays showed he had broken his neck.
‘But the doctors didn't seem at all surprised,’ said Caroline, from Thurlby, South Lincolnshire
‘They just said ‘Oh no, not another one’.
‘There was another little lad two beds away who broke his leg playing on a bouncy castle.’
Inflatables have become more and more popular in recent years.
They're a common sight at fairs, leisure centres and children's parties.
Because we're so used to them we may have relaxed our guard.
And the risks to youngsters are growing.
Doctors are seeing an increasing number of injuries, from bruises, to broken arms, dislocated shoulders, and twisted necks.
A report in today's Which? magazine estimated that in 1989 there were 3,000 accidents related to bouncy castles.
And they claim that, far from being innocent fun, the blow-up castles are putting children at risk of serious injury.
‘Bouncing off the sides or front on to the ground, being hit by other children, or just falling awkwardly while on the inflatable accounted for most of the injuries,’ says the report.
Safety expert Tom Sanders, leisure safety advisor at the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, agrees.
‘Accidents on bouncy castles are happening rather too often and are difficult to avoid.
‘Most accidents affect children in the seven to 10 age range.
And two out of three are girls.’
Orthopaedic surgeon Lawrence Freedman warned: ‘These are not just the innocuous bruises caused by children bumping into each other.
They are significant injuries.
‘Most occur when those playing on the mattress fall of it because the surrounding surface is firm rather than cushioned.
‘They are due to the unpredictable nature and power of the bounce of these castles, which is part of their fun.
Mr FREEDMAN adds: ‘The hazards of playgrounds to young children are well recognised, and among other measures, absorbent surfaces have been recommended to help reduce the severity of injuries.
‘The risk of serious injury, particularly to the arm, while playing on bouncy castles could be reduced by providing a cushioned landing around the open side of the castle.’
Oliver will have to spend weeks in hospital wearing a neck brace and lying flat on his back.
‘We are so lucky that Oliver will be fine and can now move his arms and legs,’ said Caroline.
Oliver's birthday party went ahead without him.
But mum and dad have promised him another when he comes out of hospital.
This time WITHOUT a bouncy castle.
ON THE MEND: Oliver with mum Caroline.
His birthday treat ended in agony
OFF THE WALL: Bouncy castles can cause injuries
How the good guys saved Linda's day
PAUL FOOT
BEFORE I sign off until September, here's a timely story about Mr Major's caring Britain.
On Thursday last week, wheelchair-bound Linda Eldisogi, 41, who lost a leg in an accident several years ago, arrived at the Daily Mirror in a taxi.
She'd just finished a seven-day sentence in Holloway prison.
She'd been sent there for contempt of court by Essex magistrates when she refused to answer questions about her personal finances in a poll tax case.
She was given a travel warrant and dumped on the pavement outside the prison.
She was handed a map and told to make her own way to the nearest underground station.
Somehow she wheeled herself to Caledonian Road tube station, only to find that there were not enough staff to run the lift.
The tube workers had a whip-round to pay for a taxi to the railway station.
Taxi driver Alan Macdonald was so enraged by Linda's story that he drove her straight to the Daily Mirror.
A retired T&GWU shop steward who was explaining his case to my colleague Margaret Renn in the Mirror foyer, at once bought Linda a cup of coffee and some sandwiches.
Alan then drove her, without charge, all the way home to Basildon.
This story proves two features of Tory Britain I am constantly emphasising.
1).
Most people at the top taking their lead from the government, are callous and mean.
2).
Most people at the bottom are exceptionally generous.
DUMPED: Wheelchair-bound Linda
SAS MAN SHOT BY OWN MEN
PAUL FOOT
WELSH farmer David Richards doesn't want to say anything about the shooting of his son Mark on a live fire-training exercise in Belize, Central America, last month.
I quite understand.
But I've put him in touch with engineer Eric Pendry who came into my office nine years ago with a story about his son, Paul, who was also shot dead on an SAS live-fire training exercise.
The Cardiff coroner's verdict was accidental death.
But he urged the army to impose ‘more rigid controls’ on live fire-training exercises.
Eric Pendry himself drew up a long list of recommendations for making these exercises safer.
‘Every one of these was rejected by the army,’ he says.
‘I was told by a Minister that lives in the SAS were expendable.
‘They pretended that Paul was hit by a ricochet, but the evidence was clear that he'd been hit by a direct shot.
In my view they take far too many risks in these exercises.’
RIGHTS ISSUE
GILL Rowlands, the ‘trade union rights Commissioner’, whose expensive Warrington office to hear complaints against trade unions was set up by the government five years ago, says 1991-92 was ‘an encouraging year’.
How encouraging?
She helped six people all year.
That cost £285,000 of public money: £47,500 per assisted case.
‘The government,’ says John Monks, the TUC's deputy general secretary, ‘should help people who are exploited at work rather than waste money on this unnecessary post.’
People's poet feared by the Tories
PAUL FOOT
PERCY Bysshe Shelley was born 200 years ago this week, though you wouldn't have noticed it.
There have been none of the special postage stamps or government statements which usually mark bicentenaries of famous writers.
No wonder.
Shelley was a poet who spoke for the people.
He despised kings, queens, gods — but most of all he despised the Tory government of his day which went on being re-elected.
He could see what was wrong — he called it slavery:
‘Tis to hunger for such diet
As the rich man in his riot
Casts to the fat dogs that lie
Surfeiting beneath his eye.
He favoured freedom, and he knew what it meant:
Thou art clothes and fire and food
For the trampled multitude.
No.
In countries that are free
Such starvation cannot be
As in England now we see
And he had some excellent advice for people who wanted to rid society of its wealthy oppressors:
Rise like lions after slumber
In unvanquishable number.
Shake your chains to earth like dew,
Which in sleep has fallen on you.
Ye are many — they are few.
SHELLEY: Ignored
LOVE'S IN THE AIR FOR ACE
OLYMPIC pentathlete Graham Brookhouse proposed to his girlfriend yesterday — on a live radio show.
Aerobics instructor Jackie Harley said ‘Yes’— and promptly burst into tears.
Jackie, 23, of Bristol, said later she suspected 30-year-old Graham planned to pop the question when she heard about the Radio 5 link-up from Barcelona.
‘I made up my mind to say yes if he did,’ she said.
Now she wants him home so they can talk about their ‘big wedding’.
PROPOSED: Graham
Naked FUN
FINAL PROOF THAT LESLIE NIELSEN IS OFF HIS RED ROCKER
Well how else does a cop go undercover at Royal Ascot?
NEIL MURRAY
HE'S the wackiest cop on TV — and he aims to make you groan like never before as he tries to crack his latest case.
Naked Gun star Leslie Nielsen is back on another mind-boggling trail in search of no-one-ever-knows-what as bumbling Lt. Frank Drebin in in the latest series of Red Rock cider adverts.
And this time two of the suspects helping him with his confusing inquiries are Shadows guitarist Hank Marvin and Britain's tallest man.
Silver-haired Lt Drebin's last case netted Red rock producers Taunton Cider 24 awards worldwide and quadrupled British cider sales last year.
So Drebin and sidekick Sergeant Doughray (Mi-Fah-Soh-Lah-Tee-Doh, geddit?) needed an even racier script to follow it.
What better place to get one of those than a racecourse, Doughray?
Sure thing, chief.
Sandown in Surrey was the venue for the two new Red rock ads that are part of a new £2 million Taunton campaign.
In the first called Ascot, Nielsen disguises himself cunningly in a hat that would have probably made Gertrude Shilling turn pale.
Then he is seen as Mr Policey, serving ice cream from a van painted white to avoid suspicion — with the words Unmarked Police Car printed on the side.
When a jockey asks for ‘two cones, please’ what does Drebin give him?
Two traffic cones, of course?
When the cry ‘starters orders’ goes up Drebin, now seated in the racecourse restaurant, asks for the Mediterranean prawns.
He responds to the shout ‘They're off!’ with ‘OK, I'll have the asparagus then.’
When he moves to the bar he becomes suspicious of a character in the shadows and says ‘I'm afraid I'm going to have to ask you to accompany me.’
He and Mr Marvin then sing the latest Red Rock slogan.
In the other ad, Customs, Sandown exhibition centre becomes an airport.
Drebin's quarry is smuggler Mr Big, played by Britain's tallest man, 7ft 6in Chris Greener.
His case is packed with the Crown Jewels, but Drebin, naturally, is only interested in getting his hands on the bottles of chilled Red Rock.
The titles of both episodes are also confused in the way they were on the Police Squad TV series.
On screen it says ‘Smile, Whispering Night’ as the announcer proclaims ‘Tonight's episode: ‘Smell My Whispy Nightie’, and ‘Flight of The Condor’becomes ‘My Beautiful Laundrette’, which explains a shot of Nielsen inside a washing machine.
The Canadian actor who began his career as a radio DJ was signed on a three-year contract by Taunton.
They hired him after research proved he was more popular than Rik Mayall and Rowan Atkinson among the young drinkers they were  targeting He's already appeared in US adverts for Shell Oil, Ford and Coors beer, but says of the Red Rock series: ‘This is a different kind of thing because it's comedy and fun.
It's dumb, stupid and very hard to resist.’
You said it, Lt Drebin.
IN CIDER DEALING: Lt Drebin sells a corny cone before (centre) looking for laundered money from the inside of a washing machine and (right) catching Britain's tallest man Red Rock handed
ARTFUL BODGER: In cunning Ascot disguise, Lt. Drebin investigates another puzzling case
ME AND MY SHADOW: Drebin collars Hank Marvin for a duet
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
HERE'S someone to make tennis ace Monica Seles really grunt and groan — Hollywood heart-throb Pierce Brosnan, spotted with her at a tournament in Los Angeles.
RIGHT Said Fred star Richard Fairbrass hates watching himself on telly.
Says the shaven-haired star, at No. 29 in the charts with Daydream: ‘I think my nose is too big.’
It's Neigh laughing matter
PAULINE McLEOD
DAYDREAM BELIEVER (Cert 15; West End) is a very unfunny Australian ‘comedy’.
It stars former Spandau Ballet star Martin Kemp, who struggles in vain to inject some humour into this dreary film.
He plays Digby, a self-made millionaire who is trying to make even more from a stud farm.
But he is hampered along the way by a girl (Miranda Otto).
She was so abused as a child she sort refuge in the stables and now thinks she's a horse.
So she gallops across Digby's farm neighing and whinnying.
But he helps her get over her hang-ups and together they start a loving relationship.
HORSEWHIPPED: Kemp tries in vain to save the stud farm comedy
OLD CHARMER
PAULINE McLEOD
FOR a film that has stood the test of time, catch Luis Bunuel's Oscar-winning DISCREET CHARM OF THE BOURGEOISIE (Cert 15; Selected).
This dark-humoured, surreal movie, originally released 20 years ago, continues to entertain with its intriguing storyline.
Six characters attempt to have a meal together, yet behind the facade of respectability can be found corruption, political oppression and even drug-trafficking.
TOP THAT!
PETER SHAW
BACK to football this week with a query that wins £25 for Mr M J Pownall of Burnley.
He asks you for details of the players in the last 20 years who have won First Division championship medals with two different clubs.
The second £25 prize goes to Mr A Davidson of Newark, Notts.
His was the first correct solution selected and he knew that Berlin (1916), Tokyo then Helsinki (1940) and London (1944) were the VIth, XIIth and XIIIth Olympiads.
They were all cancelled, of course, because of World Wars.
Hard to swallow
Why school dinners rap message to kids in bad taste
‘These meals should be available to all’
RICHARD GARNER
A TELEVISION drive to persuade Britain's seven million schoolkids to swap their lunch boxes for school dinners is about to become a real choker.
A tasty two-week campaign on national telly will go out in a fortnight's time in the kids' peak viewing slot — just between the early evening news and the popular Home And Away soap.
And already it looks like stirring up fierce controversy.
Just over two million of our pupils sit down to a knife-and-fork meal at midday.
The campaign, spearheaded by a trendy rap video, is to persuade the other five million to tuck in alongside them.
It is being funded by 19 of the country's 116 education authorities.
But the musical message will also be heard by half a million kids who are the unlucky ones.
They live in the nine skinflint boroughs — mostly Tory authorities — which have scrapped their school meals service on cost grounds.
Already a national campaign to supply school dinners for EVERYONE as of right has been launched by a group of 56 organisations, including the Child Poverty Action Group.
Dancing
Rap singer Scott Groves's message on ITV will fuel these campaigners, who believe every youngster SHOULD get a hot meal — either paid for or free.
Sixteen-year-old Scott, from a London theatre school, will be dancing and singing this message:
‘When they're feeling kinda hungry,
And the lesson is complete,
Take a slice of advice,
School dinners can't be beat.
'Cause the choice is always healthy,
That's why they can't go wrong,
It ‘s nutritious, it's delicious,
To help them grow up strong.
Now the message is simple,
Eating good food can be fun,
It can help them through the day,
So make sure they get one!
CHORUS: School dinners are cool dinners!
There are already plans to make the £26,000 jingle into a hit single and show the ad in cinemas.
Nutrition experts hope that after the kids have heard Scott's message they will abandon the corner chip shop, forsake the packets of crisps and pack in the pot noodles and sweets.
But that will be no consolation to the kids who won't have that choice.
Deprived
They are unlucky enough to live in London's Tower Hamlets — one of the most deprived inner-city boroughs in the country — Somerset, Lincolnshire, Dorset, Hillingdon and Sutton.
The sight and sound of Scott's musical message will infuriate parents and teachers in these areas who are campaigning for a place at the dinner table.
Dr Tim Lang, one of the pressure group leaders, said last night: ‘The advertising initiative is fine, but it's not enough.’
The Government, he says, must go back to the days when school meals were available for every child.
The dramatic drop in school meals take-up prompted the 19 authorities to find the cash for the TV ads.
Mike Jones, from West Sussex, who launched the campaign, said yesterday: ‘The old image of custard and cabbage that's soggy and cold to boot is wrong.
‘School dinners have moved into the 20th Century — with food which is healthy and nutritious.’
Range
Most secondary schools serving dinners offer a range of dishes which include the traditional meat and two veg, pizzas and salads or vegetarian dishes at a cost of between 55p and £1.25p a day.
But Hilary Witt, head of Cambridgeshire's catering service, admits: ‘The trouble is, going into a school hall for dinner is less exciting than going into the Wimpy bar.
‘That's why some schools are piping pop music into the dining hall while children eat.
‘It's important to get more children to take up school dinners.
For many it's their main meal of the day.’.
And Scott the rapier-slim rapper backs up this message by practising what he preaches.
He always eats HIS school dinners.
And he confessed yesterday: ‘I go back for seconds and thirds.’
COOL: Scott Groves, 16, raps out the message that school dinners are great
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
Silent plea to end fear
THE thousand who marched in silence to the scene of Rachel Nickell's murder on Wimbledon Common must surely be heard now.
Like thousands more around the country who shared their horror, they want to see the killer paying a fitting price for taking her life.
Murder, often accompanied by rape, has become commonplace and women fear to walk the streets of our cities alone.
Many of us are saying that we've had enough.
There must be a return to the death penalty, at least for some categories of murder..
WHAT sort of country is it where we are told we can't pay tribute to our heroes?
The Defence Ministry ban on the BBC broadcasting from the home of the Dambusters is as cowardly as Guy Gibson and his men were brave.
Why are we so afraid of upsetting the Germans now?—.
IT was a delight to read that 115-year-old Charlotte Hughes attributes her age to a sensible breakfast of bacon and eggs washed down by a tot of brandy.
I hope dieters and health food neurotics took note.
—.
Dandy Andy
HOW strange that a girl as pretty as the winner of the Kim Basinger lookalike contest in America should be called Andrew Wright.
There's obviously nothing masculine about her, though she's certainly all Wright by me.
Better even than the original.
—.
Happy scoop
IT'S fantastic that hardened TV newsman Mike Nicholson listened to his heart and took such a tremendous risk to smuggle Bosnian orphan Natasha into Britain.
—.
I DO not think Nicholson was right to bring Natasha to Britain.
he was merely pandering to his feelings did nothing for the children he left behind.
If he cared about orphans he could find plenty of them over here.
—.
JERRY'S NOT SO COMMON
I WAS astonished by your expert's view that Jerry Hall had considerable claim to Mick Jagger's fortune, even as a common-law wife.
It didn't help me that I was a common-law wife for 18 years and had a child.
My man and I separated when I was 60.
I failed to get my case for a share of his property and savings heard because I was told the courts don't recognise a common-law wife.
I hadn't a penny and I was flabbergasted to learn that Jerry can expect thousands.
—.
My gold man
WHAT a moving picture of runner Derek Redmond being comforted by his father after pulling a hamstring at the olympics.
His dad deserves a medal for brushing aside officials to reach his injured son.
It was a wonderful show of family loyalty.
—
TWIT OF THE WEEK
POOR Elizabeth Harris moans about being married to two millionaire stars, the late Rex Harrison and Richard Harris, and then to having to work for a living!
Most of us consider ourselves lucky to have a job.
—.
WIN a tenner if we publish your Twit of the Week.
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
DESPITE the family rows and marriage break-ups, and the noticeable gaps in the ranks of her party guests, the 92-year-old Queen Mum's tranquil smile and familiar wave told us that some things are unchanging.
She is the same wholehearted trouper she has been through war and peace for three generations.
I hope the Queen will send her the traditional telegram on her hundredth birthday.
—.
WIN a tenner if we publish your Picture of the Week
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
MEN-HUNGRY Californians are flocking to enrol in special aerobics classes set up to beat flabby backsides — after a survey showed that many guys rated a pert behind as highly as a pretty face.
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
ACCORDING to a new book Royal Fashion and Beauty Secrets by Ann Chubb, Joseph Corvo treats ‘several leading members of the Government’ as well as the Royals.
He was nicknamed Joe the Toe by a grateful Duchess of York after helped improve her appearance.
So which members of the Cabinet feel the need for his curative foot massage?
Here's a clue: He maintains a pressure point on the big toe affects the penial.
Can't think who'd like that…
THE luscious Melanie Griffith has never looked sexier than she does in her new film Close To Eden.
She plays a daredevil policewoman who goes undercover to catch a murderer in New York's tight orthodox Jewish community.
She sports a high-riding mini-skirt — which scarcely endears her to the strict Hasidic sect.
They insist she puts a blanket over her knees to damp down the chief rabbi's blood pressure.
As she searches for the killer of a diamond merchant, Melanie falls for the rabbi's son, played by flashing-eyed newcomer Eric Thal.
A thorn in Jean's bed
ACTRESS Jean Marsh is not flattered by a description of the rose she had named after her for her role as the maid, Rose, in Upstairs Downstairs.
The book says: Jean Marsh — pale peach, not very good in beds, better up against a wall.
‘I want to tell you,’ says Jean, ‘that's not true.
I'm good in beds as well.’
INN MEMORY OF ELSIE TANNER…
ELSIE TANNER, Coronation Street's tart with a heart, may be dead, but her memory lives on in a Derbyshire pub.
For Lynda Hall, 43, and her husband Alan, have just bought the 200-year-old Navigation Inn, at Buxworth, which actress Pat Phoenix, who played Elsie for 22 years, took over not long after going into the Street.
Pat and her then lover, former taxi-driver Bill Nadin (he was her first childhood sweetheart) used to hold great parties at the ancient tavern.
Lynda, a life-long fan of Pat, is opening the completely refurbished tavern to paying guests.
She and Alan hope that Pat's blythe spirit will attract all her fans to the place and rekindle the old atmosphere of fun.
FOURTEEN police officers in South Wales are to take part in an equal opportunities course.
None is a woman — nor a constable, reveals the Police Federation's journal.
CLASSIC QUOTE
NEVER trust a man who tells you he enjoys a cold shower in the morning.
He'll also lie about other things.
— Ronald Reagan
UK HOLIDAY XTRA
DRAGONS' WARM WELCOME
B&B landladies found room for improvement
ANNE GRAHAM
DAVID KERR
BED and Breakfast has come a long way since the days when fearsome dragon landladies belched fire and brimstone over their terrified guests.
Nor are  folk expected to doss down on a pair of planks across the bath.
Today the emphasis is on comfort.
Games rooms or even saunas are often available for visitors to use, while TVs in the room are commonplace.
According to Barry Morris, Blackpool's tourism boss: ‘People are not prepared to accept less in a B&B than they have at home.
‘Today folk expect luxurious accommodation with all the facilities.’
The main attraction of B&B is that it has always been far cheaper than hotels and this is still the case.
Prices start at £9.50 per person per night, making B&B hols fantastic value for money.
Furthermore, although charges are low, standards are going up as hosts recognise that it pays to provide a better service.
As a result increasing numbers are registering with tourist boards, even though this means  allowing inspectors on their premises.
The English Tourist Board's 1992 book Hotels And Guesthouses In England, £7.95 lists the pick of the bunch.
Included are a Georgian manor with swimming pool near Cambridge, a 17th Century inn with solarium at Chelmarsh, Shropshire, and a former 19th Century vicarage in Berwick-upon-Tweed, Northumberland.
There are nearly 4,000 B&B's in the guide, available from bookshops and most tourist Centres.
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE
FIELD NOTES
XENIA FIELD
If your Bearded Irises have grown into big clumps, split them.
Replant only the ones with with healthy roots and strong fan of leaves.
WELLS DONE!
OUR fifth great Daily Mirror allotments competition looks like being the best ever, according to judges.
Competitors are even reported to have been digging their own wells to beat the water shortage in a bid to land a prize in the competition run in conjunction with the Royal Horticultural Society.
The final round of judging is next month.
Then the over-all winner and five runners-up will be selected.
Mark
Our team of judges — the majority of them are National Vegetable Society judges — report that competition standards are up.
And more women are making their mark.
A judge's verdict of one plot was ‘by far the best allotment I have seen for years.’
A judge in another area declared a women's entry: ‘By far the best I have seen this week.’
A judge said our youngest competitor's plot ‘would be a credit to any seasoned allotmenteer.’
Area winners of the 1992 Daily Mirror National Allotments Awards, who become semi-finalists, are:
OUR GREAT 1992 PRIZES
THESE are the trophies up for grabs in our 1992 Daily Mirror National Allotments Awards.
The RHS Engraved Crystal Bowl for the over-all winner; trophies from Suttons Seeds, J. Arthur Bower, Garotta, and the National Society of Allotment and Leisure Gardeners.
For the first year there is a special award for an allotment gardener under 21, and PBI are giving a cup, and a shed-full of their products.
Other great prizes include a popular and practical Norfolk Greenhouse, garden tool chests from Norfolk Greenhouses; a Honda F210 petrol-powered tiller; Roper's super-fast Hotterrotter compost-makers; a Do It All spade, fork, rake and hoe for the winner, and products from Somerford, the garden furniture makers.
Every entry gets a £2 Marshalls Fen Bred Seeds voucher, and their new Catalogue, in September.
A TIDY SAVING
HERE'S a great idea with bags of usefulness.
Get the Tidi Noir, a light, plastic bag, for garden debris.
The Tidi Noir comes in standard for £9.95, or large for £15.95.
Both prices include p&p and VAT.
Send cheques or postal orders to: Daily Mirror Tidi Noir Offer, JEM House, Little Mead, Cranleigh, Surrey, GU6 8ND.
Phone credit card orders: 0483 268888.
Allow 28 days.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
FAMILY FORTUNE
DAVID KERR
LAST-MINUTE bargains don't always mean a midnight flight to the Costas.
Holiday Mirror can exclusively reveal a Warner Holidays offer that slashes off £300.
At six villages in East Anglia, Hayling Island, the Isle of Wight and Devon, week beginning August 29, Warner are offering a one-week half-board family holiday for £499.
For reservations call: 0705 492 121 or contact your local ABTA travel agent.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
A MOSCOW dating agency claims couples need three minutes to fall in love.
It holds ‘blitz’ evenings where couples have under five minutes to look at each other before fixing up dates.
CHART newcomer John Mathews has a £100 bet that he'll top the charts — after his clairvoyant mum predicted he would reach No. 1.
He says his mum, Maureene, is always right.
John, who fronts new band Undercover — at No. 17 with a re-make of pop classic Baker Street — says: ‘She'd have warned me if it was going to flop.’
SHABBA DOES IT AT LAST REGGAE star Shabba Ranks has finally scored his first solo hit after releasing a staggering 30 singles on 15 different labels since 1988.
His only previous chart success — last year's Housecall and She's A Woman — were duets with Maxi Priest and Scritti Politti.
Shabba, who earns £2 million a year from his raunchy live concerts, is now at No. 23 with Mr Loverman.
He says: ‘I'm thrilled my dream's finally come true.’
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
AMERICAN comedian Milton Berle, 84, claims his doctor says he has the body of a 40-year-old and adds: ‘Even at my age the sex act is terrific — especially the one in the winter.’
Boy wonder's veld up
DISAPPOINTMENT swept across the southern African veld this week when Boy George failed to arrive.
The strange one was booked to fly to Johannesburg for concerts but when the whole country, practically, took to the streets, he changed his mind.
But his agent, Mr Tony Gordon, told us the visit wasn't off — it had just been postponed.
Said he: ‘We were advised by the ANC to change the dates because of the strike.
We're now hoping to go at the end of the month.’
PUT OFF: George
FRANKS, MATE: The man in Miss Sally Kirkland's web is Sly Stallone's brother, Frank.
Let's hope he doesn't get eaten after mating.
Caroline capers
AFTER her second husband Stefano Casiraghi's death, many thought that Princess Caroline would ditch her plea to the Pope to have her first marriage annulled.
We knew otherwise — and told you so on October 26, 1990.
Last month Caroline's first marriage — to re-formed playboy Philippe Junot was finally annulled by His Holiness.
So here's another  prediction .
She'll be married to Number Three — actor Vincent Lindon — before the last autumn leaf has fallen.
Remember, you read it here first!
ONE MORE THING
A MAN walked into Lloyds Bank in the City and said to the cashier: ‘I would like to take out a loan, please.’
He was told: ‘Sorry, sir, but the Loan Arranger is not in today.’
He said: ‘Can I speak to Tonto, then?’
YOUR MONEY
ABBEY'S INSTANT EARNER
JOHN HUSBAND
ABBEY National is advising customers to get out of their Higher Interest and Seven Day Accounts, where rates will be CUT by one per cent after August 31, and to put their savings instead into Investment or Instant Saver Accounts.
A good example from the Abbey.
EURO Disney plunged 29p to £9.33p after it announced that it is closing one of its six hotels for the winter.
Loads of lolly for Unilever
ELDORADO is licking the opposition — at least in the ice cream stakes.
The hot weather has boosted sales of Wall's ice creams, which include Magnum, Cornetto and Calippo over here, and Eldorado which sells in Italy.
This has helped lift profits of Unilever, the Wall's ice cream to Persil food and detergents giant, by 10 per cent to £888 million in the first half of this year.
The hot weather has also sweetened sales of Shield and Dove soap.
Unilever said: ‘Hot weather is always good for ice cream and soap sales.’
NAME GAME
Name Game winners Mon Aug 10 £100 WINNER
Joyce Minnis, Hackney, London.
£50 WINNER
Stephen J. Bailey, Leigh, Lancs. £25 WINNERS
L. B. Howell, Lowestoft, Suffolk.
S. Mousley, Hartlepool, Cleveland.
Margaret Goldthorpe, Meanwood, Leeds.
DID YOU KNOW?
IN 1840, life insurance companies, on the advice of doctors, charged higher premiums to customers who were teetotallers.
40 years, and I only let the side down once
YOU SHARE THE MEMORIES OF OF MARJE'S REIGN AT THE MIRROR
MARJE PROOPS
THE game's up.
I've been sussed out.
My infidelity is at last exposed — all because of that Casebook I opened up, revealing some of the highlights of my 40 years as the Mirror's Marje.
One of the many faithful readers who wrote to say congratulations reminded me how, back in 1973, he and I went to Highbury to cheer on Arsenal — who beat United 3-0 in an epic game of soccer.
Peter Lowe, that Gunners' fan, sent me a picture someone took of us both, suitably decked out in Arsenal colours, to remind me of that memorable occasion.
The only trouble is, it's well known around this office that I am a Chelsea fan.
But there are few women and even fewer men who don't slip up at some point in their lives, in thought if not in deed.
Trouble is, there's always the risk of discovery.
No-one would have ever known about my moment of unfaithfulness if it hadn't been for Mr Peter Lowe.
One of the interesting things about my reminiscing is that it stirred up memories for a lot of other people, too.
Many readers wrote about the good old days, before kids got out of hand or wild teenagers stole cars for ‘joyrides’.
Or, said one wistful lady, when most of the brides who went to the altar were virgins.
Others argued with the view I expressed that life these days, because of changes in the law over the years, is better and fairer for women.
One bitter wife disagreed:
‘I have ended up with my children in a Women's Hostel, still black and blue after the battering I got from the drunken unfaithful bully I was stupid enough to marry.
Life now may be better for some women, but there are still plenty who are helpless victims…
.’ I can't dispute that.
Many generous readers sent me lovely ‘Many Happy Returns’ cards.
My desk now looks like it's Christmas.
There's one from Mrs O. Latham of Dartford, Kent, who reminded me of her favourite letter which appeared in one of my past columns.
It said:
‘My husband was made redundant and I went out to work while he stayed at home to do the chores.
The other night when I got in, he told me to put my feet up, gave me a G and T and dished up the dinner he'd slaved over.
And when I told him, later, that I wouldn't mind a bit of the other, he said he had a headache!’
Not all the congratulatory letters were complimentary, but I'm just as grateful to those who took me to task or argued with me or lectured me as I am to those who gave me a kind pat.
Miss H. K. Todd, of Ramsgate, Kent said: ‘We should be careful to keep sex in check’— clearly suggesting I shouldn't go over the top with this topic.
She also remarks, rather acidly, that women these days are inclined to be arrogant when they're in charge.
Maybe she has a point there, though she reckons it's great that John Smith's shadow cabinet includes plenty of women and she hopes that'll mean women will get a better deal in the future.
I'll second that, Miss Todd, dear.
Several readers commented on an extract of a letter from a teenager which appeared in my Casebook.
The girl had asked me how to get an abortion.
She wrote:
‘I am two months’ pregnant and need to get an abortion quickly as I'm going to a big bash next week with my boy-friend.’
This angered several readers, who seem to have been under the impression that in publishing it, I condone and support abortion.
I didn't, in fact, comment on this letter and I don't see it as my job to stand in judgement or to moralise — though I'll fervently agree it's sad that a young girl takes such an apparently casual view of life: her own and her unborn baby's.
‘Are you or are you not in favour of abortion?
Please make your position clear,’ demanded one angry lady.
My position is absolutely clear.
I am not in favour of‘social’ abortion to get rid of a pregnancy that interferes with a girl having fun at a disco.
I'm in favour of people taking precautions to avoid pregnancy.
But in the final instance, I'm in favour of women having a choice and I reckon their choice is none of my business.
Every subject I touched on in those recent reminiscences touched chords.
A transvestite told me it helped people like him to accept themselves — and the women in their lives to accept them.
‘Now,’ wrote a man who signed his letter with a female name, ‘I can take it in my stride.’
Stepmothers got into the act, with one lady castigating Princess Di for her alleged unkind treatment of her stepmum.
I'm not sure if I'm meant to send a sharp note of warning to the Princess or a letter of sympathy to her step-mother.
Many readers took the opportunity, when they wrote ‘Congratulations, Marje’, to describe their happy families, lovely husbands, peerless wives and flawless children.
It was great to have so many nice letters and wonderful tributes, including a lot of phone calls.
And please accept my truly heartfelt thanks in return for them all.
UNTRUE COLOURS: Our Marje, with Peter Lowe in 1973, decked out in Arsenal colours — traitorous behaviour from a Chelsea fan!
Er, quite remarkable David
Coleman set to end his long Olympic run…
SUBH––
JOHN JACKSON
HE HAS had a great run.
But as the Olympic flame died last night, there was every sign that David Coleman might hand on the BBC baton.
The voice of sport for the past quarter of a century will be approaching 71 when the next Olympic torch arrives in Atlanta in 1996.
And he has always said: ‘I don't intend to do a Dan Maskell and go to 82.’
Whenever he goes, he will be a hard act to follow.
Throughout his distinguished career — the Barcelona Olympics were his ninth with the BBC — David Coleman has always been a true professional.
But occasionally, and forgiveably in a live commentary that may last only seconds, his tongue has played tricks.
And it is for his gaffes as much as his gifts that old Colemanballs — the column Private Eye named after them — will be remembered.
‘Here goes Juantorena.
He has opened his legs to show his class.’
That was the one that started it all at the 1976 Montreal Olympics.
Coleman has always insisted that it was not he who said it but his colleague and friend, the late Ron Pickering.
But he adds wryly: ‘I meet people who actually heard me say it, so there's no point in arguing.’
Gold
He does not deny: ‘That's the fastest time ever run, but it's not as fast as the world record.’
Or: ‘He won the bronze in 1976, so he's used to being out in front.’
Or another Colemanballs, which returned to memory as Sally Gunnell raced to gold last week: ‘The reason she's so fast over the hurdles is because she's so fast between them.’
Coleman moved fast, too.
His rise through journalism took him from cub reporter on the Stockport Express, to the BBC in Birmingham — and the world.
His first job for the Beeb was an athletics meeting at Bradford in the 1950s, where four-minute miler Roger Bannister was running.
The BBC told him he'd made a promising start.
Promising indeed.
He went on to become anchor man for Grandstand for more than 20 years, No. 1 soccer commentator on Match Of The Day and the undisputed star of A Question of Sport.
Little wonder he can afford to laugh off most of his Colemanballs classics.
‘David Hemery has won the gold, who cares who's second or third?’
That was Coleman in Mexico City in 1968.
As it happened, Sheffield's John Sherwood was very interested because he won the bronze for Britain.
‘Forest are having a bad time — they've lost six matches without winning.’
At a World Cup: ‘The manager must have said something in the Dutch dressing gown at half-time.’
Goal
And after a World Cup match: ‘Don't tell those coming in the result of that fantastic match.
Now let's have another look at Italy's fantastic winning goal.’
‘Watch the Africans in this race.
They are the ones with the white tops and black bottoms.’
‘He's one of the great unknown champions because very little is known about him.’
‘There's going to be a real ding-dong when the bell goes.’
In and among these foot-in-mouth moments came David Coleman's finest hour…the day at the 1972 Munich Olympics when he truly showed his class.
Black September carried out its Olympic Village massacre and 16 people died.
There followed the horror of hooded Arabs bargaining from the Israeli balcony.
All day Coleman sat in a hot studio staring at one picture and maintaining hours of nonstop commentary to out-Dimbleby the best of them.
Today David Coleman no doubt enjoys the Colemanballs Private Eye prints that have nothing to do with him:
Snooker: ‘For those of you watching in black and white, the green is the ball behind the blue.’
Boat Race: ‘I do not know who is ahead, but it's either Oxford or Cambridge.’
Cricket and Brian Johnston: ‘The batsman's Holding, the bowler's Willey.’
Cricket, after Ian Botham kicked down his own wicket: ‘Botham failed to get his leg over.’
As David himself might have said: ‘Er…quite remarkable.’
PROFESSIONAL: Coleman can laugh off his gaffes
MUNICH MASSACRE: Coleman commentated while talks with the killers went on
THE LIMIT
WIN 200 RED HOT RAVE LPs
RICK SKY
HEY GROOVERS!
Have we come up with a couple of summer scorchers for you.
We've teamed up with record giants EMI to give away 200 red hot albums in a competition worth a cool £3,000.
Among the prizes are 100 copies of Now 22, a double LP compilation packed with this year's biggest hits — including Erasure's Take A Chance On Me, Jimmy Nail's Ain't No Doubt, the Utah Saints' Something Good, the Orb's Blue Room and the Cure's Friday I'm In Love.
We're also giving away 100 copies of Maximum Rave — the essential rave collection with all your faves including the Shamen's LSI, the Smart E's Sesame's Treet and Urban Hype's A Trip To Trumpton.
To enter simply answer this question:
Which group is having a monster hit with Rhythm Is A Dancer?
Phone your answer on 0839 444 100 by midnight Wednesday August 12, leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p a minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
Your calls should cost around the the price of a first-class stamp.
GUNNING FOR JIM
WILD rocker Jim Martin was held at gunpoint by police after waving a pistol and firing shots in a hotel car park.
The Faith No More guitarist, at No. 34 in the charts with A Small Victory, was frisked and ordered to surrender the weapon.
The incident happened in Pittsburgh where the band were playing a gig.
Said a friend: ‘It was two in the morning, we were drunk as hell and thought we'd do a bit of shooting for a laugh.
‘Next thing we knew we were surrounded by cops.
Luckily, they didn't press charges.
I guess it was dumb.’
SEXY singer Paula Abdul has told how she lost two stone before marrying actor Emilio Estevez…by joining a help group for compulsive overeaters.
The star, whose latest single Will You Marry Me? is about her wedding to Estevez and bubbling just outside the Top 40, spent years fighting a weight problem.
She says: ‘I used food as a substitute for happiness.
I remember feeling sad one minute and shoving a giant cookie in my mouth the next.’
ROXETTE'S Marie Fredricksson is in a sticky spot.
The person who helped squeeze her into this skin tight outfit has left the building and no one else can help her get out.
Oh, the problems of trying to show off a bold front.
MARJE PROOPS
LONLEY-HEART MUM'S BEEN CONNED INTO LOVE
I KNOW that my mother, who is 36, should be old enough to take care of herself, but sometimes I feel I'm older and wiser, at 16, than she is.
She answered an advert in a lonely hearts column and started an affair with this man who had stated in the ad that he was a good looking 43-year-old bachelor, comfortably off, with car.
They exchanged photographs before they met, but when I first saw him he looked years older and much fatter than in his photo and now it's emerged that he's 48 and divorced.
Obviously he can't be trusted.
I keep telling my mum she's got herself a con-man, but she won't listen to me.
She's besotted with him.
My gran reckons we should try to break it up somehow, but the question is, how do we go about it?
My mum, by the way, was ditched by my father before I was born.
YOU may well believe, in your bright cocky little way, that you can run rings round your gullible mother and you may, indeed, be right about this character.
But you and your gran are out of order with your plotting.
Since you fancy yourselves as being women of great wisdom, sit down, the pair of you, and think it all through.
Your mother, abandoned by your unknown father, had the job of bringing you up on her own.
No doubt your gran often gave your mum the benefit of her advice but it probably never occurred to her, as it hasn't occurred to you, that your mother longs for love, company and sex.
But available men are somewhat scarce.
Most have either been nabbed by someone else or are into teenage bimbos or are gay.
I agree this man doesn't sound like God's gift exactly, but try to understand that he needed to sell himself.
If he'd told your mum he was fat and 48 with a failed marriage behind him, she might have binned his request for a meeting.
Obviously he's now given her the facts and she's still happy with him.
And good for her.
But if you two nosey parkers don't stop interfering, she'll probably once again end up lonely and alone.
Up to now her life hasn't been altogether rosy.
The plump man who, unfortunately, didn't have an up-to-date snapshot to send her, may just turn out to be that elusive Mr Right.
She'll discover for herself if he's Mr Wrong.
If you and your gran are as wise as you think you are, you'll be as nice to him as if he was already a member of the family.
That's the best way to be helpful to your mum.
One day you might be her bridesmaid with gran, in her best hat, the proud mother of the bride.
If you must plot, you two wiseheads, begin plotting now towards that happy end.
BOUQUET OF THE WEEK
A FATHER who has every justification for being very proud of his daughter nominates her for this week's bouquet.
He writes: My daughter was recently widowed when her husband died suddenly.
He had been in charge of an Army motorcycle team which managed to raise the money for a £10,000 minibus for handicapped children.
Since his tragic death my daughter has carried on his good work.
She brings as many of these children to her home as she can and always remembers their birthdays.
She's very good to us, her elderly parents, even though I haven't always been as good a father as I should have been.
Her heart really is bigger than her body.
I am proud of her.’
I'm sending a bouquet to this young widow from Abbey Wood, London, with my very best wishes.
And I'm sure she's long ago forgiven her dad for the pain he unwittingly caused her.
FRIGHTENING AFFAIR WITH HIS BOSS
I HARDLY know how to begin this, I am in such a state.
My daughter's husband has confessed to her that he has a male lover.
He told her he can no longer bear to keep it secret, that he must ‘come out’.
It appears he and his boss have been having a relationship for two years.
The boss is also married, with two teenaged children.
My daughter has two young sons.
We are out of our minds with worry.
Her husband told her she's got nothing to fear because the things they did together weren't dangerous.
She's on the edge of a breakdown and I daresay the other poor woman is, too.
My husband and I are very worried about AIDS and we are wondering if the children are at risk, let alone our daughter, who says she and our son-in-law led a normal married life until he dropped this bombshell.
We would be very grateful for your advice.
IT'S hard enough for a woman to discover her husband's been knocking off a naive girl in the typing pool.
To learn that he is bisexual is enough to plunge his wife into an abyss of torment, anger, pain and fear.
So how can you help your daughter?
Presumably, when her husband told her that he and his boss practised harmless sex, what he meant is that they don't practise full gay sex.
I won't go into detail about what they probably get up to.
It doesn't particularly matter to you, except it's very important that your daughter knows the truth.
Many homosexual and bisexual men do indulge in sexual practises that could be a risk to their health and to that of their partners.
The risk is reduced if condoms are always used.
Your son-in-law and his boss may have taken this precaution, but can his wife believe his word?
You haven't said whether she wants to try to keep the marriage together.
Don't be shocked or surprised if she does.
Some bisexual relationships work perfectly well as long as everyone knows the score.
It's up to her to decide.
I realise your main worry is that she or the children might have been infected with the AIDS virus.
I don't imagine that the children can be at risk.
But if your son-in-law has had unprotected sex or is infected and has had sex with your daughter, yes, she possibly is.
The only way to find out is for her to get an HIV antibody test.
The HIV virus can cause AIDS.
Advise her to go to a hospital STD (Sexually Transmitted Disease) clinic.
Or get her doctor to tell her where to go.
And if you're worried in case anyone in the family has drunk out of a cup her husband used, or sat on the same loo seat or given him a friendly kiss, relax.
Well, relax as much as any mother can when she faces the destruction of her daughter's marriage — whatever the cause.
HELP!
HELP!
SHE chucks the duvet on the floor in the middle of a chilly night.
She snarls when you merely mention the weather.
She's got a headache when you fancy a bit of the other, and you get the feeling that she has dedicated her life to making yours bloody miserable.
You are one of the countless men suffering from the menopause.
I mean, of course, the mid-life change that's making the woman you love so difficult.
The trouble with the menopause is that everyone around the woman going through it suffers too.
Especially the men they live with.
But these men could do much more to help, not only their partners, but themselves, if only they understood what the menopause is and what can be done to alleviate the problems.
The Amarant Trust is a charity which promotes a better understanding of these problems, including an awareness of HRT.
The Trust has produced a very good booklet which costs £1 to everyone except Daily Mirror readers.
I've done a deal with the Trust and Mirror readers can get this guide at the bargain price of 80p.
Men, or the women in their lives, can write for The Man's Guide to the Menopause and HRT, The Amarant Trust, Daily Mirror Offer, 56-60 St. John Street, London EC1M 4DT.
ISN'T HE ENTITLED TO BLISS?
I HAVE been married for 26 years to a wife I have loved since I was 20.
Then five years ago, by chance I met another women at a trade conference.
She was a very lovely but very unhappy woman.
She was going through a traumatic divorce at the time and it was obvious she needed someone to talk to and I just happened to be around.
Neither of us planned it, but our friendship turned into love and we are still desperately in love.
When we are together the atmosphere is electric.
We read each other 's thoughts and share each others interests.
Sex is bliss.
She has never asked me to leave my wife and children because she knows the pain of divorce.
But wouldn't you agree that I am now entitled to happiness with the woman I will love forever?
TWO points I must raise with you.
First, the claim that you are entitled to happiness.
I'm always puzzled when people make this claim.
I don't understand the entitlement.
Happiness, surely, is a bonus we enjoy at unforgettable moments in time.
The rest of life goes at a sort of jog-along pace and you're lucky if it's reasonably contented.
I get very alarmed when people plan to shed all they've got for this fleeting, ephemeral happiness.
My second point is to do with love.
You say you've loved your wife for twenty-six years.
Presumably, she too was the woman you vowed to love forever.
But forever lasted only a quarter of a century and now here you are, girding yourself for yet another forever with your mistress.
She sounds like a very nice woman.
Too nice to put any pressure on you to leave your wife and children.
I think that when you go — as I'm sure you will, whatever I say — she'll be nice enough to feel guilty about your wife.
As you say, she knows all about the agony of rejection and divorce.
Think about that before you pack your bags.
Her remorse could be something of a blight on that happiness.
And it would undoubtedly take the edge off the bliss for you, too.
You might have to face anger and disgust from your children, though with divorce and family disruption now so commonplace, maybe they'll just shrug with boredom.
After all, they'll be no different from so many of their school friends.
So who knows what may happen as a result of that meeting five years ago?
I hope you'll never regret that it occurred.
But since it did, since it changed your life and the lives of at least four other people, all you can do now is go on paying forever — one way or another — for the consequences.
£10,000 TONIC FOR GEORGE!
RETIRED hospital porter George Gibbs got the perfect cure for his cash worries — he scooped £10,000 on Daily Mirror Bingo.
George, 61, and wife Betty, 60, have had to watch the pennies since he took early retirement when his hospital was privatised.
Now they can enjoy a few luxuries.
‘The cash couldn't have come at a better time,’ said George at their home in Swansea, Wales.
He won game 222 with number 26.
Edward Robins 81, of Pershore, Worcs, and Daphne Wood, 67, of Tamworth, Staffs, each won £500.
TODAY'S NUMBERS — Page 25 
PICKING UP: George after Bingo win
A SCRUFF
‘It's a bit frightening saying to the Queen: No, listen missus!’
COURT JESTER FRANKIE THE ROYALS' FAVOURITE
ANTON ANTONOWICZ
HE STOOD there, his face like a wedding cake in the rain, heart beating fast.
‘Old fishermen never die,’ he said.
‘They just smell that way.’
First the Queen, then the King started to splutter with laughter.
‘'Ere,’ said the man on stage, ‘what about the widow who wore black garters in memory of all who had passed beyond?’
There was more laughter…and the start of a right royal relationship for Frankie Howerd.
That first appearance in 1949 for a Christmas show at Buckingham Palace set the seal on a special friendship between the King of Camp and the Royal Family.
‘The Queen Mother was always my favourite after that first invitation to play before her,’ he said.
‘But I was petrified.
My act, as always, is an intimate gossip with the audience — and this made it very tricky.
‘I mean, it's a bit terrifying to talk to the King and Queen in terms of: ‘No, listen, missus!
No…no, don't laugh moosh!’
‘But if I didn't say it, well…
I mean…
I wasn't doing my act.
‘I was very fraught.
After my 20 minutes, I came off in a muck sweat.
I had visions of the Tower.
And I don't mean Blackpool's.’
His first introduction was to Princess Margaret.
‘She told me, thank God, that she had to stuff a handkerchief in her mouth to stop laughing too loudly.’
Then came the Queen, now the Queen Mum, who said how thrilled she was to speak to Francis.
‘Well, really,’ he remembered, ‘my flabber was never so ghasted.’
He told her the one about the grand lady and the taxi driver who was reluctant to take her and her poodle home in his cab in case the dog wet the seat.
When they reached the destination the driver looks back in horror and says the poodle has disgraced itself.
‘No dear boy,’ the grand dame replies, ‘I pissed in your taxi.’
Outrageous.
Hilarious.
And a performance that helped make him the Queen Mum's favourite.
His popularity saw him appear in many Royal Variety shows.
‘But they are the worst experience any entertainer can go through,’ he said.
It's not so much because the Royal Family is out there, but because you are in front of so many of your peers.
‘I have had people like Cilla Black and Petula Clarke fall into my arms in floods of tears after they've come off from that one.
‘I couldn't stand the tension myself.
I'd sit out in my car, all made up and wait for the stage doorkeeper to come and fetch me.’
Twenty-seven years on, in 1977, he was duly awarded with another request to visit Buckingham Palace when he was given the OBE.
His gong was dubbed the Oooh BE and was presented by his faithful fan, the Queen Mother herself.
‘Apart from knocking over two footmen, it all went smoothly,’ Frankie said.
Not so smooth were his forays to entertain ‘our boys’ overseas.
Howerd, Frankie pointed out, rhymed with coward.
But he went all the same.
His first trip, in 1952, took him to the Korean battlefront.
Then came the jungles of Borneo.
‘It's all a  terrible mistake,’ he told his audience.
‘This colonel chap at the War Office started it.
You know all wind and pips.
‘He asked me whether I wanted to go to Borners.
Well, I thought he meant Bournemouth.’
The trip was made all the worse by Frankie's morbid fear of flying.
As the ageing Comet hopped from Lyneham, to Cyprus, to North Africa and onwards, the captain invited Howerd to visit the flight deck.
‘No thanks,’ he replied, his face as long as a landslide, ‘I once went to the House of Commons to see how the country was run.
I never got over the shock.
It's the same with your cockpit.
Let me keep my illusions.’
But a few years later he was up and ready to go to Ulster.
It was the time of ‘the Troubles’.
He went unannounced, many times, braving the bottles and firebombs that rained on his military convoy and donated his fees, to the Army Benevolent Fund.
Frankie, the regimental sergeant major's son, carrying on serving the kind of men among whom he began his career…
…
Gunner Howerd, the man who began in camp concerts and became the king of camp.
ALWAYS
TRY as they might, no one close to Frankie Howerd could ever improve his image.
‘He always looked shambolic,’ says Tessa Le Bars, his long-time agent.
‘Frankie would buy a wonderful new suit and within a few minutes he'd look as though he'd slept in it.
His shirt tails would come askew, his sleeves ride up.
Basically, he was a scruff.’
He ignored Tessa's many attempts to change his notorious toupee.
‘Take it or leave it, that was his motto,’ she says.
‘But he was totally sensitive about it.’
In fact, it covered only a small bald patch at the front of his hairline.
But no one, given Frankie's temper, dared interfere.
TITTER YE NOT!
Frankie, an old favourite of the royal family, meets Princess Di
MAJESTIC MOMENT: 1958 and Frankie meets the Queen at London's Old Vic Theatre
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
NEW Yorkers are stepping out to weird Foot Friend parties to meet the partner of their dreams.
Club bosses are on their toes and a string of new clubs have sprung up to cater for kinky lonely-heart foot fetishists who recently won respectability after a couple of celebrated court cases.
ROCKER Danny Bowles was convinced his career was over when he suddenly went stone deaf…hours before playing the biggest gig of his career.
Thunder singer Danny, at No. 25 with Low Life In High Places, was booked to perform to 50,000 fans at a stadium in Rio De Janeiro.
But, he recalls: ‘I caught a virus on the plane and by the time I arrived in Rio I couldn't hear a thing.
At the time i thought I'd never be able to hear again.
HAIR SHE GOES AGAIN
IRISH singer Enya refused to step out of her house for two months because she was depressed — about her hair.
Enya, who is at No. 11 with the haunting Book Of Days, reveals: ‘I had hair down to my waist until I was 18, then one day I cut it all off.
Last year I decided to grow it long again.
‘But I got so depressed I had to have it cut short.
Only then did my life make sense again.’
And you thought Jacko was wacko…
ENYA cut above
FORD'S FEAR OF FAILURE
HARRISON Ford is terrified of losing his superstar touch.
The Hollywood tough-guy, whose new movie Patriot Games opens next month, admits: ‘Every morning I ask myself: ‘I wonder if I'm going to be able to act today?’
‘Sometimes I arrive on the set knowing I couldn't act my way out of a paper bag.’
HIT AND MISS FOR MORRISSEY
MORRISSEY left thousands of fans fuming after he pulled out of Sunday's Madness reunion concert.
The singer failed to turn up at the gig at London's Finsbury Park after he faced a barrage of missiles thrown by fans during Saturday's performance.
Reveals a backstage worker: ‘Roadies swept up dozens of bottles and more than £15 in coins from the stage after his set.’
Says a spokesman: ‘Morrissey was worried the same thing would happen again on Sunday.’
Madness, who attracted 65,000 fans to the two concerts netted over £100,000 in merchandising sales and now plan a full-scale British tour.
MIRROR MONEY
WHO'S UNDER THE HAMMER
JOHN HUSBAND
SCI-FI fans can grab a piece of TV history in the ‘Entertainment Sale’ at posh auctioneers Bonhams.
On offer is a red Dalek from the Doctor Who film Daleks: Invasion Earth — expected to fetch more than £2,500.
A Cyberman could be yours for just £1,000.
Costumes from Doctor Who, Blake's 7, Red Dwarf, Hitch-hiker's Guide to the Galaxy and Star Cops will also be under the hammer.
And Julie Goodyear — Coronation Street's Bet Gilroy — has given her earrings for a  separate celebrity sale in aid of Romanian children.
You can go and view the lots at Bonhams in London's Knightsbridge on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday 23-25 August.
The auction is on Wednesday August 26.
EXTERMINATE: Daleks with ex-Who sidekick Carol Ann Ford
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
CALM down, girls.
Hunky strippers The Chippendales are poised to release a single, Give Me Your Body, a raunchy rock/dance track.
I can't wait to see the video
COPS TAP RAVER
CHART star Carl Cox stopped performing at illegal raves after discovering that police had tapped his phone.
Carl, at No. 38 with Does It Feel Good To You, only realised he was being spied on by the law when police pulled him up in his car.
‘At the time I was going to lot of illegal raves,’ said Chris.
‘When the police told me everything I had been doing over the last month it totally freaked me out.’
FOOD OF LOVE
INDIE band CUD are in trouble over their current chart hit — the suggestively-titled Purple Love Balloon.
Church leaders have branded the single's cover, which features a huge cucumber and the lyrics ‘Would you like to ride it?’, offensive.
‘It's just downright lewd,’ says pastor Alex Maloney, of the Elim Pentecostal Church.
OVER THE LIMIT
IF you want to get your partner in the mood for love…try stuffing them full of salmon.
The high-protein nosh produces a substance in the body called PEA.
This brings on ‘feelings of contentment associated with being in love,’ says Prof. Diana Bunce.
Lap of luxury
Recession bites hard — but NOT into the dog's dinner
‘WE WANT TO GIVE PETS FOOD WE LOVE’
WHAT do you fancy for starters, darling?
I know you can't resist the Seafood Cocktail, but DO try the Sardines in Smoked Salmon Jelly.
And, to follow, a little lobster?
With some tuna mousse, if you're really feeling peckish.
No wonder you're purring with delight.
It's a far cry from the muck owners used to shovel down their CATS — fishbones, diced heart and other dubious delights!
Now it's gourmet treats all the way for that special feline in your life, as supermarkets scamper to cook up winning pet food combinations.
Fido too is living in the lap of luxury in pet-crazy Britain.
And if a pooch gets a little paunchy with all this pampering then put him on a health kick.
A few sugar-free yoghurt drops or a Rite Weight diet meal will soon restore that missing frisk — and perhaps persuade a hound to turn VEGGIE.
The recession may be biting in our own larders.
But to prove we are a nation of animal lovers we spending a staggering £2.4 BILLION a year on gourmet grub and luxury presents for our furry friends.
Spending on pet food was up more than seven per cent in 1991.
Spillers marketing director John Sharrock says: ‘People want to give their pets the kind of food they like themselves, which explains the development of more exotic pet food varieties and vegetarian meals.’
Upset
And, according to a new survey by Friskies Petcare, we take our pet's diet so seriously three-quarters of owners put as much effort into preparing and serving their animals meals as they do their own.
The survey also showed: A fifth of British animal fans won't go on holiday if the pet can't come too.
A third would think twice about moving home if it would upset their pets.
Only six per cent would give up their priceless pets in exchange for £1 million.
An eighth would be influenced in their choice of new jobs or plans to start a family by the affect it would have on their pet.
Half our pet owners hang pictures of their beloveds in pride of place on the living room walls.
The doting doesn't stop there.
This month saw a special range of squeaky toys for dogs designed with the 1992 Barcelona Olympics in mind.
Squeaky
And, say Armitages Pet Products, we're also buying them presents if we go on holiday without them.
This prompted the firm to launch a grooming kit with guilty owners in mind.
At Christmas we fork out £12 million on festive gifts and feasts for our family animals filling their stockings with edible Santas, squeaky penguins and mince pies.
So why do we love our pets so much?
Writer Jilly Cooper, who this year launched the Good Life premium plus dog food, says.
‘I spend more time with my four dogs than anyone else because I am often alone writing.
‘I love dogs because they are jolly, kind and cheerful.
Everyone else in the world gets cross with you, but dogs never do.’
Pet behaviour therapist David Appleby says: ‘In times past we had extended families who kept in touch.
That doesn't happen now — so pets sometimes take the place of those other relations because we crave interaction with others.
Desperate
‘They give us a sense of achievement too because we like to take on a caring role and feel responsible.
‘It also takes us back to nature and our history when we were much closer to animals.
That is why we like to have one in the house because we lead such urban lives.’
A dog is still the most popular pet.
But the more independent cat is catching up because so many people are desperate to have pets even though they are out at work all day.
The dog population stands at 7.3 million compared with 6.9 million cats.
Next month even brings us The Good Cat Food Guide (Chatto & Windus, £4.99).
The authors have tested 80 different varieties and awarded the Golden Whiskers Award for the best cat nosh to Safeways' Sardines in Smoked Salmon Jelly.
Purrfect choice, eh, pampered puss?
LICKED: Old style Arthur
WUFF!
Dog lover Jilly Cooper's grub's a howling success with her pets
THE LIMIT
STAGE FRIGHT
RICK SKY
NIRVANA star Kurt Cobain has launched a £20,000 bid to beat a rare sleeping disease after falling asleep…half-way through a concert.
The Seattle-based singer stunned fans when nodded off on stage at a packed stadium on his band's current U.S. tour.
Kurt at No 39 with Lithium suffers from the rare ailment narcolepsy which strikes any time.
Kurt, 25, says: ‘I've fallen asleep in a live show quite a few times.
‘I just keel over where I stand.
It can be dangerous because I often cut my head open.’
Now he is hiring medical specialists to help him overcome it.
WIN Clapton's video
THRILL to the magic of the world's greatest guitarist with another fabulous Limit competition.
We've teamed up with Warner Music Vision to give away 100 copies of a new Eric Clapton video, Unplugged, which features the maestro playing some of his best acoustic guitar tracks for an MTV series.
The 70-minute video, which retails at £10.99, is packed with such classic tracks as Layla, Running On Faith plus his last hit, Tears In Heaven.
Clapton introduces each number.
And for runners-up we also have 50 copies of Eric's Unplugged album.
To be in with a chance of winning simply complete this Eric Clapton song Wonderful…….
Entries on a postcard with your name, address and phone number by Tuesday August 18 to, The Limit Eric Clapton competition, 1 Thavies Inn, London EC88 IAB.
ERIC CLAPTON
Damme-buster
HOW JEAN-CLAUDE PUT FAME BEFORE MARRIAGE
HOLLYWOOD hard man Jean-Claude Van Damme paid a high price for movie riches.
It cost him two marriages.
The tough-guy actor, currently topping movie charts in Britain and the U.S. with box-office smash Universal Soldier, admits he was obsessed by ambition.
He says: ‘My first two marriages ended in divorce because I was too young and dreamed only of being a movie star.
‘I've had to be stubborn, single-minded and downright selfish in my pursuit of a movie career.
‘It made me bad-tempered and very impatient — not the best recipe for a successful relationship.’
Today the Belgian-born actor, who commands fees of more than £2 million per film, is happily settled with third wife Gladys and two children.
He adds: ‘Since becoming a dad I've changed.
I'm now more mellow 
VAN DAMME Obsessed
SEXY Hollywood star Julia Roberts, 24, who shot to fame in Pretty Woman, hates make-up…because her face is the wrong shape.
She says: ‘My mouth is crooked and I'm bad at putting on lipstick.
I always take it off before I go out.’
YOUR MONEY
BAGS OF TROUBLE
JOHN HUSBAND
CHEAPER multipack crisps crunched Bensons, which sold the Hedgehog crisps mainly in single bags.
Profits fell from £312,000 to a £191,000 loss in six months.
Chairman Malcolm Jones is hitting back with multipacks.
They now account for forty per cent of sales.
Is it really worth it?
JOHN HUSBAND
YOUR MONEY DO you want the best possible return on your savings?
Even if it means home-buyers paying more for their mortgages?
The Skipton building society, Britain's 14th biggest, has just raised its home-loan charges to pay better rates to savers.
Its new rates beat those of most major building societies.
Its 90-day notice account, for example, now offers 8.8 per cent on £5,000 rising to 10.75 per cent on £50,000.
The big worry now is: how many other societies might follow suit.
If the bigger societies feel their savings are threatened they would raise their mortgage rates to compete.
The slump leaves the Government strapped for cash forcing National Savings to compete aggressively for money.
The new Savings Certificate, for example, due out Monday week, offers a guaranteed 7.5 per cent tax free, worth the equivalent of 12.5 per cent to a top tax payer.
A rate no building society can match.
So if savers are determined to ignore their consciences and chase the best possible returns, mortgage rates must remain under pressure.
Unless and until the Government gives a lead by bringing down interest rates generally.
Freddie's hopping along
PAULINE McLEOD
THE film distributors obviously saw a hit on their hands with the cartoon FREDDIE AS F.R.O.7 (Cert U; General) because its sequel is already in production.
And although I have to admit that this tale of a French prince who is turned into a frog by his wicked aunt and grows up to be a prince among frogs and a secret agent to boot, didn't grab me, it will surely keep the little ones enthralled.
AGGERS TO THE RESCUE
COLIN PRICE
ESSEX nearly had their double dream spoilt by a radio commentator yesterday in the NatWest Trophy semi-final at Grace Road.
BBC cricket correspondent Jon Agnew answered a Leicester SOS to step out of retirement and finished with remarkable figures of 1-31 in 12 overs.
Aggers' biggest worry was that he might make a fool of himself bowling at Gooch after being out of the game for two years.
But he needn't have worried.
Winston Benjamin had already claimed the prize scalp of Gooch for eight by the time Agnew peeled off his sweater.
And he dropped on to such an immaculate length straight away that his first five overs cost just four runs and included the wicket of Jonathan Lewis for 21.
By the time he came off to a huge ovation, Essex were dawdling along at 99-3 off 36 overs.
Paul Prichard gave Essex's score some respectability.
He hit 87 as Essex made 188-6 from 52 overs in their rain-hit match, but they still face a major battle today.
Agnew said: ‘It went better than I dared hope.
I don't know how I got away with it.’
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
IT WAS like reading the last page of a well-written romance story to see John McCarthy and Jill Morrell relaxed and together a year after the end of his ordeal with Arab terrorists.
Though your story told of some doubt about their future together, the happy ending was written in their eyes.
— Mrs H. Morris, Cambridge.
WIN a tenner for your Picture of the Week
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
Shot in the back
WE DIDN'T need confirmation that the Department of Social Security is staffed with bureaucratic clowns, but their idiotic treatment of Olympic archery hero Simon Terry gave it.
A man who is working for Britain and doing it brilliantly, deserves better than to have his income support allowance stopped.
The fact that clerks actually wasted most of the money they were trying to save by telephoning Barcelona at peak time, only underlines how far they are out of touch with reality.
—.
THE unemployed can do without Peter Lilley's daft comments as he plans to make more people jobless.
A minister who can applaud dole staff redundancies and then claim that those clerks who keep their jobs will find them more interesting, is obviously in the wrong post.
—.
THE only thing that puzzles me about the Government decision to ban the Northern Irish Protestant terror gang, the UDA, is why it has taken them so long to do it.
—.
HOW sickening that President Bush has to fend off allegations of a long-ago affair as he gears up for the US election.
As we saw with the Paddy Ashdown scandal raised during our last election, politicians everywhere seem to rely on mud-slinging instead of argument.
—.
COMPUTERS KRAYS ARE A DISGRACE!
IT'S disgraceful that jailed gangsters Reg and Ronnie Kray have been allowed to commission a kids' computer game based on their Sixties reign of terror.
It was daft of their business partner to say every Kray fan will want the game and even more incredible for him to add: ‘Neither Reg or Ron would ever condone crime.’
They are no example to any kid and the Home Office should stop this glorification of crime.
—.
SINCE the BBC has bought the rights to the Thatcher Story, let's hope they tell it all.
No record of the former Prime Minister would be complete without boarding the train between Birmingham to Wolverhampton.
They could then show how Thatcherism laid waste the manufacturing base of this country.
—.
A cry unheard
I WROTE to the Prime Minister about short-wave radio broadcasts I had picked up from Yugoslavia, giving eyewitness accounts of atrocities by Serbians.
That was before Christmas last year and the crimes were being committed in Croatian border villages.
I received no acknowledgment of my letter.
But with all the equipment at GCHQ the Government must have known a lot more than I did about the horrors.
So how can John Major claim now to be surprised by them?—.
I'M ASHAMED that Britain deported 36 Yugoslavs last month while other countries are trying to give them shelter.
The Government could surely show some humanity for once.
—.
BACK SEAT DODGERS
HOME is the back seat of a car for 10-month-old Heidi Grady, yet still the local council officials blame someone else for their failure.
It's her father's fault, say the grey men of north Norfolk.
There's always someone else for them to blame.
But what a start in life for a lovely little girl.
Have they no shame?— P. Davies, Ipswich.
Here's yours
WHAT a wonderful response from the creditor of Land Travel who threw water over the boss, Valere Tjolle.
John Major get your wet suit ready when you grin over your latest failure with our money.
— L. Roberts, Tunbridge Wells, Kent.
Beret brave
IT makes my stomach turn just watching free-fall parachuting on TV.
So I'm impressed by Marie Radcliffe's wonderful effort in becoming the first woman to win the Parachute Regiment's red beret.
— Mrs C. Hoskins, Plymouth, Devon.
GIBBS GOSSIP
BORIS IS BECKONING
GARTH GIBBS
DESPITE the howls of protest, Boris Becker looks set to make a match of his relationship with model Barbara Feltus.
Ugly rumblings from Germany suggested that the 25-year-old golden boy of tennis was under pressure from family and friends to drop Barbara, the daughter of a black GI.
But our spy at the Barcelona Olympics tells us: ‘Barbara was hugging Boris's parents like they were her own.
They were getting on terrifically.
‘She has overcome the family hurdle and already looking like the daughter-in-law.’
Barbara's a long-suffering lass.
During the Olympics there wasn't so much as a hint of nookie between her and her hunk.
His order to her was: ‘No sex, please.
I want a gold medal.’
And, though he didn't get one in the singles, he did in the doubles.
With Michael Stich.
WHILE Jack Nicholson waited outside, Michael Douglas popped into the Seiko hospitality tent at the Barcelona Olympics and asked where he could get one of their watches.
Trying to get a freebie?
Surely not!
Anyway, he didn't.
A cold Catalan beauty told him where he could go to buy one.
THE Queen Mum, Princess Margaret and Princess Anne all have birthdays in August and, we're told, when they blow out the candles they sing: ‘Happy Birthday to One.’
CLASSIC QUOTE
GARTH GIBBS
I don't like to read because it takes my mind off myself.
— Oscar Levant, American wit.
Obsessed by sects
A NEW book, Organised Obsessions: 1001 Offbeat Associations, Fan Clubs and Microsocieties You Can Join, lists hundreds of groups where even folks with the most unusual interests can find kindred spirits.
Among them are: The International Petula Clark Society; The Club of the Friends of Ancient Smoothing Irons; The International Diastema Club.
(Diastema being a gap between the two front teeth of at least two  millimetres ); The Association of Aardvark Aficionados; and Sarcastics Anonymous — devoted to individuals who alienate others through the inappropriate use of sarcastic remarks.
The group claims to have ‘lots of laughs but no friends’.
ANNE'S SHOT AT STAYING PUTT
ONE of the Spanish flunkies approached the Princess Royal in Barcelona last week when the Royal Box happened to be empty and suggested she sit there.
‘No thank you,’ said Anne stiffly.
‘We think you should,’ said the  pushy flunkie.
‘Listen,’ said Princess Anne, ‘wherever I sit IS the Royal Box.’
ONE MORE THING
THE current recession joke Down Under, with Australia $16 billion in debt is: QUESTION: What's the capital of Australia?
ANSWER: About 20 cents!
MIRROR PLANT
CHARLES LYTE
GROUND cover plants help make a garden easy to maintain and they curb weeds.
Some covering plants can turn into a nuisance.
But not Pachysandra, a fleshy-leafed evergreen, which has nice variegated varieties.
Pachysandra terminalis is the best of the bunch.
It thrives in most soils that retains moisture.
But it does best in the dappled shade you get under shrubs or woodland trees.
The flowers are small and white, but the freshness of the foliage makes this plant so appealing.
P. procumbens forms neat clumps and has scented flowers, while P. axillaris tends to develop into a small shrub.
They are natives of America, China and Japan.
Take cuttings at this time of the year.
Otherwise the plants should be split up in the Spring.
Flour bomb
CHARLES LYTE
I'VE destroyed all my Begonia plants because they were covered with what looked like flour.
What was it?
A IT was Powdery Mildew and it might have been possible to save the Begonias.
If it happens again next year with new plants, spray them with something like Benlate + Activex 2.
Scrub out the pots with hot water and disinfectant.
Never use the same potting compost two years running.
Q THIS year some of the buds on my clematis, Comtesse de Bouchard, have either dried up or produced very small flowers.
Why?
FORTUNATELY, this does not sound like the dreaded, and far too common, Clematis wilt, but it could be hot, dry weather  symptoms .
Well-established clematis plants develop a large root system that takes up a great deal of water.
Dry soil round the roots spoils the flowering.
So sink a pipe into the soil down to the roots and use this to supply them with water.
Next Spring start feeding the plant every week with a liquid fertiliser.
Q MY good crop of Brussels Sprouts are ready to eat, but some sprouts are becoming over blown.
Why is this?
A SEEMS to me as though you may have been overfeeding them with a fertiliser containing quite a lot of nitrogen and perhaps over-watering.
Brassicas like well-manured ground and a reasonable amount of watering.
BELLS TO RING IN SPRING
CHARLES LYTE
ONE of the most graceful of all the Spring bulbs is the Snakeshead Fritillary (Fritillaria meleagris), which is also known as the Chequered Lily.
A rare native of Southern England, it has bell-shaped flowers chequered with pink, purple and white.
And there is a beautiful pure white form.
They do best in moist but well-drained soil.
Our super-saver offer for this week: you can buy 50 bulbs for only £4.95.
Send orders to: Daily Mirror Snakeshead Offer, P.O. Box 64, South West District Office, Manchester, M16 9HY.
Please state the number of packs you want.
Make cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Snakeshead Offer, and please put your name and address on the back.
Access/Visa cardholders can phone orders to: 061 431 6431 (24-hour service).
Please allow 21 days for delivery.
Set up a seed safari
CHARLES LYTE
NOW'S the time to go on a seed hunting expedition in your garden.
But avoid the the F1 hybrids, which are produced in special conditions.
Start your safari with the old varieties of vegetables, flowers, shrubs and trees.
For example, the Foxgloves (Digitalis) are ready for harvesting.
Many hardy annuals and perennials like Love-in-the-Mist (Nigella), Godetias, Clarkias, Delphiniums, Oriental Poppies and lilies are setting seed.
Dry the seeds in a cool, airy place and remove chaff, dust or dirt.
Seeds are best stored in airtight containers.
Or paper bags tied up tight at the neck.
Don't forget to label them.
Next week: Seed sowing.
YOUR MONEY
Thanks for the Party!
JOHN HUSBAND
THE TORY party has much to thank tycoon Lord Hanson (above) for.
He's given them £342,000 in the past five years to create the ‘right business environment’.
That recession-hit environment left Hanson Group's profits £200m LOWER at £762m in the last nine trading months.
And it looks set to see its first full-year profit drop in 28 years.
Whoops!
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
A SURVEY has shown one of the most popular girls' names in Essex is Chelsea.
Now guess which naff American politician has a daughter by that name.
Step forward Bill Clinton.
A SIGN outside a church in Flatwoods, Kentucky, hometown of hunky Billy Ray Cyrus reads: ‘Jesus Can Mend Your Achy Breaky Heart.’
OLYMPIC aces returning from Barcelona this week brought back a very silly story about cycling superstar Chris Boardman: ‘Have you heard he's been tested for drugs.’
‘Never!’
‘Yeah.
They think he's been pedalling.’
Chasin' Jason
WE'D drive all night to be by Jennifer Connolly's side.
But currently she's by Jason (Beverly Hills 90210) Priestly's side in the video for Roy Orbison's chart hit I Drove All Night.
Jason's role called on him to kiss Jennifer — again and again and again.
Dammit.
The last gasper
HOW times have changed.
Physics Nobel laureate Leon Lederman, told a recent science writers' dinner: ‘A guy goes into a store and says, in a loud voice: ‘A dozen condoms please.’
And, in a whisper, ‘A pack of Marlboros.’'
The last gasper
HOW do you make a perfect smile for the camera?
Saying ‘Cheese’ is out.
According to the chap who designs the Queen's gear, Hardy Amies, Lord Snowdon recommends the word ‘Lesbian’.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
RIGHT Said Fred hit back at 2 Unlimited who claimed fans walked out on Fred in Brisbane.
Singer Richard Fairbrass, stormed at the duo at No.12 with Magic Friend: ‘They couldn't have been at the same show.
Maybe they were jealous because we were the headliners.’
ROXETTE star Per Gessle wandered around starkers after accidentally locking himself out of his Munich hotel room.
Per, at No. 20 with How Do You Do, reveals: ‘I bumped into a chambermaid as I tried to get back in.
I think she was as embarrassed as me.’
FACT FILE
FRANKLY, DELICIOUS
MARK DOWDNEY /DAVID KERR
CHANNEL-HOPPERS are well aware of the bargains available in France — but why not turn that day-trip into a weekend break?
A couple of nights in a comfortable hotel, with the best of French cuisine, sets you up for months.
On a trip to Aire-sur-La Lys, just 36 miles from Calais but deep in the heart of provincial France, we stayed at The Three Mousquetaires, a converted chateau.
We were spoiled with four-star luxury by a family who care about getting the details right.
But don't go if you are slimming.
The food is fantastic.
Flanders, the flat landscape around this area, mauled by wars since William the  Conqueror's day, is full of farms, villages, and market towns.
And its battlegrounds are crammed with history.
The Saturday morning market fills two huge squares in the town of Arras and locals also seek the bargains.
Local cheeses and vegetables are well worth buying.
We stocked up at the hypermarket on coffee and beer at less than half English prices.
But after wining and dining in style, it's only aboard the tea-time boat home that you count the real cost — those extra pounds on your waistline.
WEEKENDS and short breaks in France and Belgium brochure from: Inntravel, The Old Station, Helmsley, York, YO6 5BZ.
Channel crossing: Sealink Stena Line, Charter House, Park Street, Ashford, Kent.
Or phone: 0233 647 047.
CHEESY: France
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
THE Yanks are going potty for our china, according to  Portmeirion , which supplies posh shop Harrods.
Sales in the U.S. jumped an eighth, to more than £4 million, in the last six months, helping push up profits by 40 per cent to £1,400,000.
Saving grace
THE latest round of interest rate cuts by building societies and National Savings is bad news for savers.
It especially hits pensioners and those on fixed incomes who rely on the interest to meet their bills.
But the news isn't as bad as it looks.
For the inflation rate has been coming down even faster.
Two years ago the Halifax was paying 10.25 per cent before tax on £5,000.
Inflation was then 10.6 per cent.
So in real terms you were getting nothing.
And after allowing for income tax you were actually losing money.
Since then the rate offered has fallen to 7.6 per cent gross.
But with inflation down to 3.7 per cent you are now getting a real return of nearly 4 per cent on your money.
Even if you pay income tax, it still amounts to a real return of 2 per cent.
And those with larger amounts to invest — attracting even higher rates of interest — are doing substantially better than that.
A B C D E F G H 1 2 26 25 3 4 24 23
WIN 50 NINTENDO SCOPE LIGHT GUNS
ENTER POWER UP PETE'S £10,500 CONTEST
Plus consoles and new games
POWER UP PETE, the kid from the street, is giving away FIFTY Super Nintendo consoles PLUS 50 fabulous new Scope light guns, and you can win them — by helping him save the world.
There's £10,500 worth of prizes for those of you who are you up to the task.
With each Super Nintendo console, you also get the great game Super Mario World and a controller.
The Super Nintendo Scope light guns — which enables you to shoot at the television set with pinpoint accuracy — won't be in the shops until the end of next month.
Each one comes with SIX shoot-em-up games.
But you start playing to win one NOW.
All you have to do is help Pete on his latest dangerous mission.
Alarm
In his last adventure Pete had to rescue the beautiful Princess Petal from the evil clutches of the monster Terradawn.And with your help he managed to do it.
But now the alarm bells are ringing again.
The wicked Dr Mamuk has stolen the secret plans for a virtual reality chamber and is trying to sell them to an alien race.
If that happens the aliens will be able to disguise themselves as humans and invade Earth.
Nothing less than the future of Mankind is at stake!
Armed with his trusty Nintendo Scope — and with Princess Petal at his side — Power Up Pete is ready to take on Dr Mamuk.
But first he has to set the number co-ordinates on his Scope before he can fire at any object.
Here is part of the code book that contains the numbers:
First crack the whole code and keep it on one side.
Today the evil Doctor has sent a runaway train after Pete.
What numbers must Pete set to fire his Scope at a TRAIN?
If you can solve the clue keep the numbers safe.
Each day this week there will be another co-ordinate to solve.
On Saturday in Power Up! in TV Weekly we will be printing a coupon for you to fill in each day's numbers.
And the first 50 entrants out of the postbag on Friday, August 28, will win a Super Nintendo games console with the game Super Mario World.
Plus they'll get a Super Nintendo Scope light gun.
COSMIC PRIZES: There's 50 Super NES consoles plus Scope light guns to be won, together with six fantastic shoot-em-up games for our lucky winners
LIVELY LETTERS
writes from : THE funerals of both a soldier blown up in Ulster and a young mother murdered on Wimbledon Common were marked by the same poem:
Do not stand at my grave and weep, I am not there, I do not sleep.
The deaths are sad and regretted by everyone but no one seems to have attributed the beautiful poem correctly.
Was it not written by Albert Sprengler son of W. B. Sprengler, 17/21 Lancers, a Chelsea pensioner?
It is a fascinating mystery.
Some years ago it was handed to the chaplain of the Chelsea Pensioners at a funeral, but the clergyman said he had read it many years before.
In 1989, Lance Bombardier Steve Cummins, the soldier killed in Ulster, wrote it to his parents to be read at his death, and marked ‘Anonymous.’
Some say he took it from an Indian funeral chant, others from a poem by a U.S. poet Mary Fry, though no one seems to know anything else about the lady.
Poetry Professor Peter Levi, Oxford University, says it is a well written poem, but not a famous one and he cannot identify the author.
CAT
, writes: THERE is another reason for the expression ‘No room to swing a cat.’
My grandfather, an old sailor, told me nearly 70 years ago that originally the expression was ‘No room to swing a cot,’ meaning a ship's hammock.
Probably when the saying went into general use, people didn't understand it and changed it to cat.
Grandad's explanation sounds more probable than the others.
Ancient mariners were a knowing all lot.
HAIRY
, writes: I'VE joined a cycling club and I am puzzled why most of the professionals shave their legs.
Even after a few beers, I am too shy to ask the reason.
Can you tell me their secret?
There are two reasons.
By shaving they have an aerodynamic advantage because the absence of hair helps them to go faster.
But the main reason is that if they have a crash, it is far easier to treat a wound with no superficial hair and the risk of infection is lessened.
EPIC
, writes: I HAVE just watched the 1956 film of Tolstoy's War And Peace.
Am I right in thinking I have seen an earlier and a later version.
Yes, you could have seen the 1916 Russian epic, King Vidor's 1955 version with Henry Fonda and Audrey Hepburn, Granada TV's 1963 Emmy winner, Sergei Bondartchuk's seven hour effort of 1964, and in 1972 Rupert Davies and Anthony Hopkins in the BBC version.
TODAY'S THOUGHT
Shame is the feeling you have when you agree with the woman who loves you that you are the man she thinks you are.
— Carl SANDBURG (1878-1967).
MICHELLE'S HOLIDAY OF THE DECADE
HOLLYWOOD beauty Michelle Pfeiffer is taking her first holiday in TEN years.
The sexy Batman Returns star says that up until now she has been too busy chasing her career to take any time off.
Blonde Michelle says: ‘My boyfriend Fisher Stevens will have to drag me kicking and screaming out of the house, but once I get on holiday I'm sure I'll enjoy it.
‘For years I didn't know what to do with myself when I wasn't acting.
I've always dreaded vacations.
But now I reckon I deserve a holiday.’
WORKAHOLIC: Michelle
CHARTBUSTERS Was (Not Was) won't return to France in a hurry after touring for a few miserable days.
Singer Sweet Pea Atkinson, at No. 10 with Shake Your Head, says: ‘The French were so rude.
Really obnoxious.
I've never seen so many unhappy people.’
LIVELY LETTERS
, writes: MY DAUGHTER is getting married in October and we are trying to find out the proper rules.
Should the bride and groom not see each other the night before the wedding or even before the ceremony.
Is it because such a meeting would bring bad luck or is there another reason?
It is a fairly modern idea, based on ancient morality that the groom should never look upon the bride in her glory before the ceremony.
In the last century, it was not observed and ‘walking weddings’ were common.
The bride walked to the church with the best man with the groom following.
When when they left the church the bride and groom were followed by the best man and the bridesmaid.
This dated back to Roman times when bachelors led the bride to the ceremony and married men escorted her back.
To ensure good luck, your daughter should leave home by the front door, stepping out with her right foot first.
It is also lucky if the sun shines, there is a rainbow, and she sees a black cat, a chimney sweep or an elephant.
CHAMPIONS
, writes: PLEASE settle a dispute with my workmates about the birthplaces of old-time world heavyweight champions John L. Sullivan, Jim Corbett and Gene Tunney.
I say they were all born in the US but they say they were born in Ireland, Canada or other places.
Long before that bell, fans, Sullivan was born in Roxbury, Massachusetts, on October 15, 1858; Corbett in San Francisco on September 1, 1866; and Tunney in New York on May 25, 1898.
Your workmates may be confused because Sullivan and Tunney were the sons of Irish immigrants.
DANCE
writes from ,: MY eight-year-old grand-daughter Jennifer is learning a song at dancing school, The Black Bottom.
We cannot find a copy of the words.
Can you?
Tell Jennifer the number was written in 1926 and was in the original film of A Star is Born starring Judy Garland.
Warner-Chappell, the publishers, still have it and we hope Jennifer will take a leaf out of Judy Garland's book and feel like a star.
SNOOKUMS
, writes: MY grandson, with a little curl in the middle of his forehead, reminded me of ‘Snookums.’
But who was Snookums?
An imaginary character whose name is used as an endearment.
As long ago as 1919, the adverts said:
‘Even Snookums knows and appreciates the soothing qualities of Johnson's Toilet and Baby Powder.’
TODAY'S THOUGHT
Cleaning your house while the kids are still growing is like shovelling the snow before it stops snowing.
— Phyllis DILLER (born 1917).
CRIME INC.
‘TORIES CAN'T ESCAPE BLAME’
In slump-hit Britain, one company is making a real killing
ROGER TODD
AS BRITAIN slithers ever deeper into recession one big business is booming — CRIME.
Professional villainy now boasts an annual turnover of £14 billion.
That places it FOURTH in the premier league of top-earning ‘industries’.
It's bigger than British Telecom which, at its profitable peak, was coining it at the rate of £90 a second.
Nice little earners like ICI, British Aerospace, British Gas, Grand Met, Sainsbury and Hanson just can't compete.
Only BP who made £41.2billion, Shell (£29.7billion) and Unilever (£23.1billion) are more profitable.
But while Crime Inc. prospers, the rest of society is paying a terrible price.
And the Tory Government can't escape a major share of the blame.
During 13 years' rule by the party of law and order the police have had only a five per cent increase in manpower.
Meanwhile the number of crimes has DOUBLED — up from 2 million crimes to 5 million a year.
Critics say Tory policy has created a crueller, more selfish Britain.
More damningly, it has abandoned the ‘underclass’— where the desperate poor are driven to petty offences.
Even the country's top cop, Scotland Yard Commissioner Sir Peter Imbert, has admitted there are ‘compelling reasons’ for linking crimes like burglary and car theft with POVERTY.
‘If you take a map of disadvantage and press it over a map of crime, there is too close a coincidence,’ he said in his annual report last month.
Ironically, crime is helping provide legitimate employment for 420,000 people battling AGAINST it.
That's 130,000 police, 50,000 civilians, 34,200 prison officers, 175,000 security officers, 7,000 probation officers, and thousands more in courts including lawyers.
The figures come from a new survey by the Guardian newspaper, which boils down the profits of our fastest growing industry like this: Drugs trade is worth £2.74 billion.
Arson, by people wanting to claim their own insurance — £407 million.
VAT fraud — £38 million.
Common Agricultural Policy frauds milking every UK citizens of £20 a head by claiming phoney subsidies — £500 million.
Plastic card frauds are running at £165 million.
Car crime.
Stealing them for resale, stealing from them, making phoney insurance claims after getting them stolen for you, even putting them through council crushers — £626 million.
Serious fraud — around £5 billion.
Shop theft — retailers believe they lose around £3.2 billion a year and the losses are growing.
Burglary — where it's reckoned that a only tiny proportion are ever caught — nets £590 million.
Muggers earn about £13 million terrorising people in the streets.
And armed robbers netted £316 million.
The Confederation of British Industry said: ‘Crime is costing business £1million an hour, every hour of the day — that's £10 billion a year.
‘That covers thefts from shops, businesses, things falling off the back of lorries, fraud, arson and robbery.’
The new National Criminal Intelligence Service, which will handle all known information on 25,000 top villains, said: ‘Crime is going up and up and up.
‘It has particularly taken off in the last three years.
We hope better co-ordination will let us convict more of the worst villains.’
Labour law and order spokesman Alun Michael MP said: ‘If every item of shopping we bought had a ticket telling us how much of its price was due to crime losses and higher insurance premiums, we would all be appalled.
‘The government does it with poll tax bills, letting us know how much we pay for those who won't, so why not extend it?
‘Much of the Government's approach to crime helps to make little crooks bigger criminals.
The emphasis in the last 10 years has been to encourage selfishness.
‘And now that people can see that crime really does pay — more will undoubtedly be drawn to it.’
Home Office figures show that a million people are convicted of criminal offences each year and that 45,000 are paying the penalty in jail at any one time.
In slump-hit Britain desperate times are breeding desperate acts.
STREET TERROR: Muggers are making £13 million
POLICE HAUL: But £2.74 billion drug trade prospers
ROLE MODEL
GEENA DAVIS got her first acting break — by posing in a shop window.
The Thelma & Louise star, then a sales assistant, impressed a talent spotter who snapped her up for a stage role.
ANITA CRACKS UP
CHART star Anita Dels was on the verge of quitting her high-flying pop career after a nervous breakdown.
The 19-year-old singer from 2 Unlimited was left mentally wrecked and physically exhausted after a gruelling tour of South America.
Anita, who with co-star Raymond Slijingaard is at No. 12 with The Magic Friend — the duo's fourth smash hit in just seven months — reveals: ‘Everything got too much for me and I couldn't cope.
‘It all came to a head while we were touring South America.
It was there I suffered the nervous breakdown.
‘I was terribly depressed, felt sad all the time and was incredibly homesick.
‘I wasn't eating or sleeping properly.
Everything was wrong with me.
I just didn't know what was going on.
And I was doing as many as ten shows a week.
‘Everything had happened much too fast.
One minute I was in Holland working as a clerk in a police station and the next I was zooming all around the world.
‘I told the people around me that I wanted to quit, so they flew me back home to see a doctor.
He told me to start taking things easy.’
Added the keyboard-playing star: ‘Raymond, my close friends and my family helped me come to terms with my depression.
‘Now I feel great.’
ANITA: Couldn't cope
WIN ELVIS CLASSICS
DOES Elvis get you all shook up?
Well, we've got a Presley prize just for YOU.
To commemorate the 15th anniversary of Elvis' death last Sunday we've teamed up with BMG Records in a fabulous £1,300 competition to give away 30 copies of The King Of Rock ‘n Roll — The Complete ‘50s Masters featuring 140 of the King's classics, including previously unreleased songs.
The five-tape set, which retails at £39.99, also includes a never-released demo Fool, Fool, Fool PLUS a colour booklet containing biography, discography, rare photos and four collector's original sleeves.
Ten runners-up choose one of THREE Elvis videos: The 1969 Comeback Special, Aloha From Hawaii or One Night With You.
TO enter complete this Elvis song title: Love Me….
Phone your answer on the following number 0891 525 512 by midnight tomorrow, leaving your name, address, video choice and daytime phone number.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p all other times.
Your call should cost around the price of a first class postcard.
TAXING TIMES FOR FELIX
SHY tax inspector Felix will miss out on £50,000 this month — because he's scared to make public appearances in case the bosses at his day job recognise him.
So the Essex-based producer responsible for this week's fastest-rising hit, Don't You Want Me, can't perform lucrative concerts or go on TV in case his bosses see him.
As exclusively revealed in Limit the 28-year-old rave whiz — who so far has sold 60,000 records — works for the Inland Revenue which bans staff from moonlighting.
So despite his record being at No. 6 and getting played 15 times on Radio One last week, Felix has not made one appearance anywhere.
One top pop agent reveals: ‘With a single so high in the charts Felix should be earning up to £2,000 a night in clubs.
‘He could earn another £400-a-time from TV shows like Top Of The Pops.
He will be losing around £50,000 a month.’
The producer/singer's record company has been forced to come up with all kinds of excuses.
But a source close to the star, reveals: ‘If his employers found out, he'd have some serious explaining to do.
‘And if he was seen on TOTP that could be the end.’
INXS are only the second Aussie band to crash into the album charts at No 1.
Twelve years ago bad-boy rockers AC/DC debuted at the top spot with Back In Black on the same date — August 9.
A spokeswoman for INXS, whose LP, Welcome To Wherever You Are, includes the recent hit, Heaven Sent, says: ‘The chances of this happening are a million to one.
It's pretty cosmic.’
PAP SNAP
HOLLYWOOD hulk Arnie Schwarzenegger has heard all about pap snap and tries to get one of his photos used.
Sorry, Arnie.
Nice try, but we like the pic our snapper took of you much better.
LOADS OF LAUGHS
A CLUSTER of top-grossing movies are due to be sent up in new spoof National Lampoon's Loaded Weapon I. The team responsible for Animal House have signed up Emilio Estevez to star in this send-up of Lethal Weapon, Silence Of The Lambs and Dances With Wolves.
PUBLIC OPINION
That's okay by me, boss
WHAT a wonderful example by the three directors of a recession-hit company to slash £30,000 off their own wages so their loyal staff would get a pay increase.
Three cheers for the bosses of Brandon Tool Hire in Bristol who made this magnificent gesture.
Now let it rub off on greedy directors of other companies, especially those recently privatised, who have been giving themselves huge rises while keeping down workers' pay.
—
WHAT nonsense people talk about school dinners being essential for the health of the kids.
They were introduced when there was a real need to get some hot food into the poor.
That era is long past.
Most don't need them.
The few who do can get them.
Stop whingeing about a non-issue. —.
SINCE everyone's gunning for Chancellor Lamont can we expect him to lose his job soon?
And will he then be rewarded for failure, like all the others, by being given a huge job in the City?—.
I AM sick of Mary Whitehouse and other so-called do-gooders telling me what I should be allowed to watch on television.
I am a 66-year-old pensioner and quite capable of deciding for myself what is suitable to see.
—.
IT WAS great to see a handsome chap in a loincloth on Page Three, instead of a girl.
And great to see Phillip Schofield voted Best-Dressed Man of the Year.
The London stage couldn't be without him — in loincloth or natty suit.
—.
YOUR MONEY
IT'S RECESSION BY THE BOOK
IAN MILLER
EVEN CATALOGUE shopping — one the cheapest ways of buying household goods — is not recession-proof.
Now Argos, our biggest cut-price catalogues group, is feeling the pinch.
Profits plunged by a tenth to £9.5 million in the last six months.
And this is despite Argos bombarding shoppers with a record 12.5 million catalogues.
Argos has opened more stores, but sales of goods like stereos and home furnishings have plummeted.
And the whole market — dominated by six firms including Argos and Great Universal Stores — is shrinking for the first time in years.
Argos can offer goods at lower prices than its High Street competitors because it hasn't got as many overheads.
It doesn't pay out costs for expensive store displays since the goods are stored in boxes behind the counter.
Argos, which has nearly 300 stores nationwide, is trying to beat the slump by slashing prices even further.
CHECK CARD
SOMETHING good has come out of the NatWest Access computer system foul-up which left customers with muddled statements.
You'll get the date you spent the money and the date it was billed to your account on Access statements.
It's to help keep a better check on spending after complaints that some credit card outlets take too long getting signed slips to card issuers.
MIRROR MONEY
SNIP FOR SNAPPERS
SAY cheese!
Alliance and Leicester building society will develop a roll of 24 holiday snaps FREE if you buy their travellers cheques.
The service normally costs £1.90 through a postal processing service.
The Alliance charges one per cent commission for issuing sterling travellers cheques and 1.5 per cent on foreign currency ones, plus a £3 handling fee.
So £200 costs a fiver for sterling and £6 for other cash.
STRICTLY FOR KICKS
SOCCER SHARES ARE FUN, BUT NOT MUCH SAFER THAN HORSES
FOOTBALL shares are about as safe as betting that Gazza won't injure himself this season.
But they can be fun — providing you gamble only what you can afford to lose.
There are now three English football clubs which are quoted on the Stock Market.
All hope their share prices will rise as they battle for trophies and titles in the new season.
But the shares are a high risk for investors because you never know how the clubs will perform.
If a club is relegated — which happened to one of them in 1990 — the shares will fall steeply in value.
Then again, it might win the FA Cup and that will bring in megamoney from higher attendances and advertising, so the shares go up.
SPURS shares were sent off in 1990 when they were suspended by the Stock Exchange.
They are back in play now at 88p, but were floated at a quid each in 1983.
Millionaire computer tycoon Alan Sugar, a lifelong Spurs fan, bought a 48 per cent stake in the club earlier this year.
Spurs made a £810,000 profit in the six months to November, 1991.
MANCHESTER
United is Britain's richest club.
It made profits of £5.4 million in the 1990-91 season.
The club is awash with cash, but the shares, are languishing at 265p because the City still reckons the original flotation price was too high at 385p.
MILLWALL shares were floated at 20p in 1989 when the club was second in the First Division.
They won only one more game that season and in 1990 were relegated.
Losses were reduced from £1.5 million to £1.1 million in the last six months of trading, and should go down further this year.
The shares are now just 2.5p, so you could pick up a massive 4,000 shares for £100 before brokers fees.
But you do NOT get any perks for buying FC shares.
So don't expect any preferential treatment or to be invited to meet the stars at their Christmas party.
INJECTION OF HOPE
New jab is breakthrough in the battle against killer meningitis
But parents are warned it's not a miracle cure
JILL PALMER
A NEW jab available in the autumn could wipe out one of the most common forms of meningitis affecting babies in Britain.
The vaccine brings hope to 1,300 young children struck down by the Hib form of deadly disease every year.
But despite the breakthrough there is still a along way to go in combating meningitis, which affects more than 3,000 people and claims 300 lives every year.
Vaccination will only protect children against one strain of the illness.
It is useless against all other forms of meningitis which cause deafness, blindness, and brain damage as well as death.
‘The vaccine is a great step forward but parents must still stay on their guard against meningitis,’ warned Helen Buttery of the National Meningitis Trust.
‘It is vital that they are aware that it only gives protection against one of the many strains of the disease.
We don't want people to think this vaccine will give complete protection.’
The immunisation programme, was announced by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley yesterday.
From October it will be offered to babies in three doses at two, three, and four months, at the same time as the triple diphtheria, whooping cough, and tetanus jab.
Doctors hope vaccination will repeat the success of measles and whooping cough immunisation programmes and eradicate deaths from Hib (haemophilus influenzae type B) meningitis which currently claims 65 young lives every year.
Viruses
Latest figures revealed by the Government yesterday show that in 1990 and 1991, for the first time ever, no child had died from measles, and last year no child died from whooping cough, again for the first time.
Meningitis can be caused by both bacteria and viruses.
Viral meningitis is very common and rarely serious.
Most cases are caused by sewage-polluted water.
Although recovery is normally complete victims can suffer months of continuing problems — as footballer Lee Sharpe has discovered.
The Manchester United winger is expected to be out of football for two months suffering from tiredness, depression, and persistent headaches.
Viral meningitis cannot be helped by antibiotics and the only treatment is rest.
Bacterial meningitis is the deadliest form of the disease, killing one in 10 sufferers and leaving one in seven severely handicapped.
It is spread by coughing, sneezing, and kissing, but is not usually caught from sufferers but from other members of the family who may be carriers.
These bacteria are very common and live naturally in the back of the nose and throat of up to 10 per cent of the population.
Most cases are isolated incidents and when clusters occur it is usually a particularly virulent strain or involves people who are possibly genetically susceptible.
Meningococcal meningitis accounts for about half Britain's cases and usually affects small children and young adults.
There is still no childhood vaccine although researchers at Southampton University — funded by the National Meningitis Trust — believe one may be developed in five to ten years.
The difficulty is that the bacteria is notorious for changing itself and every time scientists think they are on the verge of a development the bacteria becomes resistant.
Hib meningitis causes around a third of all cases of bacterial meningitis and is the commonest form in children under four.
Every year 1,300 children — most aged between six and 15 months old — are affected, suffering severe headaches, high temperature, fever, and vomiting.
Vaccine
They become very ill and need immediate intensive care in hospital with antibiotics given directly through a vein.
Around 150 are left deaf or brain damaged.
‘The Hib vaccine is both safe and effective with no serious side effects,’ said Rebecca Weston of Meningitis Research.
‘The encouraging news is that in countries such as Finland and the USA where vaccination against Hib disease had been extensively administered the incidence of this form of meningitis has been dramatically reduced.
‘In Helsinki, Finland, they haven't seen a case for nearly two years.
This gives us hope.
‘It is vital that parents get their children immunised.
But it is equally vital they do not get complacent about the disease as there are many other forms against which there is no protection.
‘And only early detection can save lives.’
National Meningitis Trust, Fern House, Bath Road, Glos, GL5 3TJ, helpline 0453 755049.
Meningitis Research, Old Gloucester Road, Alveston, Bristol BS12 2LQ, helpline 0454 413344.
LIFELINE: New vaccine helps fight meningitis
THE LIMIT
ESSEX WHIRL
RICK SKY
FORGET Essex girls — and thrill to the Essex SOUND.
The county's young men are taking the charts by storm as a string of young dance bands from the area have rocketed to stardom over the last 18 months.
Three of the summer's hottest hits — Felix's Don't You Want Me, Smart E's Sesame's Treet, and Hyper Go Go's High — are pure Essex.
Other rave bands who have put the county on the map include: THE PRODIGY, who have notched up Top Five hits with Charley and Everybody in the Place.
SL2, who got to No 2 with On A Raggatip; and SUNSCREEM, who enjoyed a Top 30 hit last month with Love U More.
Music biz insiders agree the ‘Essex Sound’ is this year's ‘in sound’.
A spokesman for XL Recordings, whose acts include SL2 and the Prodigy, says: ‘The county's bands instigated the hard-core dance movement and are still out in front.’
And Smart E's manager Danny Donnelly says: ‘There's always been a strong dance scene here and that's probably why local bands have been at the forefront of the rave scene.
‘There's a  camaraderie .
We know SL2 and the Prodigy and we help each other out.’
CAN OF WORMS
MARIO MOVIE STARS PLUMB NEW DEPTHS
FILMING of the new Hollywood blockbuster Super Mario Brothers has descended into chaos after a series of bitter on-set rows.
Members of the star-studded cast objected strongly when producers insisted they shoot one scene with LIVE WORMS in their mouths.
It is the latest setback in Disney's bid to put a movie in the can based on the world's biggest-selling video game.
The computer game, which features two crazy New York plumbers called The Mario Brothers, has already generated £330 million in sales and merchandising.
A cluster of top stars, including Bob Hoskins and Dennis Hopper, were signed for the £30 million film — PLUS Oscar-winning backroom boys behind such hits as The Commitments and Dances With Wolves.
Insiders predict the movie, on release from Christmas, will gross more than Batman Returns, which has so far earned over £150 million.
But already it has been dubbed ‘The Movie From Hell’ after stars moaned about constant script changes and cameramen threatened to walk out.
Hopper, who plays bad guy Koopa, storms: ‘The movie was re-written six times before we even started — now it's re-written every day.’
Bob Hoskins who stars as Mario, says: ‘It's all very frustrating.’
FRUSTRATED: Hoskins
MIRROR MONEY
IAN MILLER
Holiday £
Austria — 19.2 Belgium — 56.4 Cyprus — 0.79 France — 9.26 Germany — 2.74 Greece — 336 Holland — 3.09 Ireland — 1.03 Italy — 2085 Malta — 0.55 Portugal — 234 Spain — 175 Switzerland — 2.47 Turkey — 12850 USA — 1.89 Yugoslavia — Refer FOR latest exchange rates ring 0898 900 909.
Calls cost 36p a minute, cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
HILARY GILES of Dunstable and her husband Charles are all set for a super day out at York today, as guests of the Daily Mirror.
The Punters' No. 1 paper is sponsoring one of the highlights on the card, the Andy Capp Handicap.
And Hilary and her husband will be there as winner of our contest.
Joining Hilary will be our second winner Mark Wood of Oakwood, Derby, and his fiancee Jackie Allen.
They will all be wined and dined in our private box.
And to add an extra thrill to the afternoon, William Hill are giving both our winners the chance to win a fortune with £200 of free bets.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
SHANNEN DOHERTY shows worrying signs of thinking she's an ostrich.
Next step will be when the Beverly Hills 90210 beauty starts burying her head in the warm California sand during filming.
OVER THE LIMIT
MONGOLIAN women have the world's flattest breasts.
Big boobs, so adored by men in Western countries, are considered ‘appalling deformities’ there.
No wonder Dolly Parton has few fans in Ulan Bator!
WIN 25 HEAVY METAL PACKETS
GET ROCKING with The Limit's great Donington competition.
We've got a monster package of wonderful rock goodies to give away including: 25 Iron Maiden cut-to-shape Picture Discs, 25 signed W.A.S.P.
albums, 25 signed Thunder 12-inch singles, and 25 Donington T-shirts.
Twenty Five winners will win a package containing each item and ONE lucky reader will also win Almighty singer Ricky Warwick's black leather trousers (28 in waist) worn during the band's last tour, PLUS a special package of Thunder, Skid Row and Almighty CDs and videos.
To enter our super competition simply complete this Iron Maiden song title: Bring Your Daughter To The……….
Write your answer, name and address on a postcard and send to The Limit's Donington competition, Daily Mirror,……(new address).
First correct answers out of the bag by Wednesday, August 26, will win.
THE Castle Donington Monsters Of Rock festival — the biggest hard rock event in the pop calendar — kicks off this weekend.
This year 72,000 fans will see the cream of the heavy metal scene such as Iron Maiden, Sid Row and W.A.S.P perform an avalanche of blistering music.
TRICKY TIMES FOR IRON MAIDEN
MILLIONAIRE rockers Iron Maiden faced a night in jail after an amazing wrecking spree in a posh Munich hotel.
The band were left with a £10,000 bill for damage after valuable antiques were thrown out of a window, damaging a car below.
Guitarist Davey Murray and a friend all-but destroyed the hotel suite after an evening of ‘magic’ tricks turned sour.
Says Murray: ‘I was my room with a pal and after several drinks I started doing  conjuring tricks — making cigarettes and bottle tops disappear.
‘My pal said, ‘See that table and chair.
I can make them disappear too.’
‘The next minute he'd picked them both up and thrown them out of the window.’
‘We were 13 floors up and it turned out the furniture — which landed on a car — was worth £6,000.
‘The police turned up convinced there'd been a riot.
They were about to arrest the whole band until I told them I was to blame.’
Adds Murray: ‘I was hauled off to the station but allowed to go after agreeing to pay for the damage.’
MAGIC: Murray
QUAKE OF THUNDER
THUNDER were left quaking after a run-in with armed police in Rio.
The band, on a sell-out South American tour, were sight-seeing when police with machine guns surrounded them.
Says singer Danny Bowles: ‘They held us against a wall and grilled us.
Believe me, we told them everything they wanted to know.’
GRILLED: DANNY
W.A.S.P.
singer Blackie Lawless has blasted America's moral pressure group Washington Wives for their campaign to clampdown on heavy metal music.
‘Thanks to these people's scaremongering, we were plagued by death threats,’ says Blackie.
‘It got so bad FBI agents had to stay at my house to protect me from religious extremists whipped up by their campaign.’
NEW MOVIES
PAULINE MCLEOD
AMANTES (Cert 18; Selected) is a steamy, murderous love triangle, based on an actual 1955 murder case.
It stars Victoria Abril as a sexy young widow who rents a room to Paco (Jorge Sanz) and despite the fact he is engaged to his virginal girlfriend, he is more than happy to be seduced by his landlady.
SENTIMENTAL comedy JERSEY GIRL (Cert15; W.E.) stars Jami Gertz as Toby who wants a break from the ‘going nowhere’ men she dates in New Jersey and legs it into Manhattan to meet Mr Right.
She meets him immediately when she hits his new Jag with her battered old Beetle.
But sophisticated Sal (Dylan McDemott) isn't as convinced about Toby who pursues him until he has to give in to her — er — charms.
RED-HOT IRONS' WATER TORTURE
IF WATERLAND (Cert 15; Selected) were simply a simple kitchen sink drama, you would probably agree that its got the lot…guilt, betrayal, incest, insanity, murder, illicit teenage love, abortion.
But this dark, draining story, which could have done with some cheerier moments, is a lot more stylish than that.
And when you have Oscar-winning actor Jeremy Irons starring opposite his wife, Sinead Cusack you know you're in for a class act.
Based on the acclaimed novel of the same name, the movie tells the story in flashback of the tortured unhappiness of Tom and Mary Crick (Irons and Cusack).
The pair grew up as wartime childhood sweethearts (engaging performances by newcomers Grant Warnock and Lena Headey) in the East Anglian Fens.
Later they emigrate to Pittsburg, but can never escape their tangled past.
Childless through a botched abortion, Mary steals a baby from a supermarket whilst her husband is having a very public nervous breakdown in the school where he teaches.
FEELING PAST: Irons and Cusack
TAKE ‘EM FOR A RIDE
SAVE cash when you cut a dash at some of Britain's fabulous theme parks.
WE'VE lined up a host of money-saving offers to give you and the kids a day you'll never forget.
AMONG the super savings is this voucher which admits up to four people to the American Adventure Theme Park for just £3 each.
SITUATED in Derbyshire, eight miles from M1 Junction 26, this is a truly American themed leisure park.
THE razzmatazz of New Orleans, the grandeur of New England, the fun of ‘Frisco Wharf — it's all there.
THERE'S white knuckle excitement a-plenty plus other themed rides for everyone to enjoy — and Pioneer Playland, the largest indoor play area in the country, is just great for the kids.
YOU'LL find food for all tastes and a whole range of shops and stores.
And as a holiday bonus, the voucher can be used during Bank Holiday week-end, including Monday.
WE also have supersaver vouchers for Derbyshire's American Adventure, Southport's Pleasureland, Metroland at Gateshead and the Pleasurewood Hills American Theme Park near Great Yarmouth.
REMEMBER, with the Mirror you save on the swings and the roundabouts.
I'M TATTOO SEXY FOR THIS POSE!
WHAT a tattoo!
Right Said Fred singer Fred Fairbrass points it out as he meets up with ex-Brookside star Annie Miles.
The 34-year-old actress grinned and bared her heart-shaped ‘love’ mark at London's Hippodrome nightspot.
And Fred, 28 — who topped the charts with ‘I'm Too Sexy’— seemed quite impressed by it.
As Sue Sullivan, Annie played a cheating mum in the Channel 4 soap.
But she's nothing like her character in real-life.
As Fred again points out — her heart's in the right place.
Well almost!
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
IRON MAIDEN singer Bruce Dickinson does a sun dance with two Los Angeles beauties in the hope that tomorrow's show at Donington will be blessed
GARDENING
FIELD NOTE
XENIA FIELD
NIGHTS are cooling off now autumn is on the way.
So keep up the heat in your compost heap by covering it with black plastic sheets, old carpets or sacking.
MIRROR PLANT
CHARLES LYTE
THE Peony (Paeonia, right) is one of the oldest and most beautiful plants.
The herbaceous Paeonias are part of the glory of flower borders in the early summer.
Though not difficult to grow, they are greedy and prefer a rich, well-drained sandy loam.
P. suffruticosa, the Moutan Peonies, are ideal for small gardens.
They do well with little help.
P. lutealudlowii, with their clear yellow flowers like scented buttercups, thrive against a north-facing wall or fence.
LIGHT UP YOUR LIFE
CHARLES LYTE
WHEN the winter weather is foul, bowls of spring bulbs flowering indoors cheer up the house.
You can create a superb living room spring garden with a great indoor bulb collection for only £13.95.
The collection (pictured above) includes: 1 Giant Amaryllis Menerva; 6 fragrant Paperwhite Narcissi; 8 Tulips Christmas Gold; 8 Tulips Brilliant Star; 6 Dwarf Daffodils February Gold, and 9 Christmas-flowering Hyacinths — three each of Ostara (blue), Pink Pearl, and Carnegie (White).
Orders to: Daily Mirror Indoor Bulb Collection, P.O.Box 64, SW District Office, Manchester, M16 9HY.
Please state the number of packs you want.
Make cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Indoor Bulb Collection and put your name and address on the back.
Access/Visa cardholders can phone orders to: 061 431 6431 (24-hour service).
Allow 21 days for delivery.
GINGER NUTS!
Q MY WIFE and I planted a piece of root ginger and it is growing strongly.
How do we look after it?
A GINGER (Zingiber officinale) grows into a very handsome, three-foot-high conservatory or house plant, with yellow-green flowers with a purple, yellow-striped lip, but it is quite a shy flowerer.
Gingers are natives of Malaysia, Eastern Asia and Northern Australia.
They do best in a rich, limy potting mixture which should be kept moist while they are growing.
The humidity should be supplied by regularly spraying the leaves with fresh water.
Also stand the pot in a tray of damp pebbles, too.
SAVE UP TO £8.95
On a fun day out at Thorpe Park
ENJOY a great day out at Thorpe Park, Britain's favourite leisure park, with mountains of fun for all the family.
That's why the Daily Mirror has teamed up with Thorpe Park to offer great savings on a day's super safari into fun.
There's a special deal for one paying adult to take in one under-14 free, saving up to £8.95 in high season and £7.95 from Sept 7.
Plus special savings on food and souvenirs worth more than £13.
And kids under 1 metre tall get in free.
Take advantage of our special offer between now and Oct 30 this year (sorry, doesn't include Bank Holiday Monday, Aug 31).
You'll discover more than 100 thrilling rides and attractions, undercover activities  including films and live shows, and for sunny day enjoy the only inland Blue Flag beach.
There's so much fun and fantastic savings with the Daily Mirror this summer.
THORPE PARK opens daily at 10am and closes at 6pm until Sept 6, 1992.
Last admission at 4pm.
From Sept 7 until Oct 30 the park closes at 5pm with last admissions at 3pm.
Thorpe Park recommend that you plan your day out for a visit of more than six hours to get maximum enjoyment from your outing.
Up to Sept 6, 1992 admission prices are £9.95 per adult and £8.95 per child and you can use the Daily Mirror discount voucher and save the cost of a child admission.
From Sept 7, adult admission is £8.95 and child admission £7.95.
For a family of four, two adults and two children under 14 the Thorpe Park Super-saver costs £26.
You can make even greater savings for your family using one or more separate Daily Mirror vouchers.
For visitor enquiries and to enquire about Thorpe Park Supersavers for larger family groups and coach parties phone: 0932 562633.
Does tour child have a drink problem?
JAN WALSH
Shelf Life WHO?
WHAT?
WHERE?
BRITAIN'S No 1CONSUMER COLUMN
THE brand new cars that are two years old, slimmers' meals that are full of fat, holidays at the seaside that could damage your health.
They were all major Mirror investigations during the past year.
Now reports like these will appear in the Mirror every Monday.
Your favourite newspaper has won more awards for its consumer journalism than any other paper.
No other title can hold a candle to our skill at campaigning on issues that really matter.
Remember the scandal of  polyurethane foam?
Remember the firemen who told of the charred and blackened bodies of children they had to bring from the smoking ruins of homes?
And the heart-rending tragedy of the tiny coffins of a family of victims?
It was the Daily Mirror that first revealed the dangers of foam-filled furniture.
We campaigned ferociously to ban the stuff that could kill people in minutes with its toxic fumes.
It was the Mirror too which exposed the massive government cover-up last year over the poisonous waste being dumped on our beaches.
Last August we revealed that J-reg cars were a joke.
Because of the recession, stockpiles of ‘new’ cars had been waiting for a buyer for up to two years.
And we proved it by cracking the manufacturers' secret codes.
We helped second-hand car-buyers, too, when we uncovered British School of Motoring's clever dodge for covering up their cars' real origins when they sold them on.
Watch out for log books which tell you that the first owner was Engineering Educational Trust.
It's a pseudonym for BSM.
If you're one of the millions of people who is constantly on a diet we had a shock for you earlier this year.
The Mirror revealed the appalling contradiction of so-called ‘slimmers'’ meals which were up to 44 per cent fat.
Today we print the shocking truth about baby drinks, which are bought by millions of mums.
Next week we could be warning, exposing, or revealing the truth about anything from holidays to your spring bulbs.
GREASY burgers, fatty chips and sticky sweets all get the thumbs down in most  children's diets these days.
But what do you give young kids to drink?
Millions of us choose the specially prepared baby and toddler drinks because we think they must be healthier than ordinary lemonade or squash.
But beware.
They may not be as healthy as the makers would like you to think.
Over the last few years thousands of parents have been horrified to discover blackened, rotten milk teeth in their  children's mouths.
Although it's usually impossible to prove the connection beyond a shadow of doubt, the finger of suspicion has pointed directly at sweet, sugary drinks.
Last year SmithKline Beecham, who make Ribena, were forced to come to a secret cash deal with a dozen families who threatened a court case claiming their  children's teeth were rotted by the so-called ‘healthy’ baby drink.
Another six families are thought to be suing the baby drinks firm this year because of its effect on their  children's teeth.
Although many of the leading manufacturers, including SmithKline Beecham, have changed the formula of their drinks in the last few years so that they contain less sugar, dentists say they're still getting far too many cases of two, three and four-year-olds with decaying milk teeth.
‘Dentists call them Ribena fillings, though they could be caused by any of the big branded drinks,’ said dental consultant Aubrey Sheiham.
Typically, the front top six teeth will decay because of the way the child has sucked on its bottle.
‘Some three and four year olds' teeth are so bad they have to be given a general anaesthetic to have six or more teeth pulled out.
That's very traumatic for such a young child.’
Government guidelines say babies should have water without flavouring.
Giving sweet drinks, even if they're fruit juices, gives a taste for sugary foods which will lead to tooth decay problems later.
The Health Education Authority advises parents to introduce fruit juices as late as possible and then to dilute them heavily with water.
Some health experts argue that sweet drinks specially designed for babies and toddlers should be banned altogether.
‘Getting babies hooked on soft drinks even before their first teeth have come through verges on the criminal,’ said children's health writer Dr Tim Lobstein.
COW and Gate insist that there's no added sugar in their baby drinks.
‘You'll only find the sugar that's naturally in the fruit,’ said spokesman Elon Newton.
Colmans, who make Robinsons and Delrosa drinks, say their products are vital for many babies.
‘We don't accept that our products damage teeth as long as they're used properly,’ said spokesman Nick Attenborough.
SmithKline Beecham said ‘BabyRibena has less sugar than fresh orange juice.’
A Milupa spokesman said: offer a refreshing drink when additional fluids are required.’
And Boots spokeswoman Lorraine Gwinnutt said:
‘Our juice packs carry warnings never to use them with a dummy or soother.
When baby's first teeth appear we advise parents to brush the child's teeth after a drink.’
So what SHOULD you give a baby to drink?
Up to four months: Even on a hot day breastfed babies won't need any other drinks.
Bottle-fed babies might like a small drink of plain boiled water which has been allowed to cool.
Four to six months: Cooled boiled water.
Use a spoon or introduce lidded beakers.
After six months: A choice of cow's milk, water, or diluted real fruit juice.
Only give these drinks with meals and dilute the juice by AT LEAST the same amount of water.
Never put flavoured drinks in a bottle and give them only to quench thirst.
Don't worry about Vitamin C. Babies get enough from breast or formula milk.
But give toddlers lots of fruit and vegetables.
SWEET TRUTH: Dentists want to fight tooth decay in babies by warning parents about sugary drinks
Shelf Life
WHO?
WHAT?
WHERE?
BRITAIN'S No 1 CONSUMER COLUMN CONSUMER SPOT 2
JAN WALSH
THE fuss about BSE — mad cow disease — has died down to a whimper.
But does that mean you don't need to worry about the risks of eating beef?
Not yet.
Although the government has tightened up rules at the slaughterhouse, and taken action to stop infected meat reaching our food, it's still JUST possible that diseased meat scraps might reach some meat products.
There's not a lot of evidence that the government really does know what it's talking about when it comes to BSE.
The latest figures for the disease are way above their official estimate for1992.
So when politicians and farmers tell us there's absolutely no risk, you could be forgiven for wanting to make up your own mind — especially if you've got children.
If you're one of those people who'd rather err on the safe side, the best advice is to avoid meat products which use scraps from cattle bones, such as pate and some cheap sausages.
GIBBS GOSSIP SPECIAL
THE POOL WAS PARADISE…
BUT IN THE FOREST SOMETHING STIRRED
GARTH GIBBS
HERE it is, folks.
The complete Fergie and Johnny Photo Album.
Summer snaps of uninhibited fun, and all in front of the kids, too.
The goings on and comings off that stunned the world this week.
The pictures which led to such demand for the Daily Mirror that the Sold Out signs went up at newsagents all over the country.
But now the Mirror album gives those who missed out a chance to see ALL the pictures of the Duchess of York cavorting in a manner most unbecoming to Royalty.
With her was her bit on the side, one John Bryan, a financial wizard, all the way from Texas, who spent much time in close proximity, valuing her assets.
One snap even shows him on top of her, no doubt for closer inspection.
Some financial adviser!
Another treasured picture shows Johnny kissing her foot, which led to excited claims of a toe job.
This puts a much more serious complexion on matters, for it was feet that first set Fergie's heart racing and made her realise how deeply she was in love with Prince Andrew.
(She told a gathering of women in a Mayfair hairdressers that Andrew loved fooling around — with her feet — and insisted on painting her toenails at all times.
They married soon after.)
THE other snaps show Fergie diving into a pool, affectionately massaging Mr Bryan's bald head with suntan oil and generally having a swell time.
True, they were were taken in the heady surrounding of St Tropez, where every girl takes 'em off, and where Fergie and Johnny and Bea and Eugenie were staying in a modest £450,000 terracotta pink villa.
But Fergie, a married woman, should have known better.
Or kept a sharper look out for the paparazzi.
Particularly for a charming chap called Daniel Angeli.
The Pope could have warned her about him.
Angeli once photographed His Holiness, dripping wet, in woollen underwear, after fixing a video to a tree and monitoring the pontiff's early morning swims.
That was Angeli's greatest coup.
Until now…
CLINCHING THE DEAL: Fergie and ‘financial adviser’ Johnny Bryan huddle close to discuss confidential business matters
MAKING A SPLASH: Fergie's certainly done that
FERGIE'S A FOOTMAN: Multi talented Johnny shows off his amazing heeling powers to his Royal sole-mate
NOSEDIVE: For the Duchess…and her popularity
ONE-WAY STRETCH: Fergie lolls by the poolside as her faithful attendant stays on hand to offer whatever help he can
HAPPY TOGETHER: But unseen eyes were watching
WHERE'S DADDY?:
Bea and Eugenie with mum, nanny and friends
FINANCIAL BACKING: Fergie and Johnny are shoulder-to-shoulder
AIRBORNE: A crash landing was to follow, though, for the high-flying Duchess
LIFT-OFF: Now scandal-hit Fergie may find she's in need of a strong shoulder to cry on
HELPING HAND: Fergie takes time off from her poolside frolics to look after Eugenie
COVERING UP: Fergie looks as if she's lost something.
All her credibility, perhaps?
THE LIMIT
RICK'S OUT ON A LIMB
RICK SKY
GUTSY Def Leppard drummer Rick Allen gained a phantom limb after he lost his left arm in a car crash.
Pals would often tell the star — whose new single, Have You Ever Needed Someone So Bad, is out next week — they could feel his arm, even though it had gone.
Rick, 29, confessed about his ghostly arm to Lynn Redgrave on BBC TV's Fighting Back last Wednesday, but his revelations were never broadcast.
Says Rick, who lost the limb eight years ago: ‘If I said to somebody: ‘Put your hand where you think mine is’, they could actually feel it.’
SPOOKY; But Rick's ‘armless
ROY'S COME BACK AGAIN
POP legend Roy Orbison is set to become an even bigger star after his death aged 52.
The veteran singer, dubbed the Big O, currently has TWO hits in the Top Thirty.
Crying, his duet with K D Lang, stormed to No 12 while I Drove All Night has just enjoyed a long Top 10 run.
DJs have been swamped with requests and a new album of rare material is out in the autumn.
A record spokesman says: ‘Kids of 12 and 13 are discovering Roy's brilliance…‘
Roy's string of hits included Only The Lonely and Pretty Woman in a 25-year career.
He died from a heart attack.
LEGEND: Roy
THE PARTY'S OVER
FORMER Jam star Paul Weller has vowed to quit dabbling in politics to boost his pop career.
The ardent left-winger helped launch the Red Wedge pop-meets-politics movement to boost the Labour vote in the 1987 general election.
Weller, at No 21 with Uh Huh, Oh Yeh,— his first major hit in four years — says: ‘People have probably known more about my politics than my music.
Now it's music first and I'll leave politics to others.’
YOUR MONEY
HOMELY TOUCH
IAN MILLER
BUILDING tycoon Sir Lawrie Barratt has given up on Chancellor Norman Lamont's feeble attempts to halt the recession.
‘We've decided to take the initiative ourselves,’ he said yesterday.
He's offering bargain mortgages on his homes, with free redundancy insurance.
INITIATIVE: Sir Lawrie
IF you want to get a bird's-eye view of London, try Canary Wharf.
It will cost you a cool £3.
Accountants plan to open the top floor of the 50-storey tower to the public.
And here's a simple sum: they reckon 700 visitors an hour could visit Canary Wharf though it would take at least 200 MILLION visitors to meet the development's £600 million debts.
WE'RE GOING UP
MIRROR Group shares rose 1p to 64p yesterday on the back of rocketing sales.
And smart investors see future sales soaring, thanks to the Duchess of York's poolside antics.
‘They reckon sales will increase as new readers like the product they see,’ said media analyst Lorna Tilbian of brokers SG Warburg.
Around 1.7 million shares changed hands — far more than during recent days — as the newspaper group stayed firmly in the media spotlight.
THE recession has lead to record numbers of couples rowing about money problems, says Prudential.
Three quarters of men now argue with their partners, against six out of 10 a year ago.
And women are twice as worried about how much their men spend.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
DAVID KERR
CHILDREN under 16 travel free this summer on British Midland's Heathrow-Brussels route when accompanied by a full-fare paying adult.
A family of four can travel for £234 return, when buying two Superpex returns.
SOVEREIGN Scanscape have unlimited free child places to Denmark's Legoland for every first child aged two — 11 years, travelling with two adults.
Prices start at £288 per adult for two nights, until September 16.
Call: 0293 599922.
TAKE TO THE ROAD
NOW that we've won an Olympic gold medal, why not try a cycling holiday in the Pyrenees — even if you're not quite Chris Boardman.
Headwater Holidays are offering a six-night break until September 24 for £334 per person.
The price includes half-board hotel accommodation, touring bike and return ferry crossing.
Reassuringly, your luggage is carried by car between each stop.
For more information call: 0606 48699.
SUNNY SPELLS ON THE SOUTH COAST
There's loads to see, even when it rains
IT RAINED, blew half a gale and was cold.
At times the sun shone.
It has been typical weather on Britain's south coast this August.
But we had a good time and will definitely go again.
There was always a way to beat bad weather blues and enjoy ourselves.
We chose to travel a minimum distance and stayed at Shorefield Country Club in southwest Hampshire.
The New Forest was on our doorstep and the south coast, from Lymington to Bournemouth, at our feet to be explored.
When it was sunny we picnicked among the forest's ponies and searched for fossils on deserted beaches.
When the clouds came we visited Beaulieu, travelled their monorail, rode a vintage bus and drooled over the super cars in the National Motor Museum.
Nearby, at Buckler's Hard, we wandered in the village where Lord Nelson's wooden warships were built.
We went for a cruise on the river, now a mooring for ocean yachts.
The Sammy Miller motorcycle museum at New Milton, Hants (£2 adults, £1 children) has a superb collection.
And there were loads of local pubs that catered for family needs.
In our comfortable holiday home the kids cut out and coloured a dynasty of paper people while we caught up on our videos.
At the award-winning Shorefield Country Club there is ‘Le Club’, offering a pool (with a shallow lagoon for toddlers), Jacuzzi, fitness centre, ballroom, bars, shop, take-away, video games and slot machines.
It's back to school soon, so we bought a light-up world globe (Woolworths sale £9.99) which reminded me we live at the same latitude as parts of Norway, Siberia, Labrador and Alaska.
So when you holiday in Britain you can wish for good weather and only hope for the best.
FACT BOX
ACCOMMODATION at Shorefield Country Club costs from £50 per person for August Bank Holiday week, falling to £31 in late September.
Danewood bungalows with microwave and video cost £68-£42 per person per week.
Prices include membership of ‘Le Club’.
To book call Hoseasons Holidays on: 0502 500 500.
A family ticket to Beaulieu, which covers almost everything, costs £20.
For details call: 0590 612 345.
AWAYDAZE: Buckler's Hard, pictured here, and Beaulieu's motor museum make a great day out
BRAIN VERDICT ON THE BRAWN
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
BOBBY ‘The Brain’ Heenan hurls insults from the ringside faster than Randy Savage pulls punches.
But WWF's no-nonsense commentator is great at predicting winners.
So how does he see the Championship Title clash between The Ultimate Warrior and Macho Man Randy Savage?
‘The Ultimate Warrior is the better wrestler,’ Bobby says.
‘But it's easier to hang on to your title than to win it afresh.
So the Macho Man is where my money is — even if he is little more than a heap of flesh and bone.’
Heenan is even crueller about the other key SummerSlam ‘92 bout — the WWF Inter-continental Title show-down between Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart and British Bulldog.
‘What a pathetic pair of posers,’ he says.
‘Hit Man's hair is so greasy you could cause a major oil glut just by draining his head.
‘And as for the Bulldog, I hear that his wife takes him for walks at night to stop him making a mess.
‘Neither is worthy of a WWF title, but Bulldog has the clear advantage — because he'll be yapping in his own back yard.’
INSULTS: Heenan
LIVELY LETTERS
‘DOUBTFUL,’ Portsmouth, Hants, writes: FANTASTIC stories are told of how much could be earned in World War 2.
A lady friend of mine, working in an aircraft factory, tells me she once picked up a wage packet of £40 a week.
I find this difficult to believe, but as she is a religious and patently honest lady I wonder can you tell me could it be really true?
Ye of little faith should know that it could be earned but not in a normal working week.
Records show that in high-technical industries and top munitions works in 1942, there were only 47 people in the U.K. earning £800 a year or £15.38 plus a week as a regular wage.
Aircraft factory workers were the highest paid and in 1940 De Havilland reported average earnings of £5.53p weekly.
But workers were encouraged to stay on bench after hours, at weekends and bank holidays as part of the war effort.
Overtime payments in special circumstances could bring those wages up to £40 a week but you had it was an amazing effort.
CENTRE
, writes: AMERICAN friends saw the marker stone of the centre of England in Warwickshire and confessed they did not know U.S.A.'s centre.
With one-upmanship, I told them it was near Lebanon, Smith County, Kansas, but since then have been told I am wrong.
Where is it then?
You used to be right but after Alaska in the north-west and Hawaii in the Pacific became states of the union, the centre moved to a point west of Castle Rock, Butte County, South Dakota.
The centre of all of North America, including Canada, is six miles west of Balta in Pierce County, N. Dakota.
TOPS
, writes: MY mate claims that the best-selling single by the Beatles was Hey, Jude but I say it was I Want to Hold Your Hand.
Who is right?
Your are.
We want to tell you that the 1963 hit is Britain's top-seller of all time and reached world sales of more than 13 million.
VIDEO
, writes: IS it legal to copy audio or video tapes?
Everybody seems to give a different answer, some say ‘yes,’ some say, ‘no’and some say you have to get a licence.
The general answer is that you may copy a sound cassette or a video tape or disc for private use, but if it is copied again and again for commercial gain it is a clear breach of copyright and could lead to legal action.
Some tapes have built-in protection and when copied you will find the sound or vision is distorted.
VANS
, writes: PLEASE end an argument and say who has most vans and lorries, British Telecom or the Post Office.
British Telecom has 70,000 but the Post Office only 28,500 on the road, with 30,000 fork-lift trucks and other runabouts used only in sorting offices.
Much more genius is needed to make love than to command armies.
— Ninon de LENCLOS (1620-1705)
Barbara's brush up
ANNE ROBINSON
YOU can tell how serious is the crisis within the Republican party — they've persuaded Barbara Bush to have a new hairdo…
Out of Ma'ams way…
ANNE ROBINSON
ON A daily basis it's now being suggested that the Duchess of York is in danger of losing custody of her two daughters.
Yet it's hard to see how any court of law could possibly agree to them being removed from her.
In order to do so it would have to be shown that their father, the Duke of York, was a more suitable parent than their mother.
Or, more probably, since he is a serving naval officer, that the paternal grandmother, the Queen, was likely to make a better job than their mother of bringing them up.
Any judge with even half a brain would surely concede that however inappropriately the Duchess of York might have behaved in the past year, even she has yet to acquire such a proven track record on rearing maladjusted children as Her Majesty the Queen.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
BRITAIN now has 30,000 naturists — people who believe it's healthy and good to bare all.
But where to do it?
There are just 12 official naturist beaches.
DON'T mention trees to Kim Basinger's neighbours.
Residents of exclusive Woodland Hills, California, are fuming after the sexy star bought six giant maple trees and had them re-planted in her back garden.
One irate neighbour says: ‘She hired a huge crane to swing the trees over her house into the garden.’
‘But the crane was so heavy the road caved in leaving a massive hole.
We couldn't get out of our houses for two days.’
BRANCHING OUT: Kim
ERIC'S SAD VIGIL
ERIC CLAPTON keeps a secret vigil each week at the grave of his late son Conor.
The superstar guitarist, still grieving over the loss of his son who fell from a Manhattan skyscraper, says: ‘I don't mind talking about it because it helps me get over what happened.
‘I remember the date and I go to the grave every Thursday when I'm in England.’
Clapton, at No. 36 with It's Probably Me, a duet with Sting for the movie Lethal Weapon 3, adds: ‘Maybe in 10 years I'll have a family myself, but the pain will never be gone.’
WIN KYLIE'S GREATEST HITS
ARE you crazy for Kylie?
Then have we got a prize for you.
We've teamed up with PWL records to give away 100 copies of Kylie Minogue's Greatest Hits packed with the pretty Aussie singer's best songs.
And TWENTY lucky winners will get a very special album autographed by Kylie.
The double LP, which was released yesterday, contains 22 songs including her very first hit I Should Be So Lucky, and such great tracks as Hand On Your Heart, Tears On My Pillow and Word Is Out.
To enter simply answer this question: What is the name of Kylie's current chart smash?
Write your answer, name and address on a postcard and send it to the Limit's Kylie competition, Daily Mirror, 1 Thavies Inn, London, EC88 1AB, to arrive no later than Monday, August 31.
SIGNED COPIES: Kylie
SINGER Cathy Dennis is to star in an episode of Beverly Hills 90210.
Cathy, 23, makes her appearance after writing Why?, a track for the show.
Cathy, at No. 36 with You Lied To Me, says: ‘It should be a real laugh.
K.W.S. homesick for £1m pads
CHARTBUSTING K.W.S. stars Winnie Williams and Chris King have splashed out more than £1 million on new homes…and spent just ONE night in them.
The pop pair bought their swanky pads in Nottingham 10 weeks ago following the success of Please Don't Go, a No. 1 for five successive weeks.
But they reckoned without their hectic schedule.
Since then they have travelled more than 30,000 miles in Europe and Britain — and made it home only once.
This week the tour pace hots up, boosted by Rock Your Baby, the band's band's new single now at No. 8.
Keyboard wizard Winnie paid £750,000 for his eight-bedroomed mansion.
‘It's a beautiful home with a wonderful music room, but I haven't had any time to enjoy it,’ he says.
Chris used to live in a council house, a stone's throw away from his new £500,000 pad.
‘I fell in love with it,’ he says.
‘It's got a sunken bath, a Jacuzzi and outdoor swimming pool.
Not being there is really frustrating.’
HECTIC TOUR: K.W.S. on the road
OVER THE LIMIT
THE days of wedding night nerves are all but over.
Only 10 per cent of newlyweds polled by Brides magazine said they wish they were marrying a virgin.
And a mere 5.5 per cent of brides and 3.7 per cent of grooms wait until they're married to have sex.
Will I ever build sandcastles again?
BARRY WIGMORE REPORTS FROM THE BUNKERS OF SARAJEVO ON THE DREAMS OF ONE LITTLE GIRL
SARAJEVO was being pounded last night in the fiercest fighting of the five-month siege.
The battle for territory was hotting up before the today's London peace conference under the chairmanship of Prime Minister John Major.
While the politicians talk, hundreds of thousands of people — among them 80,000 children — cower in terror, mostly underground in cellars.
The Mirror spent three days with these innocent hostages of war…
THE little girl in bed in the cellar shouts in her sleep as the mortars explode.
They fall in a pattern, a few minutes apart, marching through the streets as the gunners zero in.
Six explosions make the ground shake and the walls tremble.
Dust showers from the ceiling.
You don't see it in the blackness, but feel it on the face.
And you hear the mice scamper back into their holes.
A match flares.
The little girl, Marina Besic, aged 11, sits up, wide-eyed.
Other children cry in the shadows.
‘I had a nightmare,’ she says.
‘I have them often.
I dream about blood and massacres from the grenades.
There is always a lot of blood in my dreams.’
For five months, Marina has called the cellar home, ever since Serbian soldiers lobbed grenades which crashed through the roof and blew apart her parents' flat.
She never goes out.
She cannot.
The snipers and the mortars make sure of that.
The only sunlight she sees filters into the tiny courtyard of the apartment block where 10 families live and pray together in the cellar.
In World War II, Anne Frank, a Jewish girl, kept a famous diary.
In it, she told of her two years' hiding from the Nazis in a secret room in her father's Amsterdam warehouse.
She was finally discovered and taken to a concentration camp where she died.
Marina is a new Anne Frank, one of 80,000 frightened children caught in an ugly, vicious siege.
Her existence is more precarious than most.
She is trapped in the front line on the killing streets of Western Sarajevo.
Serbian snipers hold the flats 200 yards across the River Miljacka.
They shoot anything that moves.
From the roof, they fire grenades which rain down on Marina and the flats where thousands of other terrified women and children hide.
Half a mile up the hill, heavy mortars are lined against them.
And there is a sniper they call the Serb On The Hill, who has built a bunker in his back garden and has a nice line of sight straight down the street towards them.
Marina's is an old apartment block on Putnik Street.
The fighting there is from building to building and at night, often hand-to-hand with knives.
Moslems, Croatians, and Serbs have lived happily together here for years.
There are many mixed marriages, and war has only strengthened friendships.
Eight steps in the courtyard take you down to the cellar.
There are three rooms — two 15ft square, the other 8ft by 8ft.
They have a low, vaulted ceiling and damp, grimy walls which run with water when it rains.
There is no heating because there is no fuel, and in 10 or 12 weeks there will be 2ft of snow outside.
Two rooms are wall-to-wall beds.
The third is for cooking and living.
Up to 30 men, women and children sleep here, depending upon how many men are home from the fighting.
One is a little girl crippled by cerebral palsy.
They are a mix of ordinary working-class people and affluent business families who were trapped in their town flats when the fighting started and now know they have lost their country homes for ever.
Marina's father, who worked as a hotel electrician, is Croatian.
Her mother is Moslem.
Now the little girl sits at a small table in the cellar, the playing cards, Ludo and Monopoly set aside, as snipers' bullets smack into the building and an grenades drop into the street.
Bullets fizz through the air in Sarajevo.
Crack-fzzzz…the sound of gun and bullet run together.
They ricochet through the trees, slapping away the leaves with a  little ticking sound: crack-fzzz-tchktchk.
‘It is a strange feeling knowing they are aimed at you,’ says Marina.
She is a child who has grown old before her time.
‘All I want is to be able to go out and play with my friends,’ she says.
‘But I can't go out in the street because every day in every street here there is a massacre by grenades.
‘A lot of my friends have left, but I don't know how many because many phones have been cut.
‘Their fathers are fighting on the Serbian side.
I don't think they were my friends really.’
She flinches as a machine gun stutters nearby, then wanders over to talk to her budgies, Niki and Nikica.
She often talks to them when she's frightened.
‘This is horrible, especially for the children,’ she says, ‘because children are not guilty and they are so frightened of everything.
‘Mostly, it is very boring here.
We try to play together, but there is no room.
Sometimes I read schoolbooks, but there seems no point in learning anything when you might die at any minute.’
Marina spends most of her time caring for the younger children who live with her in the cellar — especially nine-month-old Vedo Besagic.
Vedo's six-year-old brother, Nedim, worries her most.
Nedim boasts that he is afraid of nothing and says the Serb fighters who call themselves
White Eagles are really chickens.
He plays war games and ‘shoots’ his friend, Adi, seven, with his water pistol.
But Nedim is really very nervous.
He cries during every attack, says Marina, and that makes everyone more nervous.
All the children are terrified.
‘We saw how one man died, blown up by a grenade, and it was very horrible.
We were screaming.
‘Too many grenades fall on this place.’
How many grenades have hit your home, she is asked.
She counts off on her hands, but gives up when she runs out of fingers.
She shrugs: ‘More than 10.’
She rubs her forehead and runs her fingers through her hair like an old woman.
Big brown eyes stare bleakly into the distance, the thousand-yard stare of so many kids in this war.
‘Children aren't guilty of anything.
Why do they attack us?’
Marina asks.
‘I would like this all to be a bad dream.
I would like to wake up in half an hour and see people passing by in the street.
‘Every summer we used to go to the seaside in Croatia, and I built sandcastles with the other children.
I wonder if I will ever build sandcastles again?’
Her eyes fill with tears.
She cries a lot.
‘I cried when the first grenades fell and destroyed our home.
One landed in the street, very close, and we decided to go into the cellar.
‘I was on my way down the stairs when the second came through the roof.
Six grenades came down together.
‘My mum was up there, but I didn't know where exactly, and I was crying.
I will never forget that.
‘When the mortars wake me at night, it takes a long time to go back to sleep.
‘I pray to God when I hear the grenades at night.
I feel alone in all the world.
‘I lie there crying.
I cry quietly because I don't want to wake my mum.
‘But sometimes she is awake as well, and we cling to each other and cry together.’
She stops, too upset to carry on, and sneaks back into one of the ground-floor apartments to wash and put on her pyjamas for bed.
Nedim and Adi are there, eating their supper.
Suddenly a sniper's bullet ricochets into the kitchen.
Their eyes snap round in horror.
It falls to the floor, an ugly little lump of metal, and the boys sit transfixed for minutes before they eat again.
It was a long, noisy night of broken sleep.
Mortars and grenades pounded the area; 26 heavy explosions rocked the cellar.
The children cried at every bang.
The big ones started them screaming.
At dawn, in the lull when even the snipers seem to sleep, Marina was dreaming of death when she was awoken by the screams of a 23-year-old woman, Ziba Islamovic.
The phone in the cellar had rung with bad news.
There is rarely any other kind.
Ziba's 35-year-old brother, Meho, who worked at the dairy and fought with the Sarajevo defence force, had been killed during the night in a skirmish a few blocks away.
Ziba wailed her grief.
Another weeping woman staggered in off the street.
Two men running to market to look for food had been killed at the crossroads by a sniper.
There was silence in the courtyard.
Even the guns were still for a moment.
Marina, aged 11, said quietly: ‘We just want to stay alive.’
Then a gun cracked and the bullet fizzed overhead.
INNOCENT VICTIMS: Marina, terrified by the grenades, does her best to comfort nine-month-old Vedo
OUTSIDE CHANCE: Children snatch a fresh-air break during a battle lull
WAR GAMES: But Nadim and Adi loathe the real thing
TRAPPED: 11-year-old Marina
MIRROR MONEY
Brewers feel the draught
IAN MILLER
THE SLUMP is set to blow the froth off beer prices as brewers prepare to combat a fall in demand for the traditional British pint.
Sales have gone flat, with this year's figure predicted to drop from an annual peak of 41 million to 36 million barrels.
And with beer drinking declining at the rate of 10 per cent in the South East and five per cent in the North, breweries have realised they must cut prices.
Lured
Many publicans have decided to lure drinkers back to their pubs with cut-price happy hours.
And some London pubs have slashed their prices from £1.70 a pint to less than a pound.
So if you are foaming over the price of a pint, shop around for the special offers.
If your publican can knock 70p off a pint, then breweries and pubs have certainly been overcharging.
BITTER BLOW: Beer sales are feeling the pinch
A switch in time saves…
IF you're tied in to a high mortgage rate it might be worth your while doing the switch.
Since interest rates started falling millions of homeowners have had the chance to remortgage their home and pocket lower interest deals.
And that can save you pounds.
Legal clerk, Debra Morris, and her husband, Graham, did just that last month.
They had a £300-a-month  mortgage on their three-bedroomed semi in Basford, Nottingham.
Debra, 26, and Graham, 28, like millions of Britons, had run up big debts.
In total they owed £6,000 on a car loan and credit cards.
So they decided the best way out was to remortgage their home.
Packet
You'd think that adding £6,000 onto their existing mortgage of £36,000 would cost them a packet.
Not a bit of it.
They shopped around and found a tasty 8.69 per cent deal at the Norwich and Peterborough Building Society — two per cent less than they were paying.
So they did the switch, cleared their debts, and now £6 a month better off.
But for many the cost of switching could be too high.
Many mortgages have costly redemption fees — which usually cost you the equivalent of one to three months' mortgage payments.
Add legal fees and a new valuation and you could be on a loser.
So ask your building society what you could lose or gain from a remortgage.
Your bank balance might be given a pleasant surprise.
SMART MOVE: Debra and Graham Morris
YOUR MONEY
POST HASTE
JOHN HUSBAND
AS INTEREST rates ride into rough waters it will pay to move your savings around to catch the best rates.
Building societies rates are still coming DOWN even though higher bank base rates threaten.
So check out new postal accounts.
They pay TWICE as much interest as many High Street instant access accounts.
That's because they cost far less to run.
You need a lump sum of at least £1,000 to tuck away.
Norwich and Peterborough Building Society's Postmaster account pays 7.68% net.
If you have £2,000 go for the Northern Rock Building Society with 7.88% net.
MIRROR MONEY
SAFE AS HOUSES
…if you take some simple precautions
BILL KEENAN
AUGUST is a wicked month.
While you're away sipping sangria on a sun-soaked beach, some intruder may be rifling your unguarded home.
It's amazing how even a few simple precautions can save you that return trip heartbreak — and all the hassle of insurance claims.
Insurance expert Ian Frater, of Commercial Union, offers these tips to keep burglars at bay: Cancel the milk and newspapers — there's no bigger giveaway.
Leaving an empty drive is another blunder.
Arrange for friends to park their cars on your drive.
Give your house that lived-in look.
Timeswitch plugs will put the lights day or night.
Connect them to the radio, especially Radio Four whose discussion programmes give the impression someone is having a conversation.
Leave dirty pots in the sink.
Leave out the vacuum cleaner and clothes near the washer.
Try to give the impression you are half way through doing a domestic chore.
If you are away for over a 30 days, tell your insurance company.
And before you take out TRAVEL insurance think about improving your HOME insurance.
Travel insurance covers you for sickness abroad but limit the pay-out on possessions such as cam recorders, cameras and jewellery to £300 in total.
So you are better insuring these expensive possessions on your home insurance.
You can insure personal items worth £1,000 for the whole year AND get holiday cover, for just £12 to £15 on your home insurance.
HOLIDAY HEARTBREAK: But returning home to a burglary can be avoided
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
THERE'S always been something fishy about wild rocker Axl Rose…and now finally here's the proof.
Friends say the flaxen-haired singer is thinking about recording the B 52's Rock Lobster hit but we reckon that he's just a shellfish kind of a guy
Naomi hits talent trail
SUPERMODEL Naomi Campbell is seeking top producers and songwriters to help her pop career.
Sources close to the leggy catwalk queen, who signed a £1.2 million pop deal, say she has written a lot of lyrics and whoever matches them best to music will go into the studio with her.
POP DEAL: Naomi
DADDY'S GIRL
CHARTBUSTER k d lang reveals the heartache she suffered when her father walked out of her life.
The singer, who has shot to No.
13 in the charts with Crying — her duet with the late Roy Orbison — says: ‘I don't know much about my father.
‘He left when I was 12 and I ran into him once.
Otherwise, I don't know anything.
but I still miss him.’
The Canadian country rock star believes her dad's departure made her tougher.
She says ‘It helped make my mother and I more independent so, I suppose it was a good thing.’
THE funeral of Brian Munns, one of one of pop's best publicists, takes place today at Mortlake Crematorium, London.
Brian, of EMI Records, who worked with Cliff Richard, Kate Bush and Pink Floyd, died of an AIDS-related illness last Wednesday.
Music biz pals who would like to make a donation should send money to: AIDS Charity Body Positive, 51b Philbeach Gardens, London, SW5.
Pop goes all to pot
CHART stars Pop Will Eat Itself blew up when a mix-up stopped them appearing in Sweden.
The organisers did not provide the right equipment for the Stourbridge band.
A spokesman for the group, the second highest  chart entry with Bulletproof! at No.
24, said: ‘They agreed to stand in as headliners at the last minute.
But they were given the wrong tape machine.
‘What a farce.
They travelled through the night to the gig and went straight back home.’
MIRROR MONEY
IAN MILLER
THE banks are finding business so tough they're having summer sales on personal loans.
And that's fabulous news if you need to borrow cash.
Cheapest is 19.4 percent from the Yorkshire Bank — nearly four per cent lower than most of its rivals.
And there's NO restrictions on what you spend the cash on.
SIZZLER FOR SID
IF you see Sid, tell him his divi is looking as rosy as ever.
British Gas has fired up its half year dividend to 6.4p per share compared with 6p last time.
That's despite profits going DOWN by a third to £778 million because of the hot weather.
The divi is worth £25.60 for a typical Sid with the average 400 shares.
The City reckons Gas will pay out 14.2p for the whole of 1992 compared to 13.4p last year.
That gives an annual return of eight per cent— more than from most building societies.
More than two million Sids own British Gas shares.
HURRICANE!
TAKE COVER
THE evacuation of hurricane-hit Miami has devastated holiday plans for thousands of British holidaymakers.
But don't expect your travel insurance to pay up unless you're injured or get your luggage damaged in the storms.
Most won't pay up for delays unless your flight is held up for at least 12 hours — 10 with Thomas Cook.
If your tour firm offers an alternative destination at no extra cost you'll have to demand compensation from them, NOT your insurer.
And, if you're travelling solo, no one 's going to compensate you for having to change your plans at the last minute.
But don't take this as an excuse to skimp on insurance when you book your hols.
Because the big value comes if you're hurt or hospitalised abroad.
Sky-high costs in places like the US can turn a dream holiday into an costly nightmare that lasts for months after.
MIRROR MONEY YOUR HOLIDAY POUND
AN MILLER
Holiday £ Austria — 19.1 Belgium — 56.0 Cyprus — 0.79 France — 9.25 Germany — 2.72 Greece — 334 Holland — 3.07 Ireland — 1.03 Italy — 2082 Malta — 0.55 Portugal — 236 Spain — 175 Switzerland — 2.41 Turkey — 13100 USA1.94 Yugoslavia — Refer FOR latest exchange rates ring 0898 900 909.
Calls cost 36p a minute, cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
STARS ON LAUGHABLE TERMS
CARRY ON FILMING
BOUNCING BACK THE BRAINS BEHIND THE FUNNIEST FILMS EVER MADE
…we even painted the mud green
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
THEY were vulgar but never vicious.
Risque but never rude.
Naughty yet always nice.
They were the most successful comedy films of all time.
And later this year, after a 14-year break, they'll be back.
Carry On is carrying on with Carry On Columbus, a brash, bawdy tale very loosely connected to the explorer's epic voyage.
Columbus fever will soon be taking over.
But before it does, the Daily Mirror, along with Carry On creators Peter Rogers and Gerald Thomas, has been looking back at some of the funniest moments ever to be played out on the big screen.
And off it.
THE weather was vile.
But it wasn't the rain and the cold that bothered Barbara Windsor.
She had to lose her bra.
‘And I get paranoid,’ she says, ‘about giving even a flash.’
Her ample talents were to be revealed by a prop man with a hook and fishing line, standing just out of shot.
‘They carefully chose the oldest bloke they could find to handle the rod,’ Barbara recalls.
‘They thought I wouldn't be quite so embarrassed if my bra was whipped off by some poor old geezer who was past it.
‘Anyway, the first time we did the scene, the catch didn't unhook and I literally got dragged through the mud by my boobs.
‘They gave me a quick sponge down and the second take worked.
‘They all rushed off to do the next scene.
And I was left standing there in tears, covered in mud and bitten to death by the midges.’
Peter Rogers and Gerald Thomas, the brains behind all 30 of the Carry On films, remember Carry On Camping as one of their funniest and most successful pictures.
‘It was so wet,’ Peter says, ‘that we had to paint the mud green to make it look like grass.
‘All the girls were wearing gum boots with their bikinis and I couldn't shoot any lower than their knees.
But somehow they managed to look happy, gay and bright.’
The Carry On films have taken audiences to some exotic places — the mountains of India, the rugged terrain of the Wild West, mysterious Egypt…
But the behind-the-scenes truth is that the cast and crew rarely went further than their own back yard.
Carry On Camping was no exception.
The action was supposed to take place in the depths of the English countryside.
In fact, the film was shot in the orchard of Buckinghamshire's Pinewood Studios.
Rogers and Thomas moved out of Pinewood only when absolutely necessary.
‘We are both like cheap wine — we don't travel well,’ explains Peter, who to this day has never set foot in America, let alone Hollywood.
‘The ultimate test always was: Would it be funnier if, for example, Carry On Abroad was filmed in Spain rather than out on the lot?
‘The answer was usually no.
And thank goodness, because we could have ended up with Eldorado — although there is nothing funnier than that.’
He sniggers, and so does Gerald.
But then these two do everything together.
If one folds his arms, so does the other.
If one crosses his legs, ditto.
In 40 years of film-making they have had not one disagreement.
Just bellyfuls of laughs — many of them totally unsuited to the big screen.
One of the rare occasions on which they ventured beyond the studio was for Carry On Up The Khyber.
A trip to India was out of the question, of course.
But they did manage to get as far as Wales, where the foothills of Snowdonia passed for the Karakoram mountains.
‘Hardly had I arrived there than I was called back to entertain Princess Margaret, who was paying a visit to the studio,’ recalls executive producer Peter.
‘She said to me: ‘Where's your director?’
And without thinking, I said: ‘He's up Snowdon’.’
As far as fans were concerned, the location made little difference.
‘After Khyber was released, I had a postcard from an old campaigner.
He had served at the Khyber Pass and said he recognised the place at once.’
Many of the locations were just outside Pinewood's front door.
Windsor became London for Carry On Loving and Regardless, Maidenhead town hall was transformed into Finisham Maternity Hospital for Matron.
But there was another major excursion to Camber Sands for Follow That Camel.
‘The camel,’ Peter recalls, ‘couldn't walk on sand.
It had come from Chessington Zoo and trodden on nothing but concrete all its life.
‘We had to put metal grids down, with sand over the top before we could do any filming.
It just didn't like that sinking feeling.’
Follow That Camel was filmed in May, but Gerald Thomas still woke up in the morning to find snow all over their Fort Zuassantneuf set.
As with Camping, mud plagued Carry On Cowboy.
But once again ingenuity came to the rescue.
Peter explains: ‘We were on Chobham Common, doing a stagecoach scene.
It was supposed to be the parched Wild West, with dust spraying up from the horses'  hooves and the wheels.
‘We put a props man in the back and got him to pump out cement powder.’
THE only film to cost us a day's filming because of bad weather was Cowboy.
‘Normally, I would shoot through anything — but that day it rained and rained and there was nothing to be done about it,’ Gerald says.
For Carry On Cruising, there was not a drop of water in sight.
‘We did all that in-house.
P&O Ferries lent us all the props and gave us expert advice,’ Peter says.
‘But when it was finished, they refused to show it on any of their ships.
They thought it would put their passengers off.’
Carry On Cleo was made in Pinewood, too — on the same set used by Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor for Anthony And Cleopatra.
‘They had just finished shooting it, so we thought we might as well make use of it,’ says Peter.
Anything that saves money gets Peter and Gerald's vote.
One thing Carry Ons have never been is big budget movies.
The first, Carry On Sergeant in 1958, was made for £71,000 — and Thomas claims they were aghast when the cost of the second, Carry On Nurse, went up to £75,000.
Carry On Columbus was made in six weeks and weighs in at £2.25 million.
That's about enough for one blast from Arnie Schwarzenegger's Terminator gun.
PETER ROGERS and Gerald Thomas made millions from the Carry On movies — but the cast didn't.
Top pay for the stars was around £5,000.
‘We paid their agents’ asking price — unless the agents asked too much,’Peter says.
‘And we gave them all the chance to have a share in the profits.
But they all turned it down.
They said they would rather have the cash.
The only one who ever admitted later that he had made a mistake was Kenneth Williams.’
Peter thinks the multi-million-pound contracts paid to Hollywood stars today are obscene.
‘And I wouldn't stand for the prima donna behaviour of some of them, either.
‘In Carry Ons, no one 's name is above the title.
It is a team effort.’
Thomas will not allow ad-libbing — and anyone who throws a tantrum is out.
‘No one is ever forced to be in our films, but they have always queued up to appear,’ he says.
‘It's been no different with Columbus.
COMEDY KINGS: Rogers (left) and Thomas are good pals too
COWBOY: Charles Hawtrey, Sid James and Percy Herbert are heap funny
KHYBER: With Kenneth Williams and Bernard Bresslaw
CAMPING: Hattie Jacques helps Barbara Windsor hide her boobs and her blushes in a revealing scene done in two takes
CAMEL: With Phil Silvers, Kenneth Williams and a staked-out Jim Dale
MIRROR MONEY
CLAMP DOWN ON CAR COSTS
IAN MILLER
GETTING your car clamped needn't be a bad thing.
And it could save you money — if you do the clamping yourself!
More than 600,000 vehicles are stolen each year.
Some insurers give discounts for fitting anti-theft devices and others, like Norwich Union, won't insure some cars unless they are fitted with immobilisers.
Wheel clamps aren't on the list yet, but it's still worth asking for a few quid off your annual premium.
One garage earned a discount for fitting clamps to cars on its forecourt.
And an Association of British Insurers spokesman said: ‘It's certainly under consideration by some insurers.’
With premiums on many cars set to double AGAIN this year it's more important than ever to find a way to cut costs on cover.
You'll be able to drive a hard bargain by: Keeping your motor in a garage if possible.
In some high crime areas you can't get cover without a lockable garage so you may have to rent one.
Etch security numbers on all the windows and slap on stickers to say you've done it.
It won't cut your premiums but it may cut the risk of theft.
Cover up your radio — or use a removable one.
Restrict the number of fellow drivers and watch their ages.
For details of personal clamps call Lionweld Kennedy on 0642 245151.
Are our children getting smart?
Why record number of GCSE passes needs examination
HEADS SLAM NEW SYSTEM
RICHARD GARNER
A RECORD number of schoolchildren will today be told they have passed their GCSE exams.
A staggering 5.1 million exam papers were taken — 65,000 more than last year — and the numbers getting top grades are the highest ever, especially in key subjects like modern languages and English.
You would think it was cause for a massive celebration.
But headmistress Helen Williams won't be reaching for the champagne glasses or festive bunting.
And many of her fellow heads and teachers anxious about the current obsession with ‘never mind the quality, feel the width’ will be hard pressed to raise three cheers, too.
Mrs Williams, 54, is the former headmistress of St Paul's Girls' school in London who was forced to quit by a parents' rebellion over an attempt to limit the number of GCSEs her girls sat.
She suggested they would do better if they only sat five exams and spent the rest of their time on work which could give them a much broader education than just swotting for more GCSEs.
Results
She's unrepentant.
‘Nothing will change my commitment to the idea that a truly liberal education is much more than an examination syllabus,’ she says.
Her language may be a bit highbrow, but it strikes a chord with many of Britain's state school heads.
In fact, they would go further and say bluntly that the current obsession with exam passes is actually harming their pupils' education.
This year is the first time schools have been required by law to publish their exam results so they can be compared with their neighbours.
So today's record GCSE entries — coming hot on the heels of last week's record ‘A’ level scores — have to be seen against that background.
Said Arthur de Ceaux, education chief of the National Association of Head Teachers: ‘Heads are under more pressure to deliver numbers and grades rather than well-educated people.
‘The bright child who might possibly get nine GCSEs is going to be pushed to go in for more and more.
‘Equally, a school might decide not to enter people who are a bit dodgy at the other end of the scale.
‘The bright child is not going to get the time or flexibility to study things that will develop his own personal, social or moral education.
‘And pupils are not going to be allowed to pursue any particular interests they may have.’
Headmaster John Cox, chairman of the National Union of Teachers' education committee, agreed.
‘If you begin to limit things, where does something like drama or time for sport come in?’ he asked.
‘And drama has so much to offer in terms of equipping a child for life after school.
Standing up in front of the public, developing your skills in presentation — all that is useful for an employer.’
Just for the record, this year's results show: THERE were 5.1 million entries for the exam this year.
THE number of A grades increased by 0.9 per cent to one in eight.
THE A to C pass rate rose by 2.3 per cent to 51.3 per cent.
WORRYINGLY, there were again FEWER maths candidate — 2.6 per cent less.
Schools Minister Eric Forth reacted by praising pupils and teachers for their hard work, saying: ‘We can now look forward to seeing more students than ever continuing in education beyond the age of 16.’
Decline
But even the Government's staunchest supporters weren't exactly whooping it up over the results.
Former Schools Minister and Tory MP Sir Rhodes Boyson said: ‘I'm very concerned about the decline in the numbers sitting maths.
Here is a subject which is so crucial to the development of the future of this country.’
And Dr John Marks, the right-wing academic chosen by the Tories as one of the Government's chief exams advisers, last night demanded ‘caution’ over the results.
‘We have to look very carefully to make sure standards of the exam are being maintained, otherwise qualifications will be devalued,’ he said.
So let's give two cheers to kids who passed their exams.
But spare a thought for Helen Williams.
She may well have been right.
CRITIC: Helen Williams is against too many exams
THE LIMIT
Bobby's death threat shocker
RICK SKY
SINGER Bobby Brown has ordered a massive security shake-up after a series of death threats.
Brown, who married superstar Whitney Houston last month, was shocked into action after two bullets were found in his dressing room during a rehearsal.
A source close to the pin-up star at No 19 with Humpin' Around, says: ‘Bobby has received several written and verbal threats.
‘At first he thought it was just some nut who didn't like him getting married.’
But then his crew found the bullets.
Brown, a former member of hit teen band New Edition, fears he has been caught up in a long-running feud between his former band's road crew and one of America's top street gangs.
The feud has so far claimed five lives.
Two were gunned down on stage during close pal Hammer's recent American tour.
Boston-born Bobby who shot to fame after escaping a life of petty crime, has already been the victim of one gangland shooting.
He said: ‘I was caught dancing with the wrong girl at a party.
Her boy-friend shot me in the leg.’
DEATH THREATS: Bobby
Win 100 LPs
GO for gold with another record breaking Limit competition.
We've got 100 copies of the album Freddie Mercury made with opera diva Montserrat Caballe, Barcelona, to give away.
Polydor Records have re-released the album, which features the top ten hit of the same name and used by the BBC as the theme tune for their Olympic coverage due to public demand.
To enter, simply complete the Freddie Mercury hit The Great…
Phone your answer on…. by August 29, leaving your name, address and daytime phone number.
* Call costs 36p a minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
Calls should cost about the same as a first-class stamp.
ANNIE SPOOKED
ANNIE LENNOX'S Spanish holiday has left her in bad spirits after discovering her villa was haunted.
The talented female star headed for a welcome rest after a hectic six months that's seen the release of her first solo LP and current hit single Walking on Broken Glass.
But Annie's plans for a restful break were shattered when she discovered the holiday hideaway has a ghost.
But while psychic Philip Steff has offered to help, a record company spokesman said: ‘Annie is a strong lady and she's not about to let a spook ruin her summer break.’
STRONG: Annie
Kylie charged up
KYLIE MINOGUE has blasted Madonna for ripping off other people's styles.
The Aussie singer, who has been accused of copying Madonna herself, has herself been accused of copying Madonna, has hit out at the American superstar.
Kylie, at No 14 with What Kind Of Fool: says: ‘People think Madonna's a first in everything.
But there's no way she dreamt up her own image.
She's copied them all, from Marilyn Monroe to Greta Garbo and she just intimidates everyone.’
In an interview with Just Seventeen magazine, Kylie said: ‘I'm sick of people saying I'm ripping Madonna off.
I'm not.’
FUMING: Kylie
The heat is on
PAULINE McLEOD
THIS WEEK'S best movie is the classic thriller, Body Heat (Cert 18; W.E.), which is still sizzling 12 years after it was first released.
This Lawrence Kasdan masterpiece is only being screen for one week as part of a William Hurt season at London's Barbican cinema.
Still compulsive viewing after all these years, the story tells of a sexual attraction between alluring femme fatale Matty (Kathleen Turner) and sleazy lawyer Ned (Hurt) which eventually leads to a murderous crime of passion.
BODY TALK: William Hurt and Kathleen Turner
PAULINE McLEOD
WHEN a member of a Harlem street gang decides to escape his life of crime by using his DJ skills he receives little support, and the growing tension leads to violence.
Juice (Cert 15; Selected) is boosted by a strong cast of young debut actors and is the first movie from Ernest R. Dickerson, the cinematographer on many of director Spike Lee's controversial films.
Skating on thin ice
SLUSHY LOVE MATCH HOLDS FEW TWISTS
PAULINE McLEOD
THE WINTER Olympic sports of figure skating and ice hockey should provide a fascinating backdrop full of balletic grace and full-blooded aggression.
But The Cutting Edge (Cert P.G.; General), a sort of Dirty Dancing on ice set in the competitive world of international skating, left me cold.
While there are some fabulous skating routines, beautifully choreographed by British Olympic gold  medallist Robin Cousins, it all fairly predictable from the moment our two bolshie stars accidentally slam into each other behind the scenes at an Olympic event.
D. B. Sweeney plays Doug Dorsey, a working class lad whose bright future in the National Hockey League is ended by a playing accident that leaves him with permanent eye damage.
Even so, that doesn't stop him being introduced by Russian coach Anton Pamchenko (Roy Dotrice) to bitchy ice-queen Kate Moseley (Moira Kelly) as a prospective dance partner.
Kate, a poor little rich girl with her own private rink, can barely keep a partner long enough to get to the Olympics, let alone win a gold medal.
All that changes when she meets her match in Doug.
But despite the movie's terrific skating routines this is NOT a cut above the rest.
GOLD STARS: Taking the Olympics by storm
RINK OUTSIDERS: D.B.Sweeney and Moira Kelly
LIVELY LETTERS
, writes: WE BEGAN discussing at work how, in America, the ‘holes’ from fruit Polo mints are sold as sweets.
Then came the puzzle — how can Dunkin' Donuts sell very cheaply the ‘holes’ from their doughnuts when, as far as I know, doughnuts are made like rings with nothing in the middle?
Please fill us in on this.
You want the hole truth and nothing but?
Traditional doughnuts were just lumps of dough with jam in the middle until, in 1847, the Americans invented the ring doughnut.
That's when the jokes about the missing bit started, for ring doughnuts look just like traditional ones with a bit taken out of the middle.
So some bright spark produced small tasty jam-filled doughnuts and said THEY were the missing holes.
The idea took off and now Dunkin' Donuts, who sell them in an amazing 31 flavours, say ‘holes’ are one of their most popular lines.
Polo's ‘hole’ selling started when they did a consumer survey asking: ‘Which bit of mint do you like the best?’
They were astonished at the number of people who replied that they preferred the hole!
MORSE
W , writes from : YOU recently published an Inspector Morse story about a nine year old Metro car which took only unleaded petrol.
Was unleaded petrol sold in Oxford in 1983?
No.
Morse author Colin Dexeter slipped up.
Unleaded petrol did not reach our garages until 1986, although the USA had it in 1975 and Japan from 1977.
PAINTING
, writes: IS a print of Tretchikoff's green-faced Oriental girl, which the artist signed when he was alive, worth more now the painter is dead?
No, mass-produced reproductions — as distinct from limited edition — prints seldom if ever rise in value.
And even if the signature is original it would only be of value to an autograph hunter not an art collector.
PASTE
, writes: MANY years ago I was told that Colgate toothpaste was made from pebbles from Chesil Beach, Dorset.
True?
Colgate say ‘No.’
They use chalk, but not from the Chesil Beach area, adding flavouring and  fluoride .
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
THERE was more bad news for Fergie yesterday when the firm filming her Budgie The Helicopter books crashed deeper into the red.
Sleepy Kids, which has put together a deal that could earn the Duchess up to £5 million, lost £109,000 in the six months to May.
That's nearly twice its loss the previous year.
But bosses Martin and Vivien Shrager-Powell reckon Fergie's films and other new projects mean it'll be back in the black before long.
Which could mean the Duchess won't need any more financial advice to keep Budgie flying high.
THE recession has brought a mixed bag of fortunes for W. H. Smith.
The housing slump, which left millions of homeowners unable to fork out for expensive home improvements, has seen its DIY arm, Do It All, plunge £2.7 million in to the red after making a £10.4 million profit the year before.
But book and magazine sales at Smiths rose by nearly six per cent.
Added to a £149 million windfall from a shares sale, that pushed profits up 27 per cent to £113 million last year.
Wombles clear up in sales
DESPITE the slump there's big money to be made in cartoons.
Storm Group — makers of both the Wombles and Shoe People characters — has seen sales soar SIX-FOLD in the past six months.
That's helped the company, facing losses of £98,000 a year ago, turn in £401,000 in profits.
No wonder boss Jim Driscoll — who invented the Shoe People and set up the company — is being dubbed Britain's answer to Walt Disney.
WINNER: Wombles
We're off to see Europe's best
WE'RE off to Paris for the richest race in Europe, the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe on Sunday October 4.
The Daily Mirror has put together three fabulous trips with Horse Racing Abroad that are bound to be winners.
It is going to be a really great weekend with that super colt St Jovite among a host of top horses in action and you will also be able to sample the exotic Paris nightlife.
Our two-night trip by air leaves Gatwick on the afternoon of Friday October 2.
On your return on the Sunday, the coaches will leave the racecourse after the last race for the evening flight home.
The cost is £299.
You will stay at three star Paris Neuilly, with easy access into central Paris.
We also have a two-night coach trip which costs just £149.
This leaves London Victoria on Saturday morning October 3 with a Dover-Calais Sealink crossing and a leisurely drive to Paris.
You will be staying at the two-star Hotel Ibis and will arrive in time for dinner.
The return journey will be on the Monday morning, arriving at Victoria around 9pm.
Finally we can offer a super value day trip.
Our flight leaves Gatwick on Sunday morning October 4 and you will enjoy a glass of champagne en route to Paris Orly airport.
Coaches will be waiting to transfer you direct to Longchamp for the racing.
The return flight will get you into Gatwick at 9.30 pm and the price is £149.
The cost of racecourse entry and access to the Grandstand area are included in the package prices.
Reserved seating and entry to the Horse Racing Abroad Pavilion Grandstand are available at extra cost.
To: Daily Mirror Arc Trip, Horse Racing Abroad, Golden Key Building, 15a market Street, Sandwich, Kent CT13 9DA.
Please book me……places as detailed below.
I enclose cheque/money order for £50 per person deposit (plus £13 insurance if required), payable to Horse Racing Abroad and crossed (do not send cash).
Name
Address
Telephone (day time): TWO NIGHTS BY AIR £299 each Single room supplement £60 TWO-NIGHT COACH TRIP £149 each Single room supplement £40 DAY-TRIP BY AIR £144 Travel insurance £13 per person Grandstand seat £42.50 per person (Please tick as appropriate.
All bookings subject to availability).
Public Opinion
CLASS SERVICE
WE WERE shown on TV the joy of a young couple moving into their new home after just beating the Stamp Duty deadline.
The champagne corks popped but then the reporter told us the house had been repossessed.
It brought home the family's humiliation and anguish after being forced to move out.
A million families have insolvency hanging over them as their mortgage debts have grown greater than the values of their homes.
The British have never been caught in such a web of debt with no hope of escape.
—.
HOW DAFT of Manchester to bid to host the Olympic Games in the year 2000.
Our building industry is in such a bad state that we will have no trained workers to build the stadiums and villages by then.
We would have to import skilled workers from abroad.
What shame on the Tories who have brought about the collapse of this key industry in the past 13 years.
—.
PATRIOTISM is a dirty word in this country these days.
In Norway recently, I noticed that most buildings had a flag pole with their national colours flying.
Why are we in Britain made to feel guilty about flying the Union Jack just because on occasions it is used by extremists?—.
WHAT a racket in the supermarkets.
Twice I've picked up goods on a shelf marked reduced and then found, because of the bar codes, I was charged full price at the pay-out desk.
Friends confirm that it happens often.
—.
Poor show from DSS
WHAT a mess the DSS is in.
My husband applied for disability allowance in April 1991.
After supplying medical records and repeatedly telephoning the department, we were told in September that they had mislaid his file.
We started again.
Early in August, after sending the department a recorded delivery letter every month from January, I was finally informed that my husband would be granted his claim — but they couldn't make the payment yet because they had lost his file.
Why should we have to suffer from such incompetence?—.
SECOND
WHAT a difference between my experience and that of a Swindon woman who  receives a letter 90 minutes after it was posted.
When I sent a postcard from Blackpool on August 12, 1982, it arrived in Doncaster on August 13 1992.
The neighbour we sent it to died while it was on its way.
—.
AFTER I lost a pound coin in a pay phone, I immediately dialled the operator, who took my name and address.
I have now received a polite letter from B.T. together with a phone card worth 30p.
No wonder they make so much profit.
—.
THE IRAQIS latest cruel act of jailing British chef Paul Ride and their persistent attacks on Shi'ites are because of our feebleness.
If we had captured Baghdad we would not be having this trouble now.
Cost was the factor.
Paul Ride is paying for our Prime Minister's inept penny-pinching.
So are Iraq's persecuted minorities.
—.
A living nightmare
Dilemma of parents who can't forget tragedy of Hillsborough
It'd be best if Tony died
STEPHEN WHITE
IT'S the nightmare no parent should face…wishing their own son would die.
But for Allan and Barbara Bland a daily visit to their son's hospital bedside makes them wish for an end to his twilight world.
Tony Bland didn't die in the Hillsborough soccer tragedy, but he didn't  survive it, either.
Since he was pulled from under a pile of 40 bodies over three years ago he has been in a coma, unlikely ever to recover.
A life support machine pumps liquid food into his body.
And every day Allan and Barbara and the doctors treating him have to face the dilemma of keeping alive the boy they feel would be better off dead.
Tony is one of two silent victims of that fateful day.
Andrew Devine, a 25-year-old policeman's son from Mossley Hill, Liverpool suffered horrific brain injuries.
His parents moved to a purpose built house so their son could be nursed 24 hours a day.
Says Barbara Bland: ‘It's not our son lying in that hospital bed.
He died the day he went to that football match.
Its just his shell.
We still love what's left of him, but he'll never know it.’
Alive
This week 21-year-old Tony contracted septicaemia — blood poisoning — as a result of being permanently fitted with a catheter.
It seemed it was the end.
But doctors at Airedale Hospital, Nr Keighley, West Yorkshire were obliged by law to treat him as they would any other patient.
Because the law says Tony is alive.
So he was prescribed a course of antibiotics.
And, yesterday, his condition improved.
But his doctor, Jim Howe, admits: ‘Most people looking after him, and his family, would like him to die peacefully.
It would be the best thing for him and it would give his family some peace.’
In the meantime, Tony continues to ‘live’ out his days in a hospital side room filled with Liverpool soccer mementoes.
He suffered massive brain damage in the soccer ground tragedy.
His muscles are so wasted his arms are bent double across his chest, his legs are so twisted they would have to be broken to straighten them.
But there is no point.
As the law stands it would be illegal to disconnect his life support machine.
From their flat in Keighley, Allan a 55year-old warehouseman at a local shoe factory and Barbara have campaigned for a change in the law which would allow their son to finally die.
The couple have clashed with the Archbishop of York over their wish.
Dr John Hapgood argued that despite the coma there was still hope Tony could recover.
This autumn the House of Lords will be asked to give people a legal right to choose between life and death if they are left in what doctors call a ‘permanent vegetative state’.
The ‘Advanced Directive’ or ‘Living Will’could become enforceable in a court of law.
Anyone over the age of 18 can complete the form which is lodged with their GP.
It gives doctors  instructions that if a person has no possibility of rational existence there should be: NO medical intervention or treatment aimed at prolonging or sustaining life.
PAIN-KILLERS should be made available to  control any distressing symptoms, despite the fact that such treatment may shorten life.
The first Private Bill ever in the Lords is to be proposed by either Lord Winstanley, himself a former GP, or Lord Allen.
Meredith MacArdle of the Voluntary Euthanasia Society, Exit, says: ‘In a way we are victims of our own achievements.
Improvements in medical technology mean that we can now keep people alive who, years ago, would have died.’
Prolong
‘Is it compassionate for a person to be kept alive with tubes going into their stomach?
The real tragedy of Tony Bland is that he is in the public eye.
In hospitals all over the country, doctors will help incurably ill patients by withdrawing antibiotic treatment.’
The British Medical Association is currently reviewing its position on the permanent vegetative state.
A spokesman said: ‘It is a massive subject and we have to consider the ethical, medical and legal position.’
Legal expert Diana Brahams last night called for the law on euthanasia to be clarified.
It should be stated publicly that where two independent doctors agree there is no hope of recovery, patients should be allowed to die with dignity,’ she said.
For Allan and Barbara the debate doesn't matter.
‘Life has to go on, but Tony's hasn't.’
Allan said when he realised how the football disaster, which claimed 95 lives, had left his son.
‘People whose loved ones died that terrible day can grieve and in time will get over it.
We live with this every day.’
Tony Bland — who has grown into a man in his hospital bed — might have the answer to their dilemma but there's nobody to hear it where he is…stuck between Heaven and earth.
VICTIMS: Tony above, and Hillsborough, top
Oh boy, look at him now
BULLDOG SPIRIT THAT MADE A WWF STAR
GROWING PAINS OF RING KING
IAN BRINDLES
WHO would have thought such an angelic little boy would one day transform himself into a colossal 275lb power-packed man-mountain?
Yet that's exactly what wrestler Davey Boy Smith did after years of painful dedication.
Tomorrow all that hard-won muscle will be on display at Wembley when Wigan-born Davey, 29, better known as WWF idol British Bulldog, takes on Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart in the sell-out SummerSlam 92 spectacular.
The clash is the climax of 19 years' hard sweat for Davey, whose battle to turn his puny frame into a superstar hulk has won him a millionaire lifestyle in Tampa, Florida.
His proud dad Sid Smith, a retired gasman, says: ‘Davey's obsession with wrestling began after watching the Olympics when he was 10.
‘He started weight training to build his body up and spent every night working out.’
Davey even nagged his mum Joyce to prepare a special diet of lean meat, fish, pasta and protein.
‘He simply devoted himself to the sport and was never in any doubt about what he wanted to be,’ adds Sid.
‘He idolised the professional wrestlers he saw on television, and was determined to get in on action.’
Now all that hard work has paid off.
Today British Bulldog boasts 32in thighs and 25in biceps of solid muscle.
Weight — or lack of it — was a constant headache for the young Davey Boy.
Sid explains: ‘At times he was really down in the dumps.
He'd complain that all the work he was doing didn't seem to be making him any bigger.’
His fears of not making the grade evaporated when ITV talent scouts spotted him wrestling on the amateur circuit.
At 15, Davey was suddenly thrown into the lion's den on the Saturday afternoon programme with such home-grown greats as Mick McManus, Jackie Pallo, Big Daddy and Les Kellett.
But the lad didn't let the new-found fame go to his head.
He even kept his debut a secret at his comprehensive school.
Sid laughingly recalls: ‘I'm sure some of his mates knew, but his teachers certainly didn't.
His headmaster was astonished when he turned on the telly to see one of his pupils grappling.’
‘Davey was really hauled over the coals the following Monday.’
Fourteen years later Davey is just as dedicated.
Sid adds: ‘He hardly ever takes a break.
His is constantly pre-occupied with fitness, strength, and staying in peak condition.
After all, in a gruelling sport like wrestling you cannot go on for ever.’
I'm not so sure British Bullboy would agree.
PUP AND AT ‘EM!
DAVEY Boy Smith left his 14-year-old schoolfriends to chase girls while he dedicated himself to building up his body in the gym.
A year later it paid off.
DOGGYPADDLE
YOUNG Davey ponders his future by the poolside during a family holiday.
Little did he know that years later he would have his own pool in a luxury Florida-based mansion.
JACK THE LAD: British Bulldog flexes his muscles in his Union Jack tights
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
CLASSIC QUOTE
I WAS in analysis for years because of a traumatic childhood.
I was breastfed through falsies. — Comedian Woody Allen.
MACAULAY CULKIN is enduring every football-loving boy's worst nightmare.
The 12-year-old hero of Home Alone and My Girl is taking ballet lessons to prepare him for the role of Prince in Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker Suite.
BEING dubbed ‘The World's Sexiest Man’ created a lot of problems for Mel Gibson, who has turned his cheeks to the cameras in several films.
Finding a good role is now very difficult for Mel.
‘If I've got my pants on in the second scene, I think they've sent me the wrong script,’ he says.
GRAFFITI
IN A pub near Buckingham Palace: OLIVER CROMWELL, where are you now we need you?
ON A noticeboard in the West End: Woody Allen's latest movie is called: ‘Honey, I Bonked The Kids.’
WOODY Allen anagram scribbled on a Manhattan hoarding: ‘Oy!
A New Doll.’
KILLER'S TRUE TO TYPE
YOU get some funny things in newspapers these days, but parts of bodies killed by a Hannibal Lecter-style serial killer is a bit much.
Still, author Michael Molloy, once editor of the Daily Mirror, based that detail in his new crime novel on fact…
SUBH––
YOU get some funny things in newspapers these days, but parts of bodies killed by a Hannibal Lecter-style serial killer is a bit much.
Still, author Michael Molloy, once editor of the Daily Mirror, based that detail in his new crime novel on fact.
‘It really happened.
Years ago a man walked in to the paper and said he wanted to confess to a murder — and to prove it, he had sawn-off sections of the body with him in a carrier bag.’
TV rights for the book Sweet Sixteen set in a national newspaper, have been sold.
Switch on the TV, but unwrap your morning paper VERY carefully.
ONE MORE THING
AT THE recent European soccer championships in Sweden a quiet black man was sitting in the airport lounge when a group of Scottish fans came in with their wives.
When the lone passenger rose to give a Scots woman his seat her husband pulled her back saying, ‘Don't you know who he is?
Give Pele back his seat.’
BROOKE SHIELDS, who is not being offered many good roles since outgrowing her curvaceous teens, may be looking for a new career as a film critic.
In her debut for Harper's Bazaar she reviews The Lover, which she says reminds her of her own movie, Pretty Baby.
Not a dry eye in the…
HEART-THROB Patrick Swayze gets one in the eye from a small boy in the forthcoming heat-and-dust saga City Of Joy.
As a doctor who founds a clinic in the back streets of Calcutta, he saves the kid's life — and wins the heart of a nurse (Pauline Collins).
Swayze's reward?
As he holds him up in triumph, the lad piddles in his eye.
With extraordinary self-control, the dripping doc grins sportingly and tells him: ‘I can see you're going to be a fireman when you grow up!’
THE  Hitch-hiker's Guide To Not Seeing The Galaxy Before Your Time: Don't accept a lift in President Kennedy's Cadillac, James Dean's Porsche, Mark Thatcher's Land-Rover.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
PAP SNAP
WHAT a cot I've got.
Beautiful Belinda Carlisle takes her new baby James out for a spin.
Sources close to Bel say the tiny tot looks just like mom…right down to the dark sunglasses.
OFF LIMITS
LATEST edition to Reading Festival's Saturday bill is the JUPITERS — a 15-piece Icelandic Latin American band…
MICKEY ROURKE'S wife CARRIE OTIS has turned down a £500,000 cosmetics deal so she can spend more time with her hubby…
OVER THE LIMIT
SPICE up your sex life…by talking.
‘When a woman's lover says little or nothing between the sheets, she will feel unloved,’ says Barbara DeAngelis in her book How To Make Love All The Time.
‘Women get turned on in the head first so speaking to them can work wonders.’
AMERICAN chart-toppers Boyz II Men had a live appearance on Top Of The Pops blown out because of Hurricane Andrew.
The foursome, whose single End Of The Road has been at number one in the States for the last three weeks, were barred from entering New Orleans to do their live satellite link-up with the Beeb show.
Instead TOTP had to make do with a telephone interview and video.
NIRVANA'S headlining appearance at this weekend's Reading Festival could be their last.
The news comes after the grunge rock kings scrapped a hometown show at the last minute following weeks of squabbling.
Band members have had so many bust-ups over Cobain's wife Courtney Love's role in the group, they are now barely speaking.
Says a friend: ‘Relations between them have hit an all-time low and things look set to worsen.’
But a record company spokesman laughed off rumours of the split saying: ‘The band are busy making plans for the future.‘
HOLIDAY MIRROR
RIGHT TRACK
DAVID KERR
MOTORAIL is a quick and painless way to get to the South of France.
The station at Dieppe is less than half-a-mile from the ferry port and is well-signposted.
The family accommodation consists of six couchettes, which second-class passengers may have to share, and four in the first-class ones.
You may find it difficult to sleep, but it can be exciting to glimpse a floodlit Eiffel tower as you hurry through Paris in the early hours.
After your continental breakfast — included in the price — your car is unloaded and you drive off to start your holiday still feeling fresh.
Prices start from £354 return for the car and driver on the Dieppe to Frejus route with £82 for additional adults and £38 for children.
The service also goes to the Atlantic coast, Italy and to the Alpine regions in the winter months.
They also combined packages with reduced cross channel fares.
Details and bookings on 071-409-3518.
GORGE-OUS FRANCE
A YEAR in Provence may be just a dream — but two weeks is a distinct possibility.
Holiday company EuroSites offer a choice of tents or mobile homes at their Les Lacs Du Verdon site in the heart of this enchanting French region.
We arrived at the French Riviera town of Frejus after an overnight journey on the Motorail.
From there, the site is a two hour drive away.
Regusse, the walled village nearest the site, with its narrow streets and cosy bars was ideal for winding down.
Nearby, you can visit the waterfall at Sillans where brave bathers plunge into the rocky pools or the caves at Villecroze once inhabited by monks.
But whatever you do don't miss the amazing Gorge du Verdon, a European version of the Grand Canyon where the river wends between 500-metre cliffs.
We hired a pedalo on the man-made Lac St Croix at the western end of the gorge and explored the gorge from the river.
But if you just want to take it easy, the three-star camp site offers a swimming pool, a good restaurant and local folk dancing on a Saturday night.
Our mobile home was well equipped with two bedrooms, bathroom and kitchen.
There may be better ways of spending a holiday in France — but I've yet to find one.
FACT BOX EUROSITES offer seven nights on the Les Lacs Du Verdon site from £159 a week for tents and £159 for mobile homes per party.
Prices rise to £439 and £589 respectively per week during the peak summer weeks.
Prices include ferry crossings on Sally Ferries from Ramsgate to Dunkirk.
Ring 0706 830888 for full details.
PEACEFUL: The walled village of Regusse
PEDAL POWER: The Gorge du Verdon are best explored aboard a pedalo
Handcuff pair grab cops’ car
TWO handcuffed youths stole a police car yesterday — and led a 110mph chase.
The two burglary suspects were handcuffed and put in the car in Salisbury.
But as police stood outside the pair sped off in the car.
Chased by police vehicles and a helicopter it rammed three cars as it careered down the wrong side of city centre roads.
Finally it lost a wheel on a roundabout and passers-by grabbed the two as they tried to flee.
Two youths were helping police with inquiries.
UK HOLIDAY XTRA
SUIT YOURSELF, MISSUS
Self-catering is the way ahead for cheap breaks without bother
DAVID KERR
SELF-CATERING holidays have proved the great growth area in the last ten years.
It is not just cost that has made the DIY holiday so popular, although traditionally they have been the break for those on a tight budget.
Yes, you can control costs more carefully, but self-catering also means you can come and go as you please.
Want a lie in?
No problem.
You won't miss your paid-for breakfast between 8am and 9am, nor will you have the domestic staff banging at your door with a vacuum cleaner in tow.
Pay a bit extra of course and you can have a TV, or possibly video entertainment, dishwashers and washing machines.
The larger holiday parks may have entertainment centres with pools, ballrooms and restaurants and offer the features and entertainment found in big hotels — but at budget prices.
And, at the end of the day, you can return to your holiday home, shut the front door, and remain completely undisturbed.
See the FHG Guide to Self-Catering & Furnished Holidays ‘92 (FHG Publications Ltd., £2.50) for details of accommodation throughout Britain.
For more information call: English Country Cottages on 0328 864 041; for lodges, holiday parks etc., call Blakes Holidays on 0603 783 221 and Hoseasons Holidays on 0502 500 500.
Alternatively call Tourist Information Centres in the area you wish to stay.
GARDENING
FIELD NOTE
CHARLES LYTE
XENIA FIELD
WHEN shopping for spring bulbs, make sure you pick ones that are clean and firm.
Reject any that are even slightly soft or in any way discoloured.
Sage and onions
WHEN you know your onions you can avoid the gap between the last of the main crop and the new harvest.
Bridge that gap with over-wintering onion sets, ready to eat from May to July.
Start now with a net of Unwins First Early Onion sets, plus a collection of broad bean, spinach and spring onion seeds for £3.50, including p&p.
Orders to: Daily Mirror Early Onion Offer, Unwins Seeds Ltd, Histon, Cambridge, CB4 4LE.
Cheques and postal orders payable to: MGN Early Onion Offer.
Please write your name and address on the back.
Allow 28 days.
SEEDS OF PASSION
Q WILL you please tell me how you can  propagate a passion flower?
A THERE are a number of ways of  propagating a Passiflora caerulea.
One is by the leaf bud cutting taken in May and June and stuck in a greenhouse.
You do this by taking a leaf with a bud in the axil, and a little piece of stem.
You can also sow seeds in a greenhouse in March or April, or try lavering, which can be done up to August.
For this take young supple stems and bend them down to the soil.
Make a slit in a stem under a bud, and pin that into the soil.
The layer should not be disturbed for 12 months.
By then it will have developed a good root system and the new plant can be severed from the parent plant and replanted.
Q HOW can I get rid of  brambles and nettles?
A The surest  away of getting rid of them is to cut them down and dig them out.
Some herbicides designed to clear brushwork also work.
SOME LIKE IT CHILLY
SPRING is not the only time to sow seeds.
Some such as Alpines need to battle with Jack Frost.
In the wild their  seed capsules are first frozen and them buried under snow until the Spring kicks them into life.
The chill factor also helps a lot of shrubs and trees that produce very hard seeds — pips — buried in fleshy fruits.
They includes roses, berberis, cotoneasters, sorbus, the Handkerchief Tree (Davidia involucrata).
peaches, almonds, cherries and plums.
Sow them all in pots of good compost then plunge them in a cinders bed — or sand — in the coldest part of the garden.
YOUR MONEY
Sobering news for the big brewers
IAN MILLER
Now we really know Britain is in a bad way…
More and more of us are too hard up even to afford a few quid drowning our sorrows in the pub.
Experts say we're knocking back ONE MILLION pints of beer a day LESS than we were a year ago.
Sales of wine and spirits are also falling fast.
And big brewers Scottish & Newcastle chairman Sir Alick Rankin reckons the north will soon be hit as hard as the south.
This sobering news sent brewery shares reeling — S & N lost 29p to 390p and Greene King fell 21p to 422p.
And all on a day when FTSE index of the 100 biggest companies actually went UP 26.6 to 2311.6.
PRIZE GUY
Philip's WWF win is just the ticket
‘I JUST CAN'T WAIT TO MEET HITMAN HART’
FIONA McINTOSH
LITTLE Philip Carter ripped open the letter telling him he had won first prize in the Mirror's WWF wrestling competition…and burst into tears.
‘I was so happy I started crying my eyes out,’ says Philip, eight.
And the die-hard wrestling fan from Yeovil was floored when he learnt what he had won.
Not only is he going to see the WWF fans in action at Wembley stadium tonight but he will get to shake hands with his all-time hero, Bret ‘Hitman’ Hart.
‘I'll be very nervous but I want to ask him what he eats for breakfast.
‘You see, I've been thinking about becoming a wrestler myself,’ confesses Philip.
Ever since wrestling came to Britain, Philip has been diligently collecting WWF cards and has plastered his bedroom walls with posters of his beefy heroes.
‘I think they're great, especially the way they look.
I'm really excited about seeing them live at Wembley.’
Philip and his father Andy, who works in a helicopter factory, will have ringside seats for tonight's SummerSlam event.
‘It's made my school friends very jealous,’ says Philip.
‘They all want me to get the Hitman's autograph.
‘I know he is very big, but I'm pretty sure he's a nice person, too.’
FLOORED: WWF Fan Philip and (inset)‘Hitman’ Hart
GIBBS GOSSIP
DON'T RING US
GARTH GIBBS
AMERICA'S CBS TV is looking for a replacement for Alistair Cooke who, at 84, is retiring soon as host of Masterpiece Theatre, a series which presents the best of British TV drama to American viewers.
People magazine has been looking for possible substitutes, and among the personalities they suggest is Prince Charles.
Here's why: CREDENTIALS: Under-employed, and has actually read all the books the series is based upon; SAMPLE MONOLOGUE: ‘The history of our splendid isle cannot be separated from its architecture, its noble people and its rolling moors.
But, I suppose you, only want to know about my wife.’
SERIES MOST EXCITED ABOUT: Charles's Victory Garden: First episode — Plants as Confidantes.
THIS column is splashing out again…with the first photograph of the latest addition to Baywatch.
She is Pamela Anderson, a blonde surfer with all the right equipment, and the girl recently voted in a magazine as the lifeguard you would most like to receive mouth-to-mouth from.
COPS in Miami described a baboon which escaped from a zoo during Hurricane Andrew as ‘unarmed but dangerous.’
A GIRL in Ilford was asked if she would like to be a Jehovah's Witness.
‘Hey,’ she protested, ‘I didn't even see the accident.’
FAITH Brown's trying out the new blow-up bra (you'll have to puff a little harder, dearie).
BILLY Connolly's got his out-of-work wife Pam a job in the circus — as long as he agrees to tear the tickets.
‘WELL,’ says Iman, ducking, ‘would you like to be photographed with a man wearing that colour jacket?’
JFK BLEW OUT CANDLE IN THE WIND
MARILYN MONROE was killed on the direct orders of President John F. Kennedy — according to a book to be published next month.
Kennedy's brother, Bobby, and his brother-in-law, actor Peter Lawford, were also involved in the superstar's death, claims writer Peter Carpozi.
He says Marilyn ended up pregnant after her affair with President Kennedy and had an abortion only weeks before her death — in 1962.
The operation left her depressed, and she continued to pester Kennedy about it — until he decided to take action.
One evening he rang Bobby, saying: ‘It's time for you to do something about Marilyn, she's bugging me.’
That call triggered the countdown to her death.
‘Bobby phoned Peter Lawford and said; ‘Let's put the programme on go!’
Lawford, in turn, phoned his friend, the late Dr Ralph Greenson, Marilyn's psychiatrist.
‘It's time for you to do your number’, Lawford said.
‘At 6pm, Dr Greenson went to Marilyn's house and gave her an enema containing a strong dose of sedating drugs.
‘At 8pm, Marilyn, after taking her normal high dosage of bedtime drugs retired,’ says Carpozi.
‘That high dosage, when coupled with the enema constituted an overdose.
She died around 8.30pm.’
From, the book The Most Intimate Monroe, The Murder and the Cover-up'.
(SPI Books), published next month.
COVER UP: Monroe ‘silenced’ by Kennedys
WHY are you less likely to get caught speeding in a black car and most likely in a red one?
Well, bored motorway cops, fed up with all the would-be Nigel Mansells roaring down the fast lane, recently adopted a system called Speed Snooker to nab offenders.
It's simple.
You pot a red then a yellow then another red then a green…and so on.
Ahead of the game
THE Queen, rather pre-occupied these days, has nevertheless found time to quash attempts to strip Sir Walter Raleigh of his title for introducing the dreaded weed in to this country.
With a rare glimpse of humour one of her aides told us: ‘You will remember that Her Majesty's predecessors, King James I, had Sir Walter beheaded.
Surely he has suffered enough?’
‘EYE eye, The Bill for this drink's too much,’ says TV copper Tony Scannell.
YOUR MONEY
BANKING ON SUPER SALES
IAN MILLER
WHAT is good news for shoppers can be a disaster for shareholders.
Take the store wars in Britain's DIY shops this Bank Holiday weekend.
They're crunching prices to try and boost sales.
But it could cost them more than they make.
Store bosses are taking a gamble in hoping that enough folk will go shopping to make up for huge discounts on offer.
If you take advantage of the sales you'll be able to save at least 20p in the £ on goods which are already at rock-bottom prices.
Yesterday shares in Kingfisher, owner of B&Q, stood at 432p — well down on the year high of 582p.
And Do-it-All owners WH Smith shares were selling for just 391p — against their 1992 peak of 494p.
But shareholders can still make their investment work for them — by filling their trolleys at the right superstores this weekend.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
IT'S WIGHT ON
DAVID KERR
THE school holiday are drawing to a close so take advantage of an offer from Red Funnel ferries and give the kids something to talk about when the new term starts by popping across to the Isle of Wight.
Between Monday and Thursday day trips for a family of four start at just £12.
Alternatively, take the car for £35.
For more information call: 0703-333042.
FREE child places are available at 42 hotels in the new Olympic Holidays Winter Brochure.
For a family of four this can mean a saving of up to £300 on a 14-night stay.
For details call: 071-359 3500.
SAVE nearly £300 off two weeks in Kenya.
Somak Travel offer one week on safari at the Samburu Game Reserve before heading to Bamburi beach, just north of Mombasa, for £862.
Prices include return flights and full-board accommodation on safari, with half-board at the hotel.
For more information call: 081-903 8166.
TRAP THE MEAN MONSTERS
HERE'S the final pair of supermen to complete your super WWF Wallchart.
They are Tantka and  Nailz .
Now you have a stunning souvenir of the World Wrestling Federation Summer Slam ‘92 which muscles into action at Wembley Stadium tonight.
OUR super EXCLUSIVE Wallchart features 14 of the terrible tearaways and the dramatic full-colour pictures give you just a hint of what it must be like to meet them in the ring.
WITH each picture there's everything you need to know about the mighty men.
THIS will be the first time SummerSlam has been seen outside the USA and the leading WWF superstars will be in the ring in the centre of Wembley.
HUGE video screens will relay all the thrilling action of the greatest grapple of the century.
INDIAN BRAVE: Tatanka uses his tomahawk chop
THE HAMMER: Dynamic ex-con Nailz hits hard
RICK SKY'S THE LIMIT
EXTREMELY INDUSTRIOUS
RICK SKY
WORKAHOLIC rocker Nuno Bettencourt even records songs in the loo.
Extreme's heart-throb guitarist, at No 29 with Rest in Peace, works up to 20 hours a day in the studio.
He shrugs off calls to slow down and won't stop working to go to the toilet.
He says: ‘I'm obsessed with my work.
I take a boom box in the loo with me.
I can't be away from music.’
Dark-haired Nuno adds: ‘I need time off.
The last break I had was five months ago.
But whenever I go home I hang around and I miss making music something awful.’
YOU can vote for Extreme in the Music Video section
RICK SKY'S THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
MADONNA'S £2 million beach house took a beating during the recent Florida storms.
The superstar's Coral Gables mansion was battered by gale force winds which left windows smashed and wrecked her garden.
Says Madonna's spokeswoman, Liz Rozenberg: ‘There was damage done but nothing too serious.
‘Madonna likes being in the eye of the storm but this time she was safely tucked away in New York.’
OVER THE LIMIT
FORGET teachers, give apples to your partner.
According to German folklore if you want sparks of passion to fly you should give your lover an apple delicately scented with their perspiration.
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
OLYMPIC cycling star Chris Boardman may have been our big winner at the Games, but the biggest winner of all was his little boy, Edward.
He is a champion on his super bike.
A world beater in his own right at three years old.
What a wonderful picture by Andrew Stenning. — H. Carter, Doncaster, South Yorks.
WIN a tenner if your Picture of the Week is published.
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
WHAT YOU THINK ABOUT THE LAST SEVEN DAYS
Shame on us for not caring
THE horrible story of Clare Bastow, the Angel of Death who killed helpless Cathy O'Neill, is the final proof that we in Britain don't care about our old people.
Killer Clare was looking after Cathy because she had been employed by a home care agency which hadn't checked her references — though she was wanted for arson.
Of course, under this government, the agency was a private firm.
There is no compulsion for them to vet their staff and no national organisation to control them.
Clearly the old don't matter to our government.
It shames us. —.
IT'S disgusting that NHS trust managers are thinking of cutting nurses' wages and replacing many of them with lower paid, undertrained personnel.
I have been paying National Insurance and taxes for many years.
I'm entitled to a better service than the one they plan to run.
—.
WHAT a disgrace the Marquis of Blandford is.
Hours after his wife gave birth to their son, he was out with the girl he's living with.
Has he no discipline?—.
IT'S incredible that a Durham beach — so horrible after coal dumping that it was used in a horror film — may be preserved as part of British history.
What next?
Guided tours of the oil-poisoned Alaskan coast, and historic Chernobyl?—.
PLAY THE GAMES
GOOD for Princess Anne, waiting for her children to arrive in Barcelona instead of going to the Opening Ceremony without them.
If her absence jeopardises Manchester getting the next games, the Olympic ideal is all wrong.
—.
I WAS shocked that no Government ministers attended the Olympics opening ceremony.
But then how could you expect someone like David Mellor to give up his sort of games for those they're playing in Spain?—.
BEEB'S EL FLOPPO
WHY is everyone so upset about the BBC's Eldorado?
The Corporation say no soap has ever failed.
They should add: ‘Until now’.
—.
THE failure of Eldorado should make the government rethink the TV licensing system.
I resent the BBC blowing £10 million on such a silly series.
—.
Hand it to Rod
BABY Renee looked smashing, her mother looked happy, but has dad Rod Stewart got something wrong with his wrists?
He may think it looks cissy to do what a normal man would and carry the baby in its cot, but I reckon it only looks unchivalrous.
Come on, Rod, do your share.
—.
ONE LAW FOR THE RICH…
IT'S terrifying that the Tories are blundering on with their policy of no hope in education.
The opt-out schools will just increase the gap between the places where people have money to spend on their kids' education and those where they haven't.
The specialist schools will lead to more selection.
The horror world of the novel 1984, where the proles live in no-go areas with no jobs, draws ever nearer.
The riots in poor areas are our warning.
—.
AS a parent, I'm alarmed by the Tory Government's cut-price plan for school reform.
We all know what has happened since the Health Service has been starved of money.
The same will happen in education.
Schools will close and teachers will be sacked.
Our children will suffer — but not those of rich parents who can afford to send them to public schools.
—.
FOOTBALL'S new Premier League becomes more and more meaningless as millionaires vie with each other to buy the title.
Blackburn Rovers have spent £10 million so far and seem willing to lash out even more on overpriced players.
It makes nonsense of the whole thing.
—.
What a life!
NOW I am convinced there is some point in transplant operations.
Your marvellous picture of Wendy Oliver and baby Shona shows, in the apt words of Newcastle consultant John Dark, that ‘there is life after transplants’.
Shona is that life.
—.
Rely on granny
THANK goodness there was one moment of sanity and decency in the horror story of the Minister and the actress.
That came when Joan Hall, David Mellor's mother-in-law, embraced her grandson Freddie.
—
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
MIKHAIL GORBACHEV's days as a top politician may be over, but his career as a movie star is only just beginning.
The former Soviet leader has won a role in the latest Wim Wenders film Far Away So Close.
It's a tough act.
All Gorby has to do is sit at a desk, saying nothing.
CLASSIC QUOTE
If winning isn't important, why do they do keep score?— Damon Runyon.
GARDENING
CHARLES LYTE
Phoenix rises
I HAVE grown a palm from a date stone, but don't know how to care for it.
Can you help?
A THE plant is Phoenix dactylifera, which grows quite fast and large.
Put it where it gets as much sun as possible.
Keep the soil-based compost moist in the growing period and feed fortnightly with a standard liquid fertiliser.
Re-pot every two years into a pot two sizes larger.
Winter water enough to stop it drying out.
Q WHAT are the little bugs in my sweet pea flowers?
A IT seems an attack from pea thrips, particularly prevalent during hot, dry spells.
You can control them with products like Malathion greenfly killer, or a Gamma-BHC dust.
Regular watering will also discourage them.
Q I HAVE taken over an allotment infested with bindweed.
How can I get rid of it for ever?
A YOU probably won't be able to completely eliminate it, but you can certainly reduce it.
Regular hoeing helps and digging out as much as you can.
A major problem is that the roots go deep.
An effective control is to paint each emerging shoot with neat weedkiller.
If you have parts of the allotment which can be left uncultivated for a time, try smothering the weed with black plastic sheeting.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
Having a smashing time…
BUT NOT A BROKEN PLATE TO BE SEEN
DAVID KERR /STEVE CASTELI
THE pastime of hurling plates around tavernas is now frowned on by Greek authorities.
But even without smashing anything you can have a great break on Corfu.
The island is geared to giving a big welcome to tourists, especially Brits.
We ran it for half a century and left behind a road network, ginger beer and a cricket green in the capital, Corfu Town.
After watching a match you can take a scenic canter in a horse-drawn carriage.
Or if you're on foot don't miss the cluster of narrow streets around the port, reminiscent of an Eastern bazaar.
Bargains include sponges and pottery decorated with figures from mythology.
We stayed at Dassia, six miles and a 45p bus trip from town.
Our hotel, the four-star Elea Beach, stands off the main drag at the end of a quiet lane.
It has a large pool to lounge around, and attentive barman Tassos is on hand to top up your glass.
The beautiful gardens lead directly on to a beach gently lapped by clear turquoise waters.
Energetic pursuits include snorkelling and diving, para-gliding and water-skiing.
The island, 50 miles long and 25 miles across at its widest, has a wealth of attractions.
At an average 4000 drachmas (£12) a head, boat and coach trips usually include food and drink.
You can hire a car for around £20 a day but beware bumpy roads.
We visited Paleokastritsa on the western side, famed for its bays shadowed by magnificent cliffs.
We also hired a speedboat in Ipsos and powered up the coast for a beautiful view.
WE stopped off at Kouloura, only a mile from Albania across the sea.
The neighbouring village of Kalami, once the home of naturalist Gerald Durrell, is worth a visit too.
Parts of Corfu's coast are heavily commercialised but there is an absence of high-rise development.
Inland, you can ramble in villages completely untouched by the seaside hurly-burly.
One such quiet stroll had become a 12-mile hike by the time we got back to our hotel.
We were ready for a meal of garlic yoghurt (tsadziki), Greek bread, fresh squid (kalamaraiki), salad and ice-cold retsina.
It cost less than a fiver a head — and there wasn't a plate broken all night!
FACT BOX
COSMOS offer a wide range of Corfu holidays.
Seven nights half-board at the Elea Beach Hotel, Dassia, range from £279-£389 a head.
At the three-star Telemachos prices are £219-289.
Seven nights self-catering at Dassia's Pergola Studios is £184-£259.
Prices apply until October 31 and include return flights, taxes and transfers.
Details: 061 480 5799 for
POWER!
UP SPECIAL
IN GEAR FOR SUMMER
DAVID HANCOCK
GAME GEAR £99.99, Sega THE most fashionable hand-held, it has a large colour screen and a constant supply of good games.
It's the machine every Game Boy owner would like, but it costs a prohibitive £129.99 if bought with a Sonic The Hedgehog cart.
Let down by a short battery life, about three hours.
Game Gear fans include Graham Gooch, Will Carling, TV presenter Ross King, Dannii Minogue.
Poolside rating * * * 1/2 
IN GEAR: Dannii
THE LIMIT
FREDDIE'S OLYMPIC GOLD
RICK SKY
FREDDIE Mercury's Barcelona — dropped by the Olympic Committee — has beaten the Games' chosen theme tune by a mile.
The beautiful duet, sung by Freddie and Montserrat Caballe, has sprinted into the charts at No 5…leaving Sarah Brightman's rival duet with Jose Carreras trailing 13 places behind.
Queen fans were devastated when Barcelona — a Top Ten hit when first released five years ago — was controversially elbowed out as the Games's theme song by Amigos Para Siempre (Friends For Life).
But since the record, which I predicted would hit No 1, was re-released last week, it has become the fastest moving single in the charts.
Queen fan club spokeswoman Jacky Gunn said: ‘Freddie's fans were incensed when the Olympic committee dropped the song.
‘They  besieged the record company to get it re-released and they feel proud that the public has responded by buying it in droves.’
Last night Spanish Opera diva Montserrat Caballe admitted she was heartbroken when her duet with Mercury was not chosen.
Caballe, Mercury's favourite opera singer, told the Limit exclusively: ‘When I recorded the song with Freddie I wanted it to be used at the Games.
‘I was so disappointed when it didn't work out.
It is one of the most popular things I have ever done.’
CHAMPION: Freddie
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
A READER suggests these titles prove that Mr William Shakespeare had a very dirty mind: Much Ado About Nothing, As You Like It, Measure for Measure, Midsummer Night's Dream, The Taming of the Shrew and The Merry Wives of Windsor.
While the rest of us were totally bored by the opening ceremony of the Olympics, the chaps monitoring the television coverage were able to keep their eyes and minds firmly on the job.
Lucky stiffs.
YOUR MONEY
Put write the wrong
JOHN HUSBAND
THOUSANDS who sent cheques for the National Savings First Option Bond were shabbily short-changed.
Now many are demanding Government compensation.
They missed the 7.75 per cent rate as panicky ministers told National Savings to cut the rate 0.5 per cent.
The bond was raking in £20 million A DAY.
Building societies couldn't stomach losing millions of pounds from accounts.
So the Government helped out by pulling the rug from under savers.
The 6 pm timing of the rate cut announcement lumbered investors who'd sent their cheques off that day.
They lost out unless their cheques arrived in Glasgow by 12 noon the NEXT day.
They've been told: take the lower interest rate — or lump it.
But there is another way.
Write and complain to: Dan Monaghan, Controller, National Savings, Glasgow, G58 1SB — and your own MP.
While you're at it, send a copy to Chancellor Norman Lamont.
After all, the Treasury did the dirty on you.
PUBLIC OPINION
Boxing clever in sport
WHILE watching the Olympic boxing, I realised what a sensible idea it is for the amateur fighters to wear headguards to protect them from brain injuries.
Professional boxing should follow suit.
It would prevent more tragedies like Michael Watson's and bring back the skill to the game.
—
I READ with great sorrow of the demolition of the holiday camp at Dovercourt, Essex, which was the scene of the TV Hi-de-Hi series.
I arrived from Germany in a refugee transport, escaping from the Nazi oppression in 1938.
At 13, I was sent to Dovercourt camp, which I remember with affection because it was my first home after leaving my family in Germany.
—
Judged wrongly
IT'S amazing that judges can get away with outrageous statements.
Like the one by Judge Geoffrey Jones, above.
He described a youth's sexual attack on a young girl as ‘a breath of fresh air.’
The fact that the youth had attacked two boys before in a bizarre experiment to find out whether he was homosexual does not excuse that comment or the judge's equally inane remark that he was ‘a normal young man.’
—.
Harsh
That's no way to behave
WHAT a ridiculous idea for parents to be fined or punished for the bad behaviour of their children.
I know, as I had a strict upbringing.
My father was a sergeant in the Army and both parents did their best to try to make me go to school.
They even escorted me to the school gates sometimes — and I just bunked out the other way.
I was given a good hiding, which I deserved, but it made no difference.
I don't blame my parents for the way I turned out, I'm the one responsible.
—.
THOUGH I'm a racing fan, I hope the new idea of Sunday racing is a flop.
I shall certainly have nothing to do with it on principle.
We have enough racing in this country and I believe in reserving one day at least for the Lord.
—.
A READER suggests BT was mean for raking in money during the Telethon charity campaign.
Far from it.
We made a cash donation of £200,000, fitted 16 pledging sites with nearly 2,000 lines at our expense, and installed 2,000 miles of computer circuits to drive the scoreboards.
The takings from calls were less than £25,000.
More like forking out than raking in. —.
I WAS horrified to see that another 20,000 miners' jobs are at risk.
What sort of economic sense is this?
The Government would serve us better by keeping the mines open, even if they are making a loss.
While these miners are working they buy in the shops and that keeps others in work.
The alternative makes no sense.
—.
AFTER reading of yet another young lad who suffered severe head injuries when he was knocked off his bike, I think cycle helmets should be made compulsory.
They are especially important to younger children whose riding skills may not be highly developed.
—.
Sharron's pure gold
THE appearance of Sharron Davies in the swimming competition, 12 years after she won a medal in Moscow was a wonderful example of Olympic spirit at its best.
After her retirement and subsequent comeback at 30, a ripe old age for her sport, it was remarkable that Sharron qualified.
No one expected her to win — and isn't that what it's all about, taking part?—.
Poll-axed by grief
I'VE just been to court for the first time in my life at 74, because my local council said I owed them £63 for my wife's poll tax during 1991–92.
But she died of cancer on 18 May 1991, six weeks into the financial year.
The magistrate told me I would have to sort it out with the council, Rotherham M.B.C., and they finally told me I would have to pay them £45.
It's too much, but what can I do?
I haven't any spirit to argue.
My wife was on morphia for four months.
She didn't know anyone, couldn't eat, drink or speak towards the end.
And I don't want to keep being reminded of it.
—.
There's Nun so clever
WHAT a great picture of a lady with spirit — the 59-year-old nun, Sister Mary Anne.
She has taken to roller skates to speed up her travel in New York.
Keep on rolling, Sister.
—.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
DOZENS of boastful French romeos who claimed to have bedded more than 1,000 women, when quizzed by researchers, later admitted the true figure was in single figures.
Said a pollster: ‘Frenchmen still like to believe they're the world's greatest lovers.’
OLYMPICS TODAY
SOME of us struggle even to jump as high as 3 ft 6 inches.
The finalists in this evening's 110 metres hurdles BBC2 and Eurosport, 7.15pm) will take 10 barriers of that height in their stride.
Few do it better than Welshman Colin Jackson who was the pre-Games favourite to become the first Briton to win the Gold Medal in the discipline.
US hurdlers have won the Gold 18 times out of 22.
Jackson, runner-up four years ago, is one of four Britons to have taken the Silver, although by finishing second in the 1896 final Grantley Goulding was also last.
‘I know I can win if everything goes right,’ Jackson said before arriving in Barcelona, ‘and it is time the Americans moved over.’
‘I must be careful how much love I give’
PLIGHT OF WAR ORPHAN WHO STOLE NEWSMAN'S HEART
FIONA McINTOSH
SHE races across the lawn, tossing a set of car keys into the air and giggling with Max, the white terrier.
When a photographer tries to catch her in action, she playfully snatches his camera and turns the lens on him.
‘Just look at her,’ smiles ITN newsman Mike Nicholson.
And then, aware of how much she already means to him: ‘I suppose every dad wants a daughter.’
Two weeks ago Natasha Mihaljcic faced a harsh and terrifying life amid the squalor of a Bosnian orphanage.
Now, as she romps in the garden of their Georgian home in Grayswood, Surrey, this energetic nine-year-old is just as much a part of the Nicholson family as Mike's wife Diana, 50, and his two grown sons Tom, 20 and William, 19.
It was Mike who came to her rescue.
‘And from now on,’ he says protectively, ‘she is our lifetime commitment, whether she is under my roof or somebody else's.
‘Who knows, we may even foster her.
It's been in the back of our minds.’
Natasha, who speaks very little English, has been told by an interpreter that she is in England for a holiday and may one day return to Sarajevo.
‘She told the doctor at the orphanage, ‘If I'm going to go to England for a short time I must be careful not to give too much of my love, but if I'm going to be there for a long time I can give all the love I can’,’ Mike says.
‘It is very easy for us to love her.
She just has to grow to love us.’
Like hundreds of other child victims of the bloody Yugoslav war, Natasha had been sheltering from gunfire in the Sarajevo orphanage, when Mike found her.
Shelling had destroyed a wing of the building and 200 children were living in the basement.
‘Some had not seen daylight or sniffed fresh air for four months,’ he says.
Natasha was lucky.
Mike, 55 and a veteran reporter of Vietnam, the Falklands, the Gulf and many other bloody wars, was encouraged by orphanage officials to smuggle a child back to England — and there was no way he could resist Natasha's pleading brown eyes.
Or the desperate plight of a little girl who had been in an orphanage since she was a month old.
‘She just shone out from the rest,’ he says.
‘She's bright and fun and my kind of girl.
It seemed wrong to leave her behind.’
To fool Yugoslav authorities, Mike added Natasha's name to his passport, passing her off as his daughter.
Together they made an arduous two-day trek across mountains with women and child refugees to the coastal town of Split.
From there, they drove to Zagreb where they caught a plane to Heathrow.
‘The first time Natasha saw England, she went…bang,’ Mike says, punching his fist in the air.
‘I had shown her photos of Diana, the house and Max the dog and she recognised them all immediately.’
Today all three ‘get along like a house on fire’.
The ice was broken the day after Natasha arrived in England.
‘We took her out to a local restaurant for a celebration dinner,’ Mike says, ‘and she started to take the mickey out of Diana, imitating the way she nods her head when she speaks.
‘Diana saw her do it and they both burst out into giggles just like little girls.
After that things were fine.’
Now when Mike gets up each morning for breakfast Natasha jumps into their bed and nestles up to Diana.
‘My wife is the most important person in this, and at the end of the day it will be up to her if Natasha stays.
She'll be the one doing all the hard work at home and readapting her life.’
As for Mike, he treats his new charge like a china doll — he adores her, but doesn't quite know how to handle her.
When he tickles her on the tummy for photographers, she bats his hand away.
Neighbours and friends have flooded them with toys and clothes.
‘It is incredible how she has fitted in,’ Mike says.
The future, they know, is filled with uncertainty.
‘We can't adopt Natasha,’ Mike says.
‘The ruling in Bosnia is you can't adopt a child over the age of five.
‘I have a document from the orphanage which says I am responsible for Natasha while she is in England and that she will return to Sarajevo for the school term, or when the war ends.
So you can see it's pretty open-ended.
‘But if we all love each other, things are bound to work out.’
PASSPORT TO FREEDOM: Mike took the risk of adding Natasha's name
LEFT: At home with the new girl in his life.
RIGHT: Homeward bound by ferry and (below) by plane Picture: KEN LENNOX
THE LIMIT PAP SNAP
RICK SKY
HEART-THROB idol Jordan Knight makes a late build for Olympic glory.
But if he really wants to build up his muscles for a gold, he should try lifting his wallet.
MIRROR MONEY
GOLD FOR LOTUS!…
SUBH:
JOHN HUSBAND
LOTUS is also hoping to strike gold after spending £250,000 developing Olympic champion Chris Boardman's Windcheetah superbike.
The sportscar firm is gearing up for a multi-million pound windfall by having replicas of the dream machine on sale in the next few weeks for at least £5,000 apiece.
But the real race is to adapt the superbike for road use before rivals grab a piece of the action.
Lotus wants a partner to help put a £1,500 to £2,000 version of the bike into the shops within a year.
If all goes well this could boost its sales by around £2 million a year.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
MIRROR Group shares climbed another 5p to 76p yesterday.
But Heinz boss Tony O'Reilly's Independent Newspapers refused to comment on rumours that he has further increased his stake in the Mirror above the 1.3 per cent he has already bought.
Other shares on the move included property giant MEPC which jumped 10p to 246p on takeover talk.
THE LIMIT
Snubbed George hits out
STAR'S FURY AT TV CHIEFS
RICK SKY
GEORGE MICHAEL has attacked radio and TV chiefs for snubbing his latest single.
ITV's Chart Show decided not to screen the video of George's charity disc Too Funky while Kiss FM DJ Steve Jackson refused to play it on his show because he didn't like it.
But George — who is donating profits from the record to AIDS charity Red Hot And Dance — says: ‘The many people around the world who will benefit from the Red Hot And Dance project need all the support we can give them.
‘It is a shame this fact was overlooked.
This same lack of support was apparent in the Chart Show's refusal to play the Too Funky video.
‘It seems this negative approach has more to do with people's perception of George Michael than anything else.’
Chart Show producer Philip Davey said last night: ‘Not showing the video was an editorial decision.’
GEORGE: Single fury
MIRROR MONEY
Alan's pound stretches…
JOHN HUSBAND
ALAN WOLTZ, boss of condom makers London International, saw his pay packet stretch an extra six per cent because the dollar rose in value against the pound last year.
Alan now earns $688,513 (£398,445) a year and as the the average dollar rate against the £ rose from $1.84 to $1.73 over the 12 months to 1992 he was quids in.
This was just a little added bonus — Alan also received a 27 per cent pay rise.
Scots in TV rage
RODGER BAILLIE
A BRITISH television war loomed last night when the Scottish FA called for a black-out of England's pre-season glamour game on Saturday.
Satellite station BSkyB have been advertising live coverage of the Charity Shield fixture between League champions Leeds and Cup-holders Liverpool at Wembley.
But the game clashes with a full programme of Premier, First and Second Division matches in Scotland.
Now the SFA move may put in jeopardy the mega-cash deal between England's Premier League and BSkyB.
SFA chief executive Jim Farry said last night: ‘We have told the FA we will not give permission for this TV game to be shown in Scotland.
‘We have a full match  calendar , and we have left them in no doubt about our attitude.’
BSkyB cannot split their transmissions to black out programmes in various parts of Britain, the same way as BBC or ITV.
Trevor Phillips, commercial director of the English FA, admitted: ‘It's a very difficult and delicate situation.
‘I just can't tell you right now what will happen.’
UEFA have ruled matches played in one country cannot be shown on TV in another nation unless permission is given.
However, various TV companies have asked the European Community to make this ruling invalid.
A BSkyB spokesman said: ‘We're waiting for the various football bodies to sort the matter out.’
Massive
England's Premier League and BSkyB have signed a massive £304 million five-year deal to show 60 League games live on Sundays and Mondays, with highlights on the BBC on Saturday nights.
The first games scheduled are Nottingham Forest v Liverpool on Sunday, August 16, and Manchester City v QPR the following night.
But the SFA have made it clear they are not prepared to give complete clearance for all the games to be shown in Scotland.
BSkyB will not renew the £13 million three-season deal they had with the Scottish authorities which expired at the end of last season.
THE THINGS THEY SAY
PAUL FOOT
I WOULD refute the idea that hard times have wrecked the business lunch.
The fact that, even in a recession, the Square Mile alone can support well over 225 restaurants is the greatest testimony of all to the role of the business lunch in the 1990s.’
Mark de Wesselow, food guide publisher, Financial Times, July 27.
THE LIMIT
BOSS BACKS SQUATTERS
RICK SKY
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN is backing squatters' rights.
The millionaire Boss has agreed to appear on a new TV programme called Takeover, which highlights an outlawed squatter group who have seized buildings in eight US cities for use by the homeless.
A spokesman for the documentary says: ‘We're indebted to Bruce.
If he hadn't agreed to appear we could not have raised the cash to make the show.’
Wacky Robin's a bat man
PAULINE McLEOD
BEHIND the fantasy of FERNGULLY…
THE LAST RAINFOREST (Cert U; General) there is a powerful message.
It warns: Save our planet before we humans destroy it.
This delightful, animated musical will enchant tiny tots but hopefully they will also see its serious side.
The brilliantly inventive Robin Williams is terrific as the voice of Batty Korda, a cute but crazy bat.
Samantha Mathis plays Crysta the fairy while teen heart-throb Christian Slater is her jealous boyfriend, Pips.
Together they are trying to save the forest surrounding Fern Gully from developers and in particular from evil Hexxus (Tim Curry), who is polluting the air with toxic waste.
Some catchy and not so catchy tunes help spread the green message.
BRILLIANT: Williams
WIN A SUPER DAY OUT AT YORK RACES
HERE'S your chance to win a super day out at York races and see our very own Andy Capp Handicap on August 19.
Our TWO winners, and their partners, will have a VIP trip to the Knavesmire to enjoy a day of top class racing in champagne style!
And they could strike it rich!
We've teamed-up with top bookmakers William Hill, and the two winners will each have £200 of free bets.
Just look at this winning line-up!
Champagne reception in the Mirror's private box.
Excellent lunch with fine wines and liqueurs.
Superb viewing of all the racing action.
Private complimentary bar throughout the afternoon.
£200 of FREE bets with William Hill.
August 19 is one of the best days on the York calendar with the Ebor, Yorkshire Oaks, Gimcrack and, of course, the Mirror's popular Andy Capp Handicap.
And to be in the frame for a super prize you just have to answer (on a postcard, please) these two simple questions:
A. Unscramble the name of this famous Yorkshire racecourse: FORT TEN CAP.
B. What's the name of Andy Capp's wife?
Add your name, address and, if possible, telephone number and send to: Andy Capp Handicap Competition, Daily Mirror, PO Box 387, Manchester M60 4EU.
Closing date is Wednesday, August 12, and the prizes will go to the senders of the first two correct entries drawn.
Usual Daily Mirror competition rules apply.
Deep Skah
KHALID SKAH of Morocco was crowned Olympic champion to jeers last night after his off-on victory in the 10,000 metres.
The crowd chanted ‘Kenya’ when Skah, disqualified and then re-instated, received his gold medal.
Kenyan silver medallist Richard Chelimo, who had been impeded by Hammou Boutayeb, got a standing ovation.
SKAH: Booed
RICK SKY
MICHAEL Bolton can hit a mean home run AND pitch at the same time.
But even that didn't get him to Barcelona for the  Olympics' newest sport.
GIBBS GOSSIP
Lift-off laughs
GARTH GIBBS
IT'S the latest fad — punchlines for dirty jokes that astronauts tell.
The trick is to construct a joke with the punchline: You call THAT Mission Control?
Examples:
Hey!
Blame gravity.
Titan 2, Saturn 5 and Cher's water bed.
Heat shields?
I thought you said Brooke Shields.
I said Venus!
Venus!
10, 9, 8, 7 — oops.
Sorry.
Thirty seconds and holding — and please keep holding.
‘Listen to me.
You can come quietly — or I can make you’
THE FINAL PART OF CATHERINE COOKSON'S NEW NOVEL THE HOUSE OF WOMEN
THE STORY SO FAR
MATRIARCH Emma Funnell has banished Andrew Jones, husband of her great grand-daughter Peggy, from her Bramble House home after learning that he has swindled the car firm of thousands, helping him buy a house for his mistress, Rosie Milburn.
But Andrew, obsessed by his teenage daughter Emma, has sworn she will never marry the man she loves, Dr Richard Langton…
 CATHERINE COOKSON
PETER DONNELLY
SHE sat on the park bench waiting for Richard, her head turned to look towards the main gate.
When she heard the rustle behind her, she didn't turn around.
But when one hand came on her shoulder and the voice said ‘it's all right.
Stay still.
Now stay still’ she froze.
She literally froze.
When the other hand came on her shoulder and turned into a grip, the ice in her body seemed to affect her, for it came out as a croak, saying: ‘Da…
Dad…
Oh Dad, please, please go away.’
‘I'm…
I'm not going away, baby.
I've waited too long.
Now listen to me.
You're coming with me, do you hear?’
His hands gripping her arm now but his voice soft, he said: ‘I…
I can't go on without you.
I've…
I've lost everything, I must have something.
But all I want is you.
All I ever wanted was you.’
‘Leave me alone.’
‘Look.
Listen to me.
You can come quietly or I can make you.’
He left hold of one arm and thrust his hand into his coat pocket and brought out what looked like a narrow tube; then glancing first one way then the other, he said: ‘This won't hurt you and you'll come quietly.’
She didn't feel the prick in her arm.
She let out a weak cry.
Her resistance had all gone.
She was next aware of dimly seeing her father lying face down on the path, his hands bent up behind him and Richard with one knee on his back.
Richard's face was bleeding and she knew he was shouting up at the people.
‘Go to the phone box outside the gate and phone the police.’
When the two policemen stood above him, saying: ‘What's this, sir?’
Richard answered: ‘I'm Doctor Langton.
That young lady is my fiancee.’
‘This man is her father.
He is separated from his wife but he has tried to abduct his daughter.
I don't know what he's done to her.
She seems under the influence of a drug, I think.’
For that Andrew Jones was jailed.
Emma married Richard and Mrs Funnell died, leaving Peggy a fortune that she shared with her daughter, mother and ‘Auntie May’.
And, after an uncontested divorce Peggy married Charlie…
SHE was going into Newcastle and walking towards the station entrance when a woman stopped and said: ‘Mrs Jones?
I'm…
Rosie…
Rosie Milburn.
‘I've always wanted to meet you to say something…just to say I'm sorry, but…but I couldn't help meself at the time.
I knew later I had been a damn fool but…
‘He'll…he'll come to a bad end; yes, he will.
He was always on about his daughter, you know.
He had a mania for her.
Well, he's lost her, but he's got two more now.’
Peggy's whole face stretched as she said: ‘What do you mean, he's got two more?’
‘Oh, he's taken up with a divorced woman yon end of Gosforth, I understand.
Nice house an’ all and she's got two bairns, two little lasses, one three and one five.
He might think he's fallen on his feet but he'll come to a bad end, you'll see…‘
In Newcastle she came to a self-service cafeteria and, with a cup of tea in her hand, went to an empty table.
She turned and noticed a family moving towards the doorway.
The man had his back to her until he stopped to lift up the smaller of the two girls.
She watched him hug the child to him, then straighten up, and now he stood glaring at her for a moment.
She imagined he was going to make a move towards her, but what he did was to hitch the child closer to him until his face was almost pressed against his own and then he smiled a smile that widened his full lips but, as she had seen before, did not separate his teeth.
She sat back in her chair, her body trembling.
That look on his face.
It was if he had said: ‘Look what I've got now; two for the price of one.’
She wanted Charlie's arms about her.
She wanted his love, something good and clean…
An hour later she was in his arms.
And when she ended ‘It'll be the case of Emma over again, only with both of them’, he shook her gently by the shoulders.
‘You can do nothing about it.
Yet, something is being done.
It's coming into the open; the authorities are taking a hand.’
‘He won't play any more tricks, but those two children will likely have to pay for it.’
‘Well, you know what my mother's always saying: everything in life has to be paid for, and you've paid for the happiness that's going to be yours in the future.
I've got my childhood sweetheart at last.
Do you love me, Mrs Conway?’
‘With all my heart, Mr Conway.’
‘I can ask no more then; but I can add one more thing: My heartfelt thanks in that you're free, if not actually from the house, then from its clutch of women.’
The House of Women Catherine Cookson, 1992
The House of Women is available in hardback, £14.99 from Bantam.
Watch out for Catherine Cookson's next novel, The  Maltese Angel, published on October
GARDENING
MIRROR PLANT
OXALIS, a family of 800 species, make themselves at home throughout the world.
The oxalis, whose leaves are often mistaken for shamrock, range from well-mannered rock garden plants to rampant garden invaders.
Best to go for the well-behaved species like O. adenophylla, with its pinkish lilac flowers, which are sometimes a rich magenta.
O. tetraphylla, often sold as O. deppei, is a soft carmine-red and its leaves are marked with an iron cross.
O. laciniata has rich blue flowers and the lovely grey-green leaves.
They're good rock garden plants, given a well-drained spot which gets some sun, but not the mid-day sun.
While some, like the Wood Sorrel (O. acetosella) and O. violacea, can be naturalised in the light shade of a shrub border or woodland.
HOLIDAY MIRROR
MAGIC ON THE MED
Spain reigns as late winner
DAVID KERR
THE MEDITERRANEAN still wins hands down when it comes to providing cheap family holidays abroad offering plenty of sunshine, sea and sand.
Spain, including Majorca and the rest of the Balearic islands, is the first choice followed by the Greek islands.
Cyprus was a strong contender but is now effectively fully booked.
Tunisia and Turkey offer cheaper, but often less sophisticated holidays.
We asked Ilkeston Consumer Co-op — it may surprise you, but they are the biggest single travel agency in Britain — for their best buys among the late offers revealed by their computers.
If you can pack up and go on Tuesday August 11, you can dash off to Spain for a week's bed and breakfast in a two-star hotel for as little as £229.
That's the price from Birmingham to Benidorm with Falcon Holidays.
NEED a little more notice?
Thomson have a whole host of holidays leaving on August 13 to 16 from East Midlands, Birmingham and Manchester to the Greek Islands, Costa Dorada and Tunisia.
A variety of accommodation is available, from room-only pensions to half-board ‘2T’ hotels.
Prices for seven-night stays range from £245 to £269.
A week later (Thursday, August 20) you could jet away with Beach Villas for seven-nights self-catering in the Algarve.
Flying from Gatwick will cost £229.
Alternatively, fly with the same company on August 29 from Luton for seven-nights self-catering on the Costa Blanca for £219.
Looking ahead, some of the best options further afield include a fly-drive to Florida for 14days for an amazing £249.
Making your own way in the USA is easy.
Accommodation motel-style is cheap, as is basic eating out.
But you MUST fix somewhere to stay before you arrive or you may be bounced back under their vagrancy laws.
And don't forget proper insurance.
Margarita Island, the Venezuelan tax-haven in the Caribbean, is the latest ‘in’ place to go.
Six nights, including flights and accommodation cost from £499.
OR YOU can ‘do’ Margarita Island and mainland Venezuela for two weeks, with flights and accommodation, from £689.
The rapidly-growing cruise market has launched an armada of new ships, particularly in the Caribbean, and the competition is fierce.
At first glance, cruises seem more expensive than package holidays, but the price usually covers everything except drinks and laundry.
Tipping can add £40 or more to a 10-day cruise, but some cruise lines have abolished the custom.
Compare brochures and shop around on price — many agents discount as much as £200-£300 on brochure prices.
Nine-day Caribbean fly-cruises start at around £700 and £450 in the Mediterranean for lazy days of sunshine, and inclusive food and entertainment.
The late offers we mention should be available at your local ABTA travel agent.
But if you would like more information on the above, or on any other destination, you can contact Ilkeston Co-op Travel on 0602 323546 — they are on the line seven days a week.
DAVID KERR
DAILY MIRROR PREMIER LEAGUE WALLCHART
THE big Premier League kick-off takes place next weekend and you can join the Daily Mirror for the big countdown.
We are marking the start of the new-look soccer season with a super full-colour wallchart, featuring all 22 teams.
And you can collect supershots of your team's strip and captain.
There is also a rundown of each team's history plus tips on the players to watch out for this season.
Every day this week we've been printing colour pictures of the team captains and their strip for you to paste on to your chart.
The last three today are Nottingham Forest, Sheffield Wednesday and Middlesbrough.
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
BARCLAYCARD has overtaken Access as Britain's most flexible friend by keeping its annual fee £2 cheaper at £10 and charging lower monthly interest.
HOW TO HANDLE A WOMAN
A word of advice from the man who knows all about dishes
‘First get her to do all the cooking’
PAULINE WALLIN
KEITH Floyd might be a whiz with the sauces and stews for his popular telly shows, but at home he leaves all the cooking to his wife.
He married a beautiful Devonian girl called Shaunagh last year.
At 25 she is just about half his age, but she's happy to go along with his old-fashioned — some would say chauvinistic — belief that a wife's place is in the kitchen.
‘My wife is an old-fashioned, proper girl.
She likes to cook and does my favourite meals to perfection,’ said Keith, 48.
‘I never cook for us and we don't have dinner parties.
When I'm not making programmes or writing articles about food, I run a very busy pub from early in the morning to the wee small hours — and the last thing I want to do then is cook a meal.’
Surprisingly, Keith's favourite fare is about as plain as you can get.
He loves belly pork with spring cabbage and roast potatoes, and a good, hot curry.
The first meal former doctor's receptionist Shaunagh rustled up for him was cheese on toast with pickled walnuts.
‘I think she's got the attribute that every good cook should have — if you can do a few things really well, stay with those rather than attempt the impossible.’
The flamboyant star has two failed marriages behind him, but he's determined to make a go of his third.
Shaunagh revealed that before he proposed to her, he asked her if she believed in divorce.
She had the good sense to say she didn't.
‘He told me he couldn't face the prospect of another divorce, which I understood because my parents split up a few years ago and it was very distressing,’ she said.
He popped the question in the bar of his pub, The Maltsters Arms in Totnes, Devon, at two in the morning.
Hard-working, hard-drinking Keith is the first to admit he's not easy to live with.
‘I think I'm demanding and chauvinistic, but I've finally got someone with a good enough sense of humour to be able to cope with that very well,’ he said.
‘I like things to be totally organised and I like things to happen quickly.
And if I go to a rugby match, I don't want to be accused of womanising when I'm at Cardiff Arms Park cheering and shouting.’
Keith says Shaunagh has been good for him.
‘I'm much more relaxed.
I don't wake up screaming in the mornings anymore.
Instead, I'm woken up gently with a strong cup of black coffee.’
Shaunagh went with Keith on his culinary exploration for his latest BBC series, Floyd on Spain, which starts next Tuesday.
The couple had just got married and couldn't bear to be apart.
‘I think a wife's place is by your side, whether it's in the kitchen or making a programme in some remote corner of the globe,’ said Keith, who is planning to do Floyd on the Far East next year.
And Shaunagh was there to help him through one of the most embarrassing moments of his life.
The boozy cook got the trots after a late night meal of undercooked seafood washed down by lashings of wine.
He was taken ill as he was about to be presented to the President of Galicia before a dinner for which he was cooking the main course.
‘I had to rush off just as he was about to arrive.
When I emerged I had to borrow a pair of chef's trousers,’ he admitted.
But Shaunagh took it all in her stride.
She finds him ‘absolutely gorgeous’ in all situations.
And she says the age difference doesn't bother her a bit.
He doesn't want any more children at the moment — he has a 22-year-old son from his first marriage and an eight-year-old daughter from his second — and she is prepared to wait.
‘We've got a lot of living to do before we settle down,’ she said.
SINGLE MINDED: But Keith's happy now
HAPPILY EVER AFTER: Shaunagh won't divorce
GIBBS GOSSIP
ANDY AND FERGIE RULE O.K.
GARTH GIBBS
QUEEN Fergie and King Andrew — now there's a thought to put you off your breakfast.
But it could just happen, because of the risks Prince Charles takes with his boys.
Charles and Di flew off for their third honeymoon this week.
And yet again, Charles insisted on flying on the same plane as his sons William and Harry.
If the unthinkable happened — an air crash killing them all — the Queen would have to leave her throne to Andy and Fergie's daughter Princess Beatrice.
The Duke and Duchess would then step in and effectively be our monarchs.
Princess Beatrice — four years old today and blissfully unaware of all this  constitutional fuss — is celebrating with mum and dad and sister Eugenie at Fergie's rented Surrey home.
Auntie Di dispatched gifts from cousins William and Harry before she jetted off to Greece, and Charles sent a card.
Texan Steve Wyatt is also said to be sending along something.
It was holiday snaps of Wyatt with a naked Bea which angered Andrew and eventually brought about the Yorks' tragicomic separation.
NEXT TO REIGN?
Prince Andrew and Fergie
HOLIDAY MIRROR
DAVID KERR
GET A taste of the Channel Islands for £15!
British Channel Island Ferries are extending their minicruise excursions to September 12.
Hop across from Poole and spend the day exploring St Helier, or further afield, if you take the car for £25 return.
And, as a bonus, kids under four go for free!
For details call 0202 681155.
Book a holiday in Bordeaux during October with Just France and visit four vineyards in the region for free.
Prices start from £366 per week for a property that sleeps four, including return ferry crossing.
For details call: 0225 446328.
A song to say ‘Thank You’
MARJE PROOPS
MR K. Bailey, of Shipley, West Yorkshire, had music running through his head when he sent me a ‘well done’ letter, for he attached a verse he'd composed especially to mark my 40th anniversary and he told me to sing his words to an old song named Marjie…
Did I remember it, he wondered.
I'll say I do.
My dad used to tease me to hell, warbling that song.
The first line went, I think, ‘Marjie, I'm always thinking of you, Marjie.
You are my inspiration…
‘Here is Mr Bailey's version: ‘Oh Marjie, we always read your column Marjie, For Forty years, you're our favourite Agony Aunt, You've given thousands good advice, that's what we want, Oh Marjie, long may your column greet our eyes each waking day, Count your job a task well done, now go out and have some fun.
Cheers Marjie, that's what the people say, Oh Marjie, how many memories have you Marjie, Some sad, some glad, some more that made you real mad, But all in all, what an interesting career you've had, Oh Marjie keep healthy, happy and without fail writing too For without your good advice, life is a little less nice Marjie, the very best to you.’
Win a six-pack of Mel's movies
MIX and Max with Mel and you could be on to a video winner as we give away more than £2,500worth of Gibson tapes.
To mark the release of Mel's new movie, Lethal Weapon 3, we've joined forces with Columbia Tristar Home Video and Warner Home Video to show what a versatile actor he is.
Here's what each of our FIFTY winners will receive: LETHAL WEAPON and LETHAL WEAPON 2 (18, £14.99): Double action bill with the LA cops.
HAMLET (PG, £10.99): Gibson tackles Shakespeare's tortured Prince.
MAD MAX (18, £12.99): Futuristic epic.
MAD MAX 2 and MAD MAX BEYOND THUNDERDOME (18, £14.99): A double bill with Mel as the road warrior.
TO ENTER: Complete the names of Mel's female co-stars from some of the videos mentioned here:(a)……
Kensit;(b)……
Close;(c)…
. Turner.
Print your answers on a postcard with your name, address and age and send to: Mel Gibson/Daily Mirror Video Contest, PO Box 1793, London W9 3XB, to arrive by August 24, 1992.
Senders of the first 50 correct entries drawn will win.
Standard Mirror contest rules apply.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
‘THE next person who says I look like a Blues Brother, gets it,’ says Suggs while brandishing a brolly at the Madness reunion gig on Saturday.
The singer later needed his prop when the rains came down at the band's sell-out ‘Finstock’ gig.
Picture: MARK ALLAN
THE LIMIT
Another pay day
RICK SKY
JON SECADA is not afraid to admit he feels guilty about his soaraway success.
The talented Miami-based singer, who has rocketed to No. 8 with Just Another Day, has already earned £2 million from writing a string of hits for Gloria Estefan.
Now he's set for another huge windfall from his topselling solo album.
He says: ‘I was stunned when I received my first royalty cheque.
‘It takes me two hours to write a song.
It makes me feel guilty, knowing what some people have to go through to earn a living.’
WIN a Metro 1.4s WORTH £10,000
THE WHEELY GREAT CONTESTS ARE IN YOUR RED-HOT MIRROR
WE'RE moving smoothly into gear with our great series of phone-in car contests.
Up for grabs today is a K-Reg Metro 1.4s, worth around £10,000 on the road which will come to our winner fully taxed for a year and with a full tank of petrol.
You'll love driving the 1.4s.
Outstandingly agile, it has a grip and steering response which the most demanding driver will enjoy.
With its superbly crafted interior, outstandingly comfortable seats and excellent driving position the 1.4s offers a genuine ‘big car’ ride.
The Metro's special features include a five speed gearbox, three band radio/stereo cassette and a tilting, tinted sunroof.
Now here's how you could own one.
Study our picture below.
How many buckets can you spot hidden in the picture?
Are there six, seven or eight?
Once you know the answer telephone 0891 525 562 (from the Republic of Ireland 1550 123 696).
You'll hear two general knowledge questions.
Random
Leave your answers and the number of buckets you spotted on the line along with your name, address and telephone number.
Lines close at midnight August 23.
Our winner will be chosen at random by our computer.
Normal MGN rules apply and there is no cash alternative.
Calls cost 36p cheap rate and 48p at all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland 48p peak, 36p cheap rate and 24p economy.
If you don't feel like phoning send an sae to Metro 1.4s Questions, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY and we'll send the questions to you.
THE LIMIT
SLASH TO THE RESCUE
SAFARI STAR SAVES FRIENDS
RICK SKY
ROCK rebel Slash saved the lives of two pals when an African wildlife safari went frighteningly wrong.
The wildman of Guns N' Roses watched horrified as a herd of elephants charged towards his friends.
‘The African guide was nowhere to be seen so Slash picked up the guy's rifle and began firing into the air, trying desperately to scare the elephants away,’ said another friend of the star.
‘He ran towards the herd yelling, shooting and waving his arms.
‘Slowly the animals turned away and his friends managed to run to the safety of their Land Rover.’
The millionaire guitarist — a keen photographer — had booked a two-week holiday in Kenya as a way of relaxing before starting his band's current American tour.
He took two pals along with him for company and planned to spend the time snapping rare African wildlife.
Adds the source: ‘Slash and his mates laughed about the incident afterwards, but at the time it was terrifying.
The two guys could easily have been killed.’
HERO: Guitarist Slash
This is Trevor McDonald…
News at Ten…
TERRIFIED
BONG!
HOW BRITAIN'S TOP ANCHORMAN FEELS ABOUT GOING SOLO
‘With other newscasters, you could always spread the blame’
BARRY WIGMORE
NOTHING, it seems, can upset Trevor McDonald.
Colonel Gaddafi, Saddam Hussein, Spitting Image…he takes them all unflappably in his loping, courteous stride.
But now, sitting in ITN's new steel and glass office-studios in central London, Trevor announces he is petrified by the burden that has landed on his elegantly-suited shoulders.
‘I — am — terrified,’ he says slowly of his new job as solo anchorman on News at Ten.
The archetypal Englishman from Trinidad with perhaps the best-known voice in TV admits ‘I'm not just saying that.
In the past, with several newscasters, you could spread the blame.
But now the buck stops here…
‘I like the challenge, though,’ he grins after a perfectly-timed pause.
At 52, McDonald is, with Michael Nicholson, the last of ITN's old guard of celebrity reporters.
Gerald Seymour, Keith Hatfield, Desmond Hamill have all gone.
They carved the longest bulletins on television into the news show we HAD to watch, launching a new genre of reporting after the stuffed-shirt formality of the BBC.
Now News at Ten is to revamp its image and that revamp includes, for the first time in 25 years, the newsreader going solo.
We've had Sandy-and-Alastair (Gall and Burnet), Julia-and-Alastair (Somerville and Stewart), and of course Reggie-and-Anna (Bosanquet and Ford).
But they are gone.
And in the hallowed world of television, this change is akin to Charles and Di getting a divorce.
IT has taken a year for the new formula to be agreed — at a time when ITN was coping with a budget squeeze in the wake of the crippling cost of covering the Gulf War.
News at Ten was not exactly sinking, but it was generally agreed it had lost its edge.
Worse, the Beeb's Nine O'Clock News was winning the vital ratings war.
Not by much, but enough for ITN chiefs to worry.
That matters when the nation's blue-chip companies have traditionally paid premium rates for space in that 10.15pm advertising slot.
So, after much jockeying and a few power lunches (although all three contestants for the top spot — McDonald, Stewart, and Somerville — deny this) Trevor has got the top job and a salary reckoned close to £125,000 a year.
And in the news business it is generally reckoned it couldn't have gone to a nicer bloke.
‘I have been genuinely surprised at the positive reaction,’ smiles Trevor, a perfectionist in all he does.
It is a trait he puts down to his father, who died two years ago.
‘He was a wonderful man,’ he says.
‘Not well-educated, but wise.
‘I could phone him with a problem and he had such insight that he could steer me through it, although he knew very little of the problems over here.’
Trevor's father, Lawson, lived in Claxton Bay on the Caribbean island of Trinidad.
His mother, Geraldine, still lives there.
Lawson was a self-taught oil refinery engineer who cycled to work every day.
In the early years, with four young mouths to feed, they were dirt-poor.
But Geraldine and Lawson believed passionately in education and hard work.
He went to a good local school, where at 16 he put together a weekly ‘radio’ programme on the loudspeakers, and then read International Politics at the University of the West Indies before moving into local radio and TV.
But after being banned from his Prime Minister's Press conferences for asking awkward questions, decided he wanted to ply his craft in a land with greater Press freedom — England.
‘Don't misunderstand me,’ he says.
‘I was not the great campaigning journalist, but I always wanted to be able to give facts, be they favourable or unfavourable to the authorities.’
At about this time, the BBC offered him a World Service job based in London and, at the age of 30, he came here for the first time.
He thought England was cold and colourless — and he loved it.
After three ‘glorious’ years with the BBC, he moved to the still-young News at Ten in 1973.
There he followed his dad's philosophy; he kept his head down and worked hard.
One of his earliest assignments was to Belfast.
Then he moved on — to the Middle East, the USA, South Africa.
‘I love journalists and journalism,’ he says.
‘The camaraderie, the sophisticates, the eccentrics.
You go to the most wonderful places, you STAND in Soweto outside Nelson Mandela's little house and watch him come home for the first time in 25 years.
‘You cover Gorbachev and Reagan signing arms agreements and walking in the Rose Garden.
And you're getting PAID.
‘It's such great fun that, as Harry Secombe said, your only worry is that someone will knock on your door one night and say, ‘I want it all back.’'
There have been hiccups.
Trevor's first marriage ended in divorce.
He has grown-up children from that, and is now happily married for a second time with a young son, Jamie.
But by and large you feel his career has been a gentle cruise.
Was there no in-fighting for this top job?
He says: ‘I felt that when Alastair Burnet left a solo-anchor was a possibility, but I didn't fight for it, I didn't lobby.
‘Over the last year I've had lunches with ITN's Editor-in-Chief, with the chief executive, and with the Editor of Channel 3, Dave Mannion.
But so have my colleagues.
‘The only time I came close to lobbying was when I asked Dave Mannion, a friend for a long time, to tell me if he thought I'd outlived my usefulness here, then I would slip quietly away.
‘Like everybody else, I've had other offers, but I wasn't giving an ultimatum or anything like that.’
Trevor McDonald, you feel, is above crude ultimatums.
But he has got the top job.
THE BUCK STOPS HERE: Trevor McDonald's distinguished career has taken him from a poor, but loving, childhood in Trinidad to being ITN's first solo anchorman Picture: BILL KENNEDY
STARTING OUT: The young Trevor McDonald
MAN OF HONOURS: Family support as Trevor gets the OBE
MIRROR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
INSURANCE giant General Accident has few grumbles over its £21 million loss in the first six months of the year.
Slashing costs and hiking insurance rates cut its loss against 1991 by a thumping £84 million.
Car insurance premiums shot up by almost a quarter — and drivers will suffer 15 per cent rises over the next year.
IT'S K-RAZY!
WE'RE GIVING AWAY ANOTHER K-REG MOTOR TODAY
WIN A METRO 1.1S
WORTH £9,500
WELCOME to another Okay Day in our great series of phone-in car contests.
Today's super prize is a Rover Metro 1.1s, worth around £9,500 on the road, which will come to our winner fully taxed for a year and with a full tank of petrol.
A nippy three-door hatchback, the Metro 1.1s is a car for all the family to enjoy.
Passenger pleasure comes from the outstandingly comfortable seats in a beautifully crafted cabin while the driver enjoys excellent control, great  visibility and a superb instrument layout.
Special features include a 5-speed gearbox, 3 band radio/stereo cassette and a tilting, tinted sunroof.
For your chance to be a proud owner, just study our picture, right.
How many spades can you spot?
Three, four or five?
Once you've decided the answer telephone this number: 0891 525 563 (From the Republic of Ireland 1550 123 697)
Leave your answers and the number of spades you spotted on the line plus your name, address and telephone number.
Lines close at midnight August 23.
The winner will be chosen at random by our computer.
Normal MGN rules apply and there is no cash alternative.
CALLS cost 36p cheap rate and 48p at all other times.
From the Republic of Ireland 48p peak, 36p cheap rate and 24p economy.
If you don't want to phone, send an sae to Metro 1.1s Questions, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TY and we'll send the questions to you.
THE LIMIT
PAP SNAP
TAKE That's heart-throb Robbie Williams caught with his mouth full trying to break the record the number of cheese and fish paste sandwiches that can be eaten in an hour.
You'll never keep your dancing figure in trim that way, Robbie.
This bowl is a day's food for BOTH of these men
Mirro chief feature writer BARRY WIGMORE and photographer NIGEL WRIGHT report from front-line Bosnia
Sead used to weigh 12 stone…now he's half that His brother was 13 stone…he's down to 9 stone
‘TOGETHER THEY SAT AND WEPT’
BARRY WIGMORE
BOSNIA's Serbian leaders callously handed a list of 28,000 names to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.
They were Bosnians who ‘volunteered’ to leave their homes and live somewhere else, they said, and the UN should help transfer them.
These people have no choice.
It is move or die.
But Britain is sending back refugees who have fled here seeking sanctuary.
Back to what?
This is the harsh reality of ‘ethnic cleansing’— Europe's version of apartheid
Two brothers were reunited amid the misery of a Croatian refugee camp yesterday and celebrated as best they could…by sharing a bowl of scraps.
The meagre rations — two lumps of meat and a few strands of pasta in thin soup — were to last them both for the whole day.
All around, thousands of their compatriots waited in pitiful food queues as the stench of raw sewage hung over Trnopolje.
Nijaz and Sead Hukanovic had feared they might never see each other again after being parted in the savage purge of Bosnians callously dubbed ‘ethnic cleansing’ by the Serbs.
The Moslem brothers were arrested 10 weeks ago and thrown into the notorious Omarska concentration camp where they were split up.
Sead, a 26-year-old TV technician, used to tip the scales at 12st 8lb.
Now he is half that weight.
Nijaz, 39, a car mechanic, was 13st.
Today he is just 9st.
OMARSKA was shut down this week and the starving prisoners moved out after an ITN report exposed the barbaric conditions.
Sead, who had been much more harshly treated than Nijaz, could barely stand as they met yesterday.
So they sat on a blanket and clung to each other, tears streaming down their cheeks.
‘I thought you were dead,’ whispered Nijaz.
‘You look better for losing some weight,’ smiled Sead.
It was a rare moment of happiness in the place of sorrow awaiting thousands more Bosnians who were trudging towards Trnopolje.
Among them limped women carrying everything they had left, stuffed inside plastic buckets and bags balanced on their heads.
MANY were shoeless, the dust and blood caked upon their shredded feet.
Weary children struggled to keep up.
One family was lucky…they had a wheelbarrow.
The people came from Bosanska Gradiska, 35 miles away on a twisting, tortuous track through the Snake Mountains.
The town had 60,062 inhabitants: 35,989 Serbs, 15,888 Moslems, 3,422 Croats and 4,763 ‘others’.
Two days ago the Croats were given 24 hours to leave.
The Moslems expect to be told the same any time.
They have already been ordered out of Gracanica, Sanski Most, Sanica and so many other places.
The Red Cross heard about Bosanska Gradiska's ultimatum in a phone call from the bishop.
Now these tragic people were on the road.
It was happening in towns and villages through a broad swathe of the Snake Mountains around Banja Luka in central Bosnia.
Local Serbs are strengthening their grip on a narrow corridor along the Sava River between two large Serbian areas.
A huge land-grab is going on in Bosnia-Herzegovina today as Serbs and Croats fight to divide up the country.
And the Serbs do not want to share with anyone the territory they win.
To stop the people going back, their homes are shelled, shot up and blown apart.
Houses where families have lived for generations are left as blackened, shattered skeletons.
The people make their way to Trnopolje, a refugee shanty-town near the railway and a lake.
Beggars and bank managers squat side by side in a battered, broken office block, in a barn in the field next door and beneath sheets of plastic and bits of wood knocked up into makeshift shelters.
A WEEK ago there were 3,000 here.
Now it is 5,000-plus and growing by the hour.
When winter comes in 12 weeks, they will freeze.
Guards with AK47 assault rifles patrol the camp perimeter but there is no need to keep people in.
They are dead on their feet.
There are some women and children but most are men from other camps, many too weak to move and with nowhere to go if they could.
Everyone has a heartbreaking, human story to tell.
But those who bravely act as interpreters take their lives in their hands.
‘You're dead,’ hiss the guards if they see people talking to reporters.
In one room, a frightened man bared his back which was a mass of scabs and bruises.
He had been beaten by soldiers, he said, who had taken him back to his home and stolen the money he had hidden there.
Other prisoners said that in Keraterm — a notorious PoW camp which they dubbed Auschwitz — prisoners were crippled by having the ligaments in a knee cut out and tied in a knot so they could not return to the fighting.
There were stories of inhuman cruelty everywhere and the Bosnian Serbs showed videos of their people whom they said had been tortured by Moslems and Croats.
On the way to the camp, we passed Sabira Radic, 31, stumbling along the road.
Her three-month-old daughter Elma was in her arms and her son Adnan, five, clung to her skirt.
Sabira wept all the time.
Her Moslem village had been shelled, she said, to drive the people out.
Bosnian Serbs came and took her husband away and killed him.
For a while she camped with other families in fields nearby.
But they could find no food so she set out to walk to Trnopolje, where she hoped she could feed her baby.
We were travelling in a convoy with ITN and they gave Sabira a lift.
You looked around.
It was hopeless.
The roads were full of refugees.
You could not help them all.
We had been given an army escort and were following an officer who was taking us to the camp.
AT first he failed to notice we had stopped.
Then he came roaring back down the road in a cold fury.
‘I will kill you if you don't behave,’ he said flatly.
‘I could kill you all.
It means nothing.’
Life is cheap here and people want to escape.
But Britain refuses to take them.
TOGETHER AGAIN Sead Hukanovic, weakened by the hell at Omarska, desperately clings on to his brother Nijaz at the camp yesterday
TRAGIC Outcast mum Sabira Radic hugs daughter Elma on the road to the camp
MISERY Refugees queue for the meagre rations at the camp in Trnopolje yesterday
SCRAPS: Paltry bowl of rations dished out by Serbs to feed two men for a day
NEWS STORY THAT WON'T BE GRABBING HEADLINES
THE NEWS BOYS (Cert PG; General) is such a dreadfully dated-looking, and dreary musical set against the famous New York City newsboys' strike of 1899, I just can't imagine who its going to appeal to.
I can't even see that the casting of renowned character actor Robert Duvall as newspaper tycoon Joseph Pulitzer or teen heart-throb Christian Bale as spirited Jack Kelly leader of the warring newsboys is going to help this dud.
HEART-THROB: Bale…
BLYN: PAULINE McLEOD
Mush signs
CHRIS LANDER
PAKISTAN spinner Mushtaq Ahmed has struck a three-year deal with Somerset.
The leg-spin wizard will take over from South African quickie Richard Snell next season.
Somerset's cricket director Bob Cottam said: ‘Mushtaq has proved himself as a wicket-taker at the highest level.
‘I'm sure he'll do the same for us in county cricket.
He will be the perfect foil for Neil Mallender and Andrew Caddick.’
The last master leg-spinner to make it in county cricket was Pakistan's current coach and team manager Intikhab Alam, who made a big impact with Surrey in the 1970s.
Somerset beat off Worcestershire and Leicestershire for Mushtaq's signature.
They see him as a potential match-winner when the new four-day format is brought into championship cricket next year.
MUSHTAQ: Wizard
Love hurts
Why Zoe was too frightened to go shopping at Sainsbury's
…and so does fame
‘Male fans ask for pictures of me in a bathing costure’
PAULINE WALLIN
ZOE WANAMAKER looks slick and confident in her salmon-pink designer suit, the shortish skirt showing off perfect legs.
Then she reaches nervously for a hand-rolled fag.
The 43-year-old actress, more used to Shakespeare than TV comedy, admits she was scared witless by her success in the hit series Love Hurts.
Too frightened even to go out for a Saturday morning shop at Sainsbury's in case fans inspected her…and the contents of her shopping trolley.
‘Initially it was very disconcerting and made me feel very self-conscious,’ she said.
‘When the series first went out people used to do double-takes in Sainsbury's.
I hated that.
I wouldn't go shopping for the first few weeks.
‘But it got ridiculous in the end — I had nothing to eat in the house.’
The series, in which she plays tough-talking Tessa, opposite millionaire boyfriend Adam Faith, has been a smash hit with viewers, attracting an audience of more than 10 million.
Tessa and Adam's character Frank finally get married in the next series, in a magnificent old Russian church in St Petersburg.
And Zoe, who is single, admits she'd love to do something as romantic herself.
But the prospect is unlikely.
She says her love life is a non-starter.
‘I'm working so much, up at five in the morning and in bed at 11 at night.
I think most women find it difficult to balance a career with having a relationship and running a home.’
She split from actor David Lyon (the Prime Minister in House of Cards) after an 11-year affair.
She knows Love Hurts…
‘It isn't impossible for love not to hurt but it usually does at some point,’ she said with a sigh.
Not that she hasn't got plenty of admirers.
Men find her trim figure and neat little face with  its impossibly turned-up nose, very appealing.
She seems surprised at this but says: ‘That's very nice.’
And smiles her Cheshire cat grin.
‘I get a little fan mail.
Men have been known to write and ask for a picture of me in a bathing costume.
‘I cut a picture of a model in a swimsuit out of Vogue and posted it back to one man.
He wrote back to thank me for it.
He obviously hadn't noticed the difference!’
She lets out a surprisingly earthy bellow of laughter.
Zoe is a quirky lady who says she's more at home wearing bovver boots than elegant  stilettos .
But she's also shy and has thought about quitting acting several times when she's had a lukewarm review or been rejected for a role.
Love Hurts, she admits, has given her a welcome boost.
More important than all the pats on the back she's had as a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company.
‘The success of Love Hurts is wonderful.
I've devoted so much time and energy to creating Tessa and it feels marvellous that it's actually come off,’ she says taking a big puff on her roll-up.
‘How many people sit in a theatre?
Not more than a thousand and you only reach a limited number of people.
‘With Love Hurts you are seen by millions.
‘It's an amazing feeling and has made me feel much more confident about myself and my abilities.’
Co-star Adam Faith — himself a big success as a pop star in the Sixties — knows all about making it and warned her that TV fame would have its price.
But coming from a theatre background — her father is veteran American actor Sam Wanamaker — Zoe's a real trouper.
And she decided in the end that dodging fans was less than gracious.
‘If I'm not in the right mood I get very guarded and don't want to talk to people.
‘One morning I was running on Hampstead Heath and saw a couple coming towards me.
They were staring at me and kept staring.
‘I became very angry that they were staring and stared back at them.
Then I jogged past them and I thought, that's not fair because they were only being like everyone else.
‘I turned round to apologise and they were gone.
‘I felt very embarrassed.
It was very ungracious of me.
I vowed there and then that I wouldn't be like that again.’
SHY GIRL: Zoe says life as a TV star can be embarrassing
MY GIRL: With co-star Adam.
Picture: BILL ROWNTREE
THE LIMIT
GUNS BURNT OUT
RICK SKY
TROUBLED rock stars Guns N' Roses have scrapped three shows on their current world tour after their support act's singer got badly burned.
The millionaire band have been forced to pull out of dates in Toronto, Denver and San Diego after Metallica's James Hetfield burnt his arm.
A band spokesman said: ‘The band can't play without Metallica.’
UK HOLIDAY XTRA
It's never too late
CUT-PRICE OFFERS ARE STILL UP FOR GRABS
DAVID KERR
IF YOU are looking for a late summer break at a holiday park in Britain then this could be your lucky year.
Last week we were able to exclusively reveal to Mirror readers a Warner Holidays offer that slashes £300 off the price of a week-long family stay.
At six family villages in East Anglia, Hayling Island, the Isle of Wight and Devon, week beginning August 29, Warner are offering a one-week half-board family holiday (two adults plus two children aged 2-15) for £499.
The price includes en-suite accommodation, chalet maid service, nonstop entertainment, swimming pools, sports facilities and planned activities for children of all ages.
(For details call: 0705 492 121 or contact your local ABTA travel agent.)
The reason for space is available at a traditionally busy time is said to be due to school holiday dates now being more staggered.
If you are considering a short or long break on an English holiday park then you need look no further than the ‘Freedom’ Holiday Parks brochure published by the Caravan Holiday Home Campaign.
The brochures offer holiday homes costing from £55 a week and touring and camping facilities from as little as £3.60 a night.
What's more all the holiday parks listed are regularly checked and graded by tourist board inspectors.
The national Freedom brochure and regionalised Freedom guides are available individually or as a set from selected Tourist Information Centres throughout Britain.
You can also get the guide by writing to: British Holiday and Home Parks Association, 31 Park Road, Gloucester, GL1 1LH, or call: 0452 413 041.
GIBBS GOSSIP
Can Sigourney weave a spell?
GARTH GIBBS
ONE of the most sensational life-forms on this planet, Sigourney Weaver, has been telling us about Alien 3 which opens here next week.
‘I think the picture is excellent,’ she declares with touching, if shortsighted, loyalty, though she admits she wasn't over the moon about the trailer promoting ‘The bitch is back!’even if it does refer to the mother alien monster.
The sci-fi movie, filmed at Pinewood Studios, is the last such epic for Sigourney, she says, adding: ‘I want to do more love stories.
It happens in this movie, but the guy doesn't last too long.’
The unfortunate guy is Charles Dance, as a randy doctor who beds her and is whisked from the bed by the monster and chomped into little pieces.
Casanovas, be warned!
FIELD NOTE
XENIA FIELD /CHARLES LYTE
THIS is the time of year for the first phase of Wisteria pruning.
Cut the new growth back by about half its length.
In February, you must trim back to a fat bud.
Pranks for the  memory 
PAULINE McLEOD
FILMING the third instalment of the Lethal Weapon action-adventure series wasn't without problems.
Danny Glover recalls: ‘The script was never finished so Mel and I had to improvise scenes every day!’
But the 45-year-old, who plays Detective Roger Murtaugh, didn't mind a bit.
‘Working with Mel is such a joy that I didn't mind doing scenes ‘blind’.’
‘He's a very generous actor and one of the most unpretentious people I've met.
We enjoyed horsing around and adding dialogue.’
The two popular actors left it to director Richard Donner to make sense of it all at the end of the day.
‘He had to cut everything together, leaving out the improvisations that didn't work.
Fortunately there was enough left to make it a good movie.
‘There's usually a lot of tension on movie sets, but on these films it's so easy to work in unison.
We play little pranks on each other all the time.’
But, away from the set, Glover regards himself a family man — just like his Lethal Weapon screen character.
He lives in a three-story Victorian house in San Francisco, with his jazz-musician wife and daughter.
Glover only decided to do another sequel because the original people were involved.
He says ‘I knew I was going to have fun and I like Murtaugh and the friendship between him and Riggs.
‘But I wouldn't do a fourth movie.
I think three is enough.’
He doesn't feel he has outgrown the part of the middle-aged veteran cop.
‘He's in an interesting and frightening dilemma, about to retire.
‘Suddenly you think about the days beyond work.
I know what he feels, because even when I'm on vacation I've gotta do something.’
LETHAL COMBINATION: Danny Glover, Joe Pesci and Mel Gibson
YOUR MONEY
ROYAL CAUGHT OUT
JOHN HUSBAND
RECORD repossessions have left Royal Insurance with a £100 million bill in the last six months.
It had to meet huge mortgage indemnity insurance claims from lenders of  repossessed homes now worth less than was lent on them.
What's the difference between the two outfits? £44
PREMIER LEAGUE KICKS OFF WITH A BIG RIP-OFF
FIONA McINTOSH
PREMIER LEAGUE football kicks off today and every young fan will be imitating their heroes in the nation's parks first thing Monday morning.
And, as any football-mad kid knows, there is nothing as embarrassing as mucking about in last season's kit.
British parents fork out a small fortune to keep their children looking like a mini-version of Vinny Jones or Peter Beardsley.
And clubs can't help cashing in — by constantly changing the colour and style of their football strips.
Take Arsenal, for instance.
As you can see from our two pictures last season's kit appears very similar to the new one.
The only real differences are the new position of the logos of both the club and the manufacturer, plus the stripes on the sleeve.
As our table shows for these subtle alterations, parents are having to find £44.
And it's leaving them as blue as Chelsea's shirts.
Enough is enough, say consumer watchdogs who reckon some money-spinning clubs have forced parents into an impossible corner.
‘Fans are being ripped off,’ says Sue Harvey, editor of Check-It-Out magazine, a new magazine for youngsters.
Full football kit for a discerning 10-year-old will probably cost parents about £40.
So one good reason not to support Norwich is the hefty £52 they charge for you to look like one of their players.
‘Fans already feel that their loyalty is being taken advantage of as clubs keep changing their kits,’ adds Sue.
‘A lot of the time the changes in design are very small — they're not what you'd call major fashion changes.’
Fair
But not all clubs are adding extra pounds to the price of the replica outfits.
Everton have cut the cost of their kit, while Wimbledon, who are refusing to jack up their prices, have said: ‘We want to be fair to our supporters.’
QPR are also charging the same for their shirts as they did last year — £19.99 — and although their shorts and socks are not yet available they are still among the cheapest.
‘We manufacture our own shirts and shorts to keep the prices low,’ says a club spokesman.
‘We realise this is a sensitive issue and don't want to rob the fans.’
Sue Harvey urges parents to think before they buy and not to play into the hands of the clubs:
‘We want to encourage parents to talk to youngsters and see if the new kits are what they really want.
‘If they think they are being ripped off, the new strips won't sell.’
So parents, please take note.
Start telling your children what else that hard-earned money can buy.
On the other hand, you could always get them to support Everton.
KIT CATCH: These two Arsenal shirts may look pretty similar — but fans will insist on having the new one (right)
SHIRTY-SOMETHING: Premier League stars celebrate the new season, but imitating your heroes will be pricy
ELVIS: HIS LAST AMAZING LETTER
Hours before he died, the King wrote to the woman he looked on as a mother
The pictures you've never seen before
PETER DONNELLY
ELVIS PRESLEY'S last letter, written a few hours before he died, was to an elderly woman he looked on almost as a mother.
And it shows that, far from being suicidal, he was clearly enjoying life and looking forward to the future.
The letter — seen and authenticated by an expert for the Daily Mirror — is one of hundreds just unearthed as Presley fans around the world mark the anniversary of the death of ‘The King’ 15 years ago.
Handwritten to his closest friends, associates and fans, the letters, together with cards and notes, were traced by an Anglo-Australian company preparing a two-hour television documentary — provisionally called Private Presley — to be screened worldwide next year.
It will include private pictures never seen before — some of them shown  exclusively here — sound tapes never previously heard in public and shots taken from 30 hours of film footage from Elvis's home movies, showing him in intimate off-duty moments.
But the real find is the haul of letters, especially the last, sent from Graceland, his home in Memphis, Tennessee, and dated August 15, 1977.
‘It was written to an elderly fan called Elizabeth’, says Ray Santilli, managing director of the London-based Merlin Group, making the TV special with Nomad Films of Australia.
‘She is a German woman, who was married to an American, and first met Elvis in Las Vegas in the late 1960s.
‘He spotted her in a wheelchair in the front row at one of his shows and sent his bodyguards to seek her out.
‘I believe she became a sort of surrogate mother to him’.
Elvis's own mother, Gladys, to whom he was devoted, died of a heart attack on August 14, 1958, while he was in the US Army.
When she died, her son screamed: ‘Oh, God!
Everything I have is gone!’
‘He obviously felt something very deeply for Liz’, says 37-year-old Mr Santilli.
‘They corresponded regularly after that first meeting.
And we have some 150 letters he sent to her right up to the day before his death.
‘They met again over the years, too.
He would send his plane, or travel tickets, for her to come and see him at shows, for parties and at Thanksgiving celebrations.
They became quite close.
‘And Liz has kept everything she received from him — ticket stubs, cards, letters.
They are very personal, intimate, letters, in which he talks frankly about his life and the people around him.
‘They include some startling revelations which throw new light on Elvis the man.’
But the jewel in the King's crown is that final airmail letter Elvis sent to Liz.
The envelope was sent by ‘Mr J. Burrows’— the name Elvis often used as a nom-de-plume and, in case the letter had to be ‘returned to sender’, the address he gave was ‘3764 E. P. Blvd’, Memphis — his Graceland home on Elvis Presley Boulevard.
In it, Elvis tells ‘Dear Liz’ how much he appreciates receiving her letters and looks forward to seeing her during a trip she planned to America in December.
He gossips about the weather and American football, recalls that he played at school and in the Army, and was a big follower of the game.
(The highspot for the 600,000 fans who flock each year to the Graceland mansion shrine is the famous jungle room, where their idol used to watch three televised football games at once).
And he goes on to reveal in the letter that he had just taken a day off ‘work’ to watch a Tennessee high school football game with Ginger Alden, the 20-year-old Tennessee beauty queen who bore a startling resemblance to his mother and whom he called ‘little Gladys’.
It was Ginger who would find him slumped in his bathroom just a few hours after he wrote the letter.
The neatly-written two-page letter ends with Elvis again saying how much he was looking forward to her visit.
‘Until then.
Have a good trip,’ he wrote.
‘See you soon.’
‘This last letter is very coherent and structured,’ says Mr Santilli, ‘and with the others shows very clearly that he was looking forward to the future.
‘It is certainly not the kind of letter you write if you're feeling suicidal.
‘The letters also show that, at the end, Elvis knew what was happening all around him — that he was being used by a lot of people.
But they show him as being very bright and intelligent and far from naive.
‘There were few people really close to him at that time.’
Liz, now in her mid-eighties and a widow, is in a West German hospice.
‘We plan to include an interview with her in the film,’ says Mr Santilli.
‘But the proof of Elvis's state of mind at the time of his death is there in his own words.
You cannot dispute them.’
Soon after Presley died, local coroner Dr Jerry Francisco went on television to tell a grieving world that the singer had had a massive heart attack, which was supposedly confirmed by the post-mortem examination.
But that autopsy report was released only to Elvis's father, Vernon.
To this day it remains a secret, protected by Tennessee's privacy rules for 50 years.
Later, however, it was revealed that another post-mortem discovered 14 different drugs in Presley's body — including codeine, three sedatives, five varieties of ‘downers’, two anti-depressants and a decongestant.
Said Doctor Forrest Tennant, a Los Angeles drug specialist who examined the autopsy: ‘He took a combination of sedative drugs and overdosed, simple as that.’
Such reports fuelled the suicide theory, which was raised earlier this year by Presley's stepmother, Dee.
She claimed the King had left a suicide note for his father, saying he wanted to die because he had cancer and could not face an agonising death.
She went on to claim that Elvis wanted to join his beloved mother Gladys, whose death had shattered him beyond repair.
Suicide was also claimed by Presley's biographer, Albert Goldman.
He wrote in his 1981 biography: ‘I assumed that his death was due to an accidental drug overdose.’
But after talking to David Stanley, the youngest of Presley's three stepbrothers, he said: ‘I am now convinced that Elvis Presley committed suicide.’
‘Clearly’, Goldman wrote later, ‘in his last grim weeks, Elvis was possessed by the thought of death.
What transformed the thought into the deed, David is firmly convinced, was the conjunction of two intolerable prospects.’
One was the imminent publication of a book by three former bodyguards which ‘ripped the lid off Elvis's private life’.
The second was that ‘hypersensitive’ Presley — scheduled to leave on a 10-city tour — feared his fans' reaction to seeing him weighing more than 16st and out of condition.
‘But that theory really does not stand up any more,’ says Mr Santilli.
‘Until now, information about his death has been second or third hand.
This is from the man himself.
‘This last letter is so telling, so optimistic.
It was not written by a man who was drugged.
It puts the suicide theories to bed once and for all.’
Message that spells hope
AFTER three days of tests, handwriting expert Ruth Myers was in no doubt.
‘The letter dated August 15, 1977, and signed by Elvis Presley is authentic,’ she said.
We began by giving Ruth an authentic note which Elvis wrote to President Richard Nixon in December, 1970.
That famous letter, in which Elvis  offered to help the US Government's fight against drugs, said the singer was staying in a Washington hotel under the assumed name Jon Burrows.
That is also the name of the sender of letters to ‘Liz’.
Said Ruth after comparing the authenticated letter with the letter to ‘Liz’: ‘The essential characteristics are identical.
The slope of the writing, the way the ‘i’, ‘t’, ‘j’ and ‘d’are written, the hooks, loops, twirls and rounded letters, the size of lettering and punctuation, all leave me in no doubt that the two documents were penned by the same hand.’
She said of the man behind that last letter: ‘The forward right-slanted writing indicates that emotions took priority over his thinking.
‘The writing shows a person looking to the future, highly motivated, with a somewhat optimistic approach to life (shown by the upward crossing of some of his t-bars).
‘This was backed with a sense of humour (indicated by the flourishes on his capital ‘m's’ and ‘n's).’
Not, in other words, the kind of man who would have taken his own life within hours of writing that letter to ‘Liz’.
LOOKING AHEAD: The King
LOVE ME TENDER: Elvis and a German girlfriend
HAPPY BIRTHDAY BOY: Elvis in Germany
SURRENDER: Elvis during his Army days
GIBBS GOSSIP
GARTH GIBBS
PLAYTIME.
Barbara Windsor (above) plugs National Condom Week.
Sorry, to tell you Babs, THAT is a balloon.
‘Condom?
What condom?’ asks Tracy Lords (right).
Meanwhile, Yasmin Le Bon takes the kids for walkies.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
ROCK band Queensryche took 10 years to work out how to become stars.
Then the Seattle-based group hit on a sure-fire way of making the big time.
Singer Geoff Tate, at No. 40 with Silent Lucidity, says: ‘No one liked us until we changed our hairstyles.
Grow your hair and wear tight trousers and success is easy.’
FACT FILE
Good old country comforts
JOHN HUSBAND /DAVID KERR
CURL up in a cosy country cottage in one of Britain's beauty spots and you could be helping preserve the nation's heritage.
For as well as maintaining stately homes and castes, the National Trust is in the holiday home business.
It has 170 cottages around Britain that it lets out to holiday-makers and the income raised — more than £700,000 last year — helps provide extra cash for its vital conservation work.
The cottages are set in some of the most beautiful spots, including Snowdonia National Park, the Lake District, Brownsea Island, Dorset, and the the Fal Estuary, Cornwall.
We stayed at Rosetta Cottage, a period furnished Victorian villa on the seafront at Cowes, Isle of Wight.
It is very comfortable, tastefully furnished, and set in its own garden, in which Winston  Churchill's father Randolph proposed to his mother Jennie.
Sailing buffs have a perfect view of the Solent.
And not surprisingly it gets booked well in advance for Cowes Week.
For those wanting to get away from it all, the Trust has coastguard cottages situated high on the Needles Headland and a farm cottage at St Catherine's Point.
National Trust cottages can be booked for a week at a time throughout the year and for short midweek and weekend breaks between November and Easter.
PRICES for an autumn break start from as little as £140 for a cottage to sleep four in the Lake District.
For a copy of the National Trust Holiday Cottage brochure send a cheque or postal order for 75p to the National Trust (Enterprises) Ltd., PO Box 101, Melksham, Wiltshire, SN12 8EA.
For information on late availability ring 0208 73880.
TRUST SPOT: The Needles headland provides wonderful views
YOUR MONEY
JOHN HUSBAND
SHARES boomed on better than expected inflation figures for both Britain and Germany yesterday.
This renewed hopes of an early cut in German interest rates which would provide us with scope to follow them down.
The FTSE index of leading shares jumped 38.8 to 2,356.8.
Save £££s on great days out
ROLLERCOASTER BARGAINS FOR ALL THE FAMILY
LOADS OF FUN AT YOUR FAVOURITE THEME PARKS
MAKE your summer sizzle and save pounds into the bargain with your fun-packed Daily Mirror.
We've lined up a host of money-saving family days out at Britain's fabulous theme parks — and you can cash in.
Thrill to the spills of those white-knuckle rides and make it a day you and the kids will never forget.
Today, we have supersaver coupons for Derbyshire's American Adventure Theme Park, Southport's Pleasureland, Metroland at Gateshead, and the Pleasurewood Hills American Theme Park near Great Yarmouth.
So why not cut the cost of enjoying yourself and remember, with the Mirror you win on the swings…and the roundabouts.
Every mother's nightmare
Kidnap drama highlights all that is wrong with Britain's childcare…
‘IT'S A WONDER IT DOESN'T HAPPEN FAR MORE OFTEN’
TINA WEAVER
AS another week begins, every working mum today has an extra worry on her mind as she drops off her children at the childminder's or leaves them with a nanny.
For Bernadette Quli, that worry turned into a nightmare when the woman she had taken on to look after her six-month-old daughter, Farrah, fled to Ireland with the baby.
Bernadette, a dealer with a Japanese bank, was planning to go back to work.
The 24-year-old has now ditched her job.
The woman who answered Bernadette's ad for a childminder gave a false name, no proper address, was evasive about her phone number, and had no references.
Bernadette's lack of vetting will be condemned by many as the blueprint of how not to find someone to care for your child.
But, as any mother facing the bewildering task of finding a carer knows, there are no official guidelines offered.
There is a wealth of information on birth methods, whether to breastfeed your baby or not, and even potty training.
But when, several months later, the harassed new mum plans to go back to work, where should she turn to for advice?
Daunting
The terror of leaving the tot you have cared for round the clock in the hands of a virtual stranger can be more daunting than the birth itself.
And the film released earlier this year, The Hand That Rocks The Cradle, about a nanny who infiltrates a family threatening to harm the couple's child, preys on a mother's worst fear.
Jessie Hewitt, a childminder for 30 years and a regional director of the National Childminding Association, is well aware of the urgent need for a national registration system for all child carers.
She says: ‘At the moment, nannies who look after children in their employers' homes could have a history of the worst child abuse  imaginable .
‘But there is no way for parents to check.
Nannies are not registered with anyone, and police cannot check them out.
‘Parents have to rely on references to gauge their backgrounds, and we've all heard of cases when references are forged.
‘There are so many loopholes, it's a wonder things like the Farrah Quli incident don't happen more often.’
Couples are forced to pick their way through the costly minefield of private childcare because Britain's publicly funded system is desperately inadequate.
We have the worst record in Europe for care of pre-school age youngsters.
Millions of mothers have been shamefully let down by the government which, 13 years ago under Margaret Thatcher, promised a nursery place for every child who wanted one.
Access
Currently only 2 per cent of under-fives have access to full time publicly-funded day-care.
And only 40 per cent of three to five-year-olds have access to pre-school education.
Yet in France and Belgium 95 per cent of youngsters in that age group get a place.
Employing a nanny is beyond most couple's budget.
A properly-qualified nanny can cost anything from £100-£275 a week.
Childminders — who look after your child in their home — must be registered with the local authority and they and their families are regularly checked by the police, according to the 1989 Children's Act.
They cost around £60a-week, but if there's been a baby boom in the area prices can double!
However, you can take some sensible steps to vet a would-be nanny: Check her references, even if she comes through an agency.
If possible, visit her last employer and find out her reason for leaving.
Try to get a nanny with recognised qualifications, and check they are not forged.
Insist on previous experience.
If you opt for a childminder, you should: Visit the house several times with your child.
Find her through the local authority.
That way she will be registered, and she and her family will have been checked by police.
These precautions won't guarantee you a dream child carer, but until the Government  follows Europe's lead — they're all we've got.
FOR more useful tips, read: The Working Parents Handbook, produced by The Working Mother's Association, phone 071-700-5771.
Or try The Good Nanny Guide, £9.99, Century Hutchinson 
TERROR: A scene from The Hand that Rocks the Cradle
ALAS!
SMITH'S A REAL HIT IN HIS HOOT OF A SHOW
It's toe joke as poor Mel puts his foot in it
PAULINE McLEOD /STEVE ATKINSON
MEL SMITH looked a treat — matted unwashed hair, dirty denim cut-offs revealing pale chubby legs.
Partner Griff Rhys Jones was just as scruffy and grinning manically.
The pair looked like every motorist's bad news — the guys who leap out at you at the lights and demand money for wiping a dirty rag over your windscreen.
Whether you want them to or not.
In other words, we were set for a few laughs.
But things didn't quite go as expected during filming outside the Daily Mirror building in Holborn, London…
TAKE ONE.
Mel toddles up to a driver of a white Fiesta and gets out his wiper.
TAKE TWO.
The Fiesta sets off, only Mel doesn't get out of the way in time.
CUT!
The Fiesta has driven over the comic's left foot and sent Mel sprawling.
Filming was held up as portly Mel — still smiling — recovered in a stand-by ambulance, nursing a painful big toe.
‘It hurt a bit but I'll recover,’ he said.
And he admitted this wasn't the first time his feet had come a cropper.
‘I did exactly the same thing last year in LA,’ he revealed.
That time he played a yellow cab driver and got run over by his own cab.
‘I don't know what it is with me and my left foot…
‘This time the lights turned green but I didn't get out of the way sharp enough.’
We were joined by Griff.
True to form the odd couple had differing views on the subject.
‘I've had a sticker for my car made which says I Like My Windscreen Dirty,’ said Griff.
‘And I'm thinking of having it patented.
I give them whatever I have in my pocket which is usually nothing.’
‘Look,’ sniffed Mel, ‘these guys are only trying to make a bob or two…and from what I gather they usually rake in a fair bit.’
The sketch is one in a new six-part series of Alas Smith and Jones, to be screened in October.
FOOTNOTE: If it's any comfort to Mel, his medic told us the toes of windscreen pirates get crushed at the rate of ONE A WEEK on the busy A4 London to Bath road.
DIRTY LOOKS: Would you let him near your car?
OUCH: Mel's grazed but back on set Picture: STEVE KING
CLEANING UP…in a the comedy stakes, funnymen wipers Mel and Griff.
Pictures: HARRY PROSSER
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
OVER THE LIMIT
RESIDENTS of Alexandria, Minneapolis face a problem if they fancy a bit of nookie after a meal.
According to one of the city's laws no man is allowed to make love with the smell of garlic, onions or sardines.
But curry and kippers are all right.
DID YOU KNOW?
KING Peter II of Yugoslavia, who died in 1934, was the only European monarch ever to be buried in the United States.
DID YOU KNOW?
THERE are wines called Mascara (Algerian), Boos,(German) and Le Pis (French).
PUBLIC OPINION
Maggie's potty polls
OUR Tory council leader, Margaret Gimblett, has got the poll tax confused with public opinion polls.
Last year she spent £30,000 of our tax money on a poll which revealed that in Wokingham, Surrey, car park charges were not popular, refuse collection was good and the district council's various patches of grass needed cutting.
Now She is to spend £20,000 trying to find out ‘what people want and what their views are on how we spend their money.’
The poll tax is hurtful enough without Tories splashing our money about on such potty schemes.
I hope this Margaret goes in the same way as the other Tory Margaret.
—.
THE reader who brought his children from the US to Britain to be educated is talking nonsense to say our schools are on a par with those in the Third World.
My grandchildren attend an excellent middle school.
He should complain to the school if his son is not getting enough homework, instead of blaming the whole education system.
—.
THE drivers who moaned about the parking problems at the Genesis concert at Knebworth because it took them a long time to get out make me mad.
If anyone thinks it is easy trying to get 30,000 cars out of a car park at once they should try it.
I know because I was there.
If they had all spent a little of their energy cooperating with staff instead of moaning, they would have got out a lot quicker.
—.
PASTA'S OFF FOR GAZZA
GARTH Gibbs says Gazza will feel at home among the spaghetti scoffers in Italy.
But the Florentines to whom Paul Gascoigne is said to be related eat charcoal-grilled steak, chickens roasted on spit, ham, beans and the most beautiful vegetables.
Roman cooking is very similar.
Gazza won't have to scoff a single strand of spaghetti.
—.
LAUGH'S ON ZOE
I DON'T think actress Zoe Wanamaker need have been embarrassed when, out jogging, she stared back at two people who stared at her.
I always stare at joggers.
Their agonised faces amuse me and I have yet to see a happy or embarrassed one.
—
MIRROR MONEY
GO EAST FOR FAIR SHARES
IAN MILLER
IF you have a yen for rich pickings this is the time to cash in on the Japanese Stock Market.
It has tumbled to a six-year low, but it could rise 25 per cent by the end of this year.
The best way to get into Japan is through a decent unit trust, which will provide a wide range of Japanese shares for a lump sum or monthly instalment.
Like all unit trusts, you pay start-up fees of around five per cent, and annual management fees of about 1.5 per cent .
Two reliable firms are: Save & Prosper Japan Growth Fund: 0800 282101 and M&G Japan and General fund: 0245 266266.
GOING FOR A SONG: Most shares in Japan
DID YOU KNOW?
THE Library of Congress — America's largest — has more than 400 miles of bookshelves.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
LIGHTNING STRIKES
RICKY WARWICK, singer with Donington stars The Almighty, missed death by inches after a massive lighting rig collapsed during a packed concert.
Rock pin-up Ricky was performing at London's Town & Country club when the £10,000 lighting tower crashed on to the stage.
Says the star: ‘It missed me by about six inches.I turned white as a sheet, it was terrifying.
‘I'm just glad it landed on the stage and not on the audience.
It could have been a disaster.’
NEAR THING: Ricky
NEW MOVIES
SHOCK, HORROR, GROAN
PAULINE MCLEOD
I'M DEAD easy to scare.
Honest.
One of my more cynical film critic friends uses me as his personal ‘shriekometer’ to gauge how freaked out Joe Public is going to be by some of the grizzlier horror movies we have to sit through.
So he was pretty disappointed when I went to see ALIEN 3 (Cert 18; General) and walked out after less than an hour, bored beyond belief.
Still he wasn't surprised at all at my giggles when I dragged myself back to view it for a second time.
For I was shrieking with laughter at some of the unintentional one-liners and an alien about as terrifying as E.T.
Alien Mark 3 marks the final return of the grim Weaver — the statuesque Sigourney Weaver, reprising her role of Officer Ripley.
It finds her in a maximum security prison on a far-off planet.
Murderers, rapists and Charles Dance as Clemens, an ex-prisoner now medical officer, are her only companions.
Or are they?
These foul-mouthed human aliens soon realise something serious is up, particularly because their numbers are shrinking.
Ripley is right, there is an Alien among them.
Worse is to follow.
The shaven-headed Ripley is going to have a baby.
A baby Alien.
Aaaah!
Sorry, aaaagh!!!
SHOCKER: Sigourney Weaver as Officer Ripley is back among the Aliens
YOUR MONEY
DISNEY HAS GOOFED IT IN FRANCE
IAN MILLER
IT looks more and more as though Euro Disney has goofed with its theme park outside Paris.
Shares plunged again yesterday by 63p to 800p and another City expert warned of a gloomy future.
Brokers Morgan Stanley now predict Euro Disney's lack of income from property ventures will cost it a £20 million LOSS in the year to September 1993.
This is despite the fact that around 40,000 visitors enter the Magic Kingdom daily to see Mickey and Co at a cost of £23 for adults and £15 for kids.
Shelf Life
WHO?
WHAT?
WHERE?
BRITAIN'S No 1 CONSUMER COLUMN CONSUMER SPOT 1
JAN WALSH
EVER bought a sofa or a bed and been told you'll only have to wait two or three weeks for delivery, and ten weeks later you're still waiting…?
Now there's a new scheme to help us sort the good furniture men from the cowboys.
It's called Qualitas, and you'll see a blue logo in shop windows and on the furniture of the 700 firms who belong.
The Qualitas code says members must…
GIVE accurate delivery dates.
TEST upholstery to British and European standards.
LABEL products with care instructions.
OFFER unhappy customers a proper complaints system and conciliation service.
So if you see the label that's what you should get.
But of course, if you find otherwise you know where to write…
Family at war…
British  Bulldog faces up to the big challenge
DAVEY HAS TO KNOCK OUT HIS WIFE'S BROTHER
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
WEMBLEY Stadium has staged performances by the biggest heroes in rock, boxing and soccer.
And on Saturday it hosts the mean, macho and magnificent World Wrestling Federation's superstars — here for the SummerSlam ‘92 spectacular.
To put you on stand-by for the grunt'n'groan grapplers, The Daily Mirror has been speaking to two family rivals — British Bulldog and Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart.
BRITISH Bulldog Davey Boy Smith has legs the size of tree trunks — and they are used to weathering storms.
But he is the first to admit that the thought of SummerSlam ‘92 has set his knees a-trembling.
When the strains of Rula Britannia strike up, our very own Wigan-born wrestler — the only Brit in WWF's superstar line-up — will step out in front of 83,000 frenzied fans in the most famous sporting arena in the world.
He knows that he's looking for a one-way result.
He's got to win.
He reveals: ‘It is the ultimate challenge of my career.
I've fought all around America, and all around the world.
‘Now I'm coming back home.
Every kid in England dreams of appearing at Wembley Stadium.
I'm about to do it and I'm hungry for victory.’
Cheering him on will be his gas board worker dad Sid, mum Joyce, brother Terence and sisters Tracey and Joanne.
But 29-year-old Davey, who now lives in a lavish Florida mansion a long way from the two-up two-down terraced house he was brought up in, has no guarantees of success.
FOR he is challenging WWF's number one heart-throb for the Intercontinental Title — Bret ‘Hit Man’ Hart.
Bret, 34, is not backwards in coming forwards.
‘I'm 235lb of twisted steel and sex appeal,’ he boasts.
‘Davey may be younger and faster than me, but when it comes to being smart, there's no contest.’
The arch-rivals go back a long way.
Ten years ago, when Davey Boy was a mere unknown moving to America and desperate to make a name for himself, the Hit Man helped him on the ladder to success.
‘He was floundering.
He was young, inexperienced, he needed a guiding hand,’ says Bret.
‘We became roommates and I taught him all he knows.’
Through that most innocent of unions, an even stronger bond was formed.
For Davey ended up marrying Bret's sister Diana.
Davey and Diana, a bodybuilder herself, now have two children, Harry, seven and Georgia, five.
With such family ties between the two wrestlers, they are inextricably entwined.
‘It has made things very difficult over the last few months.
With this challenge, family gatherings have been a bit strained.
‘He is my brother-in-law and because of that, I have a certain fondness for him.
But once in the ring, I've got to be tough.’
Bret, a father-of-four, is the WWF's longest serving wrestler.
The son of Canadian wrestling promoter Stu Hart, he has the sport in his blood.
His colourful career has taken its toll.
‘I've had a broken nose, black eyes, split lips and banged just about every part of my body,’ he says.
‘My weak spots are my right knee and lower back, but I won't let on much because I like to make out I am indestructible.’
There is certainly not a mark on his perfectly-formed body.
The sight of his rippling muscles in his trademark pink tights sends women wild.
‘I'm not complaining.
It is very flattering to have the girls screaming for you,’ he says.
But Bret did let us into one secret.
He is shy — which is why he always wears wraparound sunglasses.
I'VE always been bashful about going into the ring, so early on I decided to cover it up.
‘Now when the bell rings, I go into auto-pilot and the shyness disappears.’
The Hit Man is credited as the best wrestling technician of his generation with his speciality moves — the sleeper, crab and stunning sharpshooter finishing hold.
But Bulldog has his teeth bared and ready to sink any rival.
I have been dreaming of those 83,000 fans around Wembley Stadium.
‘And in my dreams, it is me they are cheering to win,’ says 19st 4lb Davey.
One thing is for sure.
Nobody should expect this sleeping dog to lie.
TOMORROW: My mission, by Macho Man Randy Savage 
BATTLERS: Hart (far left) and Bulldog show their skills and Hit Man (above) comes out from behind his sunglasses
GIBBS GOSSIP SPECIAL
FERGIE'S HOLIDAY SNAPS THE DAILY MIRROR ALBUM
FERGIE FROLICKED AND SCOTLAND YARD, ERR…
KEPT OBSERVATION
GARTH GIBBS
IT'S a tough life in Scotland Yard's Royal Protection Squad.
They could be at Buck House or, even worse, at Balmoral but she wanted to take the kids and her bald boyfriend to St Tropez.
Two highly-trained coppers were detailed to take Bermudas out of stores and the latest Inspector Morse paperback and tag along.
We guess somebody's got to do it.
Their principal duty is making sure the two little princesses are safe and well.
This involves spending a lot of time in the sun by the pool listening to girlish giggles as they frolic around.
And, in particular what Fergie insists on, complete privacy and NO SNAPPERS.
If only they'd check properly OUTSIDE the luxury of the villa, all this fuss may never have happened.
What a shame!
READING THE SIGNS: To be a good bodyguard you've got to appear casual while you're working.
So as the children play, the detective studies his book
STAR-SPANGLED MANNER: Texan millionaire Bryan leans over to give Fergie an affectionate peck on the shoulder as the couple stretch out in the sun
POTTY OVER HER: Fergie mucks around by balancing a vase on her head
WET'N'WILD: Fergie and Bryan splash about together in the pool
BUT THE ROYAL SCANDAL OF THE CENTURY HAS BEEN GETTING CLOSER…
CLOSER, AND EVER CLOSER…
TO THE KISS THAT WOULD STUN THE WORLD
IT'S a balmy day on the Cote d'Azur and you're on top of the world, not to mention on top of your favourite redhead.
Of course, you're only fooling around, but it's truly a moment of magic You're with someone else's wife, and the rest of the world seems a million miles away.
What could possibly go wrong?
Plenty!
Alas, for Fergie and Johnny, enjoying a break together again after those fun days in Thailand, Bali, Indonesia and Argentina, the world was watching courtesy of a photographers all-powerful lens.
LITTLE did they know as they lazed by the pool that the roof was about to fall in.
It took just 500th of a second to take each snap.
And a matter of days for Fergie and her friend's secret world to be shattered.
NOT A CARE IN THE WORLD: The Duchess relaxes as Johnny seems intent on sharing a sunbed.
But, nearby, someone else was moving in…
LIE BACK AND THINK OF…well, certainly not England when you're soaking up the sun in St Tropez.
Trouble for the carefree couple, though, was just around the corner
THERE'S THE RUB: Fergie eases the tension from her companion Johnny.
But if the American thought he had a pain in the neck then, there were bigger shocks in store
OUT ON A LIMB: Johnny massages the Duchess's leg.
Later, the man who always insisted he was merely Fergie's adviser would be left without a leg to stand on
PASSION AT THE POOLSIDE: Fergie and Johnny enjoy getting down to some serious canoodling as the sun beats mercilessly on the naked pate of the whizzkid from Texas
CLOSE TO THE EDGE: The pair get physical as emotions run high in the heat
INTIMATE ENCOUNTER: The fun-loving couple aren't afraid to share their secrets with each other 
FOR FERGIE THERE WAS NOTHING LEFT TO HIDE
OVER the years, the cream of the world's photographers have followed the members of the Queen's Family on holiday.
And as a result we have been treated to the delightful sight of Princess Diana in a variety of stunning swimming costumes.
Not once, even in the most remote spots and island hideaways, has Diana forgotten to put on her bikini top.
Not once has she forgotten her position.
(Worse luck).
Her sister-in-law, on the other hand, has been more of an extrovert.
On her travels she's there with a goofy grin and a different pose for every occasion.
She has paraded almost everything she's had to offer.
But now we're down to the bottom of the barrel.
BOTTOMS UP: Fergie decides one may dive in topless, while her poolside chum just carries on lazing
TIME FOR A CUDDLE: Fergie and Bryan make the most of an intimate moment
TIME TO TALK: The Duchess leans back to exchange talk with her Texan friend
THOROUGHLY MODEST MRS: Fergie covers up as she heads for the pool
FOR BEA AND EUGENIE IT MUST HAVE BEEN A LITTLE BIT BEWILDERING…
FOR ANDREW HUMILIATING
TWO little princesses laugh and shout as they are tossed in the air and splash around in the pool with their mother's handsome friend with the funny accent.
At another time and another place they would have been just another set of happy holiday snaps.
But these are the saddest pictures of all.
They are sad for Prince Andrew seeing his daughters playing with another man.
THEY are sad for Fergie because these treasured family moments are not from a real family.
They are sad for Johnny Bryan because he can never truly be a member of this particular family.
But most of all they are sad for Bea and Eugenie who may never go on holiday with Mummy and Daddy again.
PLAYTIME: Johnny raises Princess Eugenie out of the pool
BEA SPECIAL: The laughing Princess rises above it all
MAN IN THE MIDDLE: Johnny with the Princesses…and Daddy nowhere in sight
LITTLE WITNESS: The princesses are close at hand as Johnny and Fergie share a tender touch by the pool
LOOK MUM!:
Fergie's on hand as Eugenie gets the high-flying treatment from Johnny
SHOW OF AFFECTION: The Duchess of York and Johnny Bryan seem to be very close (top) and little Princess Eugenie looks on (above) as the American moves in to kiss her mother
THE FAT WAS WELL AND TRULY IN THE FIRE…
NO SMOOTHING IT ALL OVER THIS TIME
THESE are the revealing pictures that all the girls wanted to see and the ones that are likely to wound Fergie Chops the most.
They prove that the flab fights back — and will get you even if you happen to be a Royal.
These saggy snaps show more clearly than any words could that Fergie has some weighty matters on her mind.
For despite all that money, all those trips to far-flung places, all those diets, all those health farms and all those vanishing creams, she still can't get rid of the cellulite.
Perhaps, in the case of the Duchess, it should be renamed and known as celluheavy.
COR, WHAT A THIGHFUL: Fergie stretches out on her sun lounger and gives the world a look at what just what kind of shape she's in
HOW'S ABOUT FAT, THEN: The Duchess gets as far as raising a leg but then decides exercise is just too much effort and takes the rest of the sunbathing session lying down
HO HUM, LOOK AT MY TUM: Despite all her holidays, diets and workouts Fergie just hasn't got the stomach to really fight the flab and win the battle of the bulge
LEG'S TALK ABOUT THIS: Fergie tries the inch-pinch by grabbing a handful of flesh on her leg to see just how wobbly it is — and pulls a face as she discovers the weighty truth
FOR JOHN BRYAN THE FALL FROM GRACE WAS JUST ONE WEEK AWAY NO LONGER WOULD HE BE ONE OF THE ROYAL FAMILY'S ANOINTED.
ALL THAT WAS NEEDED WAS ONE FINAL PUSH
EVERYTHING was going so swimmingly for Johnny Bryan.
He'd come a long way for a dude from Texas, and it had all been so very easy for the man with the Gary Cooper smile.
When he first met the Yorks at a dinner party in London two years ago, not even we had heard of him.
Then he started hitting the town.
Dinner at Langans and clubbing at Annabel's.
Inevitably he ran into Fergie again.
And again.
His ever-so-proper role as financial consultant to the Duchess of York marked the pinnacle of his climb up the social ladder.
And with just one strong hand on the top, he slipped…up.
LENDING A HAND: gentleman John guides bikini girl Fergie to a waiting sunbed
SMOKE SCREEN: Time for a cigarette in the sun as Fergie and Bryan lounge around
ROYAL PATRONAGE: Fergie — the kids nowhere in sight — gives Texan millionaire Bryan an affectionate pat on his balding head as they while away their precious French leave
LOOK, NO HANDS: Bryan plays the pool fool for little Princess Eugenie as he takes the plunge without even a glance over his shoulder to see if there's any trouble lurking
LANDED GENTLY: Fergie, now in a one-piece bathing costume, and friend crawl out of their hideaway swimming pool after a refreshing dip
YOUR MONEY
How to say no
IAN MILLER
DESPITE being a monster flop in the TV charts, property experts reckon the BBC soap Eldorado is tempting planeloads of Brits to look at dream homes in the sun.
The recession has left many folk unable, or hardly able, to meet payments on a first home, let alone a second.
But that won't stop the timeshare touts trying to soft-soap you into buying abroad.
The spivs will wave away any objections with promises about easy resale, low cost finance and tiny deposit payments.
So, never buy on holiday, never act without seeking legal advice in Britain first, and NEVER give your credit card numbers.
And remember, any document you sign abroad is as legally binding for you as if you signed it at home.
After October 12, the new Timeshare Act gives you a 14-day ‘cooling off’ period, so you can pull out of buying.
But ONLY if you buy in Britain.
The message is, if you can't afford it, don't buy it.
GIBBS GOSSIP SPECIAL
FOR THE DUCHESS THERE IS NOWHERE TO RUN…
. NO CHANCE OF A COVER-UP THIS TIME
WHAT makes Fergie run?
After dashing off to Canada last November, the Duchess of York jumped into a jet bound for New York, before hopping over the Atlantic for a bit of shopping in Paris.
Tired out, she caught her breath in Windsor over Christmas.
In January she clearly needed another break and she was off skiing in Klosters.
She returned briefly to London before getting restless again and flying to Morocco.
This was followed by a high-spirited flight to Florida.
In February she wanted to go skiing again, but on the advice of the Queen cancelled it.
Instead she made do with a holiday in Cornwall with the kids.
The following month her separation from the Duke was announced and Fergie, clearly drained, went island-hopping with John Bryan through Thailand and Indonesia, including a stop in Bali.
Next port of call was Argentina.
Then New York again and EuroDisney.
Her most recent trip was to St Tropez — where the run-around had to stop.
Fergie, you now know you can run — but you cannot hide forever.
MAKING A DASH FOR IT: Racy lady Fergie, wearing only a skimpy bikini, breaks into a sprint by the side of the pool in the sweltering sunshine — and now the heat's on her all, over again
TABLES TURNING: The Duchess does a quick change and dons a swimsuit
THE DAILY MIRROR EXPOSES THE SCANDAL AND THE QUEEN IS NOT AMUSED
BUCKINGHAM Palace's suppress office, as the press office is affectionately known, surpassed even their most dismal standards of non co-operation when the Daily Mirror's sensational pictorial scoop hit the streets.
A spokesperson was asked: ‘Is it true the Queen is furious?’
Back came the pompous reply: ‘We never attribute emotions to Her Majesty.’
But you can take it from us, the Queen was incandescent with rage and at Balmoral right now every member of her family from Prince Philipdown is desperately trying to stay out of her way.
And for once everyone is falling over themselves to take the Corgis for walkies to out of the way places.
RIDING THE STORM: Johnny Bryan is surrounded by the world's Press after we published our sensational pictures.
‘Oh my God,’ he said, ‘I better phone Balmoral.’
RIDING THE STORM: The Queen chose to be alone with her thoughts at Balmoral
SOLITARY: The lodge at Balmoral to which Fergie was thought to have been banished
BUT WILL FERGIE AND HER ADVISER BE KISSING GOODBYE TO A PAY-OFF?
AND so to the last page of the album…and surely the final chapter in the Yorks' marriage.
But don't be fooled, it won't be the end of the cash for Fergie.
In fact, it won't affect her pay-off from the Royal Family in any way.
The reason is simple: the Queen, Prince Andrew, Prince Charles and a very nervous Prince Edward are petrified she will blow the whistle on them in print.
IF SHE did, it could be the final whistle for the monarchy.
How much will Fergie collect?
From a book — at least £10 million.
From the Queen — at least £10 million.
TOP MARKS: Whatever financial advice Johnny's been giving Fergie has obviously paid off as the Duchess shows that she's well and truly on top of the subject
PRESSING ON: Just in case they've left anything out, Johnny insists on giving Fergie the full weight of his experience in these matters
THE LIMIT
WILD WATERMAN HUNTS ABBA SPY
RICK SKY
POP mogul Pete Waterman is turning his multi-million empire upside down searching for a spy.
He believes that one of his workers told Abba's record company that he was secretly recording an Abba song with a group of soundalikes.
Waterman was secretly working with a Midlands band called Abracadabra on a version of the Abba classic Dancing Queen and when the Swedish group's record company found out they tried to spoil his plans.
Both Abbacadabra and Abba's Dancing Queen were released yesterday.
Fumes Waterman: ‘There's industrial espionage going on.
Originally Abba's record company were going to put out their record in December.
Now everything has been dramatically rushed forward.
‘As a cover, I had told everybody that I was remixing the original Abba songs.
‘But someone found out and leaked the news.
I won't rest till I have found the traitor.’
Johnny Come Lately
Fergie and Johnny were in one of London's most exclusive restaurants, their legs entwined under the table
GIRLS, EXPENSIVE RESTAURANTS…
AND NOW THE ROYAL SCANDAL OF THE CENTURY
But who the hell IS John Bryan
WE ALL KNEW WHAT HE WAS UP TO AGES AGO
ANTON ANTONOWICZ /PETER THOMPSON
THE old answer to ‘What makes the grass grow in Texas?’ was ‘Bullshit’.
Now it has been replaced by…
‘Johnny Bryan’.
Or, as a regular dinner companion of the Yorks put it less delicately yesterday: ‘He's the greatest chateau-bottled shit of the Nineties.’
‘We all knew what he was up to ages ago,’ says society columnist Taki Theodoracopulos.
‘All that ‘financial adviser’ stuff had me laughing my socks off.’
For months, the 6ft tall Texan paraded himself as a loyal friend of the House of Windsor, ready to guide the troubled Yorks back to a marital bed of roses.
Failing that, he assured all and sundry that he'd get the Duchess the best darn-tootin' ‘deal’.
But that was before our exclusive pictures of Fergie and Johnny deep in financial discussions around their St Tropez hideaway.
Johnny kissing willing lips.
Johnny lying on top of the Duchess of York.
And, most of all, Johnny giving Fergie a toe-job.
The Daily Mirror's exclusive pictures had nailed the lie.
all the humbug and hypocrisy flew out of the window.
Johnny was having his jollies.
‘And he played Prince Andrew for a sucker,’ says Taki.
The Greek millionaire first met Bryan 12 years ago in New York's Xenon nightclub.
‘He was a friendly guy and could stay up, like me, for days and nights on end.
He seemed to have phenomenal energy,’ says Taki.
Then, speaking from his holiday home in Gstaad, Switzerland,
Taki went on to flesh out his old friend.
‘He has always enjoyed a drink, and I've never met a man who can hold his liquor better,’ he says.
‘He is amicable, jovial, the kind of man who gives you a two-handed handshake.
But basically he is a salesman, and one who tells tall tales.
‘He's a good wrestler, a flier, a skier — all the things that might make him an attraction to the Duchess of York.
But he can't stop at that.
He'd tell you he was one of the greatest wrestlers, fliers, skiers.
‘It's salesmanship.
And basically he sells himself.
If you want the best word to describe John Bryan then it is ‘hustler’.’
Bryan's name first surfaced in London's snob society two years ago when he met the Yorks at a dinner party.
But he had taken three years to get there.
‘I certainly helped him gain his entry to London society,’ says Taki.
‘Till then he was one of many nightclub characters in New York.
I introduced him to Natasha Grenfell, the banking heiress.
And she was his key to London.’
He settled into his role with gusto.
The ideal dinner party guest.
Unmarried, amusing, with an eye for the ladies, and a mission to please.
He sorted out the beautiful Natasha when she went through an emotional crisis.
Then he teamed up with Flora Fraser, daughter of Antonia Fraser.
Other friends included Lady Liza Campbell, Geraldine Ogilvy (daughter of press baron Lord Rothermere) and Hannah Rothschild, of the great banking family.
Johnny Come Lately, the man to whom the Home Office refused a work permit in 1984, was now fast making up ground on the inside.
And he played the family stakes through his convoluted connection related by marriage — to Steve Wyatt, the Texan Sarah holidayed with in Morocco and France two years ago.
‘It was Wyatt who introduced Johnny to Fergie two years ago — and that's when things took off,’ says Taki.
It was the biggest card Bryan could play.
‘He promises the world to get you into the mood,’ said a Kensington socialite who dated him several times.
‘He told me I had a problem because I refused to do anything with him.
‘I was far too conservative for him.
He talked about Fergie a lot.
There was something between them at the time.’
She confirmed other insiders' information that Bryan became Fergie's boyfriend last November.
‘Between now and meeting Fergie and Andy, Johnny has been playing a double game.
And he's been lying like hell,’ said one source.
‘It's no secret that the Duke of York is not the brightest Royal and he ended up like Helen of Troy's husband with Johnny playing the role of her lover Paris.’
Adds Taki: ‘Put it this way.
Andrew is a nice guy, but he has the brain of a husk.
I remember him banging a glass and shouting ‘I want to tell a joke.’
I said: ‘I'm in the middle of one, for Christ's sake.’
‘In other words he has been taken in by all this ‘financial advice’ and guidance.
After all, Bryan has been a funny kind of marriage guidance counsellor.’
However, other friends of the Yorks say that Andrew became a willing player in the charade.
‘He preferred to play golf, watch videos and settle into the role of couch potato while Fergie did her own thing,’ said one.
‘Remember, Fergie is shadowed by detectives wherever she goes.
It's inconceivable that Andrew didn't eventually know what was going on.
The Palace file on Fergie must be bursting with detail on her toings and froings.’
And there was a Buckingham Palace file, too, on Bryan's private life and business connections.
It was required reading for the Royals in Balmoral this weekend.
Taki laughs.
‘I happened to be in Annabel's nightclub last year when a path was opened for Fergie and a man yelled ‘hi’ to me and introduced her highness saying ‘Hey Tak, bow to the Duchess of York and say hello.’
I replied: ‘I'm Greek and bow to no one, but hello.’
‘I knew what they were up to then.
It was as plain as the nose on his face.’
But Bryan was quick to deny the gossip, while the finger of suspicion moved to his old buddy and fellow Texan Longhorn Wyatt.
The stolen snapshots of Wyatt and the married Duchess holidaying in France and Morocco fuelled the flames.
And in March Sarah announced she was separating from Andrew.
But two days earlier she was spotted drinking champagne in a London hotel with Johnny whom, she said, ‘was a friend who'd just become the father of twins.’
A friend indeed.
Within weeks the pair were off to Phuket in Thailand with the Princesses Beatrice and Eugenie, with Bryan still claiming ‘financial advice’ as his forte.
‘That made me laugh as well,’ says Taki.
‘A friend who saw them there said their behaviour was blatant.’
That ‘blatant behaviour’ was confirmed by another old friend of the Duchess who saw the couple sharing an intimate dinner for two ‘with their legs entwined under the table’in Chelsea's exclusive L'Incontro restaurant earlier this year.
‘I couldn't believe what I saw,’ he said.
‘They had their legs around each other under the table.
It was very, very blatant.
People have known for some time what has been going on, and I'm surprised it has taken this long to come out into the open.
‘Bryan has come from nowhere fast.
He's got to be the biggest social climber of all time.
It can't be any coincidence that the women he has gone out with have been typical English roses with titles, and the Duchess tops the lot.
‘When he first arrived, people called him
Johnny, but he's since insisted that he be addressed as John.’
Added one Chelsea socialite: ‘You have to know that Fergie and Johnny were really enjoying the game of keeping everyone guessing.
They were getting their kicks that way.
‘Johnny enjoyed using Fergie's name to impress other women.
He also let it drop that Prince Andrew was a close friend who trusted him.
‘That's Johnny's technique.
He seemed to know everyone I knew.
And later on I asked a friend in Los Angeles if he actually knew Johnny Bryan and he said ‘No, maybe…not quite sure.’
‘It's very easy to hate him, I suppose.
It seems as though he's got everything and knows everybody.
That's the impression he gives.
So why did Fergie fall for baldy Bryan?
‘Simple,’ said another insider.
‘She felt friendless after Wyatt returned to America and she developed a close bond with Bryan who, after all, came from a broken home like the Duchess and also shared her uninhibited sense of humour and fun.’
‘But,’ adds Taki, ‘what is truly terrible about all this is the way they have behaved in front of her children.
That is the real scandal.’
And the future?
‘I see Johnny going back to New York and making a fortune,’ Taki says.
‘He has got unlimited social access now through his relationship with Fergie.
He'll be the toast of the town.
‘And her?
Oh, she'll find somebody else and revert to her old self.’
But it will be a very different life for the dallying Duchess, said a Palace insider last night.
‘The St Tropez pictures have worked in the Palace's favour in its battle with Fergie,’ he said.
‘The Queen has got all the aces.
She has the whip-hand for the first time since the cock-up over the separation when they had to apologise for making it known that the knives were out for the Duchess.
‘Public support for Sarah has now vanished.
Of course the Palace can't afford to leave her as a loose cannon.
But, like the Duchess of Windsor, she will be on the cold caviar circuit for the rest of her life.
‘Fergie will get the Arctic freeze-out.’ *Peter Thompson is co-author with Chris Hutchins of Sarah's Story, to be published by Smith Gryphon in October.
SOCIETY GIRLS: Lady Liza Campbell (top), Flora Fraser and Natasha Grenfell
THE DUCHESS: Johnny rubs shoulders with Fergie in France
GETTING AWAY WITH IT…
APRIL 1992 IT'S four months ago and Johnny, working hard keep up his ‘financial adviser’ image, stays out of touching distance as he and Fergie walk out in public during their visit to Phuket in Thailand
CAUGHT RED HANDED [AND HEADED]AUGUST 1992
THE truth is out as the Mirror publishes intimate pictures of Johnny and Fergie
GUESS WHO?:
Yes, it's Johnny and Fergie — this time with all their clothes on
DID YOU KNOW?
IF ALL the fresh water on Earth was divided among the population, everybody would get around 40 million gallons each.
A WEDDING TALE WITH STING IN IT
ANNE ROBINSON
THE last time I saw Sting he was with Mrs Sting sitting on the TV-am sofa reminding us of our duty to the rainforests.
This sort of message I take to mean we must generally curb our excesses, get back to nature and question the use of anything which threatens the environment.
But the trouble with environmentalists is that they are conveniently selective.
In the case of Sting he sees no conflict with his Green beliefs and the arrangement of a wedding bash which brought to Wiltshire 250 petrol-guzzling cars, security helicopters, a £20,000 Versace wedding dress flown from Italy, paper invitations, not to mention four dozen portable lavatories, the contents of which had to be emptied…well, it hardly bears thinking about where they were emptied.
EXCESSES: Sting
THE LIMIT
MONSTERS ROAR!
RICK SKY
HEAVY metal fans turned Donington's Monsters of Rock festival into one of the year's biggest grossing gigs.
More than 65,000 cheered powerful sets by Iron Maiden, the Almighty, W.A.S.P., Skid Row, Slayer and Thunder at the 12-hour concert, which generated £3 million in ticket and merchandising sales.
Iron Maiden splashed out on a spectacular £35,000 firework display for the show's finale.
MIRROR MONEY
Going up in smoke…
HOW THE DEADLY WEED CAN COST YOU A PACKET
IAN MILLER
WARNING.
Tobacco can seriously damage your pocket — as well as your health.
If YOU are one of Britain's 14 million smokers, kicking the habit could save you a lot more than the £2.21 a packet of fags costs.
Anti-smoking campaigner Princess Diana has blasted those who claim —‘from behind a cloud of smoke’— that smoking is not addictive.
We have worked out how badly smokers lose out by not diverting their cigs cash into a savings plan.
A 20-a-day man or woman has spent from £360 to £713 a year on fags over the past 10 years.
That's well over £5,000 up in smoke — or, to be exact, an average £44.66 a month.
If, in 1982, he'd put £30 a month into the Prolific High Income PEP it would have netted £8,356.
This is without boosting his monthly payments at all for ten years.
And investing the £44.66 average sum would have given him £12,423.
A Prolific spokesman said: ‘While our PEP was not launched until 1987 we've worked out the theory.’
With 300 people each day dying from tobacco-related illness insurance firms know a risk when they see one.
Around two in 10 policy holders with big insurers are smokers and they're made to cough up bigger premiums to match the health risks they run.
Here's how they smokers get their fingers burned…
A 25-year-old man who smokes, taking out £20,000 term insurance for 35 years, pays £6.40 a month with Norwich Union.
That is 14 per cent more than a non-smoker, who pays £5.60.
Insurers say a non-smoker is someone who has not puffed the weed for 12 months and doesn't plan smoking again.
But shopping around can pay off as some firms don't penalise smokers.
Equitable Life, for example, will charge smokers — and non-smokers — £4.10 a month.
Di was worried about smokers' health, but there are definitely OTHER benefits from kicking the weed.
FOR details: Equitable Life 071 606 6611, Norwich Union 0603 622200, Prolific Unit Trust Managers 071 280 3700.
STRIKE IT RICH WITH ERNIE
ERNIE has £9 million up for grabs in unclaimed prizes.
And you could be one of the 200,00 Premium Bond holders who has not collected your share of a fortune.
So dig out those numbers and dial our hotline on 0891 311 058 to see if you have struck gold.
Calls cost 36p per minute cheap rate, 48p at all other times.
Or the London Gazette Supplement which is free to read at main Post Offices lists all winning numbers.
Easy listening
Why mobile phones are a soft target for the snoopers
‘THE THICKEST YOB ON THE PAVEMENT COULD EAVESDROP’
FRANK THORNE /ROGER TODD
SNOOPERS can tap in to telephone conversations using a simple device available in High Street shops for less than £100.
As the controversy grew yesterday over the alleged Princess Diana love tapes, electronics experts told the Mirror just how easy it is to eavesdrop on mobile phones.
Unlike normal phones, the portable kind are really mini radio transmitters which are simple to bug using scanners which tune into the correct frequencies.
Electrical giants Tandy, who sell scanners in their London shops for as little as £99.95, said: ‘Any idiot could use them.’
Tweak
Tandy sell a book called Scanners which gives hundreds of mobile phone frequencies.
All an eavesdropper has to do is key in the broad frequency and then ‘tweak’ it a little to get the fine tuning.
Amateur radio buff Mike Bosberry, who sells hand-held scanners for Nevada Communications in Portsmouth, said: ‘The thickest yob on the pavement could eavesdrop on mobile phones.
‘You don't have to be an expert.
All you have to do is study the instruction booklet.’
Doubts were raised about the claims of ex-banker Cyril Reenan that he was able to monitor a lovey-dovey conversation between a mystery woman, said to be Princess Diana, and an unidentified man for a total of 23 minutes.
Breaks
Transcripts of the tapes, in which the woman is referred to as ‘Squidgy’, show breaks in the conversation.
So would it be possible, once the mobile switched channels, to find it again and carry on taping?
‘Absolutely,’ says Mike, whose company is one of Britain's top three outlets for electronic eavesdropping devices.
‘I have no doubts at all.
Whatever the truth of who it is on the tape, this chap could easily have monitored the whole conversation over 23 minutes.’
Pensioner Mr Reenan, 70, invested £1,000 in his scanner and erected a 20ft aerial in his garden.
But, said Mike: ‘It's not necessary to spend that much.
Provided you know how to use it, a cheap hand-held version will do much the same thing.’
Throughout the country, he explained, are cellphone stations which receive signals from these phones and retransmit them to either the normal British Telecom lines or another cellphone.
A scanner simply listens in on these signals.
But what about the suspicious breaks in the conversation?
Could an amateur who lost a conversation pick it up again?
‘Yes, it is possible,’ said Mike, 25.
‘The breaks are probably where the mobile is moving from one cell to another and he is searching through to catch up with the conversation again in the next cell.
Search
‘Most scanning enthusiasts will programme their scanner to search from one frequency to another.
If the call moves from that frequency, all you do is hit the ‘search’ button and it will search until it picks it up again.
‘Within a second, you can have it back and carry on taping.’
Derek Benn, a director of Lorraine Electronics in Leyton, East London, the biggest dealers in surveillance equipment in Europe, said:
‘There's nothing clever about scanning.
You do get both sides of the conversation.
It's easy peasy.
‘I would have thought the Royals would have been warned by their security people that on no account should they use mobile phones for sensitive information because they are not secure.
They are so dangerous.’
Scanners are a major headache for police forces around Britain.
Supt. Martin Welch, of the Association of Chief Police Officers' Technical Research Committee said yesterday: ‘We are being bugged too.
‘Criminals are able to listen in to our car and personal radios with them and that gives them an early warning of our approach.’
Rapid
Police are installing scramblers on their personal radios.
Anyone tuning in will just get an earful of ‘white noise’.
But cost is holding back a rapid introduction of the scramblers.
The Department of Trade and Industry, which deals with the technicalities of scanners for police forces, said: ‘People in business are aware that calls on mobile phones are not secure.’
Maybe.
But whoever Squidgy and her chum are, nobody seems to have told them.
SIMPLE: A scanner
DANGER: Mobile phones are a security nightmare
LAST LINE
ANNE ROBINSON
NO WONDER Squidgy is said to be writing more letters these days.
THE LIMIT
SMITH TIFF
RICK SKY
MORRISSEY has launched a scathing attack on former pal Vic Reeves.
The Manchester-based singer blasted the comic for parodying him on TV with his madcap character Morrissey the Consumer Monkey.
Storms Morrissey, at No 23 in the charts with former band The Smiths' This Charming Man: ‘I've met Vic Reeves a few times and I can't believe he'd do something so hurtful.
Now I just loathe him.’
THE LIMIT
Family at war
RICK SKY
SEXY blonde film star Meg Ryan sparked a family row after telling tales about her mother on a top TV show.
She claimed her mum Susan pestered her to introduce her to former James Bond star Sean Connery.
And Meg told the watching millions that her mum hammered on his door and woke him from a nap during a break in filming.
But Susan hit back saying: ‘She made me out to be some ditsy small-town mum who wanted to meet a star.
It wasn't like that.
I'm embarrassed by the bad publicity.’
TALES: Meg Ryan
MIRROR MONEY
A FUR DEAL FOR FIDO
IAN MILLER
THOUSANDS of Britons leave money to their pampered pets when they die.
But jealous relatives can challenge Tiddles' or Fido's inheritance.
One safeguard is an insurance policy from Friends Provident.
It should ensure your pet lives in the lap of luxury — without risking a legal challenge.
The policy guarantees a fixed sum to your pet if you die.
Saving £10 per month for up to ten years will provide £14,750 for your pet if you die within the term.
Details: 0722 413366.
TUNNEL VISION AIMS FOR THE SKY
PAYING for satellite telly may soon be a thing of the past.
Just get yourself cabled.
A project almost as big as the Channel Tunnel is now underway to bring cable television to every house in Britain.
It means laying more than a million miles of underground cables in our streets at a cost of £6 BILLION.
Since the system picks up satellite telly, goggle box addicts needn't have an ugly giant saucer stuck on their home.
Around 330,000 people are already subscribing around £21 per month to receive up to 35 channels per day, according to figures released yesterday.
Wanna be cabled?
Contact 071 222 2900.
A piece of the action
HERE are two more unlikely lads to add to the super WWF Wallchart we gave you on Monday.
It is a stunning souvenir of the World Wrestling Federation SummerSlam ‘92 which muscles into action on Saturday at Wembley Stadium.
Our super EXCLUSIVE Wallchart features 14 of the terrible tearaways in full, dramatic colour.
And with each picture, there's all the information you need to know.
The Wallchart already includes dynamic colour pictures of Bret Hitman Hart and the British Bulldog flexing their muscles.
Today we bring you The Undertaker and Kamala.
This will be the first time SummerSlam has been seen outside the USA.
The leading WWF superstars will be in the ring in the centre of the world-famous Wembley soccer pitch.
Huge video screens positioned above will replay all the thrilling action — and there'll be no shortage of that in the greatest grapple of the century.
THE UNDERTAKER: Hails from Death Valley (where else?)
KAMALA: The man mountain who annihilates all who get in his way
WIN 100 copies of My Girl
LIPSMACKIN’ FUN THAT'S A REAL TEAR JERKER
MAKE up with Macaulay Culkin and you could be checking out his first screen kiss.
In another marvellous Mirror give-away, worth £8,500, we have 100 videos of his smash-hit movie My Girl up for grabs.
Columbia Tristar Home Video have just released My Girl on rental and we have 100 copies to be won as well as super soundtrack CDs from My Girl.
Eleven-year-old Macaulay gets his first on-screen smacker from child co-star Anna Chlumsky.
He plays Thomas J, the close friend of tomboy Vada Sultenfuss (Chlumsky) who lives with her widowed father, funeral director Harry (Dan Aykroyd).
When Dad hires Shelly DeVoto (Jamie Lee Curtis) to do make up on his dead clients and starts to fancy her, Vada wonders where she stands in her father's affections.
She has to turn to Thomas J for friendship in a bitter-sweet comedy that'll have you reaching for the hankies in no time.
To try to win one of our 100 videos (worth around £75 each) and soundtracks, just name the movie that starred Macaulay and was a world-wide hit:(a) Home For Christmas;(b) Home And Away;(c) Home Alone.
Print your answer on a postcard with your name and address and send to My Girl Video Contest, Daily Mirror, Blackhorse Road, London SE99 7TR to arrive by September 10.
Senders of the first 100 correct entries drawn will win the videos and CDs.
Standard Mirror contest rules apply.
CHILD'S PLAY: Macaulay Culkin with co-star Anna Chlumsky in My Girl
Unsung heroes' award
PRINCESS Diana has teamed up with the Red Cross and the Daily Mirror to launch a nationwide awards scheme.
The Red Cross/Daily Mirror Care in Crisis Awards are for the people who put others before themselves.
When the going gets tough, it's these people who react best — be it at a natural disaster, accident or sudden emergency.
Launching the scheme Princess Diana  said : ‘The awards will go to those who display exemplary qualities in adversity while helping others.’
Winners will receive a trophy and a certificate signed by the Princess — and she's eager to meet them.
The scheme covers any incident in which a neighbour, friend, relative or stranger helps other.
Nomination forms are available by sending in the coupon on the left.
They can also be obtained from Red Cross branches, Sketchley dry cleaners, wherever the Care In Crisis poster is displayed or by phoning the Red Cross headquarters in London on 071–235-3149.
These forms are the only way nominations can be accepted.
Please do not phone the Mirror.
Closing date for nominations is  September 18, 1992.
Entries will be judged in the Red Cross's eight regions.
Here is the news…and this is Martin Bell making it
THE ORDEAL OF TV'S MR SUPERSTITIOUS
‘I remember thinking: This is it.
They've got you at last’
ALEC LOM
STRICKEN TV newsman Martin Bell tried hard yesterday to crack jokes about his sudden exit from Sarajevo by air ambulance after being hit by shrapnel.
But any display of his wry sense of humour made the brave BBC man wince with pain at the agonising stitches in his stomach.
Propped up on pillows at a London hospital, he relived the awful moment, 24 hours earlier, when he was felled by a Serbian mortar shell.
Amazingly, his talk was of going back to ravaged Yugoslavia soon to carry on reporting the bloody civil war.
Still wearing his lucky white flannel suit and green socks — the outfit he claims has saved his life countless times.
‘I'll definitely stick to wearing them in the future,’ he told me in an exclusive interview.
‘I've been incredibly lucky.
I'm the most superstitious man I know.
‘I carry in my pocket a bit of a bullet that missed me two months ago.
‘But I've been doing this job for so many years, I've probably been playing the odds too long.’
Veteran war reporter Bell, 53, recently cheated death when his car was riddled by sniper fire.
Tuesday's mortar bomb blast left him with three chunks of shrapnel in his abdomen.
The last piece was removed by surgeons at London's £350-a-night Princess Grace Hospital.
In a voice weakened by painkillers and lack of sleep, Bell told me: ‘It had been a quiet morning.
We heard there was shooting and shelling in a part of Sarajevo we knew well.
‘I knew how to avoid the sniper fire.
There was this big, tall building protecting me.
‘But suddenly the mortar came in from a very unexpected area.
‘The good thing about it was my crew wasn't injured.
We consult as a team before deciding to go somewhere, but I tend to take the lead.
‘If I make a mistake, I would much rather I was the guy who got the shrapnel.
‘This is my 11th war but I've never been shot before.
‘I just remember this physical jolt, and thinking: ‘This is it.
They've got you at last!’
‘Then a split second later you realise you are not going to die.
‘It was painful, but not excruciating.
I was not crying out for pain pills or anything.
It felt like an extremely bad stomach ache.’
As he recovered last night, the BBC sent for their intrepid chief news correspondent, Kate Adie.
And Bell had a visit from his French-born ex-wife Helen, mother of his daughters Catherine, 17, and Melissa, 19.
They spent an emotional few moments in his third-floor room.
Martin says: ‘Helen is a very nice lady.
We are divorced, but I'm still very close to her.’
Bell — a BBC man for 30 years — was full of praise for his employers.
‘They have been absolutely terrific,’ he says.
‘They even found an executive jet to fly me back.
‘We have a big operation down there.
The armoured Land-Rover (cost: £60,000) is the only thing which increases your chances of survival.
‘You can't really hear anything from inside it, though, so you have to get out.
That was when I got hit.’
Luckily, the shrapnel whistled past a stomach artery.
Bell raises an eyebrow and chuckles: ‘The shrapnel missed all kinds of things.
‘All I've really got is a very deep flesh wound.
It's not that serious.’
Doctors insist that he lies low while his injuries heal.
But what then for Martin Bell?
Surely, after covering 11 wars, including Vietnam, he could be forgiven for calling it quits?
He admits: ‘This war is more dangerous than all the others put together.
‘But I'm a reporter.
I'll go on reporting.
I got so committed to the story down there, and I've got so many friends among the Muslims, Serbs, Croats, peacekeepers and peacemakers that it would be very hard to let it go.
‘Also, I really think it matters a lot.
I think the world should know what's going on.
‘I must admit there's a little voice inside me saying: ‘Stop now’.
‘But I'm fairly philosophical about it.
Maybe this is my run of bad luck over with.
This is what I do for a living and this is what I enjoy doing.
‘I'm going to have a major rest and then I'll consider what to do.
‘If I'm asked to go back to Yugoslavia, I'd go quite happily.
‘I'm afraid I might behave in a rather cowardly fashion.
I reckon I'd hardly surface from my bunker for the first few days.’
He laughed as he spoke — and instantly regretted it.
THERE YUGO: Injured war veteran Martin Bell will happily pack his lucky white suit and green socks again.
Picture: KEN LENNOX
FELLED: Millions of TV viewers saw Bell's drama
The old jokes are STILL the best
YOUNG ONES MOVE IN, BUT…
CATHERINE O'BRIEN
IT IS 500 years since Columbus discovered America — and across the Atlantic they are celebrating in true Hollywood style.
The event is being marked by two major films — Christopher Columbus — The Discovery, starring Tom Selleck, and Columbus: The Discovery, with Marlon Brando — at a total cost of more than £40 million.
Not to be outdone, the British film industry has risen to this momentous occasion, too.
Our contribution?
Carry On Columbus — a £2.25 million quickie, which took just 30 days to make and, Carry On fans will be delighted to learn, is as cheeky and irreverent as ever.
If there is a secret Carry On formula, it's familiarity.
‘People don't want surprises, they like to know what's coming,’ says executive producer Peter Rogers.
‘So although the stories and plots vary slightly, the jokes are the same — every time.’
Carry On Columbus is the 30th Carry On film Peter and his partner Gerald Thomas have produced.
‘We always boasted that we made 29 films with one script — now we have made 30,’ laughs Peter, 78.
THE film came about after a 14-year gap simply because Peter and Gerald were asked — by former Monty Python producer John Goldstone.
They may be addressing a new generation — but it doesn't matter, Peter says.
‘Carry On goes in a seven-year cycle.
At the age of seven, they fall about regardless.
At 14, they begin to wonder what the innuendos mean.
And at 21 they give up.’
The Columbus cast is half old-timers and half new blood, much of it from the so-called alternative comedy set.
But lines like ‘It's a bit hard, your Highness, I haven't had it off for a year’, when muttered by a grubby servant referring to his shoe, come just as easily from Tony Slattery as they ever did from Sid James.
Slattery's is almost a walk-in, walk-off part.
‘Yet he still wanted to be in it,’ Peter says.
Rik Mayall, as the Sultan of Turkey, is a natural too, swapping lines as smoothly as the best of them.
‘Anyone seen the Wazir?’ he demands of a servant.
‘He wazir a moment ago,’ comes the reply.
‘From the expression on Rik's face, you would think he'd been doing this sort of stuff all his life,’ Gerald says.
Other newcomers to the Carry On cast include Maureen Lipman, Nigel Planer, Philadelphia cheese girl Sara Crowe, and Alexei Sayle.
Jim Dale, an old hand, plays Columbus, June Whitfield is Queen Isabella, and Julian Clary makes a wonderfully camp jailer.
Clary tripped over a cable during filming and broke his foot.
But it didn't worry Gerald, the film's 71-year-old director.
‘We simply filmed the top half of his body and used someone else's legs,’ he says.
There was no question of stopping shooting: Columbus had been promised within six weeks.
‘The backers thought the deadline was such a tall order, we would never make it,’ Peter says.
‘They put a delayed payment on it — and we have just picked up the cheque.’
Over the years, Carry On has become a cult.
Students write theses on it, Thomas lectures at universities.
The television compilations get huge audiences.
‘We have had more fan mail in the last two years than we ever did in the previous 30,’ Gerald says.
Neither he nor Peter can conceal excitement at being back in the limelight again.
Now all that's left to do is wait for Carry On Columbus to hit the cinemas in October.
And maybe turn their thoughts to the next?
‘We've never said we wouldn't carry on,’ Peter says.
‘The last Carry On will be the first that doesn't make money.’
QUEENING IT: Maureen Lipman as Queen Esmeralda with Indian chief, Larry Miller
GALLEONS OF FUN Old-timer Jim Dale leads the way as  Christopher Columbus
ANCIENT MARINER: Veteran Carry On star Bernard Cribbins and newcomer Julian Clary
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
SINGER Sinead O' Connor blames the church for the evil in the world.
The 25-year-old rock star, who says people are being murdered in the name of God, adds: ‘People in control of the world are evil and perpetuating evil.
‘The same thing that's happened in Ireland has happened all over the world.
That people have been f***** up and it's always been done with express permission from the Catholic Church.’
YOUR MONEY
Driven up the wall…
JOHN HUSBAND
GERMAN motorists are driving insurance giant Guardian Royal Exchange up the wall — on both sides of the old frontier.
They've cost GRE a whopping £28 million in claims in the first six months of this year.
Motorists from what used to be East Germany can't cope with West German traffic.
Their cars — insured by GRE's German offshoot company — end up in tatters on the autobahns.
And West German drivers in their posh BMWs and Mercedes can't cope with the poor quality roads in the East — and damage their cars in potholes.
GRE is also suffering from losses in Britain caused mainly by rising mortgage indemnity claims on repossessed houses.
But it put premiums up by a third — and that cut losses from £88 million to £39 million in the six months to June.
A little guy in big demand
PESCI, THE SHOOTING STAR
HILARY BONNER
HE'S 5ft 3in tall, looks older than his 48 years, and is nobody's idea of a film star.
But suddenly, after a 43-year grind, Joe Pesci is taking off.
His newest triumph is in the smash hit Lethal Weapon 3.
Once again, the wisecracks fly as fast as the bullets — and are just as deadly.
Pesci plays a shifty real estate agent who becomes a thorn in the flesh of Mel Gibson and Danny Glover…and manages to steal every scene he is in.
Joe first appeared on stage and on TV when he was just five years old.
Since then he has had three wives, a mentally-handicapped daughter he adores but barely saw grow up, and spent years scratching a living in the backwaters of showbusiness.
These days the scratching is over.
His film My Cousin Vinny opened to rave reviews.
Last year he won an Oscar for his performance in Good Fellas with his old friend Robert De Niro.
And he starred again with Macaulay Culkin in Home Alone 2.
But it has been an uphill struggle.
Pesci comes from working-class American Italian stock and was brought up to take knocks.
‘My father ruled us with an iron fist and he hit us with an iron fist too,’ Joe recalls.
‘But he loved us and he worked himself to death for us.’
‘He held down three jobs to keep his family together.
He was a fork-lift truck driver with General Motors, he worked at the Budweiser brewery at night, and in between times he was a bartender.’ lf0020
It is one of Joe's great regrets that his father died before he made Raging Bull in 1980, the film for which he received his first Oscar nomination.
Joe was badly bitten by the showbiz bug as a five-year-old when he appeared in the American TV show Startime Kids.
At the age of 14 he left school to tour America, singing and playing guitar with a band.
He made a few records under the name of Joe Ritchie.
They sank without trace.
His first film, in 1975, was Death Collector.
The movie was quickly forgotten but director Martin Scorsese  remembered Pesci and hired him to play Joey La Motta in Raging Bull, for which he was nominated for an Oscar.
De Niro had to fight for him to co-star in GoodFellas, but that was the picture which changed it all.
Today Pesci's personal life continues to be chaotic.
His three marriage break-ups have been traumatic, but he does not rule out a fourth attempt.
‘I like to keep doing a thing until I do it right,’ he says.
He was barely 20 years old and already working the nightclub circuit when he wed for the first time.
His wife, an Italian American girl, bore him his handicapped daughter Tiffany, now 25, and his only child.
‘I just never saw her during those early years because I was always away,’ he says.
‘And I think that is the main reason my marriages have failed.
Joe's second wife was also Italian American.
His third was Mexican-born Marti Haro, recently the subject of a Sunday newspaper expose claiming that she was a former prostitute.
All Joe has to say about her is: ‘Although we are divorced we are actually still trying to work things out.
A reconciliation is not out of the question.’
Joe is as tough as his background and as opinionated and uncompromising as you would expect.
He may be a working class boy at heart but his lifestyle has been transformed — and he doesn't mind at all.
Indeed he makes it no secret that he feels he deserves it after all those struggling years.
SCENE STEALER: Pesci in Lethal Weapon 3
Crazy about Davey
IAN BRINDLES
IT ISN'T just the kids that are gripped by wrestle mania.
Just a glimpse of British Bulldog's rippling torso is enough to send women into a howling frenzy.
He keeps it that way with a fitness and beauty routine that includes two hours weight training, followed by half an hour on the sunbed to keep his skin golden brown.
The result is screams from grapple-crazy girls in the stadium…and very suggestive letters in the post.
‘You should see some of the fan letters I get,’ he winks.
‘It is unbelievable.
I have to tear them up before my wife sees it.’
And that is the bad news girls.
Davey Boy is happily married to bodybuilder Diana, with their two children Harry, seven, and Georgia, five.
‘All this attention from women is very flattering.
But I do try to do let them down gently — unlike the way I handle my opponents.’
GIBBS GOSSIP
MY FAIR FERGIE!
GARTH GIBBS
NEAR pandemonium broke out at the National Theatre the other night during a revival of Pygmalion.
The audience heard Professor Higgins order Eliza Dolittle to strip off her filthy clothes with the warning: ‘We want none of your prudery here.
You've got to learn to behave like a duchess!’
A moment's silence was followed by whoops of delight and applause that halted proceedings for a full minute.
THE LIMIT
RICK SKY
ALBUM REVIEW
Take That And Party: Take That
Take That haven't had an easy time of it breaking into the big time.
Now their debut album could change all that.
Among the tracks that will get teens' hearts beating are the title track, I Found Heaven and the smoochy ballad A Million Love Songs.
The strange case of Whacker Eunice and her battered balls…
WONAM'S EDITOR MARY RIDDELL TRIES TO COME TO TERMS WITH THE LATEST MEN'S TALK
Did someone say there's more drama on the shipping forecast?
MARY RIDDELL
IT IS war, and it is spreading.
In our back garden, the casualty toll mounts.
To date, three peonies have been beheaded and a pane in next door's greenhouse smashed.
The cat, although nervous, appears unharmed by the tennis ball which has just struck it amidships.
What can be going on?
Child Number One breaks off from an inspection which proves that the ball has not been tampered with but is merely the egg-shape common to three-for-£1 seconds from the local market.
‘I am trying,’ he says, ‘to bowl as fast as Whacker Eunice.’
And who, you might have asked a couple of days ago, is Whacker Eunice?
By now, anyone ill-informed enough to imagine some elderly Miss Whiplash will have been put right.
Waqar Younis, along with his colleague, Wasim Akram, are Pakistani fast-bowlers.
Any woman who has not spent the week in either a coma or the cupboard-under-the-stairs will know this.
She will know, furthermore, of the furore brewing in every pub and office in the land, ever since Allan Lamb, who plays for England, bravely explained to my colleagues what Wasim and Whacker — sorry, Waqar — have been getting up to.
‘They GOUGE the damaged ball with their nails, then smear the surface to fool the umpire,’ trumpeted our sports headline.
Are we shocked?
Are we horrified?
Or are we perhaps just a little surprised that it should take so little to set nation against nation.
You want examples?
Well, there was the battle of Jenkins' ear, in which some eastern lot had to be sorted for mutilating the head of the unfortunate Jenkins in the same way as the Pakistanis modify cricket balls.
There was the Trojan war, in which thousands perished over the indiscretions of Helen and Paris, who — give or take a sun-lounger — could have passed for the ancient Greeks' answer to Fergie and John Bryan.
There was…but let me not digress.
Let us instead wonder how this latest episode could have turned so sour, given the wonderful international spirit which distinguishes the male world of cricket.
No irate phone calls, please, from the Rachel Heyhoe-Flint Fan Club.
Cricket is primarily a man's game, bearing all the hallmarks of male camaraderie.
Namely a lot of doddery old buffers with a strong line in protocol and a hazy notion of fair play, plus various ornaments of diplomacy.
It was not long, you will recall, since Ian Botham was remarking that he would not take his mother-in-law to Pakistan.
It seems like only yesterday that the charming Mike Gatting, then England's captain, was calling umpire Shakoor Rana ‘a cheating b*****d.’
How sad that such goodwill should be clouded by Mr Lamb saying that the other lot cheated, and the other lot saying that they didn't.
And what exactly was the scope of this cheating?
Ask this question of our sportsdesk, and they will answer very slowly and carefully.
Our sportsdesk can spot from a mile off a person who cannot tell an in-swinger from a bouncer.
Our sportsdesk can detect from the far end of a crease someone who has gone through life under the impression that Bodyline may refer to a one-piece undergarment.
‘Well, it's all to do with the ballistics,’ said our sportsdesk.
Which is shorthand for saying that you don't have to cheat very much.
There was the case of an Essex player who smeared Vaseline from his eyebrows on to the ball and thus altered its flight.
There was the Australian fast-bowler who did the same with lip salve.
‘Tell them that,’ said our sportsdesk, who are never, ever patronising.
‘Women understand that sort of thing.’
What you actually have to absorb are three things.
The first is that some cricketers have been cheating for years in a most blatant manner.
The second is that Waqar and Wasim have not, as one might first assume, hollowed out the ball, coconut-style, with the aid of a Black and Decker drill.
A scrape with a fingernail plus a bit of sweat are all that is required.
The third fact is that Waqar and Wasim, even without the above technique, are perfectly capable of firing cricket balls like a Kalashnikov fires bullets.
And so ends the background to a scandal that has everything.
War.
Intrigue.
Heroes and villains.
Did I hear someone mention that they had heard more high drama on the Radio Four shipping forecast?
That's cricket for you.
WHACKER AND HIS MUCKER: Pakistan's controversial duo
IN A SCRAPE: The subject of all the fuss
MEATY ATTACK: England batsman Allan Lamb made the cheating allegations
THAT WAS THE WEEK THAT WAS
BAN THE SAVAGE BEASTS
SURELY all dangerous dogs must be banned after the latest rottweiler attack on two terrified teenagers.
It's ridiculous for owners of these dangerous beasts to claim they are as gentle as lambs.
They aren't, and I wonder about the mentality of their keepers. —.
IT'S great to see people standing up to British Telecom.
Businessman Rachh Paul Bedi's bid to have BT boss Iain Vallance jailed for illegally cutting of his phone is a good idea.
—.
HOW apt that party-changing Dr David Owen is to do his bit for the Tories now — having been sent to Serbia by the Prime Minister.
There will be a host of parties to join there and with his mastery of  manoeuvring he may even understand who is killing whom and why.
—.
BOSNIA'S VICTIMS
THE sight of Martin Bell falling injured after being hit by Serbian mortar fire reminds us of the risks reporters take to bring us the news.
When we moan about them, we should remember that 31 reporters have died in Yugoslavia since the fighting began.
—
THE true horror of Sarajevo was shown in your picture of the two little white-faced boys sitting holding their toy guns on the stairs at home, amid the real grenades and bullets.
When will we realise that ending this horror will take more than stern words?—
PROFITS OF GLOOM
SMALL wonder many couples prefer to live together and not marry when a divorce could cost thousands of pounds in lawyers' fees.
Thank goodness a legal team is to look into how the charges are made up.
It's immoral for lawyers to take advantage of people's grief this way.
—.
Black belter
LOUIS STEVENS, aged three, is a knock-out as he sends dad, Olympic judo silver medallist Ray, flying.
What amazed me was the way Ray did such a spectacular somersault just to convince little Louis that he really had scored victory.
But Ray had outwitted many an opponent in the Olympics.
They're probably still wondering what hit them, too.
—.
TWIT OF THE WEEK
HOW daft of producer Verity Lambert to talk of developing Eldorado's storyline by axing six of the stars.
If there are any storylines it surely doesn't help to wipe out the people who make them —.
WIN a tenner for your Twit of the Week.
PICTURE OF THE WEEK
WHAT a great picture by Phil Spencer of Neil Greenwood with brother Brett, Britain's most premature surviving baby at 1lb 5oz.
The three-month-old is now thriving — and isn't Neil proud.
—
GIBBS GOSSIP
SPAIN'S STREETS AHEAD
GARTH GIBBS
HERE'S further bad news for the Beeb's soap, Eldorado , reeling in the ratings: Granada have just sold Coronation Street to the Spanish.
Being screened in Barcelona five days a week — in Catalan — the old Street shows are proving so popular that Granada are now hoping to sell further programmes to the rest of Spain.
Meanwhile, the poor actors who are facing long stints on the Costa Eldorado have been told by the BBC that if they want to come home on breaks or holidays, they will have to pay their own fare.
One wag from the Coronation Street script team, told us: ‘We all feel sorry for the Eldorado cast stuck out there.
‘But at least, if they can't afford to come home, they will be able to tune into Coronation Street programmes to keep them entertained.’
HOLIDAY MIRROR
ISLES OF DELIGHT
SUNNY DAZE ON KOS AND RHODES
DAVID KERR
EDWARD VALE
WEATHER-beaten Constantinos Kaloude has one of those lived-in faces that could have seen the sun set on 30,000 different horizons.
He passes time gossiping, fingering worry beads and sipping ouzo.
His local village, Zia (pop: under 150), is 200 yards away yet he seldom gets there.
He regards it as the Big Smoke.
At 86 he has put the rest of the beautiful island of Kos, a growing concern for British tourists to Greece, out of bounds.
He reckons the traffic is a nightmare.
It's quieter than Trafalgar Square on a lean Sunday.
Constantinos has missed what a lot we ‘gawpers from the other end of the earth’ flock to see.
Like the 41-foot tree trunk under which Hippocrates, the father of medicine, was said to have made the world's first diagnoses and issued the first prescriptions.
Maybe he's not interested because he has never needed a doctor.
The Greek and Roman ruins, many from BC, are not his mark either.
Not for him, either, the lively beaches and secluded bays, leather goods, ceramics and duty-free furs.
Aperitif
But you can bet he knows retsina, the national wine with what even locals call an acquired taste; ouzo, the aperitif that could blow off your sunburn if you don't watch your step; the taramasalata fish roe dip; vine leaves stuffed with mincemeat, rice and herbs; and keftedes meatballs.
We took a two-centre holiday, bidding yassou to Kos and yassou to Rhodes.
That's goodbye and hello in Greek.
Things are busier in Rhodes and the 80,000 population swells to a peak season 700,000.
But still darn more comfortable than the maniacal part of Majorca.
There is so much to see that it is worth buying a good guide book.
There are 800 churches — about 44 for every village.
Visit some, DO, especially Kremasti.
Like Kos, Rhodes has many fine, deserted beaches but it's best getting there by car.
Food and drinks are always at hand, but not petrol — garages close at 7pm and only one opens on a rota basis.
Not that that would bother Constantinos.
FACT BOX Sunworld includes Kos and Rhodes in its Greece, Turkey, Cyprus and Summersun brochures.
KOS: Flights from Gatwick or Manchester.
Prices: from £215 for seven nights self catering in Kos.
The Hotel Dimitris Paritsa from £269 for seven nights b&b.
RHODES: Flights from: Gatwick, Bristol, Cardiff, Birmingham, Manchester, Newcastle, Glasgow and Belfast.
Prices: from £229 for seven nights self catering in Rhodes Town.
Hotel Aglaia from £265 for seven nights b&b.
More information from your ABTA travel agent.
Summer 1993 prices available from Sept.
For details call 0532 393020 
PLACE IN THE SUN: Plenty of room to move at Lindos Bay beach
SUN CYCLE: Take in Kos Town by wheel power