

IT'S THE REAL THING
LEAGUE CAN'T BEAT THE FEELING
Coca-Cola in £2.2m Cup boost
FRANK WIECHULA
COCA-COLA took over sponsorship of the League Cup in a £2.25 million deal yesterday and confirmed they are the ‘real thing’ for football.
The soft drinks giant poured the cash into a two-year deal — for what was the Rumbelows Cup — with another three-year option that could amount to around £8million.
Sponsorship of the FA Cup — along with three other backers — could be the next item on the company's agenda, as exclusively revealed in the Daily Mirror this week.
Penny Hughes, president of Coca-Cola in Britain and Ireland, said: ‘Our interest in football is very wide and very broad so obviously we're always discussing any other opportunities to further increase that relationship.
‘We have got a very long and relevant association with football which is the nation's number one sport.
‘Because of the relationship we have then obviously football people will come and talk to us.’
The sponsorship puts the Football League in a stronger position and leaves the newly formed Premier League still looking for their first backer.
Coca-Cola already has deals with England, Scotland and Wales, the FIFA World Youth Championship and runs a soccer stars programme for more than 100,000 youngsters.
Sparkle
Gordon McKeag, League president, said: ‘It is a champagne sponsorship that will bring a bubble, sparkle and zest to our Cup.
‘I wouldn't dream of gloating but I think perhaps it does demonstrate there is a commercial expertise in the Football League which is continuing.
‘We may be poor relations in pure financial terms but certainly not in either footballing or commercial terms.’
McKeag's delight was tempered by regret at the loss of sponsors Rumbelows, who were due to sponsor the Cup for a further two years.
Rumbelows chief Roy Campbell said: ‘When we make deals we stick to them but the company has changed quite dramatically in the past year.
‘When we discussed the new season with the League there arose an opportunity that was of advantage to all of us.
I'm delighted it's all been settled amicably.’
FIZZING: Last season's Wembley hero Brian McClair with delighted Manchester United boss Alex Ferguson
ROCKY SEEKS HAT-TRICK
DAVID Rocastle aims to get off to a flier with Leeds today by chalking up a hat-trick in the Makita Tournament.
Rocastle, Leeds' £2 million signing from Arsenal, said before his Elland Road debut against Stuttgart: ‘It's becoming a habit for me to play in this competition.
‘I ‘ve taken part in all three previous tournaments with Arsenal and we won two of them.
‘Each time it was a great way to start the season.
Now I only hope I get off to a winning start with Leeds.’
The England midfielder added: ‘I've only been with Leeds for a few days but that's long enough to know I've made the right decision coming here.’
ROCASTLE: Habit
I WANT A PIZZA TASTY ACTION
DES WALKER /FRANK WIECHULA
DES WALKER knows he has to make a quick impression for his new club, Sampdoria.
Walker faces his old club, Nottingham Forest, today in the Makita Trophy, saying: ‘If I can get in and get a good start and play well I'll be happy.
It's a lovely country, the food's nice and the weather's great — but it all centres around playing and getting the football right.
‘I think I'll adapt to the life and I already love it in Italy.
But to me everything revolves around the football.
‘In fact, I could well see out my career in Italy with Sampdoria because I'm not one of those players that move around — I was at Forest for ten years.’
Walker is ready to make the effort to fit in with the locals.
He's being taught to speak Italian by his new friends, but there's no real change as far as his job is concerned.
And he added: ‘I'm just going to take the ball off them at the back in Italy as I did in England.
It's defending and no-one can teach you that.
‘I'm not a sweeper and they didn't buy me to play as one.
‘In Italy the sweeper is a ball-player, he's not a defender.
Glenn Hoddle could play in that position over there.’
WALKER: Happy
GHOST-MUSTER!
MATT HUGHES
PAKISTAN'S Moin Khan has escaped ‘trial by video’.
The volatile wicketkeeper, reprimanded by match referee Clyde Walcott for frenzied appealing at Headingley last Sunday, looked set to face another investigation into his behaviour.
It was alleged that Moin tried to scuff up the pitch — but England officials said yesterday that they would not study the video.
Swim chief may quit
NIGEL CLARKE
TERRY Denison may quit as chief coach after Britain's swimmers sank without trace here in Barcelona.
He returns home next week to supervise a thorough investigation into British swimming and said: ‘I'm disappointed, frustrated and upset.
I don't know what happened.
I'll have to seriously consider my situation.’
These Olympic Games have been our worst since 1936 — just one bronze medal — and only four swimmers reaching the finals.
But while the British have gone from bad to worse, the Games have become a Chinese takeaway.
Said British team manager Paul Bush: ‘Why are the Chinese so good?
I'd rather not comment.
But they are under an East German regime now and using their training systems.’
And Britain's swim pin-up Sharon Davies added: ‘We have all been told not to talk about the Chinese and why they have done so well here.’
TESSA ALIVE
DAVID MOORE
TESSA Sanderson edged into tonight's women's javelin final after the toughest fight of her life.
Tessa, the 36-year-old from Wolverhampton who struck gold in 1984 at Los Angeles, found her fifth Games no fun at all.
After throwing 60.70 metres to qualify in eighth place, she confessed: ‘That's the hardest semi-final I've encountered in my entire career.
‘It was so hot and humid out there, with not a breath of wind.
The air was dead.
‘I feel absolutely exhausted — but because a lot of good people finished behind me I still feel anything can happen.’
SANDERSON: Battle
Budd wilts
ZOLA BUDD, the barefoot waif who once ran for Britain, was a South African disaster in the 3000- metre heats.
She ended a bedraggled also-ran, trailing in ninth.
Now Budd, who devastated America's Mary Decker-Slaney by tripping her in Los Angeles eight years ago, is facing extinction at world level.
Scotland's Yvonne Murray made no mistake, easing into second place in her heat.
Shame of the Games
MILE LANGLEY
CLENBUTEROL, the supposed steroid weightlifters Andrew Davies and Andrew Saxton took for asthma, now seems NOT to be banned after all.
And it seems to have been a monumental over-reaction by the British Olympic Association, to send the pair home in a pantomime of sealed letters and secret flights under assumed names.
Britain wanted to be firm, instead they've been hasty and stupid.
They seem to have treated the lifters as brainlessly as they did a student with a night job in Bournemouth when he couldn't give a sample despite an hour of trying on a roasting day in London.
‘Sorry, but I must go to work,’ said the lad.
So they've suspended him from his event, the 5,000 metres, for four years.
Yet the same men in blazers let a cheat like Johnson back.
Disgusting, isn't it.
DALTON Grant, Britain's high jumper who threatened to ‘make the big boys sweat in Barcelona’ flopped out and could only reach 2.15 metres — near the bottom of the list.
But Liverpool 19-year-old Steve Smith qualified in second place for the final by clearing 2.29.
Shame of the Games
MIKE LANGLEY
SOME 61,000 spectators, the biggest athletics crowd ever seen in Spain, barracked the one-time ‘Flying Steroid’ Ben Johnson in the Olympic stadium last night.
But it wasn't Johnson's obnoxious presence to which they jeered, or the sacrilege of a confirmed cheat crouched in lane eight beneath the sacred flame.
No, the fans were only being impatient with three false starts and directed their anger at 30-year-old Johnson for causing the final one.
It didn't cross their minds that the true falsity of the start lay in having Johnson included in it.
He should have gone forever once the drug testers in Seoul four years ago established that the boastful arm he raised to Carl Lewis was actually saluting a lie.
JOHNSON'S piston thighs, bulging biceps (and bulging eyes) were achieved through the banned intake of stanozol.
For 48 hours he strutted and gloated in headlines that spread 3000 miles from Canada's Pacific to Atlantic coast: ‘Canadian hero sprints to gold’.
A phone call at dawn from the Olympic clinic turned those headlines into ‘Jamaican immigrant in drugs bust’.
Johnson should have stayed remembered like that — as a joke but also a dreadful warning.
Instead we've had limp-wristed pardoners, a well paid return after a couple of years and now the insult of Johnson being only 10 and a bit seconds from another Olympic final.
Johnson here exposes the incompetence and confusion of Olympic officialdom.
RICHARD Nerurkar and Paul Evans defied the tough conditions to reach the 10,000 metres final, but Eamonn Martin missed out.
BRITAIN'S Samantha Purvis finished fifth in the consolation final of the women's 200 metres butterfly in a time two and a half seconds slower than her British record.
A RUSSIAN weightlifter was banned for life by the sport's governing body after rejecting an Olympic bronze medal last night.
Ibragim Samadov stormed off the rostrum as a furious row erupted within the CIS team.
Wild-man is out for year
IRISH featherweight Paul Griffin was banned from boxing for a year last night after being accused of trying to assault officials at the Olympics.
European champion Griffin argued violently with ringside judges after a doctor stopped his opening bout.
International secretary Karl-Heinz Wehr said: ‘We will not allow anybody to fool around with us.’
CRUSHED
CHRISTIE BEATS CHEAT BEN
DAVID MOORE
LINFORD CHRISTIE is in pole position to grab the Olympic 100 metres gold medal.
And Britain's greatest-ever sprinter, aiming to become the oldest man in history to win the coveted crown, did it by humbling drug cheat Ben Johnson last night in front of 61,000 spectators and a worldwide television audience.
Christie, 32, scorched to victory in 10.07 seconds — the fastest time in the quarter-finals.
Seoul silver medallist Christie left Canada's Johnson — sensationally stripped of the gold and world record after being slung out of the 1988 Games after testing positive for steroid abuse — stumbling in his wake.
Johnson just staggered into this evening's semi-finals, trailing home fourth as Christie also captured the scalp of American favourite Leroy Burrell.
Frank Dick, Britain's national coach, glowed:
‘Linford has still got another gear left in him, even after that race.
‘He is in exactly the right frame of mind to do the business.
I take my hat off to Linford after the week he's had.
‘He joined the management team in a big way when the storm broke over Jason Livingston's drug suspension.
It would have been far, far worse for Jason if Linford had not been present to counsel and comfort him.’
Burrell, nominated by 1984 and ‘88 Olympic king Carl Lewis as his natural successor, had beaten Christie nine times in a row at 100 metres.
This time, he hardly landed a blow as the majestic Christie cruised home.
All the signs suggest that Christie can now reign in Spain — and burst from his blocks at 8 o'clock tonight to become the man who steps into Lewis’ golden shoes.
Three false starts, the third one Johnson's fault, failed to disturb the icy cool of Christie in 82 degree heat and 89 per cent humidity.
Christie, involved in an angry bust-up with reporters and photographers on Friday, hurdled two steel barriers to avoid questions afterwards.
He left the Montjuic Stadium happy and smiling, sharing a hug with British team manager Joan Allison.
All the big guns are through to the semi-finals as expected.
It looks like boiling up into a battle in the athletics bullring between Christie, Burrell and fellow American Dennis Mitchell, plus Namibia's Frankie Fredericks.
BYE-BYE BEN: Linford Christie leaves Ben Johnson (left) trailing in yesterday's 100 metre heats Picture: ALBERT COOPER
SILVER
NIGEL CLARKE
NICOLA Fairbrother was last night just two seconds away from winning an Olympic title.
As she finished with the silver medal in the women's lightweight judo final, team boss Roy Inman claimed she was robbed of a gold.
In the last minute of a ferocious bout with Spain's Miriam Blasco Soto, Nicola got her opponent in a stranglehold.
But Inman said: ‘The referee did not recognise the technique and let her off the hook.’
ROBBED
Judo star's final agony
NIGEL CLARKE
NICOLA Fairbrother was last night just two seconds away from winning an Olympic gold medal.
After she finished with the silver in the women's lightweight judo final, team boss Roy Inman claimed she was robbed of the title.
In the last minute of a ferocious bout against Spain's Miriam Blasco Soto, Nicola applied a stranglehold that stunned her opponent.
Inman said: ‘The Spanish girl's eyes were glazing over.
But the referee didn't recognise the technique.
‘The girl was going to be unconscious in another two seconds, or have to submit.
But he suddenly said stop, and let her off the hook.
‘It was not a home town decision — the ref just made a mistake.’
Nicola, who had shed tears of disappointment, said: ‘Another two seconds and I would have been Olympic champion — the girl's eyes were going red.
‘I don't think she would have submitted — I wouldn't have done in that position — but she would definitely have lost consciousness and that would have given me the title.’
A capacity crowd of nearly 6,500 — including King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofia — went wild as their 28-year-old world champion went for her own golden bid.
In the bedlam the Spaniard built a 5-0 lead but then 22-year-old sports journalist Nicola stunned her by fighting back to 5-3.
SO CLOSE: Nicola Fairbrother in tears last night
Hot Oz
AUSSIE
Wayne Gardner won his first British motorcycling Grand Prix at Donington Park yesterday.
The race ended in chaos when three riders drove into an oil slick and skidded off.
INGLE OUT
MIKE LANGLEY
FLYWEIGHT Paul Ingle was eliminated on a 13-12 verdict by strong North Korean southpaw Chol Su Choi — despite a rally that won him the last round 9-4.
Now Britain have only four boxers left from their original ten: light-fly Rowan Williams, lightweight Peter Richardson, middleweight Robin Reid and super-middle Stephen Wilson.
Ingle, a 20-year-old builder from Scarborough, started too slowly, losing the first round 4-1 and manager Ian Irwin said: ‘He needed more belief in himself.’
The fight raised further questions about the electronic scoring where five judges push buttons to record the punches, an innovation that brought a serious but unsuccessful protest from the USA over the defeat of their captain, light-flyweight Eric Griffin.
Anyone seeing the second round of Ingle and Choi must have wondered how anyone could have decided that the Korean had won that round 5-2.
A nonsense!
WILKO STORM
Ell of a rumpus
Batty's in the wars
JOHN EDWARDS
Leeds 0, Sampdoria 1
ANGRY Howard Wilkinson last night laid the blame on Italian play-acting for a bad tempered Makita Trophy final at Elland Road.
Firebrand David Batty was twice surrounded by finger-jabbing Sampdoria players as the pre-season showpiece frequently boiled over.
Wilkinson himself became involved in the controversy when Batty made his way to the touchline to be substituted after a 38minute flare-up.
The Leeds boss pointed the midfielder back on and had to be restrained by reserve official Brian Hill as he furiously remonstrated with referee Joe Worrall.
Wilko said: ‘The ref wanted Batty taken off.
He felt he had been upsetting one or two people and that the game would be easier to control without him around.
‘It was my view that is exactly what Batty is paid for and I wasn't happy with the situation at all.
‘I pointed out to the ref that the boy had done nothing to warrant a caution at that stage.
‘It's a crazy state of affairs for a player to be persecuted for the reaction of others to what he has done.’
Wilkinson's heated exchange with Worrall followed a touchline flashpoint when Batty bundled defender Marco Lanna over an advertising board.
Several Sampdoria substitutes and officials leapt off their seats next to the dug-out, hurdled the board and jostled the England midfielder.
‘That sort of behaviour is nothing you don't see every week in the Italian League,’ added Wilkinson.
‘If the referee had any problems they were created by the reaction of Sampdoria players.
We've just got to learn from the experience and I said to my players afterwards ‘welcome to European football’.’
Sampdoria coach Sven-Goran Eriksson tried to diffuse the ill-feeling by saying: ‘There were several situations involving Batty but my players weren't angels either.
Mayhem
‘I told them at half-time that Batty was an aggressive player who would challenge hard and that they shouldn't expect any less — maybe I should have warned them before the start.
‘Certainly I have tremendous admiration for Leeds and feel they can go all the way to the European Cup final.’
A lapse of concentration seconds after the 38th-minute mayhem gave Sampdoria a hat-trick of Makita titles.
Central defenders Chris Whyte and Gary Speed watched a through ball sail over their heads and Vladimir Jugovic nipped in as keeper John Lukic hesitated.
Earlier, Nottingham Forest went down to a Fritz Walter penalty in the third placed play-off against Stuttgart.
FLASHPOINT: Howard Wilkinson vents his anger from the touchline
TOUGH TIGER
NEWSBOY
GALLANT globe-trotting mare Ruby Tiger is poised for a rematch with All At Sea.
They meet again in the Juddmonte International Stakes at York on August 18.
Paul Cole's grey, who has won in Ireland, Italy, Germany and Canada, had a neck to spare when taking her second Vodafone Nassau Stakes at Goodwood on Saturday.
Ruby Tiger had looked on the point of collapse after her thrilling victory but quickly recovered.
And trainer Paul Cole said yesterday: ‘She's come out of the race very well and has eaten up.
‘This is the first time we have had her right this season.
There is now every possibility that we will go to York.’
Later targets are the Beverley D Stakes in Chicago and the Prix de L'Opera during Arc weekend at Longchamp.
Forest Wind made a spectacular debut when hammering his rivals by 10 lengths and more in the Vodapage Maiden Stakes at Goodwood.
At Newmarket, Desert Shot was almost as impressive when a heavily backed winner of the Colemans Mustard Maiden.
‘They didn't go much pace but as soon as Wally (Swinburn) asked him I thought he would win,’ said trainer Michael Stoute.
‘He's a nice colt in the making.’
Pursuit of Love, unluckily beaten by Mr Brooks in the July Cup, gained compensation in France yesterday.
Henry Cecil's colt landed the Prix Maurice de Gheest at Deauville.
Cardoun was second with Ben Hanbury's Twafeaj back in third.
Make it a double
HERO CHRISTIE STILL IN THE HUNT FOR GOLD
Linford can lick the Yanks again
MIKE LANGLEY
NO British runner has won two golds in one Olympics.
Not Seb Coe, not Steve Ovett and not even Harold Abrahams from Chariots of Fire.
Like Coe, Abrahams finished with a gold and silver.
Now Linford Christie holds the rare chance of a second gold — first in the 200 metres but, more promisingly, by beating the United States next Saturday evening in the 100-metres relay.
The Americans are world champions and half a second faster than the British best — but I can redress that balance just by telling Christie he has only a dog's chance.
I will further provoke him by saying that anchor-man is a most fitting name for his role in the relay team.
That's because he'll be a deadweight, even if he doesn't bungle the changeover or drop the baton.
Christie, as you saw when he walked slowly round the track in a Union Jack, loves a wallow in praise.
But there are many clues to how he is even more energised by criticism.
Once he frogmarched a knocker out of a press conference, although it transpired that he could hardly wait to see what the victim wrote next.
Christie is an ‘I'll show em’ guy when aroused.
You can see that in the imperial bearing and haughty carriage of his head as he surveys fields he intends to dominate.
Andy Norman, who's a sort of Sam Goldwyn of our athletics, spotted this key to his character years ago during a wait at Helsinki airport where Christie was hanging around for the last plane on a ticket about one grade up from cargo.
Christie moaned, being a gold medal complainer in those days.
Lousy lanes, biased officials, the worst flights, everyone down on him.
Norman heard him out then said: ‘You don't put bums on seats.
You couldn't even fill a phone box.
When you can, I'll get you Concorde.’
Christie's attitude to training had been casual, to say the least.
He might condescend to attend at half-time if there wasn't a party or a bird somewhere.
Or a rum and blackcurrant to hand while he played dominoes.
HE was 25 and going nowhere except to a good time.
Olympics?
Don't make the selectors laugh!
Yet his ability was obvious the moment he arrived from the West Indies and enrolled, aged seven, at a primary school by the old White City track near QPR's ground.
‘You look nippy,’ said a master watching Christie in playground football.
‘Would you like to run for the school?’
That's how he started and, in a sense, where he stayed for too long, as a make-up-the-numbers sprinter plodding home through all his early twenties.
He studied electronics and accountancy, became a cashier at Wandsworth Co-op, then switched into youth work until the centre burnt down — and his job with it.
Everything came together then.
On the dole, boots up the backside from Norman and coach Ron Roddan — and positive advice from his beloved granny when undecided about taking athletics seriously at last.
‘Do it,’ she said.
‘You'll never know if you never try.’
Linford did it!
All in a year he won European indoor gold in Madrid, the Commonwealth silver in Edinburgh and the European outdoor gold over 100 metres in Stuttgart where officials ticked him off for collecting his medal while draped in the Union Jack.
The blazer brigade doesn't say anything about that now, any more than the Metropolitan Police will risk making fools of themselves again by arresting Christie for possession of a supposedly stolen car.
That's what the law did four years ago when he was training to win his silver in Seoul and driving about in a car supplied by the British Olympic Association.
Silly officials, bone-headed coppers.
They could annoy a saint, let alone a man who's a mixture of anger and sensitivity.
SPRINTERS must also be single-minded fellows who blank out their own family in the minutes before the gun.
As coach Roddan says: ‘The race is so short that nothing can be allowed to go wrong — and nothing must ever distract them.’
Carl Lewis has called the 100 metres ‘ten seconds going on ten years’.
But Christie says the greatest day of his life wasn't like that at all: ‘The funny thing is I can't remember much about it.
I knew I'd win because after the semi-final, I still had a lot in my tank.’
Christie raced and conducted himself afterwards in a way of which we can all be proud — and, I don't really believe he'll drag down the relay team.
That's just the gee-up he often needs.
What I want is to see him win that second gold and wear the flag again — while the Yanks stand fuming.
Hand it to me!
CHRISTIE has time to raise his arms in triumph as he crosses the line for his 100-metres win — with clear daylight between him and the pack.
CHRISTIE, the Union Jack draped over one arm, revels in the applause on his lap of honour
CRACKERS!
BRITAIN'S women's hockey team earned an Olympic semi-final place with a 3-2 victory over New Zealand.
Two goals from Kathy Johnson and a superb 51st minute strike by Alison Ramsay saw Britain through to play Germany.
MURRAY MISERY
DAVID MOORE
YVONNE Murray was reduced to tears after trailing home eighth in the 3,000 metres final.
Medal-hope Murray sobbed: ‘It all went wrong — I'm devastated.’
Alison Wyeth was ninth, but Sonia O'Sullivan just missed out on the bronze for Ireland, who have never had a female Olympic medallist.
She finished fourth behind winner Elena Romanova.
MURRAY: Loser
CHRISTIE GUNS FOR CARL
And he's set to land £4M
DAVID MOORE
SPRINT king Linford Christie last night roared: ‘I want Carl Lewis now.’
Christie was refusing to bask in the glory of his sensational Olympic 100 metres victory.
Instead he said: ‘I want to race Lewis to end any dispute over keeping me number two in the world rankings.
‘Otherwise they will find some reason to put Carl above me.’
Already a giant American sports management group reckon that Christie could earn up to £1million for each of the next four years.
And they want a three-match shoot-out between Lewis and Christie, who became a guaranteed millionaire the split second he flashed across the line in Barcelona on Saturday evening.
World record-holder Lewis — who lost his chance of an Olympic 100-metre hat-trick when he flopped in the American trials — will collide with Christie in Zurich on August 19.
Aim
Meanwhile, the US International Management Group are the men aiming for a Christie-Lewis head-to-head.
Their London bureau chief Ian Todd says: ‘One race could be in the United States, one in Europe and the third out in Japan, where they absolutely idolise the speed merchants.
‘If we were given a clean opportunity, the job of turning Linford into a millionaire would be a breeze.
‘Clothing and shoe deals alone could approach $1 million a year.
Todd reckons that Christie can gross between £1 and £4million over the next four years.
Christie begins his drive for further Olympic glory in the 200metre heats this morning.
He said: ‘I can't afford to be emotional about it all and stay on a high.
There are other things to do here.
‘I think the 200 will go very well.
I always said if I won the 100 it would be very hard to beat me in the 200.
‘I like the inside lanes, and if I get the right lane I think I can go under 20 seconds.
‘I'm not just trying to make the final.
I was fourth at the last Olympics, so third would give me satisfaction.
But I am going out there to win.’
Christie could yet collide with Lewis in Barcelona  because both are expected to run in the relay.
GOLDEN SMILE: Christie
BRUCE SOS CALL
STEVE BRUCE became the third player to leave Manchester United's tour of Norway when he flew home yesterday because of an accident to his seven-year-old son Alex.
Paul Parker and Bryan Robson have already returned home for treatment on hamstring strains.
BUTCH MAKES IT
FORMER England captain Terry Butcher has won his fight for a football future at Sunderland.
Butcher, whose career looked over last season because of a knee injury, will be offered a one-year contract this week after starring for the First Division club in three pre-season friendlies.
Geyer chase is on
MARTIN RICHARDS
LEEDS' hopes to land fiery Aussie Test forward Mark Geyer received a big boost yesterday.
The 23-year-old back rower has now made it clear that he wants to play Rugby League in England this season after scrapping his contract with Australia's champion club Penrith.
Geyer, devastated by the death of Penrith team-mate Ben Alexander in a car crash five weeks ago, wants to get away from Sydney.
He's not keen to join another Aussie club and face having to play against his old Penrith pals.
Geyer can't play again in in the Sydney competition anyway until next March — and a spell in England is the obvious alternative.
Leeds chief executive Alf Davies has said they are very keen to talk terms to Geyer, who was a target for the Headingley club last season.
Geyer, a big and powerful runner with a liking for the rough stuff, would be the ideal recruit to play alongside new Kiwi forward signing Gary Mercer as manager Doug Laughton builds a new pack.
Manly coach Graham Lowe is ready to give pack star Ian Roberts the go-head to play in England.
A First Division club — possibly Wakefield Trinity — has made him a tempting offer and Roberts, who played for Wigan in 1987, is keen to accept.
Adrian Hadley, Salford's £120,000 winger, has joined Widnes in a swap deal for Great Britain under-21 forward Jason Critchley and utility man Steve Wynne.
I QUIT
Kerly bows out in tears
NIGEL CLARKE
SEAN KERLY was close to tears here yesterday as Britain lost their Olympic crown.
Hockey's greatest ever striker admitted: ‘I'm quitting now.’
After the Australians had gone Pommie-bashing with a humiliating 6-0 victory, Kerly said: ‘I'll play the last two remaining pool matches, and then that will be it.
I can't see myself carrying on.’
It was Britain's heaviest defeat since they lost 7-0 in the Tokyo Olympics 28 years ago, and again it was the Aussies who bush-whacked them.
But as Kerly heads for retirement, team coach Norman Hughes said: ‘I'd like to think that this is not his last Olympics.
‘He could be back as coach or manager in four years time.
I would certainly like to see it, and we'd be foolish if we did not consider it.’
Record
Britain were beaten out of sight after Kerly, Britain's all-time record scorer with 65 goals in 97 internationals, had missed a glorious chance seconds before half-time, when Britain, although 2-0 down, were still in the match.
A goal then could have changed the face of the battle, and Kerly said: ‘I feel so sick about it because it was such a significant miss.
If we had pulled a goal back then who knows what might have happened.’
But Hughes said: ‘I'm not blaming Sean.
He had a great match, his best in the tournament.
‘It is going to be so difficult to replace him.
He's a superb striker in the same mould as Ian Rush and Gary Lineker.
‘It will be impossible for Britain to find another like him.
We won't even bother to try, they just don't come along like him.
‘He's without a doubt the greatest scorer hockey has ever seen.
Unmatched over the last ten years.
‘If hockey was a professional sport he'd be a millionaire.’
Kerly added: ‘I've been in this game for 16 years.
I've enjoyed it all and got some great memories, but I need to concentrate on family life now.’
SAD SIGN-OFF AN emotional Sean Kerly is comforted by wife Jackie after he had announced his retirement.
Below, shattered team-mate Russell Garcia reflects on what might have been.
Pics: ALBERT COOPER
Cristo's cracker
CRISTO Espana, Barney Eastwood's Irish-based Venezuelan, will get a world title crack at Earl's Court on October 31.
Espana, the WBC international champion and leading WBA contender, challenges WBA welterweight king Meldrick Taylor in a mandatory defence on the Lennox Lewis-Razor Ruddock bill.
Taylor, the 1984 Olympic gold medallist, is sure to add extra interest for the massive American TV audience expected to watch the Lewis-Ruddock clash.
I'LL STOP THE WAR
Dickie laughs it off
DICKIE BIRD, the world's most famous umpire, vowed yesterday not to let the final Cornhill Test match turn into a war.
He said: ‘I admit I've hardly slept these last few days.
But that's Dickie — that's my nervous energy.
‘I'll be telling both captains, Mr. Miandad and Mr. Gooch, ‘Let's have a Test match to remember — one that stops the Olympics hogging all the limelight’.
‘More important still, let's have a Test that doesn't become a bloody war.
The game of cricket is too great for that’.’
Loved
Bird, the public's most loved umpire with his odd mannerisms, his rolled-up sleeves and white cloth cap, will stand with David Shepherd, ranked England's top umpire.
He is confident that between them they can do their bit towards the deciding Test in a gripping series with Pakistan ‘being remembered for the right reasons.’
Bird, now 59, will be one match short of the legendary Frank Chester's record of 48 Tests.
He admitted: ‘After what's gone on this summer, of course things could blow up.
But I've umpired the Pakistanis before.
‘I've handled their Tests in England in five different series since my first game back in 1973, and I've always got on all right with them.
‘I hope I can defuse any potential incident with a laugh and a smile.
‘It's become harder and harder to smile or laugh out there during an international match.
Maybe there's so much more pressure and stress because of the big money stakes they are playing for.’
Bird reckons a system involving a panel of the world's best umpires should be tried out in Test cricket.
He would like the nine captains of the Test playing nations to decide on an elite panel of say, 16 umpires.
He added: ‘Nor should it matter if there are, say, four Indians, three Englishmen or four West Indians picked for the panel.
‘Idon't agree with every country just automatically having two umpires named for the panel.’
He revealed that he never watches TV highlights of games he has umpired.
‘That would not help,’ he said.
‘I know if I've got something wrong.
‘You are only human and cannot get every decision spot on.
I do my best to be totally honest and fair, whoever is at the other end.
‘Even if it's harder to smile and have a chuckle I would love to carry on, provided the Test and County Cricket Board still want me.
It would be great to umpire 50 Tests.’
He is vehemently against the huge action replay screens tried out on English Test grounds this summer.
He said: ‘They add unfair pressure and hold up the game, with players being distracted waiting to see an incident shown again before they bowl the next ball.’
BIRD'S EYE VIEW: Dickie Bird's 47th Test leaves him one short of the record
Picture: BRENDAN MONKS
Bronze at the double
BRITAIN'S bowmen hit the target for another Olympic medal yesterday when they beat France by two points in the bronze shoot-out.
The British team's bronze will add to Simon Terry's third place medal in the archery individual target shooting.
Terry, Steve Hallard and Richard Priestman reached the last 16 of the men's team event by beating Germany 233-231, Australia in the quarters by 240-236, before falling to Spain 234-236.
Then, in the shoot-out they edged France out by 233-231.
Said Priestman: ‘We didn't shoot badly against Spain — they were just brilliant.’
LAWRIE Smith salvaged a medal for Britain from an otherwise disastrous Olympic yachting campaign by snatching a bronze in the Soling Class yesterday.
Skipper Smith, 36, with crewmen Rob Cruickshank and Ossie Stewart, grabbed the verdict in a photo finish with Germany.
ROBIN Reid guaranteed himself at least a bronze medal when he reached the semi-finals in boxing's light-middleweight division.
FENCED OFF
BRITAIN'S showjumping chief Ronnie Massarella was furious last night after his team missed out on the medals.
He said that the last of the 14 fences was too brightly painted and frightened some of the horses.
The quartet of Nick Skelton, Tim Grubb, and the Whitaker brothers, John and Michael, finished seventh.
Holland won the gold.
CAUTHEN GETS WHIPLASH
ROGER PLUMMER
STEVE CAUTHEN was beaten but unbowed as he left yesterday's Jockey Club hearing with a ten-day suspension.
Cauthen had a further six days added to the four-day suspension he picked up at Goodwood last Thursday.
It is a blow to the American who was hoping that yesterday's inquiry would give him the chance to press for an amendment to the existing whip rules.
He said: ‘Naturally I am very disappointed, especially as I felt that the evidence and explanations produced would be accepted.
‘I regret that this whole matter could not have been handled in a more constructive manner.’
The ban, which runs from August 8-17 inclusive is Cauthen's fifth, but the first for whip abuse.
The American, considered one of the most sympathetic of riders, has been penalised four times for careless riding since arriving here in 1979.
He was initially suspended for for hitting Goodwood Cup runner-up Witness Box down the shoulder with the whip in the forehand position.
He was referred to the Jockey Club after repeating the offence later in the day on Daru.
Pat Eddery and Michael Roberts displayed the strength of their concern about the whipping issue by giving Brighton's afternoon meeting a miss to appear with Cauthen.
Roberts, who was also a witness to the Goodwood incidents, was seen for for twenty minutes.
‘For what Steve did, the punishment seemed very unfair to me.
His suspension for the first incident was fair enough, but the second was very hard,’ he said.
Unfair
Asked whether he thought the Jockey Club was ready to change the rules, the South African champion was guardedly optimistic: ‘You never know, It's difficult.
‘I talked my head off in there.
We tried to get our point across.
‘The rules are not going to change overnight, but they must be looked at — I think they're silly.
‘In the race in which Steve was done, there were four or five other jockeys who hit their horses in front of the saddle.
It helps the horse to concentrate.’
Pat Eddery, whose afternoon off cost him at least two winners in his battle with Roberts, left the hearing after an hour and a half.
Eddery had been ‘seen briefly,’ but refused to comment as he left for Kempton's evening meeting.
The Jockey Club are to consider the the whip issue more fully at a Disciplinary Committee on September 8.
STEVE CAUTHEN
ANTHONY Cottrell, son of Devon trainer Gerald Cottrell, made a dream start to his own training career when Bluechipenterprise scored at Exeter.
ANGRY COLUMN
PETER SHAW
THERE is £25 for the lead letter and £5 for every other letter published.
Write to the Angry Column, Daily Mirror, Holinwood Avenue, Chadderton, Oldham, OL8 9EP.
Chuck out the sports dopes
PLEASE rid our sport of bungling, useless and totally inadequate administrators.
I cannot believe it took two weeks to discover that three of our Olympic athletes had taken drugs.
The Sports Council should have dealt with them before they left for Barcelona.
There is hardly a mainstream sport in this country controlled by people who know what they are doing.
Those who run tennis live in the Victorian age, football is run by proven failures, cricket ruled by men who still belong to the archaic Gentlemen v. Players era and athletics is in the hands of incompetent amateurs.
Need I go on?.
No, you've made your point.
But why have I got the feeling you won't be any happier?
Off track
WHATEVER Chris Boardman was riding when he won Olympic gold in the cycling pursuit, it certainly wasn't a bike.
It was a Meccano set on wheels.
He should have been booted out of the Olympics and told to race at a more apt venue.
Euro Disney, for instance.:-.
I've met your sort.
Can't see a party without pooping.
Tart ‘un
ANGRY?
I'm furious.
When Tom McKean and Yvonne Murray were beaten at the Olympics, what observation did we get from BBC's commentators?
‘A bad day for Scotland,’ they said.
Had they won it would have been a ‘great day for Britain.’
And don't you dare label this as a chip on my shoulder.
It is a genuine complaint..
Would I do that?
Especially when I know an inferiority complex when I see one.
Pal's act
I'VE just heard Daley Thompson on telly trying to explain away Jason Livingstone's being sent home from Barcelona for drug-taking.
He might be a pal of Livingstone's but there is still nothing to excuse Thompson's mealy-mouthed attitude.:-.
Obviously you've never heard the one about a friend in need.
Cash in
MONEY isn't a four-letter word, but envy is.
I'm fed up hearing that the Olympic superstars are motivated by money.
Who isn't?
Providing they entertain us with stupendous performances, who cares if sponsors want to make them millionaires.
Clearly the cynics think looking a gift horse in the mouth should be an Olympic sport.:-.
You've got that one well wrong, pal.
The Olympic cynics are those who provide the gift horses, not those who question their presence.
Stalled
LINFORD Christie's marvellous achievement in taking the sprint gold was one of the great moments in British sport.
The only disappointing aspect for me was the unbearable tension caused by the starter who ‘held’ the men for an unbelievably long time, causing false starts.
Maybe they should take a leaf out of horse racing's book and introduce starting stalls.:-.
Must say I've heard dafter ideas, luv, but not lately.
DAZZA JOY
Friendly fire
Sund'land 0, Spurs 3 SPURS' £1.7million new boy Darren Anderton grabbed a superb hat-trick in last night's friendly at Roker Park.
Anderton struck twice in three minutes in the first half to stun 20,000 fans allowed in for nothing for a game marking Sunderland's new status as a city.
Both goals were examples of calm finishing by the winger who is pleading with White Hart Lane fans not to label him ‘Dazza’.
The 20-year-old from Portsmouth found space on the six-yard line to tap in Gordon Durie's cross after half an hour.
Then Anderton slid the ball between the legs of keeper Tim Carter after again being set up by Durie.
Anderton completed his hat-trick from the penalty spot after 77 minutes after being fouled by Gary Owers.
Anderton said: ‘I'd never scored a hat-trick as a professional, so it was a great feeling.’
HOT SPUR NEW boy Darren Anderton showed his value to Spurs with a hat-trick in last night's friendly at Roker Park.
BABY BOOM
KEVIN Keegan yesterday signed a player he first spotted in a maternity ward!
The Newcastle boss snapped up 18-year-old Peter Cormack junior — the son of the former Liverpool midfielder — from Meadowbank for £10,000.
Keegan said: ‘I saw him before his dad — who was playing for Scotland in the World Cup.’
Simon signs
WEST BROMWICH boss Ossie Ardiles signed Blackburn striker Simon Garner in a £250,000 deal yesterday.
Garner, 32, hit a record-breaking 192 goals in nearly 500 appearances for Rovers and Ardiles said: ‘He's got a proven goal-scoring record.
‘He's such a good striker with plenty of experience and ability that'll help us in our drive for promotion.’
ARDILES: Deal
Jones health scare
RICHARD TANNER
LIVERPOOL whizz-kid Rob Jones could miss the early weeks of the new season after being struck down by a mystery virus.
Jones is in a Merseyside clinic after losing a stone and a half in weight over the last seven days.
He was laid low by what was thought to be a stomach bug during the club's trip to Norway last week.
Jones, 20, suffered sickness and diarrhoea and didn't eat for five days.
He was admitted to hospital earlier this week after showing no signs of recovery.
Liverpool boss Graeme Souness said last night: ‘Rob is still in hospital and we are awaiting the results of tests.
It's disappointing for him and us.’
Problem
Right-back Jones will definitely miss Saturday's Charity Shield clash with Leeds at Wembley.
And even if the tests show there is no serious problem, he will take at least a couple of weeks to build up his strength again.
That raises a question mark over his  availability for England's opening international of the season against Spain on September 9.
Jones finished last season on the casualty list.
He was ruled out of Graham Taylor's European championship squad by a leg injury.
Liverpool are already without John Barnes, who will be sidelined until Christmas with a ruptured Achilles, and Jan Molby, out for a month with a torn calf muscle.
TARGET
PHIL KING, 24, the Sheffield Wednesday left-back, is the shock target of Chelsea.
Manager Ian Porterfield wants King to fill his problem number three spot and has asked Wednesday to name their price.
Wednesday's price is £800,000 but Chelsea's valuation is nearer £500,000.
Battling Knight
NICK KNIGHT'S fighting qualities came to the rescue of champions Essex as they were made to struggle for runs in reply to Northants' 444 for nine declared at Chelmsford.
The 22-year-old left-hander batted for nearly three hours for 69 to help the leaders to 266 for six at the close — still 29 short of avoiding the follow-on.
KEN ON THE BUSES
ANGRY Pakistan fans are taking English umpires for a ride.
Huge photographs of Ken Palmer's run-out blunder involving Graham Gooch at Headingley have been displayed on buses all over Pakistan.
They've also been plastered on walls usually reserved for political propaganda.
Above each picture is the message: ‘English professional umpires — the best in the world!’
YOU BEAUTY
Golden girl Gunnell roars home to hurdle into Olympic history
Super Sal just head over heels
DAVID MOORE
SALLY GUNNELL pulled the old Muhammad Ali trick last night to absolutely pulverise some of the world's finest women runners.
Sweet Sal did it just like boxing legend Ali used to — she floated like a butterfly and stung like a bee.
Nobody in the Olympic 400 metres hurdles final could hold a candle to Gunnell's superb technique, which put her head and shoulders ahead of the field.
It all stems from when Sally was a high hurdler.
Switching to the smaller barriers in 1987 has proved child's play for the sweetheart from Chigwell ever since.
After a false start by world champion Tatyana Ledovskaya, Gunnell was into her Rolls-Royce stride instantly, coasting through the first 200 metres with principal rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick firmly in her sights in the next lane.
And from the crown of the final bend it was murder in the Montjuic stadium as Gunnell first eased alongside the American, then left her for dead down the home straight.
And after crossing the line and clasping her head in wonder, Sally was able to find her mother and father among the 64,900 crowd for hugs of delight.
She said: ‘It was great to see mum and dad for the first time in several days.
Perfect
‘They have left me alone to prepare in the proper fashion, so it was quite emotional when we saw each other.
‘What with my wedding as well in October, it is really turning into some exciting year, isn't it?’
After her Essex Ladies team-mate Jenny Stoute had rushed on the track to embrace her, Gunnell then embarked on one of the slowest laps of honour imaginable as, draped in the Union Jack given to her by the crowd, she stopped to receive hugs from the fans.
‘It was unbelievable,’ she said breathlessly.
‘People in the crowd were just so great, I wanted to savour every moment.’
Gunnell, captain of the British women's team, showed exactly how it should be done with what turned into a near-perfect performance.
Farmer-Patrick admitted: ‘I thought I ran a good race.
I've no complaints against myself on that score.
‘But quite honestly from the way she shone in the semi-finals, Sally was always the one who was going to win the gold medal.’
Dream
Sally, who shares a home with fiance Jon Bigg in Patcham, near Brighton, went on: ‘I feel wonderful — it is a dream come true.
‘All those days, weeks and years of hard work have paid off.
‘I had so many people telling me that I could do it — and I did!
‘It was such a brilliant atmosphere, I enjoyed the entire race.
‘I felt good from the opening hurdle and from then on it was relaxation, relaxation.
‘The fifth hurdle wasn't quite as smooth as I would have wished, but then I let go from the 200 metres mark.
‘I knew I could win and I gave everything I could.’
History
Gunnell, who took silver in last year's world championships in Tokyo, was timed at 53.23 seconds, the sixth fastest in history.
It was also the quickest 400 metres hurdles in the world this year — clinching her place in history as the first European to win this event.
Tonight, Kriss Akabusi will be trying to follow in the golden shoes of Sally after winning his 400m hurdles semi-final in an impressive 48.01sec.
And although Winthrop Graham of Jamaica and America's Kevin Young were quicker in the second semi, Akabusi declared: ‘It's all systems go.
Better
‘I shan't be hanging around when the starter's gun goes for the final, and I reckon I'm in with as good a chance as anybody.
‘I just concentrated on the job in hand and felt better than I have done for months.
‘Tuesday was a down day because of what happened to Derek Redmond, Roger Black and Colin Jackson.
From here on we are on the way up again.’
THE FAST LANE SUPER Sally Gunnell set a scorching pace right from the off in Barcelona last night to clock the quickest 400m hurdles in the world this year.
I'VE DONE IT, MUM JUBILANT Sally celebrates her sensational gold medal win in the Montjuic stadium — and then goes looking for her mum and dad in the crowd for a victory hug.
SHAMED
HOCKEY star Steve Martin yesterday became the first British player sent off in Olympic Games history.
Six other players were sin-binned as Britain beat New Zealand 3-2 in a grudge match.
YOUNG GUNS CRASH
YOUNG pretenders Curtis Robb and David Grindley last night discovered that it's tough at the very top.
Britain's talented twosome both had to settle for sixth place in their respective finals.
Robb, the brilliant 20-year-old from Liverpool bidding to be the youngest-ever to take the two-lap crown, was always off the pace in the 800 metres, won by Kenyan William Tanui.
Grindley, the 19-year-old from Wigan, battled his heart out behind American Quincy Watts' Olympic record in the 400 metres.
He said: ‘I hoped I might scrape a bronze.
But it's been an amazing week reaching the final and taking the British record.’
ROBB: Sixth
SKAH BOOED
KHALID SKAH was crowned Olympic champion to deafening jeering last night after his controversial off-on victory in the 10,000 metres.
The crowd chanted ‘Kenya’ when disqualified and re-instated Skah received his gold medal.
Kenyan silver medallist Richard Chelimo, impeded by another Moroccan, got a standing ovation.
SKAH: Champ
PRIDE OF OUR SALLY
Golden girl Gunnell roars home to hurdle into Olympic history
She's head over heels
DAVID MOORE
SALLY GUNNELL pulled the old Muhammad Ali trick last night to absolutely pulverise some of the world's finest women runners.
Sweet Sal did it just like boxing legend Ali used to — she floated like a butterfly and stung like a bee.
Nobody in the Olympic 400 metres hurdles final could hold a candle to Gunnell's superb technique, which put her head and shoulders ahead of the field.
It all stems from when Sally was a high hurdler.
Switching to the smaller barriers in 1987 has proved child's play for the sweetheart from Chigwell ever since.
After a false start by world champion Tatyana Ledovskaya, Gunnell was into her Rolls-Royce stride instantly, coasting through the first 200 metres with principal rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick firmly in her sights in the next lane.
And from the crown of the final bend it was murder in the Montjuic stadium as Gunnell first eased alongside the American, then left her for dead down the home straight.
Emotional
And after crossing the line and clasping her head in wonder, Sally was able to find her mother and father among the 64,900 crowd for hugs of delight.
She said: ‘It was great to see mum and dad for the first time in several days.
‘They have left me alone to prepare in the proper fashion, so it was quite emotional when we saw each other.
‘What with my wedding as well in October, it is really turning into some exciting year, isn't it?’
After her Essex Ladies team-mate Jenny Stoute had rushed on the track to embrace her, Gunnell then embarked on one of the slowest laps of honour imaginable as, draped in the Union Jack given to her by the crowd, she stopped to receive hugs from the fans.
‘It was unbelievable,’ she said breathlessly.
‘People in the crowd were just so great, I wanted to savour every moment.’
Gunnell, captain of the British women's team, showed exactly how it should be done with what turned into a near-perfect performance.
Farmer-Patrick admitted: ‘I thought I ran a good race.
I've no complaints against myself on that score.
‘But quite honestly from the way she shone in the semi-finals, Sally was always the one who was going to win gold.’
Sally, who shares a home with fiance Jon Bigg in Patcham, near Brighton, went on: ‘I feel wonderful — it is a dream come true.
‘All those days, weeks and years of hard work have paid off.
‘I had so many people telling me that I could do it — and I did!
‘It was such a brilliant atmosphere, I enjoyed the entire race.
‘I felt good from the opening hurdle and from then on it was relaxation, relaxation.
‘The fifth hurdle wasn't quite as smooth as I would have wished, but then I let go from the 200 metres mark.
‘I knew I could win and I gave everything I could.’
Gunnell, who took silver in last year's world championships in Tokyo, was timed at 53.23 seconds, the sixth fastest in history.
It was also the quickest 400 metres hurdles in the world this year — clinching her place in history as the first European to win this event.
BAND OF GOLD SUPER Sally Gunnell stands proudly on top of the winner's rostrum in Barcelona last night and gives her treasured gold medal a big kiss.
I'VE DONE IT, MUM JUBILANT Sally can't believe she has beaten American rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick to the gold medal — and her mum and dad were quick to join in the celebrations.
Pictures: ALBERT COOPER
Isle hunt for rapist
A MANHUNT was launched on a holiday island last night after a 15-year-old girl was beaten up and raped.
Police are seeking a man aged 35 to 40 seen in a white car in the Valley area of Anglesey.
GAIL BLOW
GAIL DEVERS, winner of the 100 metres sprint, saw a second gold medal cruelly ripped from her grasp yesterday.
The American was streaking clear in the 100 metres hurdles when she hit the last barrier and crashed to the ground.
Paraskevi Patoulidou came through to grab a first ever athletics medal for a Greek girl.
But Devers, who came sixth, said: ‘I'm delighted to go home with one gold medal.’
Dion's delight
TED MACAULEY
THE MAGIC that failed to lure Alan Shearer to Manchester United worked its spell on second-choice striker Dion Dublin yesterday.
The 6ft 2in Cambridge hit-man took one look at Old Trafford, which couldn't tempt Southampton's Shearer, and decided: ‘This is the place for me.’
Manager Alex Ferguson paid £1 million for the 23-year-old, which is £2.4 million less than Shearer's asking price.
Now Fergie could spend the balance on a new bid for Chelsea's Andy Townsend.
Ferguson knows his flop in the title race was caused by a goal drought and he said: ‘We needed a shake-up.
I am immensely pleased with Dublin.
‘His goal ratio is good — and he is a superb finisher.
‘Dublin will add considerably to our armoury.
He's different from other strikers.
Because of his height he's obviously strong in the air.’
Everton's Howard Kendall, who could not tempt Dublin, is now ready to offer £2 million for United's Mark Hughes.
And Ron Atkinson of Aston Villa is also keeping a close eye on Hughes.
Chelsea, who also failed to land Dublin, have stepped up their interest in US international striker Mike Masters.
Masters, 25, a 6ft 4in economics graduate playing for American side Colorado Blackhawks, last season helped Colchester United win the Vauxhall Conference.
MIND OUT
DAVID MOORE
LIZ McCOLGAN will play ‘mind games’ tonight in a bid to drive her main rivals for the 10,000 metres gold crazy.
Liz, whose duel on the Montjuic mountain top with South African sensation Elana Meyer could bring an Olympic flashpoint, has already run the race several times in her thoughts.
Confident she can add Games glory to her world championship title from Tokyo, she revealed: ‘I visualise how events will go in my head.
‘I do it when I'm sitting down, walking about the athletes’ village or even when I'm eating a meal.’
Meyer, three years younger than super Scot McColgan at 25, has burst out of Africa to threaten Liz's dominance.
And the little Springbok insisted: ‘When McColgan broke her field in Japan, it's a good job for her that I wasn't there.
‘She won't get away from me like she did from the ‘palookas’ who tried to sit on her shoulder in the world championships.’
McCOLGAN: Cool
Tait's target
MARTIN RICHARDS
CLASSY full-back Alan Tait was poised to sign for Leeds last night — and hoping to resurrect his Great Britain career.
The former Scottish RU international, listed at £230,000, joins his former Widnes boss Doug Laughton as part of a swap deal which will take scrum-half Bobby Goulding and prop Steve Molloy to Naughton Park.
‘I'm really pleased.
I've enjoyed my four years at Widnes but I think a change of clubs will help me get back on the international scene,’ said Tait, 27, who has agreed a three-year contract with the Headingley club.
‘I hope to be able to use my kicking game at Leeds.
It was taken off me at Widnes, with Jonathan Davies doing most of the tactical kicking, and I've been told it cost me a Great Britain tour chance.
‘I'm really looking forward to playing with the likes of Garry Schofield, Ellery Hanley and new signing Gary Mercer, who is one of the best forwards in the world.’
Goulding is set to link up with his hometown club after only a year at Leeds after his £90,000 move from Wigan.
Molloy was a £110,000 capture from Warrington two years ago.
Goulding's move leaves Wigan's £75,000 scrum half Andy Gregory in limbo with the new season just over a fortnight away.
Former Hull boss Brian Smith has had a mystery offer to return to England with a First Division club next year.
He says he is very tempted.
RED CARD RIDDLE
BILLY BREMNER
KEVIN KEEGAN and I made all the headlines for being sent off and throwing our shirts down last time Leeds and Liverpool met in the Charity Shield.
That was 18 years ago — and I'm still convinced it was a set-up.
Kevin and I had a bit of a scuffle, but it was nothing that didn't happen all over the park and certainly nothing to warrant our marching orders.
I can still vividly remember the referee calling us together and saying: ‘On your way.’
I took that to be a quiet word of warning and an instruction to get on with the game.
So when he followed up by pointing us towards the touchline, I got the shock of my life.
To this day I'm still puzzled as to why.
BILLY BOILS BREMNER threw away his shirt in disgust after receiving the red card.
SMASH ‘N GROB
He's still No1 says Souness
HARRY HARRIS
GRAEME SOUNESS last night declared that his clowning keeper Bruce Grobbelaar is still his No 1 — even though Liverpool have bought England hopeful David James.
The extrovert Grobbelaar makes his 16th Wembley appearance in today's Charity Shield against Leeds with the Anfield chief claiming the 35-year-old is perhaps the best keeper to deal with the new back pass laws.
Souness said: ‘I'm not too upset by the new rule — I've got the best outfield playing goalkeeper in the world!
‘Brucey is still our No 1, and will be in the side.
We are going to a tribunal on Tuesday to buy a keeper with a lot of potential — but that's all he is at the moment, a lot of potential.’
The arrival of £1.5million-rated James from Watford had sparked rumours that Grobbelaar was on his way out.
But the eccentric goalkeeper, famous for his willingness to race out of his area, has been helped by the new law banning back passes to the goalkeeper.
Leeds manager Howard Wilkinson condemned the new rule that will get its first major exposure in this country.
Power
He said: ‘It's a sledgehammer to crack a nut.
For the little good it's supposed to do it brings with it inherent problems.
‘Referees have the power to cut time wasting.
They can talk to a player, warn him and if he persists caution him so I don't see a need for this new law.’
While Souness was happy to confirm Grobbelaar's inclusion, Wilkinson remained cagey about whether new £2m man David Rocastle or 35-year-old midfielder Gordon Strachan would play.
It will be Leeds' first visit to Wembley since their infamous Charity Shield clash with Leeds 18 years ago — a match marred by the sendings off of Kevin Keegan and Billy Bremner.
Both sides have injuries going into the match.
Liverpool are without John Barnes, Rob Jones and Steve McManaman while both Michael Thomas and Jan Molby are battling to shrug off calf strains.
Champions Leeds will miss Mel Sterland while Tony Dorigo (knee), Scott Sellars (thigh) and John Newsome (calf) are all doubtful.
SOUNESS: Ready to stun Leeds
BRUCE GLEE CLOWNING Bruce Grobbelaar is the best to cope with the new law banning back passes.
GRIM SHOW
MIKE LANGLEY
GRIM Reaper Robin Reid's road to boxing glory ended yesterday with a disappointing 8-3 points defeat in the semi-finals, writes Mike Langley.
The light-middleweight from Runcorn, who now gets a bronze, was easily beaten by Dutchman Orhan Delivas and sadly admitted he was ‘too hesitant.’
REID: Lost
Backley in hunt for gold after scare
DAVID MOORE
STEVE Backley's Tokyo nightmare nearly came back to haunt him yesterday.
Great Britain's javelin star needed two throws before making sure of qualifying for tonight's final.
It was too close for comfort — and revived memories of Backley's resounding flop in last year's world championships in Japan.
Backley, needing to reach the 80-metre mark, must have been sweating when his opening effort dropped short at 79.36 but he went through with his second throw of 80.76.
He admitted: ‘What I've learned is that I was too complacent going into this competition.
‘It's given me a kick up the backside.
I'm through to the final, and now I must make absolutely certain I'm in the right frame of mind.
‘I'm not very happy about the way I performed.
Even my second throw was a poor one.
‘Everything went well in the warm-up and I thought I just had to lob it out to qualify.
‘Then I realised I had to work hard and concentrate on the job.
It was stupid of me,’ Backley said.
‘I can only hope all this has shaken the kinks out of my system.’
Backley, who came away from the throwing area clutching an icepack under his right elbow ‘as a precaution’, was fifth best of the 12 qualifiers.
Main rival Jan Zelezny picked up the spear and pounded out an 83.96 metres with his first and only effort to lead the field.
Britain's Mick Hill scraped in with 79.66, to make up the minimum number of 12 this evening but Nigel Bevan was eliminated after overstepping the mark.
BACKLEY: Survived
Bubka crash shock
DAVID MOORE
SERGEI Bubka's domination of world pole vaulting was shattered last night when he crashed out of the Olympics — without clearing a height.
The 28-year-old great double champion twice failed to clear 5.70m and then, when he tried 5.75m to stay in the competition, he again knocked off the bar.
The Ukrainian superstar had won every major championship since 1983 — with the exception of the European title in 1990 when he was recovering from injury — said: ‘I had problems with the swirling wind.
‘Maybe I took too long to prepare for each jump.
It looked like the clock was running faster than usual.
Perhaps my nerves were playing me up.’
BUBKA: Out
TRIPLE TREAT
Exhausted Steve Redgrave (right) collapses in relief after winning his third successive Olympic gold in the coxless pairs with new partner Matthew Pinsent
Kriss Akabusi doubled his collection to two bronzes as our 4x400 relay world champions took third place behind the world-record breaking United States
Steve will be back
DAVID MOORE
BRONZE medallist Steve Backley has quit athletics until next year.
His mounting injury problems meant Backley was unable to challenge Czech Jan Zelezny's golden Olympic record throw of 89.66m.
Backley confessed: ‘I'm bitterly disappointed.
‘I needed a pain-killing injection in my right elbow and then the abductor muscle in my groin went.
‘But at the end of the day, I can look at myself in the mirror and say I gave 100 per cent.
‘I will be at Atlanta in 1996 and at the 2000 Games, still chasing the gold.’
BACKLEY: injured
Bold medal
MICHAEL Carruth sprang one of the biggest surprises of the Olympics when he won Ireland's first boxing gold medal.
The 25-year-old Dublin soldier had been virtually written off in the welterweight division.
But Carruth, one of ten children, had no doubt he could beat Cuban world champion Juan Hernandez in the final.
He said: ‘I trained tremendously hard and felt sure I could beat anyone in the world.’
CARRUTH: Stunner
OLYMPIC RESULTS
ATHLETICS
Men's Marathon: 1 H Young-cho (S Kor) 2:13.23; 2 K Morishita (Jpn) 2:13.45; 3 S Freigang (Ger) 2:14.00.
Also: 27 S Bruce (GB) 2:17.49; 39 D Long (GB) 2:20.51; 41 P Davies-Hale (GB) 2:21.15.
BOXING
Super-heavyweight final: R Balado (Cub) bt R Igbineghu (Nig) 13-2.
Light-heavyweight final: T may (Ger) bt R Zaoulitchnyi (CIS) 8-3.
Light-middleweight final: J Lemus (Cub) bt O Delibas (Hol) 6-1.
Light-welterweight final: H Vincent (Cub) bt M Leduc (Can) 11-1.
Flyweight final: Choi Chol-su (N Kor) bt R Gonzalez Sanchez (Cub) 12-2.
Featherweight final: A Tews (Ger) bt F Reyes Lopez (Spn) 16-7.
VOLLEYBALL
Final: Brazil bt Holland 15-12, 15-8, 15-5.
MEDAL TABLE GldSlvBze Ttl CIS 45 38 29 112 United States 37 34 37 108 Germany 33 21 28 82 China 16 22 16 54 Cuba 14 6 11 31 Spain 13 7 2 22 South Korea 12 5 12 29 Hungary 11 2 7 30 France 8 6 15 29 Australia 7 9 11 27 Italy 6 5 8 19 Canada 6 5 7 18 GT BRITAIN 5 3 12 20 Romania 4 6 8 18 Czech'kia 4 2 1 7 North Korea 4 0 5 9 Japan 3 8 11 22 Bulgaria 3 7 6 16 Poland 3 6 10 19 Holland 2 6 7 15 Kenya 2 4 2 8 Norway 2 4 1 7 Turkey 2 2 2 6 Indonesia 2 2 1 5 Brazil 2 1 0 3 Greece 2 0 0 2 Sweden 1 7 4 12 New Zealand 1 4 5 10
OUT OF THE FRYING PAN
MIKE LANGLEY
ADIOS, Barcelona — you old frying pan!
Goodbye to your sweaty nights, broiling days, gassy ale and loudspeakers never turned down.
Goodbye, also, to the multitudinous managers and coaches of the largest team we've ever sent overseas.
That farewell to the coaches was going to be ‘Hello’ until a few minutes ago when the British Olympic Association suddenly cancelled a meet-the-press day.
Maybe they had no answer for how a little gymnast from Minsk, training through Russian winters in an unheated hall, could win more gold medals on his own than our 388 competitors between them.
Six for Vitali Scherbo, but only the usual five for Britain — and two of those were won in boats and another on a bike!
I wondered if the athletics department might explain why we hadn't a 1500 metres runner in the final for the first time since 1960?
Would they be suggesting, as some of the swimming coaches did, that kids these days are going soft.
Rotten
Youngsters won't put in enough pool time and, even if they do, their efforts are unappreciated by a country not placing much importance on sporting success.
I don't think that's right.
The bit about the country, I mean.
How are we, the public, at fault when 37 swimmers, divers and synchros win only one bronze medal between them?
And the boxers were as bad.
One bronze is a rotten return for ten entrants from the birthplace of Queensberry Rules.
What shall I remember longest from the Games?
That Clenbuterol, the stimulating steroid that got three Brits sent home, is known to its devotees as Dopers Delight.
I won't forget Linford Christie's eyeballs — bulging, fixed and apparently unseeing as he burst from the 100 metres pack.
And then Sally Gunnell talked to me about stuffing her gold medal in a cupboard at home.
We've seen British courage a-plenty this year.
For instance, judo flyweight Karen Briggs grappling on with a dislocated shoulder shoved back in its socket.
Steven Redgrave, so dead set on a third consecutive rowing gold that he's trained through four months of a stomach illness that would put many of us in hospital.
Nobody, though, captured the Bull Dog spirit like quarter-miler Derek Redmond, hopping along for the final 200 metres with a busted hamstring and his dad's help.
There have been great deeds in Barcelona, like that eighth athletics gold for Carl Lewis, the hurdles world record by Kevin Young, the three Kenyans who swept up the steeplechase medals.
But nobody is comparable with Redmond the indomitable.
The Canadian who wrote to him hit the bull's eye and the words deserve memorising: ‘Long after the medallists have faded from our minds, you will be remembered for having finished, for having tried so hard.’
WATCH IT!
SPAIN winning the football gold 3-2 against Poland wasn't the best news for Graham Taylor.
If these control-and-pass senors are only the Spanish under-23s, what might the full side do to England at Wembley next month?
And the Poles will endanger Taylor in the World Cup qualifiers.
After being pipped for places in Italia 90 and Euro 92, they must be thinking ‘third time lucky’.
Woe jumping
JOHN Whitaker blew his bid to win Britain's first individual showjumping gold medal yesterday.
The Yorkshireman, riding Milton, had a disastrous second round, after a first round clear, and crashed to 14th place — just one place above his brother Michael.
WEST Bromwich Albion manager, Ossie Ardiles, is set to sign former Wolves goalkeeper Tony Lange on a free transfer this week.
Ardiles is also close to persuading first choice ‘keeper, Stuart Naylor, to sign a new contract after he initially rejected a one year deal.
John begs Blues
COLIN PRICE
Bristol City 2, Chelsea 1
JOHNNY Ekstrom last night begged Chelsea boss Ian Porterfield: ‘Please don't judge me on this game.’
The Swedish star has always wanted to play in this country and is desperate to stay.
Chelsea are ready to pay IFK Gothenburg around £1 million to end their striker search but Ekstrom knows he fired only blanks at Ashton Gate on Saturday.
‘I did not show today because I have not trained for three weeks,’ he said.
‘But I have a few more days before Chelsea have to decide whether to buy me.’
Bristol City's £500,000 signing from Arsenal, Andrew Cole, scored one and earned the penalty for Martin Scott's winner after Joe Allon put the Blues into an 11th minute lead.
Lennie set to fork out
WALTER STOREY
MIDDLESBROUGH'S dismal display in the first Super Challenge Cup could shock boss Lennie Lawrence into a last-minute move on the transfer market.
The Premier League new boys finished with the wooden spoon after losing a penalty shoot out 5-4 to John Toshack's Real Sociedad.
Stunned Lawrence faces his top flight baptism at Boro with Coventry in just five days.
He says: ‘We just haven't stopped conceding ludicrous goals.
‘Obviously it's not good enough and I'll decide over the next 48 hours what I am going to do.
If you ask me if I'll buy, the answer is ‘probably’.’
But there was encouragement from an entertaining game.
Boro fought back after trailing 2-0 to a 39th minute goal from Oceano and a Kodro free-kick after 55 minutes.
Then in a crazy 10-minute spell John Hendrie and Willie Falconer levelled, and Robbie Mustoe fired Boro ahead.
But their celebrations were short-lived when stand-in keeper Ian Ironside made a dreadful mistake handing Luis Perez an open goal for the equaliser.
Boro's woe was complete when Hernandez Patxi saved the final penalty from £750,000 striker Andy Paton in the shoot-out.
First Division newcomers Birmingham City will be without midfielder Ian Rodgerson for the first two months of the season while he recovers from a groin operation.
LAWRENCE: Stunned
GREAT GATT!
MIDDLESEX captain Mike Gatting thrashed 89 to ensure a comfortable victory against Essex — and open a 12-point gap at the top of the Sunday League.
With Mike Roseberry (57) in support, Middlesex set a target of 237 which Essex never threatened — they were skittled for 142.
CHAMPS CHEATS!
OR
But Javed's men should be on top of the world
CHRIS LANDER
PAKISTAN should today simply be hailed the world's best cricket team.
Their 10-wicket trouncing of England in the deciding Cornhill Test at the Oval yesterday more than confirmed they are not just the world's one-day cricket kings.
But when they fly home to Karachi at the end of the month they are in danger of being remembered as cricket's chumps, not champs.
Javed Miandad's team have developed into the most powerful combination on the international scene in any form of the game.
Dazzling
Yet with their rousing cricket, built around the fearsome fast bowling duet of Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis and boosted by an array of dazzling stroke-makers, they have sadly been guilty of abusing opponents, rounding on umpires and blatant dissent.
At times their appealing for lbw decisions, bat-pad catches and run-outs have reached hysterical proportions.
What a tragedy they had to scar so many glorious days in a dramatic series with such outrageous incidents as fast bowler Aqib Javed confronting umpire Roy Palmer, or Rashid Latif hurling his cap to the ground in disgust at Headingley.
Skipper Javed, so often the centre of Test scandals in the past, began the international games clashing with England's now dethroned all-rounder Ian Botham.
At first he claimed Botham had told him to f*** off after being trapped lbw in the second Texaco Trophy contest at the Oval.
Later he admitted there had been a misinterpretation about the exchange.
Robin Smith, England's lone second-innings batting hero in the abysmal final collapse at the weekend, was incensed by Waqar Younis's disgraceful threat during the tour match at Southampton.
Hampshire players were staggered when Smith told them that Waqar had said: ‘I'm going to ******* kill you, you ****.’
Ironically, that made England more determined than ever to pull off the stirring victory at Headingley which levelled the series.
While some of the fight had clearly faded from his team-mates by the time they reached the Oval, battling Smith was more single-minded than ever.
He at least was ready to slug it out to the bitter end.
But England's couldn't defy the irresistible force of the two Ws, now ranked by none other than Graham Gooch amongst the all-time greats.
Throughout history the great sides have always had devastating pairs of fast bowlers — Larwood and Voce, Lindwall and Miller, Trueman and Statham, Hall and Griffith, Lillee and Thomson, Holding and Roberts.
Now Wasim and Waqar have earned their place alongside them in the fast bowling Hall of Fame with 43 wickets between them in the series.
To put that in perspective, Waqar's 5-52 to reach 22 wickets beat Imran Khan's series record haul against England — and Wasim equalled it.
It took them just 93 minutes yesterday to wrap up a crushing 10-wicket win, with Akram taking three wickets in 14 balls and Smith left high and dry on 84.
All summer English cricket has been highly suspicious about how the Pakistanis made the old ball swing about so violently.
For years Pakistan's opponents have made snide remarks about their bowlers getting away with such trickery as seam-picking and scuffing up the ball, ploys which make the ball swerve off the pitch or swing further in the air.
But Pakistan's cricket bosses vehemently deny any malpractice with the ball.
They also point out that no action has been taken against their bowlers by any of England's leading umpires.
Pakistan also have strong support from ex-Test stars from other countries such as Australia's respected former captain, Richie Benaud, who says: ‘On the opening day of the final Cornhill Test I was privileged to witness some of the finest swing bowling in the 44 years that I've been in the game.
‘The Pakistan bowlers have added a new dimension to bowling — one that needs to be carefully noted by other countries if they are to be equally successful swingers of the old ball.’
LETHAL WEAPONS
PAKISTAN'S deadly pace duo, Waqar Younis (left) and Wasim Akram, hail victory at the Oval while (below) England's batting hero Robin Smith sits it out as his team mates fall apart.
BOWLED: Wasim Akram beats Derek Pringle
BOWLED: Devon Malcolm falls to Waqar Younis
DANNY IS SO LION-HEARTED
COCKNEY celebrity Danny Baker yesterday revealed how he nearly drove the chairman of his beloved Millwall to tears.
Outspoken radio presenter Baker infuriated Reg Burr last season when he called on air for the dismissal of former manager Bruce Rioch, now boss of Bolton.
‘It was then reported in the Press that Millwall wanted me fired from the station,’ explained Baker, who insisted Rioch was the ‘worst-ever’Lions manager.
‘When I saw Reg Burr at a function soon afterwards I thought ‘Oh my God’.
But he came over to me, apologised and was almost in tears.’
Burr said: ‘No tears were shed — we just kissed and made up.’
BAKER: Outspoken
Jon dead unlucky
OLDHAM keeper Jon Hallworth is facing an anxious battle to be fit in time for Saturday's big Premier League kick-off.
Hallworth, who picked up a dead leg in a pre-season friendly, said yesterday: ‘If it is still as sore nearer Saturday I won't be playing at Chelsea.’
Worried boss Joe Royle is already without record buy, £700,000 striker Ian Olney, and £600,000 full back Neil Pointon, who both sit out bans.
HALLWORTH: Dead leg
Chance for Mac
DAVE BASSETT last night handed Alan McLeary a three-match run to clinch a £450,000 move to Sheffield United.
The on-loan Millwall centre-back will replace banned skipper Brian Gayle against Manchester United, Liverpool and QPR.
And if he handles that daunting task, Bassett is ready to offer him a Premier League future.
‘Alan has looked impressive so far in our pre-season matches,’ said the Blades boss.
McLEARY: Doing well
CHELSEA FC
IN A report on July 29 concerning Chelsea FC's midfield star Andy Townsend, we stated that £2.5million in cash for him would be ‘a huge temptation to Chelsea FC because of its precarious financial position.’
We have been asked to make it clear and we accept Chelsea is not in a precarious financial position.
Its trading account is substantially in credit and it has no overdue or significant trading debts.
It is in fact currently owed about £1.5million by other clubs.
We apologise for our error.
£3.60M SHEARER CAN GO TO HELL!
DANGER WARNING FOR NEW BLACKBURN STAR
He'll pay the price like me
TONY COTTEE/HARRY HARRIS
ALAN SHEARER will this season take on the burden of the highest-priced player in Britain — and it could break him.
It broke Tony Cottee…and the Everton striker reveals for the first time the enormous cost of carrying the tag of Britain's costliest player.
Cottee admits: ‘There were times when I felt I was carrying the whole world on my shoulders.’
Shearer's £3.6 million move to Blackburn doesn't guarantee him success.
And Cottee testifies to the personal trauma that hangs over Shearer unless he can cope with the strain, media attention and the taunts from the terraces.
Cottee became the British record signing when his £2,050,000 move from West Ham to Everton just edged him ahead of Paul Gascoigne as the costliest player.
If he ever left Everton now it would be for a modest fee.
And he will be thankful.
He says: ‘Dean Saunders suffered the pressure last season, Gary Pallister the season before and now it's Shearer's turn.
There are plenty of players changing hands for £1 million, even £2 million, but it's the one who is the costliest who comes under far more pressure.
‘I found the pressure hard to handle because everyone expects something special from you every single week.
That is just impossible to live up to.
‘I was the first one to experience this sort of pressure, while players like Ian Wright and Keith Curle can go for extraordinary amounts but they escaped because they were not the record signings.
‘Some of the pressure is self inflicted, but a great deal comes from intense media attention.
‘Then there is the scrutiny of the fans, and that can be the most damaging.
‘When you hear them chanting ‘What a waste of money’ you can't close your ears to it, no matter how much you try.
‘It all builds up to the point where it affects your game.
It ended up where I felt the whole world was on my shoulders.
‘If the pressure gets to Shearer then he will find it tough to produce the sort of form he is capable of.
‘I don't sympathise with him, I wish him luck.
‘In comparison, Darren Anderton at Spurs will be relatively free from pressure because his £1.7 million fee is no where near the record.’
Shearer goes to Crystal Palace on Saturday for the start of his ordeal.
Pressure
Cottee scored a hat-trick on his Everton debut but soon after went quickly down hill.
He went on: ‘I started my first season quite well, but by the end of the season it was a vastly different story.
‘Colin Harvey bought Mike Newell for the start of my second season and I ended up in the reserves, with all the publicity and pressure that brought.
‘It was hard to fight my way out of the reserves and it took a long time for me to recover.’
Cottee suffered an operation on a torn cartilage in May and last week needed a new operation on the same knee.
He'll be out for four to six weeks.
A transfer seems the only way out, but he says: ‘I feel I still have so much to prove to Everton and myself.
‘I want to do well for the club but I seem to be heading up a blind alley and maybe a move is the only solution.
‘Certainly I blame it on the pressure.
I was 22 when I had to suffer the pressure, perhaps now at 27 I would cope much better.
‘Shearer is only 21 and Blackburn might not be one of the glamour clubs, but they will be expecting an awful  lot from him.’
Cottee's advice to Shearer; ‘Ignore everything they write about you in the papers — including this!
‘Get on and play your own game, like the way you did for England against France.
Score goals for England and for Blackburn.’
Cottee believes that Shearer won't remain the highest-priced player for long.
He adds: ‘Where's it all going to stop?
I don't think it is.
‘Clubs have even more money from BSkyB TV and the fees are still going up and up.
‘One day there will be a boy wonder, like Baggio in Italy, and one of our clubs will pay £5 million.
‘Everyone said it was ridiculously high when Gazza and I went for over £2 million.
What will they say about the first £5 million player?’
ALL EYES ON ALAN
ALAN Shearer is Britain's costliest player — now he has to handle the pressure that goes with his £3.6m price tag.
THE ROAD TO RUIN
TONY Cottee was a British record transfer to Everton — but soon his career crashed at Goodison.
Wally sale
HUDDERSFIELD
Rugby League Club have transfer-listed £125,000 Australian full-back Wally Gibson.
Warrington have signed their former scrum- half Greg Mackey from Hull.
London Crusaders have been given special permission to field five overseas players per game in the new season.
Aldo is one in a million
RICHARD TANNER
TRANMERE
Rovers warned Aston Villa last night that they will want £1million for striker John Aldridge.
Villa boss Ron Atkinson is eager to sign Aldridge before Saturday's kick-off but Rovers won't let their biggest asset go cheap — even though he's 34 next month.
Chief executive Frank Corfe said: ‘Obviously every player has his price.
But I can say that John Aldridge will not be leaving here for under £1million.’
Villa wanted the former Newport, Oxford and Liverpool star for £300,000, just £50,000 more than Tranmere paid Spanish club Real Sociedad last summer.
BOBBY BUY
LEEDS striker Bobby Davison, 33, last night joined Leicester for £70,000.
He was a £350,000 capture from Derby five years ago.
SPYING TRIP
ENGLAND boss Graham Taylor begins his 1994 World Cup campaign today by watching Group Two opponents Poland play Mexico in Belchatow.
England play away to Poland on May 29 next year, with the return at Wembley on September 8.
England last played Poland in Poznan last November, when Gary Lineker's goal 13 minutes from time earned Taylor's team a place in the European Championship finals.
LINEKER: Goal
KOP THAT
Reds roar to revenge win
JOHN EDWARDS
Leeds Utd 1, Liverpool 4
DAVID JAMES made a four-hour motorway dash to stake a claim for Liverpool's number one jersey, then admitted: ‘I am still in a daze.’
The 21-year-old keeper attended a Birmingham tribunal with manager Graeme Souness for a ruling on his transfer fee from Watford.
He motored north to link up with his Liverpool team-mates after being valued at £1million, plus a further £300,000 if he makes one hundred appearances and wins an England cap.
And within a couple of hours he was pitched into a trial outing for a place in Liverpool's opening Premier League match at Nottingham Forest on Sunday.
James found himself plunged in ahead of Bruce Grobbelaar for Jim Beglin's testimonial at Elland Road.
Grobbelaar was left on the bench and could be missing on Sunday as the tug-of-war between Liverpool and Zimbabwe rumbles on.
His country still insist he must turn out in an African Nations Cup qualifier against South Africa rather than the televised curtain-raiser at the City ground.
So in came James — and he recovered from a jittery start to stamp his authority on an emphatic Liverpool win.
But he admitted with a grin: ‘If that was a trial run for Sunday I wouldn't have minded a bit more notice!
‘My mind was fixed on the tribunal most of the day, then I spent four hours travelling up for what I thought would be a place on the bench.
‘I only knew I was playing when we had our warm-up just before the kick-off, and I simply wasn't prepared for starting the match.
‘I felt stiff and lethargic and my mind wasn't tuned into the job — I definitely didn't enjoy the first ten minutes.
‘That's why there were a couple of early hiccups and it took a while to settle in.
‘I don't think anything has been decided for Sunday yet, but if the boss was taking the chance to have a look at me I was reasonably happy with my performance overall.
‘And the tribunal outcome suits me.
It will be a couple of years at least before the fee reaches £1.3million, so I don't feel any pressure at the moment.’
James fluffed a couple of early crosses before growing in confidence and playing his part in an impressive Liverpool performance.
An Ian Rush double and goals from Jamie Redknapp and Dean Saunders swamped Leeds, who replied through David Batty when it was 3-0.
But the real victor was former Liverpool and Leeds left back, Beglin, who netted £50,000 from an 8,000-plus turnout.
NOW IT'S THE JAMES GANG DAVID JAMES made his first full appearance in goal for Liverpool last night, in place of Bruce Grobbelaar.
And after a nervous start he brought off some important saves — but this was one time he wasn't so sure, playing spot the ball with Mark Wright.
RUSH: Hit two
£6M SKY HIGH CLUB
Premier dish of the day — on ITV
HARRY HARRIS
SKY TV will splash nearly £6million in the next four weeks on a lavish advertising campaign to sell the Premier League — even though their £304million deal with the League is not yet signed.
The League's chief executive Rick Parry stresses there is no real problem about the deal, and says the formality of signing is ‘hours rather than days’ away.
But some of his clubs remain uneasy about various aspects of the contract, notably whether Sky can repeat their ‘live’ matches within 24 hours, match scheduling, and the timing of payments from the television company.
But like Parry, Sky see no real problem, and yesterday gave a full-blown London premier to the 90-second commercial which will be seen also on ITV.
The slick production is set to the Simple Minds song ‘Alive and Kicking’ and features such stars as Bruce Grobbelaar, Gordon Strachan, Paul Stewart, Vinny Jones, John Wark and Anders Limpar.
Players from almost every Premier League club were involved in a shoot that took four days and cost £400,000.
The ad kicks off on ITV at 10.20 tonight during the News at Ten break.
Sky will spend £3million on the ITV ads — a great irony after ITV lost out in the race to buy Premier League football.
In addition they will spend £2million on billboard, newspaper and magazine ads.
Did you spot the Premier League faces in our back page picture?
They are:
BACK (l to r) David Hirst (Sheff Wed), Lee Sharpe (Man Utd), Vinny Jones (Chelsea), John Wark (Ipswich), Tim Flowers (Southampton), Tim Sherwood (Blackburn).
CENTRE: Gary Charles (Forest), Ian Brightwell (Man City), Ian Butterworth (Norwich), Hans Segars (Wimbledon), Lee Hurst (Coventry), Carl Bradshaw (Sheffield Utd), Gordon Durie (Spurs), David Hillier (Arsenal).
FRONT: Andy Ritchie (Oldham), John Salako (Palace), Andy Sinton (QPR), Alan Kernaghan (Boro), Gordon Strachan (Leeds), Peter Beardsley (Everton).
REACHING for the Sky — stars of the Premier League who will feature in a massive TV advertising campaign.
If you can't put the names to all the faces, turn to page 27, column 7
WIGAN ACES
SHAUN'S £15,000
OLYMPIC ace David Grindley helped to give Shaun Edwards the perfect lift-off to his benefit season at Central Park last night.
Grindley, the new British 400 metres record holder from Wigan Harriers, paraded the relay bronze medal he won in Barcelona before a testimonial for Edwards.
Then the 19-year-old athlete scored a try as Wigan beat a Great Britain select side 37-36.
But the most important result for Edwards was on the terraces where 5,769 fans braved the damp, dismal weather and paid around £15,000.
Edwards, still only 25, has made more than 300 appearances for Wigan.
He has twenty winners' medals — more than any other player in the club's history.
And predictably, stand-off Edwards topped the scoring with four tries.
One disappointment was the absence of scrum-half Andy Gregory, the half-back partner to Edwards for the past six years.
He could be leaving Wigan before the start of the season.
GRINDLEY and Edwards salute the Central Park crowd last night
HELL RAZOR!
Bowe tips Ruddock to put out Lewis's lights
Lennox in for a slashing
IAN GIBB
LENNOX LEWIS will be crushed by Razor Ruddock in the heavyweight world title eliminator at London's Earls Court on October 31.
That's the scathing view of Riddick Bowe — the next challenger for Evander Holyfield's world crown — who was ringside for Lewis's fourth-round victory over outweighed and outclassed American Mike Dixon here yesterday.
Bowe's criticism was backed by Ruddock's manager Murad Muhammad but Razor, ever the gentleman, kept his predictions to himself.
Bowe, still bitter after being beaten by Lewis for an Olympic gold medal four years ago, said: ‘I wasn't impressed at all.
Who was he fighting anyway?
A guy all washed up, not someone out of the top ten.
‘He should have knocked the guy cold and not let him go on to the fourth round.
‘Razor Ruddock will crush him.
Lennox has not yet been hit in his 21 fights and if Razor gets him with that left smash, it's goodnight.’
To be fair to Lewis, he followed instructions more closely than in the past and jabbed his way in before breaking up Dixon, who had not been stopped in 15 fights.
Heavy
But even though Lewis used him for target practice with heavy right crosses and upper-cuts, he could not floor the durable American, who took a standing eight count early in the fourth round.
Referee Rudy Battle had seen enough soon after and called it off as Dixon took a pounding.
Although ringsider Ruddock refused to join the attack on Lewis, he did say: ‘I took on Mike Tyson not once but twice, I knocked out Mike Dokes, Greg Page and Bonecrusher Smith.
‘So do you think I am going to be afraid of Lennox Lewis?
Come on guys, be realistic!’
Lewis certainly is not short of confidence and after the fight he said: ‘I know Razor was feeling those right hands I was hitting Dixon with.’
And on the Dixon fight, the British, European and Commonwealth champion said: ‘I gave him a taste but he got a bit feisty by trying to hit me back and I took him out.
‘I was taking my time, I was in no rush.
When he smiled at me, I knew he was hurt.
‘I don't like getting hit — do you hear that, Razor?
I hope I showed Ruddock something tonight.’
But Bowe believes Lewis should have had a harder warm-up than Dixon, who was outweighed by nearly two stone and was knocked down twice in a ten-rounder five weeks ago.
‘To prepare for a fighter like Ruddock, you have to fight hard because he is coming at you to separate your head from your shoulders,’ Bowe said.
‘If Lennox doesn't learn to crouch and get his right hand up more, Ruddock will zoom in on that and it is going to be all over.
‘Who knows if Lennox can take a good punch after this?
Razor is a much heavier puncher.’
Razor's manager Muhammad at first affected terror after Lewis's win, rolling his eyes and saying: ‘What a monster!’
HEAVY METTLE LENNOX Lewis acknowledges the applause after his fourth-round victory over American Mike Dixon yesterday.
THAT HURT MIKE Dixon shows the effects of the beating he took from Lewis after the referee stopped the fight.
ARSENAL'S FLAW
CHRIS Waddle backs Manchester United for the championship — and Arsenal to fall foul of the new back pass laws.
He believes the title will be decided between Alex Ferguson's United, the Gunners, Aston Villa, Liverpool and his new club Sheffield Wednesday.
‘Everyone is tipping Arsenal for the title and they have the best drilled team with some exciting strikers in Ian Wright, Paul Merson, Kevin Campbell and Anders Limpar,’ said Waddle.
‘But they love to push up and that might leave them vulnerable to the ball over the top.
If their defence doesn't catch the opposition offside they can no longer pass back to David Seaman.
‘If I wasn't going for Sheffield Wednesday then my instincts tell me it's Manchester United.
‘But Leeds will still be in their with a fight, there's no doubt about it.’
SEAMAN: Problems
Gavin's target
GAVIN Peacock is hoping for a little help from his friends in the Newcastle United side this season.
Peacock scored more than a quarter of United's goals last season — many of them from midfield.
But the 24-year-old admitted yesterday that he wants to share the scoring burden with his team-mates.
‘Look at all the best sides and you find they get goals from a variety of positions,’ said Peacock.
‘Lee Clark certainly has the potential to score a lot of goals and I expect people like Brian Kilcline to hit some from set pieces.’
Peacock hopes to beat his 22-goal haul last season.
‘That's my target,’ he said.
‘But, if the team are doing well, I don't mind if the goals are spread around.’
GOOCH DREAM OVER
COLIN PRICE
GRAHAM Gooch's double dream flowed down the Grace Road drains yesterday as Leicester clinched a NatWest final with Northants on September 5.
His chances of defending a frail total of 226 slipped away with the steady rain that fell for the last two hours.
It forced the championship leaders to bowl and field with a slippery ball.
Gooch said: ‘I'm not bitching about it but I don't think the conditions were fit for a match of that stature.’
But despite the handicap Essex made a terrific fight of it and only went down off the penultimate ball.
It might all have been different had Gooch clung on to either of the two catches Nigel Briers offered him on 26 and 61.
But Briers stayed on to mastermind the Leicester run-chase with a battling 88.
GOOCH: Shattered
Gary's Upton fled!
ENGLAND defender Gary Charles is homesick at Nottingham Forest — and that could alert his boyhood idols West Ham.
The 22-year-old Cockney is so lonely in the Midlands he makes a 300mile round-trip to his mum's house, a bus ride from Upton Park, immediately after Forest home games.
‘I try to get home as much as I can,’ said Charles.
‘The boss knows I'm going home, but I don't think he knows I'm homesick.’
West Ham, meanwhile, are ready to give a home to Serbian refugee Budo Vajacic.
Boss Billy Bonds has been impressed in training by the 23-year-old centre half from Partisan Belgrade.
CHARLES: Lonley
CROWD TROUBLE
Arsenal's plastic fans face FA noise check
HARRY HARRIS
ARSENAL'S new rent-a-crowd will be closely monitored by the Football Association when the new Premier League kicks off tomorrow.
The Gunners yesterday unveiled their terracing of  artificial fans on the derelict North Bank, but plans to pipe cheers from the end could still fall foul of the game's bosses.
The Premier League favourites feared that ground re-development would have left Highbury with a ‘graveyard’ atmosphere, so splashed out £150,000 on a mural, depicting rows of cheering and scarf-waving fans.
When arch-rivals Tottenham redeveloped the West Stand, their home form slumped disastrously with players blaming the lack of atmosphere.
Volume
Arsenal's opponents might consider the scheme — dreamed up by vice chairman David Dein and managing director Ken Friar — just a little too clever and the FA have been considering the implications since Mirror Sport's exclusive story last week.
Norwich will be the first to face the League's best behaved supporters but Arsenal will be able to regulate the crowd volume to appease any objectors.
The club also plan to cover the 35ft high by 140ft wide mural with more sponsorship and advertising deals to help recoup the cost.
A spokesman for the FA said they would investigate any complaints, and added: ‘We shall look at what happens closely before we say one way or the other whether this would be allowed or not.’
Promise
Highbury's capacity will be heavily cut this season while the North Bank is closed as part of a £22m redevelopment scheme.
The maximum attendance will be just 26,000 and places within the ground will be at a premium, particularly if Arsenal fulfil their promise and have a successful season.
Meanwhile, record signing Ian Wright declared the new Premier League nothing more than unimpressive hype
The £2.5m star said: ‘The players won't notice the difference when the ball starts rolling tomorrow except for a lot of cameras concentrating on individuals and advertising.’
The striker is anxious to shake off a thigh strain and said: ‘I trained today, and I shall see how it reacts.
‘I'm hopeful I'll make it and it is 70-30 in my favour — that's if the boss wants to take the risk on me.’
FIRST AGAIN: Mirror Sport reveals the plan
ALL CHANGE: End of the famous North Bank
DION AND OUT
EMLYN HUGHES AND THE TRUTH ABOUT MANCHESTER UNITED
GAMBLE ON DUBLIN IS A BLUNDER
EMLYN HUGHES/NIGEL CLARKE
WHAT Manchester United have done in the close season has convinced me Alex Ferguson has probably blown it.
And he has laid himself wide open to the kind of criticism that will cloak him in a dark shroud of misery.
It was his management at the end of last season that cost United the First Division title.
He had pledged it to the fans, but once again couldn't deliver.
Dumped
It was the biggest body-blow the club had taken since they were dumped into the Second Division 20 years ago.
Ferguson then said he would buy the title for the fans he had so badly let down.
But he hasn't.
And I'm left to wonder if a little of the sheen has gone from a club who once shone like burnished gold.
They haven't been champions for 26 years and it could be another 26 before they win it again.
It is a sorry state of affairs when Blackburn Rovers are allowed to snatch from beneath your noses Alan Shearer, the most promising centre forward in the country.
It is obvious United can no longer compete when it comes to buying the best.
They missed out on Shearer, who joined Kenny Dalglish at Ewood Park after Ferguson had tracked him for a year.
Then they didn't have enough financial clout to tempt Stuart Pearce from Nottingham Forest.
When Chelsea wanted a bit more than the £2.5million United offered for Andy Townsend, the club pulled out of the deal.
That doesn't sound to me like a club whose ambition is to be the best team in the country.
Instead, they've spent £1million on Dion Dublin, an unproven centre forward from the Second Division who may or may not come off.
Greatest
Are the greatest club in the land happy to settle for that kind of substitute?
I fear it is a transfer made in desperation and it could put Ferguson under real pressure.
Dublin was the focal point of a Cambridge side who played the ball long, got it forward quickly and were condemned for their tactics.
I have my doubts whether he will fit in at Old Trafford.
And if he doesn't, where does that leave Fergie?
With the same team and the same way of playing that wasn't good enough to hold off Leeds last season.
And with a question mark against his judgment in the transfer market.
Time is running out for him.
He must deliver the title soon.
It might be that this season will be his last chance, that he is a manager who can win Cups with short sprints but not the silverware that goes with marathons.
His youth policy has produced a side who have won the FA Youth Cup with a crop of richly talented players.
But it might be two years before they are ready to be drafted into the League side.
In between times Fergie has got to keep United up there challenging — with a team that needs strengthening.
Business
The problem last season was that they did not score enough goals.
Now they appear to be looking to a Second Division centre forward to do the business.
Dublin may be all heart and soul, a cracking lad who'll give 110 per cent.
But don't tell me he is a United player, the kind who can win them that coveted crown.
Don't blame the lad.
Of course he'd jump at the chance of wearing the most famous shirt in the Premier Division.
It's just that I think Fergie has blundered again.
He's making it so hard for himself.
How come a club of United's stature can no longer compete in the transfer market, and are now overshadowed by humble Blackburn when it comes to buying players?
So where does it leave them in the title race?
They'll be up there again, but champions — No!
Leeds did great to win it last year, but it will be much harder the second time around.
My title odds are Leeds 5-2, Arsenal 6-4, Liverpool 7-2, Blackburn, Manchester City and Sheffield Wednesday 25-1, the rest 3,000-1.
CAP THAT
UNITED'S £1million striker Dion Dublin jumped at the chance to go to Old Trafford Picture: DENNIS HUSSEY
WIDE OPEN: United boss Alex Ferguson
SHEARER: Blackburn won the race for him
TOWNSEND: United would not increase their offer
PEARCE: Not tempted
RANGERS FURY
BSKYB's plans for a smooth start to their big-money coverage of the Premier League were blown wide open yesterday.
QPR and their boss Gerry Francis, who play at Manchester City in Monday's live game, have refused to co-operate.
Rangers, furious they have to play three games in five days because of TV commitments, are refusing to do interviews or allow cameras into their dressing room.
David Hill, BSkyB's head of sport, said: ‘I can't believe a group of professional adults could act this way.
‘If that is the way they want it we will just talk to City.’
FRANCIS: Angry
Mural boost
ARSENAL'S rent-a-crowd will assist the team in their battle for the first Premier League title.
The club unveiled their mural to prevent Highbury becoming a ‘graveyard’ while the North Bank is being rebuilt — as revealed in Mirror Sport.
Manager George Graham said: ‘I've played in grounds that have been wide open and there is no atmosphere.
This will help the team to push on and have a good season.’
LEAVE US ALONE
ARSENAL manager George Graham believes bosses shouldn't be sacked during the season.
The Arsenal boss said yesterday: ‘There should be responsibility when managers are hired that they see it through to the end of the season.
‘If they're sacked at the end, it's a different matter but sometimes directors get off too lightly.’
HARRY HARRIS
KEVIN Ratcliffe, the ex-Wales skipper given a free transfer by Everton last season, last night joined Scottish Premier Division club Dundee.
PALACE'S £2.5m HOT SCOT
TONY STENSON
CRYSTAL Palace last night launched a £2.5 million bid for Dundee United striker Duncan Ferguson.
Palace chairman Ron Noades admitted: ‘He's the man we want to replace Ian Wright.’
Palace have been fighting off offers from moneybags Blackburn all week for England star Geoff Thomas.
But they have also been busy in the transfer market, making a £2 million bid for Coventry striker Kevin Gallacher, a £1 million offer for Wimbledon's Robbie Earle and a £1.8 million move for Dons' defender Terry Phelan.
But they know they are struggling for both Wimbledon stars and now Ferguson has become their top target.
Noades added: ‘We feel he is the type of player who would suit our style.
‘We did make a £3 million offer to Sheffield United for Brian Deane, but they weren't interested.
‘Ferguson is now our target.’
Impact
Palace face a fierce battle with Scottish giants Rangers to sign the tall, explosive striker who has already made a major impact north of the border.
Ferguson was in the Scottish pool of players that travelled to Sweden for the European Championship.
The 6ft 3in Ferguson, born in Stirling, was signed by Dundee United as a 14-year-old.
He was part of the Jim McLean conveyer belt of talent that includes Coventry sensation Gallacher.
Palace are at home to Blackburn today and Noades will have lunch with Rovers' directors to finally thrash out the Thomas deal.
FERGUSON: Palace target
MIKE GATTING'S Middlesex clinched their first-ever Sunday League title with a five-wicket win over Yorkshire at Uxbridge.
Last year's champions Nottinghamshire stay next to bottom after an 11-run defeat by second-placed Essex.
Pleat won't bleat
DAVID Pleat shrugged off Luton's 2-1 defeat away to his old club Leicester and insisted: ‘We are not going to change our style.
‘I have a young side with seven of the lads under 22 and I want them to go out and play good football.
We can't change our style and we won't.’
MILLWALL boss Mick McCarthy criticised Malcolm Allen who was sent off after 13 minutes of their 3-1 defeat at Watford.
‘He retaliated and you can't do that.
I've told him so.
He will be out for three games and it is all so unnecessary,’ said McCarthy.
CHARLTON boss Steve Gritt was unimpressed with his side's performance even though they won 3-1 at home to Grimsby.
Late show
ALAN MCKINLAY
San Francisco 49-ers 17 Washington Redskins 15
SAN FRANCISCO 49-ers won the American Bowl at Wembley last night before a crowd of 61,722 with a last second 48-yard field goal from kicker Mike Cofer, writes Alan McKinlay.
Two touchdown passes from quarterback Steve Bono — deputising for superstar Joe Montana — sparked a 49-ers come-back from 12-0 down.
Chip Lohmiller's 45-yard field goal had put the Redskins 15–14 ahead with just three minutes left.
OFF TO THE DOGS
Come clean on all coups
HARRY LLOYD
BOOKMAKERS face a reputed £75,000 payout after last Thursday's Hackney coup, but it could be months before ‘winning’ punters know their fate.
The ‘don't pay’ call from betting shops pending an inquiry infuriated punters who genuinely backed the 2-3-4 combination which paid £52.03 for a pound stake.
Canterbury punters waited six months before hearing just their stake money would be returned on a £60,000 coup.
Asked one angry betting shop punter: ‘Why is it only afterwards that we hear of a betting coup?
‘If bookmakers know the pattern of the betting, as they claim, why keep it to themselves?’
Calls for BOLA, the bookmakers' association which represents the majority of High Street betting shops, to reveal the coups that failed have fallen on deaf ears.
Hackney racing manager Michael Marks, who said he found nothing wrong with the running of the race, will remember Black Thursday for other reasons.
Treble
‘It was raining, my car wouldn't start, and I forgot my raincoat.
I'm going into hospital for a hernia operation on Tuesday.
I think I could do with the rest.’
Open race fans could kick off the week with a Crayford treble in tonight's heats of the Carlsberg Vase.
Ballarue Hove, Lovely Charlotte and Noisey Croppy, all course and distance winners, are also well drawn.
On Tuesday, punters' pal Capolla Jack looks the pick in Walthamstow's O'Gorman Hurdles.
Try Queenies Fashion in the other heat.
Dealing Team, who has been knocking on the door at Hackney, should prove too strong for her rivals on Tuesday's BAGS card.
Kapellan (5.22), overdue for a win, should be worth waiting for in the last race at Hove today.
An ease in grade plus the bonus of Trap 1 should all add up to a return to form for the Gordon Hodson runner.
Sunset Hiker, a winner last time, would be a live contender but a difficult trap position may prove a problem.
Between Times (5.04) is on a recovery mission and is given another chance in similar company.
One of the heaviest performers at the seaside track, Between Times was floundering after a slow start.
He ran on in the latter stages, but never looked likely to justify heavy support in the betting market.
DAVE RAPS FANS
NEIL SILVER
Chelsea 1, Oldham 1
BIG Dave Beasant hit back at the Chelsea fans who booed him off the pitch and blasted: ‘You're out of order.’
The man they call Lurch was the villain of the piece after his uncharacteristic boob let in Oldham for an 85th minute equaliser.
Beasant, a master at clearing the ball outside his box, mis-hit one and was left in the lurch as Nick Henry guided the ball home from 50 yards.
The Stamford Bridge faithful turned on the keeper and jeered him until after the players had left the pitch.
But Beasant said: ‘I don't agree with the crowd's reaction.
In the dressing room all the lads said the crowd were out of order.
‘But this thing is tending to happen at lot at Chelsea.
Gareth Hall was an emergency left back and the fans were on his back when he miskicked a ball.
‘They are not a forgiving crowd, they are a bit fickle.
You do something well and they're cheering you, but you make a mistake and they are on your back.
‘They are entitled to their opinion but it doesn't help anyone.’
The truth is that Chelsea should have had the game sewn up long before Beasant's blunder.
Robert Fleck ran his heart out on his debut and might have scored twice.
Then skipper Andy Townsend blasted the ball over the bar with only the keeper to beat.
It seemed the season would start happily when Mick Harford kept up the habit of scoring on his debut with a superb 84th minute strike from 20 yards which went in off the underside of the bar.
Chelsea were still trying to regroup when Beasant's error was punished by Henry.
‘That type of mistake is going to happen to many goalkeepers this season,’ said Beasant.
‘But all the lads have got confidence in me.
Graeme Souness said that Bruce Grobbelaar is the best sweeper, but Don Howe says the same about me.
‘I am confident with the ball at my feet.
This is just one of those things.’
BEASANT: Blunder
Fans fail the screen test
HUGH JAMIESON
B'ham 1, Notts Co 0
BIRMINGHAM manager Terry Cooper yesterday blasted live television coverage and said: ‘It cost us 5,000 fans.’
A St Andrew's crowd of only 10,614 saw little Louie Donowa hammer the winner with a rasping ninth minute volley from 18 yards.
But with Central Television covering the game, Cooper insisted: ‘We would have had 15,000 without the cameras.
‘That's cost us £30,000 in lost support.
Fans are staying at home to watch the match.
We want them here.’
Birmingham's first three week-end home games have been scheduled for live TV.
But at least Cooper could smile at Blues' all-round display.
Relegated County were unlucky, hitting the woodwork twice through Rob Matthews and £2.5 million rated Craig Short.
Short then missed a point-blank header two minutes from time but Blues' sub Ian Rodgerson also rattled a post in injury time.
DONOWA: Volley
REDS IN THE RED
LIVERPOOL are in the red — thanks to an annual wage bill which soared to £8.3m last season.
Big earners like John Barnes, Dean Saunders, Mark Wright, Ian Rush and Michael Thomas helped push up salaries by £2.2m.
Boss Graeme Souness spent nearly £10m on new players, wiping out a trading profit of £3.4m — and the balance sheet does not include the £3.2m outlay on Paul Stewart and David James.
With costly building work still to be done, Liverpool are faced with their worst cash crisis of modern times, despite winning the FA Cup last season.
By RICHARD TANNER 
SOUNESS: Spender
Faldo's second thought
IAN GIBB
NICK FALDO knows that but for his Saturday stumble he would have waltzed away with the US PGA title yesterday here at Bellerive.
Open champion Faldo threaded together an immaculate last round of 67, including four birdies and not a dropped shot, to finish joint second with three others on 281.
But his disastrous 76 on Saturday cost him dearly as Zimbabwe's Nick Price kept his head to take his first major title with a battling 70 for 278 and a three-stroke victory ahead of Faldo, John Cook, Gene Sauers and Jim Gallagher Jnr.
At least Faldo had the satisfaction of seeing American young guns Sauers and Jeff Maggert crumble under the pressure.
Faldo said: ‘I tried to go for it and at least I put a scare into the guys out there.
‘If only I could have made one more birdie at the last, that might have done the trick.’
Yet he still postponed a quick flight out of here, just in case he was involved in a sudden death play-off.
It was a marvellous triumph for Price and his caddie Jeff Medlen, who was loaned out last year because Nick had to pull out of this tournament — and he carried the bag of winner John Daly.
American Cook, who was just caught by Faldo for the Open at Muirfield, finished with a bogey to wreck his chances.
FALDO: Fired 67
Scot wants to stay put
COVENTRY City's highly-rated striker Kevin Gallacher conceded last night that he may have played his last game for the Sky Blues.
But the 25-year-old Scottish international does not want to leave Highfield Road.
Manager Bobby Gould wants £2.5 million for Gallacher.
LENNIE'S LOADED
MATT HUGHES
LENNIE Lawrence, Middlesbrough's big-spending boss, is ready to splash out again to secure Premier League success.
Lennie knows he hasn't any time to play with if Boro are to stay in the big time.
He admitted last night: ‘I can't wait for the players to find their feet in the Premier League.’
The Wearsiders are up against it tomorrow, when they face Manchester City.
And Lennie will have a clearer idea after the game about his side's strengths and weaknesses.
But Lennie seems to have made up his mind that it's his midfield which needs strengthening.
Danger
He said: ‘I could have fielded the best striker in the world against Coventry last weekend.
But without somebody to make the bullets he wouldn't have been able to do the job.
‘I don't want to make rash judgements after just one game but I can't afford to wait.
‘And although we haven't got endless cash, we do have enough for one more quality buy.’
His goalkeeper, Stephen Pears, is doubtful for tomorrow's match after injuring his back in a pre-season friendly at Gillingham.
Pears struggled against Coventry and is now in danger of missing both the match against City and Saturday's clash with champions Leeds.
LAWRENCE: Big spender
BELT UP KINNEAR
Gary Mcallister hits back at Dons in the great Elland Road row
Leeds ace goes on the attack
JOHN EDWARDS
GARY McALLISTER last night laughed off Wimbledon manager Joe Kinnear's stinging attack on champions Leeds.
An angry Kinnear reacted to his side's 2-1 defeat by Howard Wilkinson's men at Elland Road by aiming a double blast at referee Gerald Ashby and Leeds' style of play.
The former Spurs full-back, whose Wimbledon team were among the originators of the direct approach, complained: ‘Leeds hoofed the ball about 50 times further than we ever did and relied on John Lukic knocking it on to Lee Chapman's head for about 70 per cent of their attacks.’
He also blasted Worcester referee Ashby for giving an indirect free-kick early in the second-half against Chris Whyte and raged:
‘You get Mickey Mouse decisions when you come to Elland Road — that's how Leeds managed to win the title.
‘We should have had the most blatant of penalties.
But the referee bottled it — as so many do at Elland Road.’
But stand-in skipper McAllister took all this flak in his assured stride and said: ‘That's two weeks running we've been rubbish because Graeme Souness tried to make out Liverpool were the better side after the Charity Shield.
‘But we've come away with two victories — so we must be doing something right.
Ludicrous
‘Kinnear is entitled to his opinion, but really it's too ludicrous for words to say we're just a long-ball team.
‘Our side isn't the type you could send out every week with instructions just to knock it long all the time.
With the players we've got, it simply wouldn't work.
‘Sure, we can adapt and get the ball forward quickly when needs be, but that's all about having the variety to cope with any situation.
‘Knocking Leeds United isn't exactly new, and now that we're champions I suppose we'll have to put up with it all the more.’
Midfield stylist McAllister vowed to make Kinnear pay for his dig when the sides meet again in February.
‘We'll put his comments away in the locker and bring them out again when we go down to their place,’ said the Scotland international.
‘That will remind us of what he's had to say, and I think he may just find it acts as a spur to show him what we can do.
‘No-one at Elland Road is losing any sleep over what he thinks of us.
We're not hurt by his outburst — more amused by it.
‘If anything was wrong on Saturday, it was a bit of anxiety about making sure we started the season on the right note.
‘For 10 or 15 minutes, we played some smashing stuff.
But we couldn't add to our early goal and just lost our shape a bit when they came back at us.
‘Mind you, not too many teams would concede a late equaliser in those circumstances and still bounce back to snatch a winner.
‘That spoke volumes for the character as well as quality of our squad — no matter what others might think.’
Midfielder David Batty is battling to be fit for tomorrow's trip to Aston Villa after missing the second half of Saturday's win with a damaged calf.
MONDAY'S Mirror Sport on Kinnear's attack
KINNEAR: In a rage at Leeds' style of play
WHAT A JOKE Leeds midfielder Gary McAllister described Joe Kinnear's attack on his side as rubbish and won't lose any sleep over his comments.
WILKINSON: His style is successful
Thanks Nick!
IAN GIBB
NEW US PGA champion Nick Price yesterday paid tribute to Nick Faldo for inspiring him to victory here at Bellerive.
Faldo ruined his chances with a 76 on Saturday — and even a 67 on the last day could only put him in joint second place.
But Price, who has been waiting for his first major title since blowing the British Open ten years ago, said: ‘I learned from his example, watching his Open triumph at Muirfield.’
‘Nick has played good, solid golf under the gun to win five majors while others around him have made their mistakes.’
Meanwhile
Faldo has increased his lead at the top of the world rankings and is now well ahead of Fred Couples and Jose Maria Olazabal.
And Price's win lifted him into the top ten for the first time.
Tense Teddy
HUGH JAMIESON
NOTTINGHAM
Forest striker Teddy Sheringham has been left anxiously marking time on a £2.1 million move to Tottenham.
Sheringham, who cost £2 million from Millwall 12 months ago, was lined up for Spurs a fortnight ago but the deal was called off at the last minute.
Forest's search for a replacement had collapsed, but Sheringham still insists: ‘I'd love it if the transfer was on again tomorrow.’
Sheringham, who hit 24 goals last season and scored Forest's winner in their televised 1-0 clash against Liverpool at the City Ground on Sunday, says: ‘I had virtually concluded negotiations over personal terms with Tottenham's Terry Venables and in my own mind I had already joined Spurs.’
SHERINGHAM: Blow
Crosby hunts Drago
SUNDERLAND boss Malcolm Crosby is preparing a bid for Yugoslav international Drago Brnovic.
Crosby has been given permission to speak to the player by his French club Metz, who want about £175,000 for the unsettled Serb.
The Roker Park men are desperate for more drive and Brnovic, who has won more than 30 Yugoslavia caps, could provide it.
The midfielder had a trial with Manchester City last season but the deal fell through.
LAUGHTON SWOOP
JIM O'BRIEN
BIG spenders Leeds are poised to make another major capture.
Their coffers have been boosted by the £100,000 sale of their former England Rugby Union three-quarter John Bentley and international loose forward Gary Divorty to Halifax.
Leeds boss Doug Laughton is planning to use the cash to press home another transfer swoop after the earlier signings of fullback Alan Tait and second row forward Gary Mercer.
Laughton refuses to be drawn on the Leeds' target, but he is keen on Great Britain tour scrum half Deryck Fox, valued at £150,000 after telling Featherstone he was determined to leave before the start of the new season.
Leeds tempted Bentley to turn professional with a £100,000 contract in November, 1988, while Divorty cost them £90,000 from Hull three years ago.
Wigan are 7-4 on to win the First Division championship with Corals.
Other odds: 7-2 St Helens, 15-2 Castleford, 8-1 Leeds, 12-1 Widnes, 25-1 Warrington, 66-1 Wakefield Trinity, 80-1 Halifax and Hull, 100-1 Bradford Northern, Salford and Sheffield Eagles, 150-1 Hull KR, 500-1 Leigh.
KOO LOOKS A SMASHER
CHARLES FAWCUS
FLYING FILLY Kooyonga pays her first visit to York today all set to bank another £200,000.
The other jockeys riding the talent-packed opposition in the Juddmonte International Stakes are well aware that she is the big target.
‘We've all got her to beat, but that's not to say that we won't be trying our best to do it,’ said John Reid who resumes his Derby-winning partnership with Dr Devious.
‘The Doctor just wasn't at his best when St Jovite murdered him in Ireland and it's taken him a while to get over that.
‘Whatever happens today I'm sure he'll be even better for the race and we'll be ready for the Arc.
‘But you have to respect Kooyonga.
She was the best horse at Ascot where she got disqualified and she was brilliant at Sandown when people said she wouldn't handle going much the same as it will be at York.’
Kooyonga's jockey Warren O'Connor has no doubts on his racehorse of the year whatever happens today.
‘She's always been a star.
I was really down when we got disqualified at Ascot, but she put it all right in the Eclipse.’
Reid will be attending a big jockeys' meeting at York when whips will be among the subjects under discussion.
Steve Cauthen returns from his ban today when one of his rides is Daru -the second horse involved in his Goodwood misfortunes.
Barry Hills' luck took a turn for the better at Goodwood and he's hoping the same applies at York.
‘I've got a few with chances,’ he says.
‘Colorific doesn't meet the best opposition ever seen in the Great Voltigeur and Further Flight looks a worthy favourite for the Lonsdale.’
FACT FILE
TWELVE other clubs who have lost League status since the War: 1951 — NEW BRIGHTON, replaced by Workington.
1960 — GATESHEAD, replaced by Peterborough.
1962 — ACCRINGTON STANLEY, replaced by Oxford.
1970 — BRADFORD PARK AVENUE, replaced by Cambridge.
1972 — BARROW, replaced by Hereford.
1977 — WORKINGTON, replaced by Wimbledon.
1978 — SOUTHPORT, replaced by Wigan.
1987 — LINCOLN, replaced by Scarborough.
1988 — NEWPORT COUNTY, replaced by Lincoln.
1989 — DARLINGTON, replaced by Maidstone.
1990 — COLCHESTER, replaced by Darlington.
1992 — ALDERSHOT, not replaced.
It's all over now for the Stones
FRANK WIECHULA
THIRD DIVISION Maidstone United became the first casualty club of the new season yesterday — and the fear is more could follow.
The Stones resigned from the Football League, which they joined just three years ago, unable to fulfil their fixtures.
The beleaguered club finished off without a ground, a reported £650,000 in debt and with only two registered players.
They failed to meet the League's noon deadline to provide assurances they could continue and tomorrow's Coca-Cola Cup tie at Reading has been cancelled with the Second Division side getting a bye.
Players' union chief Gordon Taylor — whose organisation helped out the United players with wages — said: ‘We have every sympathy for the players and supporters.
‘It's very sad news because, following Aldershot, we've now had two clubs go out in the last six months.
‘It illustrates the gulf that is developing and the problems clubs lower down the scale have keeping themselves viable on a full-time basis.
‘And that job will become even harder with the separation now of the Premier League and the Football League.
‘We've also had problems reported with Barnet, Northampton and Brighton this summer and I'm just glad that the season's started so we can get some income from gate receipts.
‘But let's not kid ourselves.
I believe it's going to be a lot more difficult at the lower end of the scale unless the new Football League can come up with really competitive sponsors and TV agreements.’
Maidstone chairman John Waugh, who bought the club just three weeks ago, said: ‘I feel desperate for the people that have worked so hard for the club.
‘It is a sad day.
Everyone at the club is shattered.’
MAIDSTONE: Debts
DISH-ASTER FOR SKY
HARRY HARRIS
SKY's live satellite soccer has failed to lift off with viewers according to official figures released yesterday.
Hardly anyone is watching Sky's coverage — while BBC's Match of the Day Saturday night highlights scored an instant winner.
Sky have splashed £304 million over five years for Premier League football, but the evidence shows the incredibly low viewing figure of less than 400,000.
The outstanding, highly entertaining Charity Shield at Wembley between champions Leeds and FA Cup holders Liverpool attracted a mere 390,000 live TV audience on Sky.
Yet Match of the Day's highlights on BBC 1 much later that night had an audience of 5,660,000.
Those figures were released yesterday by the Broadcasters Audience Research Board.
Match of the Day has become Snatch of the Day as their come-back is proving a big attraction, illustrating that recorded highlights have been missed.
Rupert Murdoch's company is not turning out to be all the hype suggested it would.
The first figures hint that armchair fans aren't rushing out to buy dishes because of the new football contract.
Sky are spending £5 million this month on a lavish advertising campaign in a bid to sell more dishes and win more armchair fans.
Most of the advertising budget is being spent on ITV, ironically BSkyB's rivals for the Premier League television deal.
Nearly all the big clubs voted against the deal, wanting to stay with ITV where the product, including sponsors, would get maximum exposure.
The exception was Spurs, whose new owner Alan Sugar is the boss of Amstrad, who manufacture satellite dishes.
Sky will screen 60 live Premier League games, extending Sunday afternoon soccer to Monday nights, angering many managers, including QPR's Gerry Francis.
A survey commissioned by Liverpool indicates that many fans will boycott Monday night games.
Sky Sports commentator Martin Tyler
Sky Sports presenter Andy Gray
TEARS OF A CLOWN!
The carnival is over for Anfield joker Bruce Grobbelaar
JAMES IS NO.1 HIT
HARRY HARRIS
DAVID James is a young man with a mission — to put Bruce Grobbelaar out to grass at Liverpool and challenge Chris Woods as England's No 1 keeper.
And the powerfully-built, agile James is capable of doing both.
England boss Graham Taylor  scrutinised his impressive Premier League debut at Nottingham Forest — and may well find a place for James in his World Cup plans.
James is highly rated by Taylor and sure to challenge the current England goalkeeping trio of Chris Woods, Nigel Martyn and David Seaman.
Martyn became the first £1 million keeper, Seaman the costliest at £1.3 million — now a tribunal has set a £1.3 million fee for James.
Watford wanted £2 million as manager Steve Perryman insisted James will be as significant a signing for Liverpool as Ray Clemence — and Grobbelaar himself.
Now Bruce, one of the game's greatest characters, may have to quit Anfield in search of first team football.
Ironically James is a great admirer.
He says: ‘For years I liked his style more than any other keeper's.
‘He was my kind of keeper.
‘But I haven't come to Liverpool to be number two.
There's been talk of Bruce leaving but it will be a greater achievement for me to establish myself as first choice with him still at the club.’
And James had done just that.
Bruce made it a little easier by abdicating this throne to play for Zimbabwe in the African Nations Cup on Sunday, leaving James to face Forest.
Grobbelaar admitted on his return: ‘I hear the young man had a very good game so I don't think there should be any change.
‘That's always been the Liverpool way — if someone takes your place and does well, you accept it.
‘You can't grumble about it.
That's football.
I knew the situation before I went out.
I weighed it all up and made my decision.’
But Grobbelaar, 34, insists he has no regrets.
He was greeted like a long-lost hero after Zimbabwe's historic 4-1 win over South Africa in Harare.
It ended an eight-year exile for Bruce — and by going home he was handed back his much-cherished Zimbabwean passport.
He added: ‘I'm happy I made the right decision to go back.
The opportunity to go over to regain my citizenship was a must because of the pressure I was under.
‘Now I've achieved my main priority of getting back my passport after a six-year fight.
And I've kept my British one.
‘I was carried off the pitch at the end — to be received like that was one of the best feelings I've experienced in my life.
‘It was a great occasion.
I was born in Durban and brought up in Zimbabwe so it was an historic moment for myself as well as the South Africans.’
Fight
Grobbelaar will be wanted again by his country on August 30 when they play Mauritius in their next Nations Cup-tie.
The Zimbabweans have even changed a World Cup date against Togo to avoid clashing with Grobbelaar's testimonial game against Everton on October 10.
Whether he goes back again or not depends on his fight to regain his Liverpool spot.
He added: ‘They will ask for my release but if I am back in Liverpool's first team then I'll have to weigh it up.
‘It was great to play international football again.
‘And Zimbabwe have got a very good chance of qualifying for the African Nations Cup AND the World Cup.’
BUILDING FOR THE FUTURE: England's Under-21 goalkeeper David James is aiming to become a permanent fixture at Anfield
LAST LAUGH: Grobbelaar's Zimbabwean safari could mean the end for Liverpool's clown prince of goalkeeping
Come and back us
LENNIE Lawrence is urging Middlesbrough fans to vote with their feet — starting tonight in the home game against Manchester City.
Lawrence insists the club needs 18,000 gates this term and warned: ‘Last season's 15,000 average isn't good enough for the Premier League.’
Ian Ironside will be in the Boro goal if Stephen Pears fails a late fitness test.
Arsenal gun for Thomas
HARRY HARRIS
ARSENAL still want to sign Geoff Thomas after Kenny Dalglish yesterday pulled out of a £3 million deal — but a simmering feud threatens any transfer.
Bad blood between Palace chairman Ron Noades and Arsenal vice-chairman David Dein is a major barrier.
A dismissive Noades blasted yesterday: ‘We're not interested in dealing with Arsenal.’
He accuses a ‘small band’ of top clubs of working against the rest within the Premier League and wants a boycott of dealings with them.
But the door opened again for Arsenal to land Palace skipper Thomas when loadsamoney Blackburn boss Dalglish changed direction.
His top targets are now Notts County defender Craig Short and a goalkeeper — either Liverpool's Bruce Grobbelaar or Bournemouth's Vince Bartram.
Arsenal have always been Thomas's first choice, but talks between the clubs broke down acrimoniously two weeks ago when a £2.5 million offer was rejected.
Palace are themselves interested in splashing out £2 million on Wimbledon's Terry Phelan.
THOMAS: Target
OH GORD!
IT'S YOU AGAIN
Strachan Mark Two
Leeds meet their match
JOHN EDWARDS
CHAMPIONS Leeds will be up against a familiar figure tonight — a Gordon Strachan clone!
The little Scot's impish skills were at their most destructive last November when Leeds visited Villa Park for a live TV match and turned it into a Sunday slaughter.
Strachan was at the hub of a spellbinding 4-1 triumph that underlined his inspirational effect on Leeds' push for the title.
The 35-year-old skipper's tireless, selfless scheming brought the best out of others and kept Leeds' fortunes soaring sky-high.
Opponents frequently struggled to cope with that type of galvanising influence as Howard Wilkinson's team may discover for themselves on their return to Villa Park tonight.
Master wheeler-dealer Ron Atkinson landed one of the bargains of the summer when he paid Liverpool £800,000 for Ray Houghton.
Threat
Big-spending Big Ron immediately tagged the Glasgow-born midfielder Strach Mark Two — and Scottish international Gary McAllister sees no reason to argue.
Midfield stylist McAllister will keep the captaincy tonight if Strachan is again left on the bench.
And he was quick to acknowledge the threat posed by the vastly-experienced Houghton as Leeds bid to build on Saturday's opening win over Wimbledon.
‘Ron compared getting Ray to Leeds signing Strach three years ago, and I can see what he means,’ said McAllister.
‘To be fair, it's a hell of an act to follow when you consider Gordon has already led us to two championships in the space of three seasons.
‘But Ray is quality through and through and is the sort of player who can give the whole Villa team a real lift.
‘I was a bit surprised Liverpool let him go after he looked one of their best players last season, but I don't suppose Ron is too worried about that.
‘He'll just be delighted at signing someone who is a real player's player.
‘Ray has always been one of the most popular and respected figures around for his ability and conduct, and I'm sure he will prove an outstanding signing for Villa.’
McAllister can even recognise the same Strachan-like industry and inventiveness in Villa's 30-year-old Republic of Ireland international.
‘Ron wants Ray to do the same sort of job, and there are definite similarities between the two,’ he said.
‘Firstly, they are both constantly in the thick of the action.
‘They make things happen and are always geeing people up, and that does lift other players in the team.
‘There is no doubting their skill, and they even have the same way of scampering round the pitch and keeping people on their toes.’
Leeds expect full-backs Jon Newsome and Tony Dorigo to shake off minor knocks but await a late fitness test on England midfielder David Batty.
HOUGHTON is a Strachan clone
THANK YOU DAILY MIRROR
AN OPEN LETTER FROM DEREK REDMOND
NEIL SILVER
DEREK REDMOND, Britain's crocked Olympic hero, vowed last night: ‘I'll go for gold again.’
The courageous 400 metres star captured the hearts of the British public when he bravely hobbled 200 metres to the finishing line, propped up by his dad Jim, after being crippled by a pulled hamstring in his semi-final in Barcelona.
It was an act which touched the heart of the watching world.
Redmond received many messages of sympathy and he answered them all last night when he promised: ‘I will run again.
My goal is, as it always was, to win an Olympic medal.
‘When I succeed I will do so for me, for my family and for the people of Britain.’
Redmond was overwhelmed by the support he received from the British public during and since the Olympics and asked to send a message through the Daily Mirror.
He said: ‘It is incredible to find that the whole country shares your pain.
‘It has helped me see more than ever that I compete for my country and always will.’
THANK YOU ALL: Derek Redmond's letter to the Mirror FRONT PAGE NEWS: Daily Mirror, August 4
Magpies ban fans
NEWCASTLE are to ban visiting fans from St James' Park next season.
Ground capacity at the club is to be cut to under 19,000 while rebuilding work goes ahead and chairman Sir John Hall said: ‘Our own supporters come first.’
WE'VE BOTH DONE GOOD
BOTHAM AND SON (HE'S MAGIC, TOO) POISED FOR A TOP-LINE DOUBLE ACT
Liam rivals the old man
COLIN PRICE
IAN BOTHAM and son Liam create cricket history 60 miles apart today — for while Ian runs out at Trent Bridge for his 114th one-day international appearance, son Liam gets his first one-day England call at Oundle School, Peterborough.
Beefy has been recalled for the resumed Texaco Trophy series in a bid to give England a clean-sweep revenge for their World Cup final beating by Pakistan.
Liam, an all-rounder like his dad, plays in the first under-15 schools one-day international against South Africa.
‘That's something for the family album.
I don't think it has ever been done before,’ said proud dad.
‘I've been to watch Liam play in the mini-Test against South Africa at Derby and he's coming on very well.’
The recall of Botham and Allan Lamb open up the prospect of 20 of the 22 players who contested the World Cup final clashing again in the third Texaco match.
That defeat in Melbourne still hurts Botham.
He said: ‘I still maintain we were the best team in the tournament until injuries caught up with us.
‘We're two up in the Texaco and nothing less than a 5-0 whitewash will satisfy me.
‘I've wanted to win every game I have ever played in and I will never change that outlook.
‘Pakistan are going to be a tougher proposition this time because they have gained confidence from winning a series.
But we can take them.’
Botham's recall took many by surprise after age and injuries appeared to catch up with him in the Test series.
But he said: ‘I never wrote myself off and it was amusing reading some of the stuff that was churned out.
A bit like being able to read your own obituary.’
Pakistan's main doubt is skipper Javed Miandad who has been laid up in London with a stomach complaint since leading Pakistan to Test victory at the Oval.
Coach Intikhab Alam said: ‘He has been having rest and regular medication and he is most likely to play.’
Liam made a debut his dad will have admired at Abergavenny earlier this month when he wrecked Wales schoolboys with a five-wicket haul in the first innings.
He followed that up with a typical Beefy blast to win the match with a  fusillade of sixes in a sparkling unbeaten 70.
That clinched his place in the first-ever meeting between South African schools and England — and he has not looked back.
And as soon as his own net duties were over on Tuesday and yesterday, Ian made the short trip to Derby to spectate.
Despite his return to the England scene, Botham has no intention of making himself available for one last tour to India this winter.
He still hopes to play against his favourite enemy Australia next summer but said:
‘Nothing's changed.
I haven't toured for a few years now, apart from the World Cup and I made that an exception because I felt we could go all the way and win it.’
‘I've been on 10 or 11 tours in my career and it's time that I spent a little while with my family.
They deserve to have a father around.’
Senior service FATHER Ian has proved once again that England need him — that the old Beefy talent just cannot be written off
Lion cub SON Liam has already shown his prowess with a five-wicket international haul
JACKSON FLYING HIGH
BERNIE LOVETT
COLIN Jackson, a disappointment at the Barcelona Olympics, beat American silver medallist Tony Dees in the men's high hurdles at the Zurich Grand Prix athletics meeting last night.
European champion Jackson, seventh of eight in the Olympic final after hitting barriers, led from the start to win in 13.06 seconds.
The 25-year-old Welshman, who had been favourite to take the Olympic title, has been unbeaten since the Games.
Canada's Mark McKoy, the Olympic champion and Jackson's training partner, did not take part, but both twice-Olympic champion Roger Kingdom and three-times world champion Greg Foster were present.
Kingdom finished fourth and Foster seventh.
Not so dishy!
HARRY HARRIS
SKY'S ‘Super Sunday’ soccer presentation was slammed by American TV expert  Professor Ellis Cashmore yesterday.
He said it was three hours too long and was full of boring statistics and graphics.
‘The fans don't want all that,’ he said.
‘They want to know the score and who scored.’
Spurs dash for Fash
NEIL SILVER
TOTTENHAM are set to renew their interest in Wimbledon striker John Fashanu after failing to capture Teddy Sheringham.
But the north London giants will have to fight off a bid from Everton who want to take the bustling hit-man to Merseyside.
Fashanu has been a 20-goal-a-season man ever since Wimbledon rode their magic carpet into the top flight.
That has led Wimbledon to put huge price tags on his head and wealthy owner Sam Hammam has even promised to make him president of the Dons.
But Fashanu is desperate to play on the big stage and with Wimbledon's crowds at an all-time low, they may be forced to part with their biggest star.
The Dons broke up their star-studded FA Cup-winning side of 1988 which upset the odds to beat Liverpool.
Dave Beasant, Eric Young, Dennis Wise, Andy Thorn, Vinny Jones and substitute Brian Gayle were all sold.
Terry Phelan was also in the side and is on the verge of a £2.5 million move.
The other big name to come and go after the Cup final was Keith Curle when the price is right.
Tottenham have failed to prise Sheringham away from the City ground and are still looking for a replacement for Gary Lineker.
Terry Venables thought he had a deal with Forest, having agreed terms with Sheringham, but then Brian Clough pulled the plug because he had no replacement lined up.
Fashanu, 29, has made no secret of the fact that he wants to fill Lineker's boots for England, even offering to cut down his  commitments outside of soccer for his country and a move to Spurs would help.
FASHANU: Chase
BANG
Boss Reid hammers big Niall
Middlesbrough 2, Man City 0
ANGRY City boss Peter Reid blew his top at sent off striker Niall Quinn.
the Republic of Ireland international got the red card after throwing a punch at opposite number Paul Wilkinson as City crashed to defeat.
Middlesbrough peacemaker Alan Kernaghan wrapped his arms around Quinn as Wilkinson walked away rubbing his jaw.
But the lanky striker got no such protection from his own manager following the 24th-minute incident as Reid blasted: ‘We all know the rules and there is no excuse for that.
If you put your hands up you go off the field.’
But Reid's fury was outweighed by his concern over Paul Lake, who was carried off after seven minutes with what appeared to be a recurrence of the knee injury that kept him out for two years.
If that wasn't bad enough, City were destroyed in a two-minute burst from Bernie Slaven.
He beat the offside trap in the 15th minute, and headed home a John Hendrie cross in the 17th.
QUINN: Dismissed
Glenn hits back at new law
Bristol Rov 3, Swindon 4
SWINDON player-manager Glenn Hoddle has called for the new back-pass laws to be changed immediately.
The former England international slammed the new rules as ‘crazy’ after his side threw away a three-goal lead.
He insisted: ‘In the 18-yard box you should be allowed to pass the ball back to the goalkeeper.
It should be as simple as that.
‘They have to look at the laws now.
It's no good leaving it till the end of the season.’
Hoddle's anger came after Rovers had pulled back to 4-3 with a goal two minutes from time from a free-kick awarded when goalkeeper Frazer Digby picked up a loose ball.
Two-goal Dave Mitchell fired Swindon into an early lead.
There were seven bookings in an untidy game and Hoddle added: ‘The problems tonight were totally because of the new laws of the game.
‘Both teams got excited, as did the crowd.
Referees are under pressure and that is wrong.’
MITCHELL: Two goals
BRING ON LEWIS
Bruno's world dream fight
But first he must topple Coetzer
FRANK WIECHULA
FRANK BRUNO is urging bitter rival Lennox Lewis to world title glory — and set up the biggest British heavyweight battle of all time.
Big Frank's third comeback opponent will be top South African Pierre Coetzer at Wembley Arena on October 17.
And promoter Mickey Duff has applied to the IBF and WBA to have the fight recognised as a world title eliminator.
A fortnight later Lewis takes on Canadian Razor Ruddock at Earl's Court in a world title eliminator for the WBC.
Victories for both Brits would propel them to within one fight of a king-sized domestic dust-up for the world crown that could be worth around £5 million next summer.
It's the clash that all Britain is aching to see and Bruno, firmly back on the comeback trail after two straight KO's can't wait.
Big Frank said: ‘I'd love to fight Lewis for the world title.
And I think a contest between us will come off.
‘It'd be a historic showdown and I'd love to take part in it.
But if we did meet it would have to be on my terms.
‘I want to fight for the world title and to do it against a fellow Brit would be just great.
‘I came back after two years out of the ring because boxing's in my blood and because I feel I can win the title.
‘I know I have the power to do it.
This is my second time around and I've got to go for it.
I feel confident and mentally and physically right.
‘The scene is wide open and I think I'm reaching my peak now.
I'm maturing, feeling good and getting better every day.’
But before Bruno can fulfil his dream of a third crack at sport's biggest single prize, he must overcome Coetzer.
The tough-guy South African was beaten in seven rounds in an explosive world title eliminator against Riddick Bowe in Las Vegas last month.
It was hailed as one of the best heavyweight bouts of recent times and Bowe's reward was a shot at undisputed champion Evander Holyfield on November 13.
If Lewis gets past Ruddock on October 31 he'll meet the winner of Holyfield-Bowe — and after that Bruno is ready and waiting to step into the world title frame.
Bruno never takes an opponent for granted but said: ‘I saw the tape of Coetzer's fight with Bowe and to be quite honest I don't think there's any problem with him.
‘I know he's very durable and very fit and comes to fight.
But I've got the tools to fix him.’
Bruno then gave his view on the other two big heavyweight clashes coming up: ‘Bowe is a very good boxer, strong, young and very confident and seeing his last fight I fancy him against Holyfield.
‘He's got the bulk, the movement and the style and has a bit of power there.
‘Lewis's fight with Ruddock is a very dangerous one for Lennox.
Ruddock had two hard fights with Mike Tyson and took some heavy punishment.
‘You just never know what's going to happen in a fight and I wish Lewis all the best.’
Package
The Coetzer fight is the last of the original three-bout package agreed between Bruno and promoter Mickey Duff, and they are having talks about extending it to another two fights.
Bruno knocked out hapless John Emmen last November and then big Cuban Jose Ribalta in April and now faces his stiffest test against the 31-year-old who has won 39 and lost three.
Duff said: ‘Of course it's a risk fighting Coetzer.
It's undoubtedly the hardest fight Frank has had since his comeback.
LEWIS: Tough test
FISTS OF FIRE FRANK Bruno was yesterday promising a hot time for his next opponent Pierre Coetzer at a Press conference in London when a fire alarm went off and the building had to be evacuated.
Picture: BILL KENNEDY
Karl won't move
MARTIN RICHARDS
BRADFORD Northern have refused a bid from Leeds for Great Britain forward Karl Fairbank.
Leeds said they had offered a six-figure sum for Fairbank and manager Doug Laughton wanted the player in his side for the home game with St Helens on Sunday week.
But Bradford coach Peter Fox said the bid was for £60,000 plus prop Steve Molloy and centre Carl Gibson.
An angry Fox said: ‘I am not interested in those players and I am not interested in Fairbank going anywhere.
‘Karl has given me no indication that he wants to leave and Paul Dixon is the only player they have got who is good enough to get in my side.
‘They must think we are mugs, offering us inferior players for our best player.’
But Laughton hit back: ‘A lot of cash is involved and the offer is a good one.
‘Bradford said they needed players and were interested in taking Paul Dixon.
But Dixon is needed here and he won't be going anywhere.’
Leeds are also confident that Aussie Test forward Mark Geyer will be in their pack in early September.
FAIRBANK: Offer
Christie crunch
OLYMPIC sprint champion Linford Christie could clash with Carl Lewis in Berlin tonight.
Lewis, down to run in the 200m, wants to switch to the 100m to meet Christie.
Danny dream
DANNY Porter has vowed to take Scotsman Pat Clinton's WBO flyweight title in Glasgow on September l9.
‘He beat me three years ago, but it will be different this time,’ said Porter at a press conference yesterday.
‘I would like to assure the Scottish people that the Danny Porter who lost to Clinton in 1989 for the British title will not be the same man who fights Clinton next month.’
LIFE AFTER ANDY
Wigan call up their young guns
Jason's a class act
MARTIN RICHARDS
JASON Robinson heads a posse of Wigan young guns who will be given their head this season as the champions face life without Andy Gregory.
Wigan have predicted a golden future for 18-year-old utility back Robinson, who will play in Sunday's CIS Charity Shield clash against St Helens at Gateshead.
‘Jason  excites me as a player just as much as Gregory or Alex Murphy did when they where 18year-olds,’ said Wigan chairman Jack Robinson.
‘He's like a pocket Ellery Hanley with great strength and pace.
‘It's no use investing a great deal in youngsters like Robinson if we don't give them the chance to prove themselves.
‘People forget that the nucleus of our side — notably our pack — is made up of players who have come through the junior ranks.’
Robinson and other outstanding youngsters like Barry-Jon Mather, Andy Farrell and Mick Cassidy are all set to play bigger roles in a Central Park side now stripped of Gregory and Aussie Gene Miles.
Chairman Robinson said: ‘There is only one Andy Gregory and he was the most influential player in our years of success since 1987.
‘He's a brilliant passer of a ball and one of the most courageous half-backs I've seen.
‘It's the end of an era but there are no hard feelings and we wish him well.
We wanted him to finish his career at Wigan but once we couldn't agree terms with him, we had to buy a replacement in Martin Crompton and we have to back him now.
‘It might take a few games for Martin to settle into the side but he is a good team man and strong defensively.
‘Andy's move will certainly add spice to the Wigan-Leeds games this season, as long as he doesn't turn us over!’
Wigan coach John Monie added: ‘We are obviously going to miss Gene and Andy and we are not as strong as we were.
It's going to pull us a little bit closer to the rest of the pack but we have still got a good squad.’
Wigan are hoping to negotiate a new deal with Andy Platt and also have their sights on an Australian player, believed to be Western Suburbs centre Andrew Farrar.
And versatile international Joe Lydon has signed a new 12-month contract to keep him at Central Park.
LEEDS coach Doug Laughton gets to grips with new boy Andy Gregory.
Rebels back down
HULL KR's pay rebels have accepted the cash-starved club's £400-a-win terms.
Most of the players backed down from a damaging dispute at a meeting with chairman Phil Lowe yesterday.
‘They realise we can't afford to pay contract money,’ Lowe said.
‘If the financial situation improves, we will take another look at it.’
But the chairman still has to meet star centre Graeme Hallas, who is on the transfer list at £180,000 and talking to three other clubs.
SCOTS ON THE ROCKS
HARRY HARRIS on two top soccer bosses who are finding it's no jock at the bottom
We've got to be more physical
Graham in clash with ‘fatso’ Paul
HARRY HARRIS
PAUL MERSON may have been bombed out of the Arsenal team by George Graham for being overweight.
Rumours of a row between Graham and Merson are circulating, and that will only damage still further the Gunners' cause after two shock defeats leaves them bottom of the new Premier League.
Merson was substituted during the shock 4-2 home defeat by Norwich, and was consigned to the reserves for the next match.
He was left out while the first team travelled to Blackburn with speculation mounting that he was as much as 6lb too heavy.
The official reason for Merson's absence was that he was unfit, carrying an ankle injury as a legacy from the European championship.
It is true that Merson has been handicapped by an ankle complaint, which has restricted his pre-season training.
Yet Merson played the full 90 minutes in the reserves against Wimbledon on Tuesday instead of being involved in the defeat at Ewood Park!
That has given momentum to the rumour that Merson and Graham clashed verbally over the player's weight on Monday.
Graham axed David Rocastle two seasons ago, accusing him of being overweight after the summer break.
There would be no shortage of clubs interested if the dispute escalated, but Graham will want Merson in peak condition rather than out of the club.
Arsenal are bottom of the new Premier-League along with Manchester United, urgently needing Ian Wright and Merson back to full fitness and goal-scoring potential.
Arsenal play a vital match at Liverpool on Sunday where the England pair are hoping to make their comebacks.
Graham has already suffered the indignation this week of the bookmakers slashing Arsenal's odds against relegation.
The bookies installed the Gunners as favourites for the title — only to halve their odds against dropping out of the Premier League to 50-1 after just one week!
Graham has already criticised the players' poor start, suggesting they've gone soft by failing to come to terms with the physical aspect of their opening two games.
Graham said: ‘We lost the solidarity which Arsenal are famous for.’
Sacrifice
After rugged David Shearer barged over Jimmy Carter and Lee Dixon before firing home Blackburn's 85th-minute decider, Graham conceded: ‘We've got to put the physical side of our game back in place — even if it means sacrificing some of the attractive football we want to play.’
John Jenson, Graham's only summer purchase, will miss the next home match against Oldham because of international duty with Denmark.
With Anders Limpar similarly wanted by Sweden, the Gunners much heralded large squad will be sorely depleted at times.
WEIGHT ON HIS MIND: Paul Merson (left) has a fat chance of making George Graham's Arsenal team until he sheds a few pounds
FLASHBACK: Wednesday's Mirror on Graham's woe
JET-SETTER
MANCHESTER United goalkeeper Peter Schmeichel will get the VIP treatment when he flies out for Denmark's World Cup qualifying match on Monday.
The great Dane is to be rushed to an international rendezvous in a luxury jet that will cost United nearly £7,500.
Schmeichel seemed certain to miss Monday ‘s Premier League match at Southampton because Denmark need him for their game in Latvia on Wednesday.
But Danish coach Richard Nielson said United can play Schmeichel — if he flies out straight after.
United boss Alex Ferguson said: ‘It will be expensive but worth it.
We are indebted to Richard Nielsen for his help.’
SCHMEICHEL
SINNING SAINTS
Dodgy Dell boys continue bad ways
TONY STENSON
SOUTHAMPTON, the bad boys of English soccer, are again under scrutiny for their poor disciplinary record.
The Football Association warned last night they were keeping a close eye on the sinning Saints after collecting five bookings and one dismissal in the opening two games of the season.
Southampton were hit with a £20,000 fine after having 80 cautions, five players sent off and tagged the ‘worst in Britain' last season.
Now fur is about to fly after Micky Adams was sent off on Wednesday night against QPR and yesterday Southampton discovered Francis Benali was banned one match for a  similar offence on the pre-season tour of Sweden.
Southampton were ordered to pay just £5,000 up front with the rest hanging over their head.
An FA spokesman added: ‘We are keeping a close watch on the situation.
‘It's too early yet to decide how we will act.
They might not have another booking.
By Christmas we'll have a proper picture.’
Benali, who will now will miss the game against Middlesbrough, was also booked against QPR.
Saint boss Ian Branfoot claims his men are suffering unfairly.
‘I think you get a reputation and it goes before you.
‘It's unfortunate.
Of course we are all under pressure because we don't want to get in the same position as last year.
But people take advantage of the situation.
‘We can't do any more.
The players get fined the maximum allowed.
Nobody escapes.’
ADAMS: Sent off
BENALI: Banned
ROCKY ROAD
Rocastle happy out in the cold
LEEDS United's record buy David Rocastle last night refused to lose heart over his failure to break into the first team at Elland Road.
Howard Wilkinson's £2 million midfielder from Arsenal has yet to win a place, even on the bench.
And Leeds' fighting performance in the mid-week 1-1 draw at Aston Villa has hardly improved his chances of selection at Middlesbrough tomorrow.
Quality
But instead of despairing, Rocastle believes his omission is a sign of Leeds' ability to retain the championship.
‘I was under no illusions I would walk into the team here,’ he said.
‘I knew the position when I arrived.
‘It's all about having quality players and a big squad.
That's what I'm part of here.
‘Having 12 or 13 good players doesn't win you the championship.
‘You need 18 to 20 — and that's what we've got.
‘People need to be at peak form to stay in the side.’
Rocky may get his chance if England midfielder David Batty fails to make it for the Boro game.
Batty couldn't make it for the second half against Villa after a recurrence of a calf injury he received against Wimbledon last Saturday.
Wilko said: ‘David has been in tremendous form in the early games and we can only hope the trouble clears up by Saturday.’
Queue
If Batty is ruled out, Rocky joins the queue of quality midfielders along with Gordon Strachan, Steve Hodge and fellow new-boy Scott Sellars.
IN THE QUEUE: Rocastle
Stew aims for a call
RICHARD TANNER
PAUL Stewart hopes he hasn't blown his chances of an England re-call for next month's friendly in Spain.
Graham Taylor watched Liverpool's £2.2m summer signing make a disappointing Premier League debut at Nottingham Forest on Sunday.
But Stewart was in much better form — and scored the winner — as the Merseysiders launched their title drive with a 2-1 victory over Sheffield United on Wednesday.
The former Spurs star, who has won three caps, said: ‘The England manager was at Forest and I didn't do myself justice.
‘I was happier with the way I played against Sheffield United.
Now I've got to keep that up and see what happens.’
Liverpool are hoping Ian Rush will be fit to return against Arsenal on Sunday — he missed the midweek game with a groin strain.
STEWART: Hoping
BLAKEY CALLED UP
ENGLAND yesterday added Yorkshire wicketkeeper -batsman Richard Blakey to their triumphant Texaco Trophy squad.
Blakey, 25, is expected to play in Monday's final Texaco international at Old Trafford.
Simon Kellett hit 78 and left-hander David Byas 70 as Yorkshire made 341 against Surrey at Bradford.
David Capel took three wickets to put Northants on top against Kent in the clash between the second and third placed championship teams.
Kent were hustled out for 196.
Capel dismissed Mark Benson, Neil Taylor and Matthew Fleming and Kent were grateful to a battling 65 by Steve Marsh for their solitary batting point.
BLAKEY: Ready
BOTHAM SHOCK
IAN BOTHAM is in danger of missing his last big game for England at Lord's today.
The heroic all-rounder visited a specialist in London yesterday about a shoulder injury that has dogged him for some weeks.
Beefy will report fit for today's fourth Texaco Trophy clash with Pakistan, but skipper Graham Gooch said: ‘It's a problem which has troubled Ian for some time.
Although he should be fit I wouldn't rule out him of missing this game.’
Either Dominic Cork or Dermot Reeve will replace him.
Pakistan, desperate to restore their shattered morale after Thursday's humiliation, will have skipper Javed Miandad back.
BOTHAM: Injury
Crowe flying back
COLIN PRICE
DURHAM are ready to bring New Zealand captain Martin Crowe back into county cricket next season while current overseas star Dean Jones tours with Australia.
And that would again link him with Ian Botham, who walked out on Somerset when they previously signed Crowe and sacked his great West Indian pals Viv Richards and Joel Garner.
At the time Botham and Crowe would barely speak but Beefy insists there are no lingering problems.
West Indies captain Richie Richardson is also high on the wanted list.
Skipper David Graveney said: ‘We'll be finalising our plans in the next couple of weeks.’
Daley blow
MARTIN RICHARDS
AUSTRALIA's brilliant stand-off Laurie Daley is set to miss October's World Cup final against Great Britain at Wembley, writes Martin Richards.
Daley's damaged knee is not responding to treatment and he faces surgery.
Penrith skipper Greg Alexander definitely won't be in the Aussie squad.
Alexander hasn't played since his younger brother Ben was killed in a car crash in June.
And he won't return until the beginning of next season.
Former Aussie Test star Peter Sterling will be Perth's first coach if the Western Australian club are allowed into Sydney's Winfield Cup in 1995.
Boks play cool
SKIPPER
Naas Botha took his white Springbok players to a squalid black township yesterday in an attempt to defuse today's potentially explosive Test with Australia in Cape Town.
Politics have dominated the build-up to the Springboks clash with world champions Australia.
No anthems will be sung and a minute's silence for peace will be observed.
If these conditions are not met, South Africa's tour to England in November will be called off by the ANC.
Botha's men travelled by luxury coach to the Nyanga township.
It was the first time that the national team had ever trained in a black area.
After being mobbed by local rugby fans Botha said: ‘We have come here to prove that we are all equal and our rugby is unified.’
The Test is likely to be the last international outing for Nick Farr-Jones, the Australian captain.
He leads his country out for a world-record 36th time and would only continue at the top if the Springboks win.
He knows the South Africans are touring Australia next year and the need for revenge would keep him interested.
Australia's only worry is Michael Lynagh, who has needed intensive treatment on a knee injury.
FARR-JONES: Record
Giant Erik faces poser
NEIL SILVER
SPURS goalkeeper Erik Thorstvedt is facing a ‘club or country’ dilemma.
The giant Norwegian international was due to join his country for their friendly against Sweden next Wednesday — but now he may be needed to play for Spurs against champions Leeds at Elland Road on Tuesday.
Thorstvedt started the season as number two at White Hart Lane behind England Under-21 international Ian Walker.
But Walker injured his back against Coventry on Tuesday and is almost certain to miss Saturday's visit of Crystal Palace.
That means Thorstvedt, who came on as sub against Coventry and saved a penalty as Spurs crashed 2-0, will suddenly find himself back in the number one spot.
If Walker also fails to recover in time for Tuesday's trip to Leeds, Thorstvedt will face the agonising decision of whether to play for club or country.
Thorstvedt said last night: ‘First things first, I'll take the Crystal Palace game and then decide what to do.’
Spurs boss Doug Livermore said: ‘Ian is struggling to be fit for Saturday, so that will give Erik his big chance.’
THORSTVEDT: Dilemma
DON'T EXPECT ANY CHARITY
Saints aim to pluck Cherries
Wigan run hot
MARTIN RICHARDS
RUGBY LEAGUE'S deadliest rivals lock horns in the season's big curtain-raiser at Gateshead tomorrow — and the heat will be as fierce as ever.
Wigan and St Helens take no prisoners whenever they meet.
Their CIS Charity Shield clash promises to be the hottest in the eight-year history of the contest.
Saints were Wigan's closest challengers in the Cherry and Whites' march to the triple crown last season.
And Mike McClennan's men have been installed as 7-2 second favourites behind Wigan, who are 4-7 on for a fourth successive title triumph.
‘Wigan-St Helens games are always ultra competitive no matter what the occasion, ‘said Wigan coach John Monie.
‘They have a special intensity, and often a bit of nastiness, which makes them compelling matches to watch.
‘They seem to seem to bring the best out of both teams.’
Despite the excitement caused by Leeds raids into the transfer market, Monie and the Wigan players are convinced that St Helens will be the biggest hurdle this season.
‘Sunday's game will be a good test of what we will be up against.
We've still got a very strong squad despite losing Andy Gregory and Gene Miles,’ said Monie.
Wigan faced a similar situation at the beginning of last season after Ellery Hanley and Kevin Iro left the club.
But Monie knows that the loss of Miles and Gregory will be even harder to make up, even though they have great faith in new scrum half signing Martin Crompton.
Veteran
Saints, beaten four times by Wigan last season, aim to throw down the gauntlet early with victory at the International Stadium.
Their veteran prop Kevin Ward commented: ‘I never knew there was so much intense rivalry between the two clubs until I came to St Helens.
‘Beating Wigan in any game means so much to the St Helens club and its supporters.’
Ward, now 34, has no intention of making this his last season.
‘My one remaining ambition is to win a championship medal and I'll keep on playing as long as my legs will carry me,’ he said.
Partners
Monie is without Shaun Edwards (broken thumb), Martin Dermott (elbow) and Neil Cowie (groin) plus Test prop Andy Platt, who is out of contract and has still to agree new terms.
But they still have a side boasting 11 full internationals.
Frano Botica and Martin Crompton form a new half back partnership with one of Wigan's outstanding youngsters, Mick Cassidy, filling in for Dermott at hooker.
St Helens: Veivers; Hunte, Connolly, Ropati, Sullivan; Griffiths, O'Donnell; Neill, Dwyer, Ward, Harrison, Mann, Cooper.
Subs: Riler, Forber.
Wigan: Hampson; Panapa, Bell, Lydon, Offiah; Botica, Crompton; Lucas, Cassidy,
Skerrett, Betts, McGinty, Clarke.
Subs Mather, Myers.
KEVIN Ward will be taking no prisoners against bitter rivals Wigan
Bassett bets on Gerry
JOHN EDWARDS
DAVE Bassett last night named his title dark horses — unfancied QPR.
The former Wimbledon boss takes his vastly-improved Sheffield United side to Loftus Road today, full of praise for the way Gerry Francis has transformed Rangers' fortunes.
‘'We've made quite an impact since Christmas, but Rangers have done even better,’ he said.
‘I would rate them the most improved team in the land over the past year.
‘Ray Wilkins is still a tremendous influence in midfield, and a few of the players Gerry has introduced have really blossomed.
‘They are my outside tip for the title.’
Today's game will be Rangers' third match in five days and striker Les Ferdinand admits: ‘Tired legs could be a factor.’
Rangers were forced into their hectic schedule when BSkyB decided to screen their opening game at Manchester City live on Monday — just 48 hours before a home game with Southampton.
‘We just have to get on with it,’ said Ferdinand.
‘Whether we like it or not we have to play and there's no point in playing half-heartedly — particularly against a team managed by Dave Bassett!’
BASSETT: Tipster
FERDINAND: Fear
DEANE-AMITE
Brian primed to explode on England scene
Bassett booster
JOHN EDWARDS
GOAL machine Brian Deane was last night tipped to spearhead England's World Cup qualifying campaign.
The Sheffield United marksman posted an early application to succeed Gary Lineker by producing his lethal best for England boss Graham Taylor.
Dynamo Deano dazzled Taylor with a two-goal solo show against Manchester United, and followed up by running Mark Wright ragged at Anfield in midweek.
The 24-year-old has claimed all three Blades goals so far and is out on his own as the leading candidate for Lineker's shirt, according to team-mate Ian Bryson.
‘You've got to fancy his chances, particularly after Graham Taylor watched him against United — that can only have helped his cause.
‘The great thing is that he's over his glandular fever and has ended all the speculation about his future by signing a new contract.
‘He's now able to concentrate solely on his football, and it's beginning to dawn on him just how good he really is.
‘He was tremendous against Mark Wright — and when you consider he's as good a centre-half as any, you just know Deano need fear no-one.
‘It's great to see him looking sharp and hungry for goals.’
With midfielder John Gannon passing a test on a calf strain, manager Dave Bassett has no injury worries against a QPR side he believes can emerge as title dark horses.
‘Gerry Francis has done an excellent job, and they could be the surprise package,’ he said.
And Bassett's players are armed with a ready-made excuse if they lose at Loftus Road today — they'd been out celebrating New Year's Eve!
Bassett — always one to Hog-many headlines — caused a stir last week by throwing an early Christmas party at a festive-looking, balloon-bedecked Bramall Lane.
The idea — to kid his players into producing their cracking post-Christmas form from the start of the season — worked a treat as they sleighed United.
The only problem was convincing them they couldn't follow up with a New Year's knees-up a week later.
Still, ‘Arry Boy was good enough to dress up as Old Father Time for our exclusive picture.
And the message for QPR was clear enough — we're ready to scythe you down!
TIME'S ON MY SIDE HARRY Bassett hopes his act as Old Father Time will give his Blades a greater cutting edge — bringing forward their New Year form by four months Picture: PHIL SPENCER
TOP SON
Darren's a chip off the old block
I'm glad I didn't sell him to Clough
KEN LAWRENCE
DARREN FERGUSON has won over his biggest critic — Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson, who also just happens to be his dad.
And the Old Trafford boss last night thanked his lucky stars that he turned down Brian Clough's approach for his 20-year-old son.
Ironically, Clough's own kid Nigel had to undergo the same perpetual ultra-critical appraisal of his skills before the Forest manager would accept the striker as a player first and a member of the family second.
Now Fergie junior, one of the few real success in United's so-far disastrous Premier League start, has come through the toughest test any youngster can undergo — pleasing his father.
And proud dad Alex said last night: ‘When I arrived down here from Aberdeen my then assistants Archie Knox and Brian Kidd said I would be silly to let a good player go just because he was my son.
‘Brian Clough made the lad a terrific offer but there was only one place he wanted to be, and that was Old Trafford.
‘Now I am very happy with the decision I made to sign him.
‘I was cautious about taking on Darren, knowing the kind of pressures managers’ sons have to endure.
‘But I am now convinced he has the talent and is ready for the big challenge every Manchester United player faces.’
Rivals
Midfielder Ferguson, indeed, has outshone most of his more experienced rivals as he fills in for injured Bryan Robson, as the expense of England's Neil Webb.
Ferguson senior added: ‘All I ask is for the United fans to judge him on what he does on the pitch and not as the manager's son.
‘I think he has a terrific attitude to the game.
He has the temperament to cope with the job at Old Trafford.’
Young Ferguson's determined attitude will be required in full today as United attempt a recovery exercise following defeats by Sheffield United and Everton.
Manager Ferguson is still undecided on his team but £1million Dion Dublin looks likely to start his first game.
FERGIE-SON
YOUNG Darren Ferguson's ability persuaded his dad Alex not to sell him to Forest — and now he's the bright spot in United's poor start to the season
Nevin suits Aldo
RICHARD TANNER
JOHN Aldridge greeted the arrival of Pat Nevin at Tranmere by saying: ‘I'm hoping for even more goals now.’
Nevin, a £300,000 club record signing from Everton on Thursday, goes straight in for his debut at Sunderland today.
And ace marksman Aldo is rubbing his hands in glee at the prospect.
Eight of his 40-goal tally last season came during Nevin's loan spell with Tranmere.
Aldo said: ‘Playing with wingers has always been my game.
My strength is from crosses.
Service
‘Things went really well for me at Liverpool when I had John Barnes on one side and Ray Houghton on the other.
‘I'm hoping it'll be the same here with Pat and John Morrissey providing the service.’
Nevin, out in the cold for the last year at Goodison, said: ‘I'm aiming to create as many goals as possible for Aldo and help take Tranmere into the Premier League.
‘I'm very excited about joining them.
I've missed playing football badly.’
Aston Villa boss Ron Atkinson has had an increased bid of £425,000 for Aldridge rejected.
ALDRIDGE: Glee
NEVIN: Record
Gord's great army
JOHN EDWARDS
GORDON Strachan was last night hailed as the secret weapon behind Leeds' unbeaten start to the season.
The veteran skipper, 35, rallied his troops to prise a last-gasp winner from Wimbledon, and repeated the trick to force a draw at Villa Park in mid-week.
Leeds' boss Howard Wilkinson said: ‘The sight of Strach entering the fray will have sent a shudder through them.
Players of his calibre will always scare opponents because they always seem to make the right decisions.’
And Strachan beamed: ‘I'm just happy to be back.
I thought it would be up to seven weeks after my back operation before I was playing again, and I feared I might miss the first month of the season.’
Strachan may yet be promoted at Middlesbrough today if England midfielder David Batty fails a late test on a calf injury.
Middlesbrough boss Lennie Lawrence is considering a raid on Sheffield Wednesday striker Paul Williams.
Williams, 27, started his career under Lawrence at Charlton.
And Lawrence confirmed yesterday: ‘I would not discount making a move if I could get him for something like £700,000.’
STRACHAN: Super
LAWRENCE: Move
Fleck's Blues recall
CHELSEA recall striker Robert Fleck to a 16-man squad for today's trip to Sheffield Wednesday.
The Scottish international missed the midweek defeat at Norwich as part of an agreement made between the two clubs when he moved from Carrow Road earlier this month.
Chelsea, still looking for their first win of the season, are without the suspended Dennis Wise.
Prolific England marksman David Hirst will be aiming to terrorise Chelsea's defence at Hillsborough.
Hirst faces a race against time to be fit for England's friendly in Spain next month after still feeling his way back from an Achilles tendon injury.
Wednesday bid to maintain their unbeaten start to the Premier League.
FLECK: Return
PERRY'S A SAINT
NEIL SILVER
ARSENAL manager George Graham last night sold Perry Groves to Southampton and said: ‘He never got a fair deal from the fans.’
Groves, Graham's first Highbury signing, joined the Saints for £750,000 — giving the Gunners a profit of almost £700,000.
Winger Groves was a target of the Highbury boo-boys.
So he admitted: ‘I'm relieved to get away.’
Graham added: ‘Perry Groves was an outstanding asset to us but the fans never really appreciated him — he received a lot of unjustified criticism.
‘Yet in his six years here he has won two championship medals and made a big contribution.
‘We've made a healthy profit on him and that will come in handy because it's no secret I'm still looking to buy players to improve our squad.’
Saints boss Ian Branfoot made it a double raid on London when he also signed Chelsea's Dutch defender Ken Monkou for a similar figure.
But neither player will be in the side today at Villa Park.
Groves signed after the midday deadline while Monkou is suspended.
Groves also misses Monday night's televised clash with Manchester United — and the situation left Branfoot fuming.
The rule, introduced for this season, states players must be registered by midday on the last working day before a game.
With Saturday and Sunday not classed as working days, it means Groves is also out for Monday.
‘It's crazy,’ said Branfoot.
‘I've signed the players three clear days before Monday's game.’
Monkou, however, will make his debut then.
GROVES: No favourite
GIFT OF THE GAV!
IPSWICH youngster Gavin Johnson makes his dream trip to Old Trafford today planning to extend Manchester United's nightmare start to the season.
And the midfielder is also bidding to continue a scoring streak that has seen him hit the target in his last four League matches.
‘Old Trafford is the one ground I have wanted to play at more than any other,’ said Johnson, 21.
‘Our aim is to go there and make sure United stay at the bottom of the Premier League.
‘They might be favourites but if we stick to our passing game and play for each other we can shock them.’
Ex-England and Ipswich boss Bobby Robson, now coach of Sporting Lisbon, has sent his Australian international Vlado Bosinoski, to Portman Road for a week's trial.
JOHNSON: Scoring streak
KEV'S CLEAN AWAY
NEWCASTLE boss Kevin Keegan last night vowed to wipe out the bitter memory of their last trip to Derby.
Three Newcastle players were sent off and an angry exchange with the referee earned Keegan a £1,000 fine.
He has lodged an appeal against the size of the fine.
But of today's trip to face Arthur Cox's side at the Baseball Ground he says: ‘This is a different season and we start with a clean sheet.’
Derby are favourites ahead of United for promotion and Keegan admitted: ‘We go into this game as the underdogs.’
Kevin Brock, laid low by a virus, is out of the Newcastle line-up, but Paul Bracewell is likely to shrug off a toe injury.
KEEGAN: Appeal
REID BACKS KENNY
KEN LAWRENCE
PETER REID last night told the rest of English football to stop bleating about Blackburn's spend, spend, spend policy.
The Manchester City manager insists his counterparts should stop moaning over Kenny Dalglish's cheque book charge — and accept the Rovers boss has got his priorities right.
And Reid denies that Dalglish's massive transfer splurge — he has spent more than £10 million in less than a year — has sent the market mad.
Reid, preparing for today's confrontation at Ewood Park, declared: ‘Blackburn have made it harder for the rest of us but there is no point in bleating about it.
‘As a manager you have to do the best by your club, and Kenny is doing that, that is the bottom line.
‘I have always been an admirer of Dalglish as a player and a manager.
He is the kind of person you want to beat because you hold them in such high regard.’
Dalglish spent £5 m this summer alone as he brought in £3.3 m British record buy Alan Shearer and Stuart Ripley as part of a stunning buying campaign.
Yet Reid stressed: ‘Rovers have a lot of financial clout but Kenny has spent wisely.
‘If I had that kind of money I would try to go out and buy the best players available — I would pay the price needed as Kenny has done.
‘I have spent a few quid myself, like breaking the British record for a defender when I spent £2.5 m on Keith Curle.’
Mike Sheron replaces Paul Lake — partnering Niall Quinn, who was sent off at Middlesbrough for fighting.
Reid added: ‘Niall knows he did wrong and he is so disappointed in himself.
But he has held his hands up and I wouldn't swap him for anyone.’
REID: Admirer
COOL GUY
FRANK WIECHULA
HOT-SHOT Mark Robins spearheads surprise leaders Norwich against Everton today with a calming ‘We haven't done anything yet’ message, writes Frank Wiechula.
The £800,000 bargain from Manchester United scored in wins over Arsenal and Chelsea.
But he said: ‘We're not getting carried away — there's still such a long way to go.’
ROBINS: Calm
Frank?
He is fair game!
OUT of Africa comes a bellow of defiance directed at Frank Bruno.
‘Who's no problem?’ roars Pierre Coetzer as he starts training in Johannesburg for their fight at Wembley on October 17.
Coetzer, 6ft 4ins and nearly 16 stones, was ranked No.1 contender by the WBA and IBF until last month in Las Vegas, when Riddick Bowe stopped him in round seven.
But trainer-manager Alan Toweel tells me: ‘The crowd gave Pierre a standing ovation and then Bowe came into our dressing-room.
‘He said: ‘Man, nobody's ever given me a fight like that.
Nobody's ever hit me as hard as you did.’'
Coetzer's punch, especially his left hook, is the danger to Bruno.
Twenty-seven of his 39 wins were inside the distance.
Also, Frank's ‘chinny’.
Remember the KOs by Bonecrusher Smith, Tim Witherspoon, Mike Tyson and that saved-by-the-bell escape from Jumbo Cummings in an early bout?
Coetzer's chin is solid.
He's been down three times in his career, but always got up to win.
Toweel  said : ‘At 30, he's got two or three good years in him and still believes, as I do, that he can win the world title.
‘Pierre is just as confident as Bruno.
Tell that to Frank.’
MIKE LANGLEY
WHAT a thoughtful company are Ford Motors.
They don't only help to sponsor Sky's TV Soccer but close down a factory and various assembly lines so that their workers will have time to watch!
IT'S A FACT
396,785 was the total attendance at 4l League matches, comparing with last year's total at 40 matches of 447,352
IT'S A FACT QUICKEST
LEE Ferdinand took all of 125 seconds to score Q.P.R.'s first goal in their 3-2 win over Sheffield Wednesday 
LES: Rapid fire
PARK IS PIPPED
CHARLES FAWCUS
MARK JOHNSTON'S dream double attempt failed in France yesterday — but only just.Johnston sent out Marina Park for the £100,000 Prix Morny at Deauville in a bid to add to Quick Ransom's Ebor success last week.
The soft ground was against his filly, but Marina Park ran her heart out to finish a close third to Zafonic, ridden by Pat Eddery.
‘She did her best and we'll win a big race like this one day,’ promised the Yorkshire-based trainer.
Drum Taps (Frankie Dettori) finished second to Sought Out in the Prix Kergorlay with Michelozzo third.
A MOMENT OF MAGIC
MOMENT OF TRUTH looks set for yet another successful season after registering the 16th victory of his career in the Scottish Racing Club Handicap Hurdle at Perth on Saturday.
Peter Monteith's gallant campaigner ran unplaced on the Flat at Ayr just 48 hours previously but, though still to score on the level, he has now amassed four hurdle wins in addition to 12 over the bigger obstacles.
He may have another outing on the Flat before bidding to add to his National Hunt tally here next month.
Jonjo O'Neill's conditional rider Tony Dobbin sent Moment Of Truth on two out and the top-weight saw off the attentions of Buckra Mellisuga by a length and a half.
OFF TO THE DOGS WITH HARRY LLOYD
When an embargo becomes phoney!
HARRY LLOYD
CHEERFUL Crayford is the only track in the country which plays to packed houses.
Quite a feat in these recessionary times.
The compact circuit, purpose-built with the betting shop service in mind, has surprised owners Ladbrokes with its robust evening trade.
Even if you can't make it to this Aladdin's cave of a track where diners have access to all the latest betting news at the touch of a button, there's always the 0891 numbers.
Evening greyhounds with Ladbrokes telephone services provide live commentaries as well as results at selected tracks.
Just the job, you would have thought, for those unable to get to a meeting.
But, according to other track promoters, Ladbrokes are embargo-busting by giving out this information.
Denying armchair dog punters instant access to the results is claimed to steer them back to the tracks whose attendances have dipped from 30million to under 4million.
How many more can Crayford accommodate when they put up the house-full signs?
There could be a capacity Crayford audience tonight for the £3,000 final of the Carsberg Vase.
Side Wink (9.38), a pocket Hercules who tips the scales at barely 55lbs, has a great chance, says trainer Pam Heasman.
‘She likes the track, can run from any trap and stays every inch of the trip,’ said the an unusually forthcoming Miss Heasman.
Romford feature four heats of the Steve Simmons Marathon and My Texette (8.32) and Son Of Ash (9.04) look the pick.
Star stayer Rahan Arc (9.15) showed a glimpse of his old form at Walthamstow on Thursday and stands out as the banker bet of the seven open races on an attractive Ramsgate card.
On Tuesday at Walthamstow, Water Dip (8.30) will appreciate an easier task and the two for Hackney betting shop punters are Retired Lady (2.42) and Indie Go (5.11).
Thursday's £1,000 stamina-sapping Daily Record Marathon could be an opportunity for Flossie Vale, confides racing manager Robert Lithgow.
SUNDAY GAMBLE
SUNDERLAND have become the first dog track to dip a tentative toe into the contentious Sunday racing pool.
No tote and with the betting shops closed, Sunderland appear to be taking quite a financial chance on their October 11 meeting.
But where there's a will a bet can't be far behind and the local bookmakers can be relied on to provide ante-post prices the day before.
Doncaster's history-making Sunday crowd of 26,000 topped the Epsom Derby figures.
Two thousand enjoying the dogs with their Sunday pint would make the Sunderland venture a success.
CORKY'S CRACKER
IAN GIBB
QPR 3, Sheff Utd 2
ALAN CORK, fast becoming as big a folk hero at Bramall Lane as he was down Wimbledon way, has set a new record.
The strains of ‘He's got no hair, but we don't care,’ from his adoring United followers had hardly died down before he announced:
‘I'm the first player to score in all five  divisions !’
Come again, Corky?
‘Yes, the Premier — and the Fourth right up to the First.
And I've done it with the same manager — Harry Bassett.’
But it was a bitter-sweet day for the striker who lives on the road — training with his old Dons' mates, staying at his mum and dad's in Derby and arriving in Sheffield just to do the business.
Alan's third minute equaliser at Loftus Road was an angled belter.
But a late Rangers' free-kick hit him on his nearly-bald spot and bounced kindly for Dennis Bailey to rob United of a point.
But he still upstaged fellow striker and England hopeful Brian Deane.
QPR have their own contender, Les Ferdinand, whose second minute opener may not be bettered all season.
England No 2 Laurie McMenemy arrived late and missed the Corky and Ferdinand goals — but he saw Deane spurn a gift of an equaliser before finally striking with a header.
Said Cork: ‘If Graham Taylor is going to play the long ball, Deanesy is ideal.
He's quick, he has strength, two good feet and is excellent in the air.
‘He's not as aggressive as he might be but that could come, and he has more skill and speed than someone like John Fashanu, who plays an intimidating game.
‘Les has had a few problems but he could do very well alongside Deanesy.’
United boss Dave Bassett has no doubts: ‘I'd put Brian Deane in the England team.’
On losing to a late goal he added: ‘We just didn't get that bit of fortune you need — perhaps we'll have it in May at Wembley instead.’
On this evidence United will be a handful — but there are holes down the centre of defence, exploited by Ferdinand and then Simon Barker, who headed QPR 2-1 ahead.
Bassett groaned: ‘Where have all the central defenders gone?
You find me one — there are not too many about.’
CORK: Record
FERGIE BANS DOC!
Tommy's comments enrage United boss
HARRY HARRIS
ANGRY Manchester United boss Alex Ferguson has slapped a ban on former Old Trafford supremo Tommy Docherty.
The Doc's diagnosis of defender Gary Pallister's frailties has so incensed Fergie and his players that they are refusing to do interviews for Piccadilly Radio, the station which employs Docherty.
But The Doc remained defiant, saying: ‘I'm prepared to see Alex face-to-face but I'm sure he'll shy away from that.
‘Matt Busby would have dealt with this by buying me a bottle of champagne.
‘I'm amazed that a club as big as Manchester United can react in this way.
‘I shall be in the studio on Monday and I shall carry on making my observations, I will praise the team if they deserve it.
But if I spot anything that's wrong I will point it out.
Supporter
‘I'm a supporter of Manchester United even above being a radio reporter.
‘People might say I was a rubbish manager.
Well, they're entitled to their opinion.
I'm entitled to mine.
‘I said Gary Pallister is soft, that he gives away too many chances for forwards to dispossess him.
‘And I said Mark Robins is a local lad who cost nothing and should have been given more of a chance.
But it is only my opinion.
‘I've also praised Darren Ferguson for his brilliant performance at Sheffield and said he's an outstanding prospect, and last season I said that Steve Bruce should be picked by England.
‘I've always maintained that Peter Schmeichel is the best goalkeeper in Europe.’
Manchester-based Piccadilly still plan to let the Doc comment on tonight's game at Southampton.
Piccadilly will make an appeal to United chairman Martin Edwards for a peace pact between Docherty and Ferguson.
Commentator Tom Tyrell said: ‘This is the first time in 22 years that this station has been shut out in this way.
‘As I understand it Alex Ferguson and the players are upset by comments made by the Doc in his newspaper column and on Piccadilly Gold.
‘The Doc has criticised Gary Pallister, Neil Webb and others, but he will be in our studio for United's match at Southampton on Monday night.
‘Out sports editor intends to contact Martin Edwards to clarify the situation.’
Fergie, defending PFA Footballer of the Year Pallister, said: ‘Gary won't ignore the criticism because it does hurt.
There are a few people having a go at him now.
‘Gary can only answer by performing in the style we have grown accustomed to for the last few seasons.’
Pallister missed the European Championship because of back and foot injuries and Ferguson stressed: ‘He has worked so hard this summer to get right for the season and I am sure it will pay off for him.’
Meanwhile Paul Ince will have a fitness test this morning to decide whether he plays against Southampton at the Dell tonight.
FERGUSON: Furious at the Doc's comments
DOCHERTY: Banned
Sunderland have appointed a firm of consultants to advise on a proposed referendum over a move from Roker Park.
DAVID MOORE /TED MACAULEY
Clough is also thinking of offering Sheffield Wednesday some of their money back on out-of-favour £800,000 striker Nigel Jemson.
Boss turns air blue
Notts C 1, Leicester 1
NOTTS County chairman Derek Pavis could be charged with bringing the game into disrepute after he swore at Leicester supporters over the public address system.
Pavis, upset at being interrupted as he tried to thank the contractors who have built three new stands, said: ‘I regret the choice of words but it was an instinctive reaction which wasn't meant to be heard.’
PAKISTAN IN NEW STORM
No one shall rub the ball on the ground or use any artificial substance or take any other action to alter the condition of the ball 0-LAW 42.5
COLIN PRICE
PAKISTAN were locked in a fresh ball-doctoring row yesterday after their three-run Texaco Trophy win at Lord's.
The ball their bowlers used in the morning session was sensationally taken from them at lunch by match referee Deryck Murray.
Mysteriously, he refused to say why — but he did confirm his action.
Murray will make a detailed report to the ICC later today — while the World Cup winners play their final match of the tour at Old Trafford.
All summer long Pakistan have angrily denied charges that their bowlers achieve tremendous swing by tampering with the old, worn ball.
And only last week they threatened libel action against several newspapers for making the allegations.
But yesterday, in a one-day series which the Pakistanis had already lost, umpires Ken Palmer and John Hampshire became concerned with the state of the ball.
They showed it to Murray and he confiscated it immediately.
He gave Pakistan another ball that was also 32 overs old.
It took almost an hour for Murray to prepare an 15-word statement saying: ‘I can confirm the ball was changed at lunch-time but will make no further comment.’
But Murray's report will confirm that the ball was changed under Law 42.5 governing fair play.
It says: ‘No one shall rub the ball on the ground or use any artificial substance or take any other action to alter the condition of the ball.’
Pakistan manager Intikhab Alam insisted: ‘I don't really mind what people think.
They can say whatever they like but the ball was no tampered with.
‘The reason it was changed was because it came soft.’
However a ball going soft or out of shape is covered by an entirely different Law.
That is Law 5, which would not require the umpires to consult with the match referee.
And Akram admitted last night: ‘This might start further accusations of ball-tampering but we don't care any more.
‘Every time we win, people start saying these things.
We won the match fair and square and that's all there is to it.’
Waqar, who has just signed a new three-year contract with Surrey, said: ‘I don't care what people say about ball-tampering either.’
Ironically, the ball change helped Pakistan win the match, which earned them £5,250 in prize-money.
Akram added: ‘I don't know why they changed the ball but I am glad they did because the one they gave us was newer and in better condition than the previous one.’
The match referee's intriguing report on exactly what is meant to have happened to the ball will not be handled by Sir Colin Cowdrey, the International Cricket Council chairman.
Last night Sir Colin was on his way to India for meetings with India's cricket chiefs.
Then he was due to travel to Sri Lanka where he will watch the second Test against Australia.
In his absence, the report will be handled by Col John Stephenson, the ICC secretary.
He is expected to study the referee's and umpire's comments at Lords today 
INTIKHAB: People can say what they like
SALIM MALIK hits back at England charges after the Pakistanis had won the Test series
Picture by ARNOLD SLATER
COLIN WANTS TO BE BOSS
Hoko is his top  target 
FRANK WIECHULA
CLASSY Colin McMillan has Scouser Paul Hodkinson firmly in his slick-moving sights — determined to prove he's king of the featherweights in Britain.
The WBO champion knows unless he takes on and beats WBC title-holder Hodkinson he can't be called boss in his own backyard, let alone the world.
The Barking stylist, who earned rave reviews when taking the WBO crown off Italian Maurizio Stecca in May, said: ‘The only way way we are going to find out who is the true champion is when we climb in the ring together.
That's why I'm pushing for the fight and for me the sooner the better.
‘We are both fighting in September and I don't know what he's got planned after that, but hopefully we'll be meeting early next year.
‘I spoke to Paul about four months ago and we were both keen on the fight, so I don't see what the hold-up is.’
Promoter Frank Warren said: ‘We made a £160,000 offer to Hodkinson to defend his title against Colin.
‘But since then Colin has become a champion so I'm quite sure that he would like a fairly substantial purse for the fight.
‘It's the clash which everyone in boxing wants to see but it's up to them to get back in touch with us.’
Meanwhile, McMillan defends his title against tough Colombian Ruben Palacio at London's Olympia on September 26.
PIANO MAN Colin McMillan wants to get in tune with a fight against Paul Hodkinson.
Pic: BRENDAN MONKS
Ray Gun
NEIL SILVER
TEENAGER
Ray Parlour is aiming to persuade Arsenal boss George Graham: Put your cheque book away, I'm your new Rocky.
The 19-year-old wonderkid from Romford could save the Gunners more than £2million in the transfer market by establishing himself as a key figure in his club's revived quest for the Premier League title.
Arsenal fans still talk about former Highbury heroes Michael Thomas and David Rocastle, the main men from the Championship-winning team who have now moved on to Liverpool and Leeds.
Now Parlour will get the chance to stake his claim after putting Arsenal back on the rails after their bad start to the season by making both goals in the 2-0 win at Liverpool on Sunday.
In only his third full senior game, he produced a creative, mature performance that was too much for Liverpool at Anfield — where Parlour made his League debut last January and gave away a penalty.
‘I don't know if it was my best game — the manager decides that sort of thing,’ said Parlour.
‘But I'm certainly a lot happier than after my first match at Liverpool!
‘It went much better for me on Sunday and the result is a great boost for everybody.’
PARLOUR: Bid
CLOUGHIE'S SNUB TO PSYCHO
Nottingham Forest boss won't play ball
I'm in charge
HUGH JAMIESON
STUART PEARCE, Nottingham Forest's England left back and skipper, has had a demand for a new contract thrown out by Brian Clough.
And Clough has also cracked down on a similar plea from right back Brian Laws.
Pearce, who signed a five-year deal worth around £1million two years ago, is looking for a rise despite a wage packet that puts him on nearly £4,000 a week.
But Forest manager Clough, already upset with his team's disappointing start, yesterday declared: ‘Both players have been to see me about new contracts but they're not getting them.
‘I made up my mind about that long before we had five goals stuck past us at Oldham on Saturday.
Cult
‘Never mind contract talks.
I'd just love to speak to somebody about the chances of us keeping a clean sheet.’
Pearce, 30, has become a cult figure at Forest in seven years with the City Ground fans nicknaming him ‘Psycho.’
He is a key figure in Graham Taylor's England World Cup qualifying plans and has been valued at £3million.
He has been wanted by a string of clubs, including Manchester United, who last season saw Pearce as the final piece in a title jigsaw.
Pearce's request for new terms could have been sparked by transfer fees and wages rocketing in the last 12 months.
Italian giants Inter Milan are understood to be watching the situation closely, with Pearce hoping Clough changes his mind and puts him more in line with the kind of wages being picked up by some of his England team-mates.
He has also seen Des Walker, his former England and Forest team-pal, become an instant millionaire with a £1.5million close-season move to Italy to join Sampdoria.
Laws, 31 in October, was also in the Forest side hammered 5-3 at Oldham, and last season struggled to clinch a regular place.
CLOUGH: Defiant
MONEY TALKS ENGLAND star Stuart Pearce thinks he's worth more at Forest — but his manager Brian Clough refuses to pay up
Game for a moan
HUGH JAMIESON
ANGRY Aston Villa boss Ron Atkinson yesterday hit out at a Premier League fixture glut that threatens to rebound on England.
Villa go to Everton tonight for their fourth match in 10 days and Atko said: ‘It's barmy.
By the time England play their first World Cup qualifying match in October, the squad will have played about 14 games in six weeks.
‘That means Graham Taylor will have either the fittest bunch of players around — or the most knackered.
‘In an ideal world, the Premier League would involve 18 clubs with League games played once a week.
‘That way players would be fresher, stronger and more skilful, because they would have time to work on their technique.’
ATKINSON: Angry
Kev's new Carr
KEVIN Keegan yesterday threw down the gauntlet to refreshed Newcastle winger Franz Carr.
Carr was linked with a move to Crystal Palace last season and named in a pre-season swap deal for Leicester's Tommy Wright that broke down.
But the 25-year-old flyer made the most of his come-back chance when he starred in last weekend's win at Derby.
And he'll keep his place tonight as Newcastle bid to establish their best start since the war with a Coca Cola Cup win at Mansfield.
Keegan said: ‘Franz thought he should be in the team to show what he could do.
I said ‘show us in training and the reserves’.
‘He's done that and now the challenge is to keep his first team shirt.
‘There's not a quicker player in the League and his crossing has been excellent.’
Newcastle go to Mansfield nursing a 2-1 lead.
Meanwhile Newcastle have delivered a bizarre snub to the losers in the bitter power struggle against chairman Sir John Hall.
Football League president Gordon McKeag is among ex-directors promised lifelong access to the St James's Park boardroom — but now they have now told to use a former refreshment room on match days.
KEEGAN: Pleased 
KEEGAN: Pleased
Strike force
STEVE Coppell is backing a post-Gary Lineker England attack of David Hirst and his former Crystal Palace star Ian Wright.
Palace boss Coppell rates the prolific Sheffield Wednesday and Arsenal strikers ahead of 3.3million Alan Shearer.
Hirst, with four goals already this season, will press his claims for an England call in Spain next month, against Coppell's Palace side tonight.
Coppell said: ‘I put Hirst and Wright ahead of Shearer in terms of goals.
Shearer has not proved himself yet and has a long way to go.’
Meanwhile Palace's Eddie McGoldrick is well on the way to winning a £10,000 cash bonus for scoring seven goals this season.
Hull plea
HULL CITY are hoping their bank will say yes to a rescue package to help fight off a winding-up order from the taxman.
City are believed to owe tens of thousands of pounds in VAT but the club's chairman Martin Fish insisted they will be able meet the debts without outside help.
The club were served with the winding-up order on Saturday despite an offer to pay the debts off in  several payments.
But he said he was confident that a new offer by City director Christopher Needler to underwrite an increased overdraft will be accepted by the bank.
Meanwhile Fish has slammed councillors who blocked the club's plans for a Monday market at the team's Boothferry Road ground.
‘We are not going to sit back and accept this.’
SKY HIGH
TREVOR FRANCIS last night predicted a record goals output for football's first season under the new back pass law.
The Sheffield Wednesday boss was still catching his breath from Saturday's six-goal thriller with Chelsea.
And he can see the high-scoring theme continuing and burying defensive reputations.
‘When you count the goals up next May, I think you'll find there has never been a season like it,’ he said on the eve of tonight's match at Crystal Palace.
‘The goals will keep flowing, and it's all down to the back pass ban and the sheer panic it's spreading through defences.’
Francis added: ‘I'm all in favour of lots of goals, but I like to see them created properly rather than artificially.
And I don't think it's good for the game to see defenders and keepers under so much pressure that they repeatedly end up booting the ball into the stand.’
GAYLE WARNING
BRIAN Gayle returns to action against his old club Wimbledon tonight warning: ‘Write them off at your peril.’
The Dons are anchored at the bottom of the Premier League after crashing to defeat in all three opening matches.
But Sheffield United skipper Gayle is expecting no easy ride as he makes a comeback from a three-match ban.
‘People have been writing them off as long as I can remember, but they love nothing better than proving their critics wrong,’ he said.
Manager Dave Bassett has brought Gayle straight back in alongside Paul Beesley and allowed Alan McLeary to return to Millwall without taking up the option of buying him.
GAYLE: Recall
No go for Dean
WIMBLEDON have turned down a £1.6million bid by Southampton for striker Dean Holdsworth.
The Dons, who yesterday pulled in £2.5m from the sale of full-back Terry Phelan to Manchester City, could have made an instant profit on their newly-signed hitman.
They paid out £600,000 — plus two players valued at £400,000 — for the 23-year-old from Brentford last month, but the Dons rate Holdsworth highly and are determined to hang on to him.
LIFELINE
FORMER England Under-21 goalkeeper Brian Horne has been rescued from the soccer scrapheap by Middlesbrough.
Horne, third choice at Millwall, has been snapped up on loan by Boro boss Lennie Lawrence.
The 24-year-old didn't play a first-team game last season after a bust-up with the then-boss Bruce Rioch but he's eager to rebuild his career.
Lawrence moved for Horne yesterday because his No.1 Steve Pears is expected to be out for a month with a back injury.
But inexperienced deputy Ian Ironside definitely keeps his place for the trip to Southampton after helping Boro to wins over Manchester City and Leeds United.
Lawrence said: ‘I need cover but there is no question that Ian will stay in the side on Saturday after doing so well against Leeds.’
Video nasty
GARY McAllister last night vowed to make Spurs pay for the darkest moment of Leeds' reign as champions.
JOHN EDWARDS
By JOHN EDWARDS GARY McAllister last night vowed to make Spurs pay for the darkest moment of Leeds' reign as champions.
McAllister and his team-mates were made to squirm their way through a special screening of their 4-1 Saturday mauling by Middlesbrough.
Manager Howard Wilkinson subjected his shell-shocked players to the video nasty before turning his attention to plotting the downfall of Spurs at Elland Road tonight.
But stand-in skipper McAllister is confident that Leeds will bounce back in the style that made them champions last May.
He said: ‘A win is essential because we've got to prove what happened at Ayresome Park was a freak.
‘One of our great strengths is our ability to take it on the chin and come out fighting.’
WHAT A LOAD OF OLD
verdict on the tour of shame
Shame on the International Cock-up Council
COLIN PRICE
THE International Cricket Council stand accused today of being the International Cock-up Council.
Amazingly, they spent yesterday with their heads in the sand unable to tell the world just what the Pakistanis are meant to have done with the match-ball at Lord's.
Having sparked a cheat mystery by confiscating the match-ball, the ICC-appointed match referee Deryck Murray refused to explain exactly why he did it.
And that led to a day of fury and counter-claims by the Pakistan team bosses who insisted: ‘We are not cheats and we intend spending our last rupee proving so.’
Manager Khalid Mahmood said: ‘An impression has been created that the change of ball was due to tampering by the fielding side.
‘Suggestions that we messed around are a scurrilous attack on the integrity, conduct and reputation of the Pakistan cricket team — and they are unjustified.’
Team manager Intikhab Alam went further.
‘It's total rubbish,’ he said.
Faced with that counter-attack, Murray stubbornly refused repeated appeals to simply say under which Law he took the unprecedented action.
Lord's insiders insist that he acted under Law 42.5 which specifically deals with unfair play and clearly states: ‘No one shall rub the ball on the ground or use any  artificial substance or take any other action to alter the condition of the ball.’
Pakistan claim the ball was changed under Law 5 simply because it had gone soft — but that would not have needed the intervention of the match referee.
Missing
With ICC president Sir Colin Cowdrey on an Asian tour, it was left to the secretary, Colonel John Stephenson, to deal with Murray's report.
Although Stephenson's office is just a cricket ball's throw from where the bust-up took place the report had still not arrived yesterday — and was not expected until tomorrow!
He did speak to Murray on the phone but says he cannot clear the mystery until he has a chance to study the report in detail.
Col Stephenson refused even to say which Law had invoked.
‘The matter is closed for the moment,’ he said.
‘But in due course the ICC will study the whole issue of tampering with the ball.
‘I stress I am not referring to this incident, but ball-tampering must never be allowed to happen again.
‘Test countries must get together and discuss ways of making sure this is stamped out.’
The Pakistanis have been incensed all summer by mutterings that they only make the old ball swing so violently by tampering with it.
That has opened new wounds in relationships between the two sides, barely on speaking terms after bad blood dating back to the infamous Shakoor Rana-Mike Gatting bust-up.
The ICC's newly drawn-up code of conduct has twice led to severe fines for Javed Miandad's world champs this summer.
And the entire team were warned about their over-enthusiastic appealing and shows of dissent.
Pakistan hit back with claims that the England umpires were not up to standard, repeating calls for neutral officials in future.
England team manager Micky Stewart fuelled the controversy at the end of the Cornhill Test series when he pointedly refused to clear the Pakistan bowlers over their methods of making the ball swing.
Despite the squabbles, Harvard-educated Mahmood insists that bridges have been rebuilt between the two countries.
Warned
He warned his players to expect a hostile reception in England and said: ‘We came mentally prepared for a hard time and determined to give our answer out there on the field.
‘We believe we have done just that, and this team will go down as an outstanding one in any era.
‘It has also been scrupulously fair and we are determined to clear our names.
‘It's now a question of honour and that's more important than winning on the field.
‘We would do everything possible to set the record straight.’
Despite that, there is no doubt— for all the brilliance of maybe the best Pakistan side of all time — they will be remembered by many for their tricks and tantrums.
The ICC has a clear duty to say whether they should go down as champions or cheats.
No date has yet been set for England to tour Pakistan — or for them to return here.
Maybe they should be apart until they have earned the total respect of the rest of the cricketing world.
MIRROR SPORT headlines yesterday
EXAM TIME: Umpires Kitchen and Bird inspect the ball
LOADSA BOTTLE: Ian Botham has plenty to celebrate — the Pakistanis are not so sure
Waqar is the wrecker
COLIN PRICE
PACE aces Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram produced the goods again as Pakistan claimed a thrilling three-run victory over England at Lord's.
England looked certain to make their target of 205 — for a fourth straight Texaco Trophy series win — when they reached 191 for six.
But then Waqar bowled newcomer Richard Blakey for 25 while Wasim dismissed Chris Lewis for one and Phillip DeFreitas for nought during a deadly double wicket maiden.
Ironically it was part-time spinner Aamir Sohail who pulled the rug from under England by dismissing Ian Botham for 40 and Trent Bridge destroyer Graeme Hick for just eight.
Neil Fairbrother hit a typical innings, combining flowing drives with scampered runs.
But after the Lancashire captain had reached 33, from only 30 balls, he too fell to Aqib.
Allan Lamb looked to be guiding England through with a gutsy 55 before popping a catch to wicketkeeper Moin Khan.
At the start of the final over, England wanted five to win.
Dermot Reeve clipped Waqar's first delivery for a single but his second ball uprooted last man Richard Illingworth's leg stump.
Man-of-the-match Javed Miandad and Salim Malik, who has resigned for Essex next season, are both likely to miss today's final clash at Manchester.
Sour tour over and out
COLIN PRICE
PAKISTAN signed off their stormy tour of England yesterday with a beating on and off the pitch.
They were thrashed by six wickets in the final Texaco trophy one day international at Old Trafford.
And they even found their 2-1 Cornhill Test series triumph soured by the continuing row over whether they tampered with the ball at Lord's on Sunday.
The all-powerful ICC even made a balls up of it by refusing to clear the tourists when asked to do so.
Match referee Deryck Murray confiscated the match ball after umpires John Hampshire and Ken Palmer showed him the scarred leather.
But yesterday Murray refused to say just what was wrong with it.
The Pakistan Board is still pleading frantically for ICC Secretary Colonel John Stephenson to clear their name.
But for now he is as immovable as England hero Robin Smith, who blasted Graham Gooch's men to a quickfire success, clinching his third Man of the Match award as well as Man of the Series.
FULL STORY — Pages 30, 31 
SMITH: Heroic
NO GO JUNIOR
Bristol City winger Junior Bent has turned down a loan move to Plymouth.
Hope and glory
RICHARD TANNER
HOWARD Kendall sends Everton into action tonight warning: ‘Don't ruin our good start.’
Kendall's team — 12th last season — were dismissed as 33-1 title outsiders before a ball was kicked.
And there was plenty of pre-season gloom among Goodison fans after Kendall's failure to land a big-money signing.
But spirits are soaring for tonight's home clash with Aston Villa after five points from three tough games — against UEFA Cup qualifiers Manchester United and Sheffield Wednesday plus high-riding Norwich.
Kendall said: ‘We've rekindled the fans’ hope and belief and eased their apprehension.
‘They've been lifted by our win at Old Trafford and the fact that we are unbeaten after three games.
‘We had tremendous support at Norwich.
The visitors’ section there was almost full — I hadn't seen that since we clinched the championship five years ago.’
Kendall is forced to make one change because Polish winger Robert
Warzycha is away on international duty.
Peter Beagrie is likely to step in.
KENDALL: Support 
KENDALL: Support
WAYNE WON'T SIGN
STOKE forward Wayne Biggins has refused to sign a new contract unless he gets an immediate pay rise.
Biggins, who scored 22 goals last season and was on target again on Saturday, has been after a wage rise for some time and is currently on a weekly contract.
Broad blow
CHRIS LANDER
CHRIS BROAD, the ex-England Test opener, was sacked yesterday by Nottinghamshire in a clear-out of senior cricketers.
His axing is a surprise after making five centuries this summer.
Also being released are former England off-spinner Eddie Hemmings and Kevin Cooper.
OUT: Broad
Ian's Royle salute
OLDHAM'S record buy Ian Olney is set to make his long-awaited debut against championship favourites Arsenal tomorrow night.
Olney, 22, who cost £700,000 from Aston Villa during the summer, has now completed a three-match ban from last season and has been added to the squad which hit five goals against Nottingham Forest last Saturday.
Boss Joe Royle last night said: ‘He is definitely in contention.’
And of Oldham's great start Royle purred: ‘It showed we can live with the elite — and whack ‘em.
‘Now, I want to put a bit of steel through the side and remind them we can't have nice games all the time.
‘We fear nobody — but Arsenal will be a hell of a test for us.’
OLNEY: Record
Andy plea
SCOTLAND boss Andy Roxburgh wants a quick solution to the English club versus country conflict which threatens his World Cup hopes.
Roxburgh is unhappy that Leeds' Gary McAllister and Manchester United's Brian McClair are playing in a TV match on Sunday, September 6 — three days before Scotland's World Cup qualifier against Switzerland.
The Scottish FA decided against using a FIFA rule to order the release of the pair yesterday but Roxburgh had a warning for the English Premier League.
He said: ‘For Saturday and Sunday games we won't use the FIFA rule but we will for Monday evening games before internationals.’
BSkyB decides which games are played on Sundays and Mondays but Roxburgh wants talks to stop similar problems.
How they do it
ALLAN LAMB/COLIN PRICE
HERE is my step-by-step guide to how the Pakistanis doctor the ball — and get away with it.
The big picture on the right shows how easy it is to slip a thumbnail into the torn leather of a ball that has become worn naturally.
As the bowlers work on it, the scar becomes deeper and wider with every sneaky scratch altering the aerodynamics.
The effect achieves what we players call reverse swing.
It changes the normal behaviour pattern of a ball so that the one you expect to move away actually comes racing in at you at 90mph.
And towards the end of each over — when the bowlers know the ball is most likely to be inspected by the umpires — the new gouges are disguised by rubbing sweat on to the roughened surface.
That causes the red leather of the ball to run enough to cover over the marks — but it is all cosmetic.
As soon as the next over starts, the work begins all over again.
STEP 1: A brand new ball
STEP 2: After wear and tear
STEP 3: Gouging with nail
STEP 4: Now use of sweat
Trev raves at kid
HARRY HARRIS…
HDLN: BART'S MY BOY
TREVOR FRANCIS yesterday predicted that 18-year-old Chris Bart-Williams is destined to become one of the greatest talents of English football.
The former Leyton Orient midfielder was the star of the show at Crystal Palace when Sheffield Wednesday boss Francis hauled off £3million-rated Carlton Palmer.
Bart-Williams' appearance as a 64th minute substitute transformed the game — and it was his corner that led to Wednesday's equaliser.
Francis let his guard slip when he said: ‘He's going to be one of the great players…perhaps I shouldn't have said that because it will put too much pressure on him.
But he's just 18 and yet he came on and took control, linking with the front players and proved to be the right substitution’
Palmer — the England player that Graham Taylor found necessary to defend the most during the European championship disaster in Sweden — headed back into the dressing-room without a word to his manager.
And, Francis was frank in the reasons for the substitution when he said: ‘I felt at that moment something different was needed.
Palmer was not injured, it was purely tactical.
‘Carlton is very important to us, we know his qualities, but we needed Chris Bart-Williams.’
The prodigious kid has an uninhibited approach, a range of skills and vision that might be alien to the Taylor method.
But if the England manager deplored the lack of flair in the squad he took to Sweden then it can only be a matter of time before he turns to the Bart Man.
Despite his tender years the ‘Bart Man’ is already on Taylor's short list as he flew out yesterday to Oslo to watch World Cup opponents Norway.
And Francis has no doubts that the sky is the limit for the Sierra Leone-born kid, who has  already gained England youth recognition.
He made just 20 League appearances for Orient but had already done enough to convince Wednesday to splash out £350,000 for his services last November, quite a sum for a player who was just 17 at the time.
He made his League debut against Arsenal at Hillsborough in November 1991 and scored his first goal for the club in the third round FA Cup victory over Preston.
YOUNG Chris Bart-Williams is being tipped for the top by Trevor Francis — a teenage star himself before Chris was even born.
DAVIES IS No 1
Widnes set for glory!
MARTIN RICHARDS
JONATHAN DAVIES will be the Widnes No 1 as the Chemics begin their championship campaign under new coach Phil Larder on Sunday.
Ex-Great Britain assistant team boss Larder hands the full-back jersey to Davies for the tough opener against Castleford following the departure of Alan Tait to Leeds.
The former Wales RU stand-off has played there with great success in the past when Tait was injured.
And Davies set Sydney alight last summer with some scintillating performances at full-back while guesting for Canterbury-Bankstown.
‘I think it's his strongest position and he will start the season there although young Paul Aitcheson will push him all the way for the No 1 jersey,’ said Larder.
‘We have strength in depth and nobody has a God-given right to any position.’
Tough
Davies, who missed the Lions tour to rest a pelvic injury, has been building up his upper body strength and Widnes, 12-1 shots for the Stones Bitter title, will feel the benefit.
Larder, who has given the captaincy to tough utility forward Paul Hulme, is also expecting great things from giant Welsh second rower Paul Moriarty.
The ex-Swansea and Wales RU star has only played 12 full games in two seasons after serious leg and shoulder injuries.
But Larder says the the 6ft 5in, 17-stone Moriarty, is back to full fitness and itching to get back into action.
‘He is determined to have a big season and hopes to break into the Great Britain squad for the World Cup final against Australia in October,’ added Larder.
‘Castleford made an inquiry for him but I wasn't interested in letting him go.’
Winner
ACE Jonathan Davies will be the last line of defence as Widnes fight to topple champions Wigan.
Bullet-in
DERBYSHIRE'S Steve Goldsmith switched on his car radio yesterday — and found out he had been sacked!
The former Kent all-rounder was ‘disgusted’ that news of his sacking — along with batsman Andrew Brown — was announced before the club had told them.
He raged: ‘I'm hurt and angry that after five years here I heard I was sacked on my car radio.’
Derbyshire issued an apology, and said there had been a ‘breakdown in communications.’
GOLDSMITH
LUCA CUMANI improved his impressive Brighton record when the strapping Declassified made it 22 winners from 40 runners at the track in five years for the Newmarket trainer.
Cumani landed a double on the track on Tuesday, and travelling head lad Ian Willows said: ‘When I got back last night the boss said ‘thank heaven for Brighton.’
We always seem to do so well here.’
The runner-up, Stitchcombe, a newcomer from Peter Chapple-Hyam's yard, may have been unlucky.
He hung left to the rails and by the time Willie Carson was able to switch him, Declassified was beyond recall.
MIRROR PLANT
CHARLES LYTE
GARDENING
THE POPPIES (Papaver), from the scarlet of the Flanders Poppy (P. rhoes) to the exuberance of the Oriental Poppy (P. orientale, above), are brilliant.
Icelandic Poppies (P. nudicaule) are perennials best treated as biennials sown in July and planted out in the autumn for flowering from early Spring.
The Oriental Poppies, also easily raised from seed, put on magnificent early summer border displays.
Three super annuals are the P. calfornicum, the more flamboyant peony-flowered P. somniferum, and the Shirley Poppies.
Sow annuals in spring or late summer where they are to flower.
Increase the Oriental Poppy by division in the early autumn.
All poppies like a sunny, well-drained position in good soil.
WIGAN WARNED
MARTIN RICHARDS
SHEFFIELD EAGLES boss Gary Hetherington plans a record-breaking welcome for Wigan tonight — with fireworks on and off the pitch.
The Eagles are expecting a 10,000 crowd for the visit of the champions.
It will be the city's biggest Rugby League gate, beating the previous best of 6,800 when Hetherington's men beat Widnes at Bramall Lane in 1989.
A £3,000 firework display, brass band and male choir will salute the Eagles' return to the First Division.
‘I'll be singing myself if we win,’ said Hetherington.
‘We'll be competing rather than just surviving this season and the game against Wigan will be a indicator of what we are up against.
‘It's the same side which finished on a high by winning the Divisional Premiership final at Old Trafford last May, apart from Aussie second row Paul Carr.
It's a pity I couldn't include my other Aussie signings Gary Jack and Bruce McGuire who fly in next week.’
‘Wigan will certainly know they've been in a game.
It will be a great night for First Division Rugby League in Sheffield.’
Hetherington dismissed talk of cracks in the Wigan machine following their Charity Shield defeat by St Helens at Gateshead.
‘They'll still have 14 internationals on duty and are the top team in the country.’
AGANA AXED
HUGH JAMIESON
TONY AGANA was yesterday slapped on the transfer list by Notts County — and given an earbashing by boss Neil Warnock.
The striker, County's record £750,000 signing from Sheffield United last November, has scored just once in 18 appearances.
And after being taken off in County's 2-1 defeat by Watford on Tuesday, Agana ripped off his shirt and headed for the players' tunnel.
Warnock yesterday said: ‘The incident suggested that Agana is not really behind either me or the team — and if that's the case it's better for both parties if he moves on.’
AGANA: Dispute 
AGANA: Dispute
Davis scare
STEVE DAVIS last night stopped a runaway Thai to book his place in the semi-final of the £100,000 Kent Classic in Beijing.
Davis edged home 5-4 against Bangkok snooker hall worker Rom Shurin and said: ‘I could easily have lost.’
Shurin, who beat world number five Neal Foulds 4-1 in the last round, came from 2-0 down to lead 3-2 and 4-3.
But Davis won the eighth frame and then compiled a break of 50 in the decider.
Now Davis tackles his toughest rival, world champion Stephen Hendry, who beat Dennis Taylor 5-2.
In the other semi-final, Terry Griffiths faces John Parrott.
TOP TWO
Wright and Shearer the best
ANDERS Limpar believes Graham Taylor should go for Alan Shearer and Ian Wright as the attacking force to give England renewed life after Gary Lineker.
Limpar, on his way back from international duty with Sweden in Oslo, told me: ‘Shearer is top class, a striker I rate very highly.
‘Ian Wright is a player who can always guarantee goals.
I couldn ‘t understand why he was not in the European Championship squad.’
Limpar, sporting a black eye after a clash with Liverpool's Steve McManaman and a dislodged tooth after another facial injury against Norway, is convinced that Norway won't be the next Scandinavian side to embarrass England.
Taylor watched Norway hold Sweden to 2-2 — and England's first World Cup opponents are Norway at Wembley in October.
But Limpar said: ‘They have a very strong squad but nobody can beat England at Wembley when it really matters.
Hard ‘It will be hard when they play in their small stadium but England will be too strong at Wembley.’
But Norwegian coach Egil Olsen disagrees.
He said: ‘There is no reason why Norway can't do what Denmark did 10 years ago — dislodge England with an important victory.
‘We go to Wembley where Denmark began their rise to fame.
Who is to say Norway won't do the same?
‘Taking three points out of four from Italy in the European Championship qualifying group and beating Italy 6-0 at under-21 level is evidence enough we can do it.
‘There are good signs for Norway to qualify for the World Cup.
When we were drawn against both England and Holland, people were not so sure but after the European Championship finals, those fears have gone.’
Olsen hopes that Taylor does not go all the way with the long ball game and play big, powerful strikers like Brian Deane and David Hirst.
He said: ‘If England play the direct game, they will worry us.
That's not the kind of game we like to play against.
‘We are very good at dealing with the technical sides like Italy.
‘That weakness in our game showed against the Swedes.
The high ball in the air at the back is one that causes us problems.
‘I'm well aware that England have players who can come in and play that way.
‘I think that is the best way for England to play.
We saw in Sweden they tried to modify their game to fit in with the Continental style and it didn't work.
‘I know Graham Taylor must be under pressure — but then I'm under pressure.’
LIMPAR: Clash
‘TURNIP’ TORMENT
GRAHAM TAYLOR has revealed that being depicted as a turnip has deeply hurt him and his family and has created hate mail.
The England manager said: ‘The turnip thing has even started to appear on the envelopes of the personal letters which drop on my doormat.
‘I suppose the newspaper which started it would say that it was just a bit of fun.
Fine.
But why continue it?
Is it a campaign to undermine my position?
‘I don't know.
Only myself and my family are affected by it.
But there is no point in losing any sleep over it.
‘I know as a public figure I am likely to be lampooned.
I have to take it and live with it, but I will not allow it to undermine my confidence.’
Howzat!
South Africans go for trial by television
SOUTH AFRICA hope to be the first country to use television replays to assist the umpires when they play home Tests against India later this year.
Ali Bacher, managing director of South Africa's United Cricket Board, said yesterday that they had recommended to the Indian Board of Control that a third umpire assist the standing umpire by viewing the replay in close calls.
‘The third umpire in the umpire's room can assist the standing umpire, if requested, in immediately determining a run out, stumping or hit wicket decision when the standing umpire is uncertain in those three situations,’ Bacher said.
Replays would be used only during Test matches.
‘Sir Colin Cowdrey, Chairman of the International Cricket Committee, is very supportive of this,’ Bacher added.
THE Jockey Club have reached agreement with the Press Association over the introduction of the overnight declaration of jockeys.
The two sides announced a deal yesterday which will enable the information to reach all punters via newspapers from September 7.
PA's development manager, Roger Macdonald, said: ‘We always supported the principle of an official system and all PA's customers will now receive the official list.’
GOB-SMACKED
Freebie Gary replaces £2m Ted
Bannister just can't believe it
DAVID MOORE
GARY BANNISTER, given the chance to fill Teddy Sheringham's boots at Nottingham Forest, gasped last night: ‘I'm blooming amazed!’
Bannister, now 32, takes over from £2.1million Sheringham — sold to Tottenham — for today's glamour home game against Manchester United.
It's another outrageous stroke by Forest boss Brian Clough, who picked up the stocky striker after he was handed a free transfer by West Bromwich.
Bannister, told earlier this week that he could have a second month on trial at the City Ground after scoring twice against Oldham as substitute for Sheringham, confessed: ‘I never thought I would make such quick progress with Forest.
‘I remain confident about my ability to do the business at Premier League level, and suddenly I've got the chance to prove this self-belief is not misplaced.
‘I was quite prepared to play in the reserves, and wait patiently for an opportunity.
Being thrust into the limelight is a big bonus.’
Pleasant
Clough said: ‘Gary has impressed me very much in the month he has spent with us so far.
‘He's got on with the job in a pleasant and professional manner.
‘It is just a pity Gary chose to go to QPR when I wanted to buy him from Sheffield Wednesday.
We could have enjoyed the intervening eight years together.’
BANNISTER: Back in the big time thanks to Clough
Peter's B sting
RICHARD TANNER
PETER Beardsley last night clarified his England future by insisting: ‘I still want to play for my country.’
The in-form Everton striker, who has been tipped for Graham Taylor's squad for next month's friendly in Spain, denies he told the national boss to forget about him.
He DID ask not to be selected for future B team games after being pulled off in last April's second-string clash with the CIS.
Beardsley said: ‘I'd be delighted to play for England again.’
Prize Bull
STEVE Bull should play in England's friendly in Spain next month.
So says Brian Horton, whose Oxford side face Bull and Wolves today.
Horton believes that Bull, who recently became the first Wolves player to score 200 goals, would be the ideal England partner for Alan Shearer.
‘We're crying out for a replacement for Gary Lineker,’ said Horton, ‘and a front two of Bull and Shearer doesn't sound bad to me.
‘His scoring record is phenomenal and I don't see why being out of the Premier League should stop him being selected.’
Wolves defender Derek Mountfield has completed a three-match ban — but is now ruled out with a heel injury.
KENNY STAYS CALM
KENNY Dalglish yesterday brushed aside talk about the prospect of unbeaten Blackburn Rovers setting the pace in the Premier League.
Dalglish, preparing for today's clash at Coventry, said: ‘There's no point in going on about the League table while we are still in August.
‘It is our policy to take one game at a time and look no further than that.’
DONS DOUBLE
HARRY HARRIS
WIMBLEDON'S Robbie Earle and Warren Barton are being touted for inclusion in Graham Taylor's England squad for the friendly in Spain, writes Harry Harris.
With big Sheffield United striker Brian Deane also in favour, it will add fuel to the conviction that Taylor will adopt a direct, if not long-ball, approach.
KING EDWARDS
MARTIN RICHARDS
Sheff 6, Wigan 46
SHAUN EDWARDS grabbed a hat-trick as Wigan opened with an eight-try warning to all title hopefuls.
The Great Britain star, last season's leading scorer with 40 tries, formed a fine half-back link with new £65,000 scrum-half signing Martin Crompton, who had a hand in five tries.
The ex-Warrington man, replacing Andy Gregory, had a massive confidence boost.
Wigan handed out a ruthless lesson in finishing, sinking the Eagles with a three-try burst in seven minutes.
Crompton helped Edwards grab two of them — and Martin Offiah scored a 50-yard special.
The Eagles, making a hyped-up return to the First Division, rallied with a well-taken try by Anthony Farrell.
But then Wigan underlined the huge gap in class.
EDWARDS: Hat-trick
Goodway quits
MARTIN RICHARDS
ANDY GOODWAY last night ended seven  successful years with world champions Wigan to join title rivals Leeds in a cut-price deal, writes MARTIN RICHARDS.
Leeds boss Doug Laughton moved in quickly for the 31-year-old former Test forward after he was listed at £20,000 at his own request.
Goodway asked for a move after being left out of Wigan's squad for last night's game at Sheffield.
ON THE MOVE: Former Test star Andy Goodway
Gould's money worry
KENNY DALGLISH was last night named as the new ‘Mr Big’ of Premier League football — by rival boss Bobby Gould.
Gould's Coventry City side take on Dalglish's Blackburn Rovers this afternoon, and he declared: ‘Kenny is now in a position to kill the rest of us dead!’
Gould, forced to operate at the lower end of the transfer market as Coventry tighten their belts, can only gaze in wonder as Dalglish spends multi-millionaire Jack Walker's money.
And he insisted: ‘It's now not a case of whether Blackburn will begin winning championship titles and cups, but when.’
Gould is likely to throw Scotland international striker Kevin Gallacher back into today's action.
SAM'S SALE
Tough times for Wimbledon
Crazy Gang's shock
HARRY HARRIS
WIMBLEDON owner Sam Hammam last night warned that he is ready to sell off ALL the club's top players.
A dejected Hammam is prepared for the worst — sacrificing Premier League status and possibly even suffering successive seasons of relegation.
In one of the frankest interviews ever given by a club owner, he said: ‘I am contemplating abandoning my quest for silver to go for gold.’
The silver is soccer's prized trophies, the gold is the money from selling players.
Other options already considered by Hammam are even more  abhorrent to him.
Accept a £12m offer to move Wimbledon north to merge with a League club who would take over the Premier League franchise.
Merge with Crystal Palace and lose Wimbledon's identity.
Sell the club outright.
The most likely outcome is to sell  players until the club are doomed as far as the Premier League are concerned — but, for the long-term, he will put in more money to keep the name alive.
Boss Joe Kinnear has instructions to sound out interested clubs for Robbie Earle, Warren Barton, John Scales, Dean Holdsworth, John Fashanu, Roger Joseph and Hans Segers.
Already, the Dons have sold Terry Phelan to Manchester City for a record £2.5m.
For Hammam, running a club with gates dipping below 5,000 has been a great strain.
He said: ‘It is like driving a mini in a race against Mansell in his Williams.
We've done it for years, even won the FA Cup, but I don't now how long I can go on.
‘It doesn't matter whether or not we win at Everton.
I don't see us going down if we keep all our best players and we'll finish mid-table.
‘But I am not one for settling for mid-season mediocrity — it's all or nothing for me.
‘We can't get the gates or a sponsor!
Last year, we lost £1.75m and we will lose £1.25m this season.
‘If we sell one more player I might as well sell them all and forget the silver and take the gold — I'm not going to continue to sell one or two a season.
‘This is my 16th season and I am weary.
I want to make Wimbledon one of the biggest clubs but that is still a million-to-one shot.
‘I have many options, but I don't want to transport the club elsewhere and I don't want to merge.’
D-DAY: Sam Hammam is facing his biggest test
So long Simeon
WEST BROMWICH boss Ossie Ardiles has released defender Simeon Hodson on a free transfer — the 14th player to leave the club since the Argentinian took charge in May.
Hodson, who holds the dubious distinction of being relegated with every club he has played for, had rejected a new one-year contract and was on a week-to-week basis.
Ardiles said: ‘When we are back to full-strength there wouldn't have been a place for him.’
CHEERS, TEL
MATT HUGHES
IPSWICH TOWN general-manager John Lyall will thank Terry Venables tomorrow for saving him from the  wilderness .
Lyall hasn't forgotten how Tottenham supremo Venables gave him a job on the scouting staff after he was sacked by West Ham.
The move restored Lyall's confidence.
And after his successful return to management at Ipswich, he guided them into the Premier League before moving ‘upstairs’ at Portman Road this summer.
But while Lyall will want Ipswich to take the points off Spurs in tomorrow's live televised game, he admitted: ‘I owe a great debt to Spurs, and to Terry in particular.’
‘I was obviously low at that time and needed a pick-up.
‘It was great to work with supreme professionals and to see how a big club like Spurs was run.
‘I can never thank Terry enough for the way he treated me.
He is one of the shrewdest coaches around and I learnt so much during my year there.’
‘It was a real wrench to leave Spurs.
‘But I knew there were great opportunities at Ipswich and they are my sort of club — a  family club.’
Brave Regis
CYRILLE REGIS is ready to take a risk today in a bid to solve Aston Villa's looming crisis.
Villa, with only three points from four games, face a tough trip to Sheffield United.
And with England winger Tony Daley ruled out after damaging knee ligaments in training and Dwight Yorke also unfit, Regis will attempt to burst the pain barrier.
He revealed: ‘I'm suffering a bit of discomfort from an Achilles tendon and, ideally, should be resting.
‘But if it's for the good of the club, then I'll pull on a shirt and get stuck in.’
I'M OFF
Leeds swoop for angry Andy
Wigan star walks out
MARTIN RICHARDS
ANDY GOODWAY last night ended seven successful years with world champions Wigan to join title rivals Leeds in a cut-price deal.
Leeds boss Doug Laughton moved in quickly for the 31-year-old former Test forward after he was listed at £20,000 at his own request.
A bitterly-upset Goodway asked for a move after being left out of Wigan's squad for last night's game at Sheffield.
Goodway, who missed the whole of last season with a broken arm, made his comeback as a substitute in last Sunday's Charity Shield defeat by St Helens.
Leeds have agreed to pay Wigan £5,000 for every five first-team games he plays up to a maximum of £25,000.
It's a similar deal to the one that brought another of Wigan's old guard, Andy Gregory, to Headingley.
Castleford-born Goodway, who won 23 caps for Great Britain, was registered in time for him to play in tomorrow's big championship opener with St Helens.
And Leeds hope to wrap up a short-term deal for Aussie Test forward Bob Lindner in the next three or four days.
Wigan chairman Jack Robinson said: ‘Andy Goodway has been a very good servant of the club.
‘But with seven forwards on this summer's tour and Andy Platt back on the scene, he would have struggled to get into the team.’
Goodway will join up with ex-Wigan stars Gregory, Ellery Hanley and Shaun Wane at Headingley.
Scrum half
Gregory said: ‘I'm looking forward to this season as much as any in the past.’
A surprise choice on the right wing for Leeds is ex-All Black John Gallagher.
DEAL ANDY Goodway, out in the cold at Wigan, has moved to Leeds
BOSS PETE SENT OFF!
WALTER STOREY
FORMER England goalkeeper Peter Shilton was sent off last night for the first time in his long career.
Shilton, winner of a record 125 caps and a star of three World Cup campaigns, received the red card for slicing down an opponent in front of just 4,194 fans at humble Hull.
The veteran keeper — 43 next month — said goalkeeping was much tougher now than when he started.
‘In those days we could run about the area bouncing the ball, but now things are more entertaining.’
Nicky Marker took over in goal from Shilton — and saved his manager's blushes by pushing away Leigh Jenkinson's weak penalty.
Gary Lund raced in for the rebound but Marker turned the ball round the post.
He was finally beaten twice in the last 10 minutes.
David Hockaday struck first and Lund sealed the match with a glancing header.
SORT-OUT
Searching time for Souness
Big test for Reds
RICHARD TANNER
GRAEME SOUNESS will today seek proof that his rebuilt Liverpool team can be a Premier League title threat this season.
The Merseysiders face a searching examination at Leeds with Souness admitting: ‘We've still got things to sort out.’
Defeats to Nottingham Forest and Arsenal have raised question marks over Liverpool's strength and desire.
And Souness wants his players to sweep away the doubts by winning at Elland Road.
He said: ‘This will be as tough a test as we are likely to face this season.
Leeds were shaken by their defeat at Middlesbrough last Saturday but put things right in a big way against Tottenham.
‘They will have their tails up and I don't think we could be going there at a harder time.
We'll have our hands full.
But I'm hoping we are going to give them some problems as well.’
Four points from four games is not the start Souness was hoping for in Liverpool's centenary season.
He added: ‘It's very important at any stage of the season not to get too adrift of the top.
‘There are still a few things to sort out.
We're still looking for balance and the injuries we've had haven't helped.’
Steve Nicol (hamstring) and Michael Thomas (ankle) are both ruled out again today.
SOUNESS: Demanding
IT'S MY FAULT
SIMON TRACEY last night volunteered to carry the can for the double calamity that denied Sheffield United victory over Wimbledon.
United keeper Tracey, willing to take the rap for both Wimbledon goals in midweek, said before Aston Villa's visit: ‘I've got to sharpen up.
I should have done better.’
LIVELY LES
Leaders face Bridge battle
QPR hit-man bounces back
FRANK WIECHULA
LES FERDINAND has shrugged off concussion and a hospital spell to lead table-topping QPR's attack today at Chelsea.
Striker Ferdinand, one of the midweek heroes in the win at Coventry, was taken to hospital after being replaced in the second half.
But leading scorer Ferdinand, who'd set up the only goal for Andy Impey, has been passed fit for the Stamford Bridge derby.
Unbeaten Rangers are the surprise Premier pacemakers, and manager Gerry Francis admitted: ‘Staying at the top will be a lot more difficult than getting there.
‘The hard part is still to come and I know I won't be given any big money to strengthen the squad, even if we stay at the top.
‘After Chelsea tomorrow we play Arsenal on Wednesday and they may be our toughest games so far.
I'm delighted by the way we've started.
‘I can't buy players but I have to make sure we keep the ones we have.
I've persuaded them to stick with me and they have responded superbly.’
Unchanged Chelsea, still looking for their first win of the season, will keep Gareth Hall at left-back after refusing to meet West Ham's £2.2million demand for Julian Dicks.
ROBBO Mk II
Fergie finds new leader to replace Bryan
Arise King Paul
KEN LAWRENCE
PAUL INCE will one day inspire Manchester United — just like his hero Bryan Robson has done.
Robson's influence has been legendary within United — but manager Alex Ferguson believes Ince is showing the qualities which will make him the new Red leader.
Robson, 35, is expected to return in a fortnight after a hamstring injury which has seen him, yet again, miss the start of the season.
But in Robson's absence, Ince has proved to Ferguson that he is now maturing rapidly.
Ferguson says: ‘It's got to the stage now that the younger players are beginning to look up to Paul, which delights me.
‘Ince has developed into a player of substance and people forget he is still only 24.
I'm not sure that even Robbo was a leader of men at that age when he was still with West Bromwich.
‘Paul arrived up here as a typical Cockney.
He was full of it.
‘But there is no question now that he is maturing.
He has settled down, has a family and is aware of his responsibilities.
‘He is becoming more and more important to me.’
Vital
Ince's influence will be vital to United as they today attempt to give Fergie his first win at Nottingham Forest.
Also vital will be the contribution of £1 million striker Dion Dublin — whose first goal gave United their first win of the season at Southampton.
But while Dublin continues in a new partnership with Mark Hughes, Ferguson vows that there will be no sacrifice of United's world famous attacking philosophy.
While soccer's purists quake at the thought of Graham Taylor bringing in the long-ball game, Ferguson insists Dublin's arrival will not mean a switch to Route One football at Old Trafford.
He said: ‘Dion's presence will not affect the pattern of the side too much.
‘Obviously, he's a big man and we can bang the ball up to him so he can pick up the crumbs.
But that is only one option.
‘We will still be whipping the ball in from the wings as we have always done and we will continue with the style which brought us two trophies last season.’
INCE: Qualities that made Bryan Robson (inset) a legend
PALMED OFF
MATT HUGHES
ENGLAND star Carlton Parmer has been axed for Sheffield Wednesday's visit to Arsenal — just three days before Graham Taylor names his squad for the friendly in Spain.
The 26-year-old midfielder, who played in all three of England's European championship games, now faces an anxious wait for Taylor's verdict.
Before this week, Parmer had never been dropped or substituted in his club career.
But after being pulled off at Crystal Palace in midweek, he has suffered both in the last four days.
Manager Trevor Francis said: ‘Carlton hasn't been playing as well as he did last season.
‘I sympathise with him because he missed most of pre-season training with an ankle ligament injury.
Then picked up a virus.
‘We both decided he should play in the reserves on Thursday.
I felt he needed a break.
Now he has a training programme for the week-end to try to build up stamina.’
But Palmer declared: ‘I don't think my England chances will be affected.
Mr Taylor will know the position and I still expect to be named in the squad on Tuesday.
‘I'll be fully fit by the time of the international.
In fact, I'm looking to be back against Coventry on Wednesday night.’
Chris Bart-Williams is set to take Palmer's place at Highbury.
PARMER: Out but not down
Blackpool are hoping to sign opera star Luciano Pavarotti to stage a concert in 1995 that will mark the opening of the club's £250m super stadium.
HOME ALONE
KEN LAWRENCE
STEVE REDMOND today goes back to the club that broke his heart aiming to prove Manchester City were wrong to let him go.
Redmond, now with Oldham, is slowly recovering from the misery of his final few months at the club he joined as a boy.
And the 25-year-old defender, who moved to Boundary Park along with Neil Pointon in the deal that took Rick Holden to Maine Road admitted: ‘I grew up with Manchester City but in the end I hated getting out of bed in the morning to go to work.’
Redmond, once a Maine Road hero, has settled in fast with Joe Royle's side.
And he stressed: ‘I feel wanted again.
It will be a strange feeling running out on to the Maine Road pitch in another team's colours.
‘But I'm determined to show they were wrong — I just hope I don't have a stinker!’
REDMOND: Return
Teddy ready
NEIL SILVER
GORDON DURIE met Teddy Sheringham at Tottenham yesterday and said: ‘We're delighted you're here.’
Durie, who cost £2.2 million, will team up with £2.1 million Sheringham at Ipswich tomorrow in a live TV match.
Sheringham finally completed his move from Nottingham Forest yesterday and will be out to provide Spurs with the firepower that has been missing since Gary Lineker left.
Durie said: ‘I've been up front on my own for a few games.
So I'll be glad to have Teddy up there with me.
‘You can't compare anyone with Gary Lineker because he was his own man.
But I'm sure Teddy will come in and do very well.’
Sheringham had a shock on his first day at Tottenham — a training session.
‘That was the hardest training I've done for a year,’ he said.
‘At Forest you don't train that much because Brian Clough puts a great emphasis on rest.’
WELCOME, partner.
Sheringham (left) is greeted by fellow striker Durie yesterday Picture: DALE CHERRY
LORD'S — LAUGHING STOCK OF WORLD CRICKET
TEST CHIEFS ARE WOBBLING LIKE JELLIES
Lamb's out on a limb
‘They bowed to pressure’
COLIN PRICE
PAKISTAN'S cheating cricketers fly out of England today — as free as birds.
But Allan Lamb, who is at the centre of the ball-tampering row, has been hung out to dry by the game's gutless rulers.
The all-powerful International Cricket Council showed themselves to be wobbly jellies of men by shaking uncontrollably under pressure from the tainted tourists.
And in doing so they have become the laughing stock of world sport over the great ball-changing saga in the Texaco Trophy one-day international.
After spending five days trying to work out what to tell the world about the changing of the match ball by the referee at lunch on Sunday, they finally issued a statement — which said nothing.
ICC secretary Col. John Stephenson produced one of the great ‘We'll sweep it under the carpet’ statements of all time.
It read: ‘I have decided not to make any further comment concerning the change of ball during the lunch interval at Lord's on Sunday.
‘Umpires’ reports are, and always have been, treated as strictly confidential and after careful consideration I have concluded the same should apply to the match referee's report.
‘The umpires’ decision is final.
Therefore, so far as the ICC is concerned, the matter is closed.’
Break
And he immediately set off for a long Bank Holiday break!
Not surprisingly, Pakistan's terrible twosome, Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram, immediately claimed their total innocence of all charges and prepared to sue Lamb for his comments in the Mirror.
But they overlook one vital fact — it would have been the simplest thing in the world for the ICC to announce the ball was changed under Law 5 because it had gone out of shape — if that had been true.
But even the weak-kneed ICC officials stopped short of a total whitewash.
Now Lamb must spend the weekend fretting over whether the TCCB will ban him from next Saturday's NatWest Trophy final.
His club, Northants, have already banned him for two games.
And the TCCB disciplinary committee is due to meet at the weekend to decide whether to increase Lamb's punishment for the awful crime of failing to get his comments cleared by Lord's before they were published in the Mirror.
However, the TCCB itself came under fire yesterday for allowing a similar attack by former England captain David Gower on India's bowlers to be published in a new book — Gower: The Autobiography.
With the Pakistan ball-tampering row at its height, Gower has embarrassed Lord's by claiming the 1990 India tourists scuffed the ball at The Oval as they pressed for victory.
Gower said: ‘Their surreptitious scuffing-up on one side of the ball’ was quickly snuffed out by umpire Nigel Plews.
Lamb's friends are asking why Gower was given a free hand to make his remarks while Lamb faces one of the toughest penalties ever imposed in cricket for making the same kind of accusation.
The unconvincing answer comes from TCCB spokesman Ken Lawrence, who says: ‘It's simple.
The book was passed by us here at Lord's.
‘He had permission to go into print.
Lamb did not and that is what he has been disciplined for.’
DEFIANT
WAQAR Younis still insists he is innocent of the charge of ball-tampering
I BET £1,000 DEVON CAN'T DO IT
AQIB'S CHALLENGE
JOHN EDWARDS
AQIB JAVED threw down a £1,000 challenge last night in a bid to clear his Pakistan pace partners.
The Pakistan seamer put his money on the table and said: ‘The fact is we have nothing to hide, and I think it is more than coincidence that all the complaints have come after England have lost.
‘I certainly didn't doctor the ball.
I don't care what pictures you have.
I am as innocent as Waqar and Wasim.’
Both tour manager Intikhab Alam and support bowler Aquib maintained that the deafening silence from Lord's spoke volumes for their plea of innocence.
And the volatile Aqib took the argument a step further by saying: ‘If people are still trying to say that the ball was the main reason for our success rather than the bowlers, let's put it to the test.
‘Let's scuff a ball up the way we are alleged to have done and give it to someone like Devon Malcolm.
‘He's got plenty of pace — but I'll bet you £1,000 he would not get anything like the same results as Waqar and Wasim.
‘He should do if it is all down to the ball.
But he wouldn't for one good reason — he is not in the same league as our two.
‘I can say the same for all the great West Indies bowlers and myself for that matter.
‘I've shared the same ball as Waqar and Wasim all series, so why haven't I had the same degree of success?
‘I can't because I am not as good as they are, and it has nothing to do with the state of the ball.’
Aquib shrugged off the flashpoint at Lord's that led to Allan Lamb exposing Pakistan as cheats.
Message
Lamb alerted umpires John Hampshire and Ken Palmer to tell-tale tears on the ball.
But Aqib countered: ‘We did not know what all the fuss was about.
We got a message at the end of lunch saying the ball was being changed because it was scratched.
‘Our reaction was ‘OK, change it.
Are you all right with the new ball, because we are’.
‘We promptly went out and proved a point by taking six wickets with a new one.
‘We know we've done nothing wrong and it does not bother us in the least what the referees’ report says.’
Aqib added: ‘I don't remember too many grumbles at Headingley when England won and squared the series.
‘Suddenly, when it's England v Pakistan, we are branded villains when really there is only one relevant detail — that Waqar and Wasim will take wickets and destroy sides in any conditions.’
MALCOLM: ‘Not in same league’
GAZZA TONIC
Lazio doc goes, too
He's set to reign in Spain
BERNIE LOVETT
PAUL GASCOIGNE will be joined by his Lazio team doctor if, as expected, he makes his comeback for England against Spain in Santander on September 9.
Claudio Bartolini will be there to keep an eye on £5.5million Gazza, who is set to make his first competitive outing for more than 15 months.
England manager Graham Taylor names his squad for Spain next Tuesday — and Gascoigne's inclusion will be accompanied by a request from Lazio that he does not play more than 15 minutes.
‘It will be good to see the England lads again and to put on the international shirt,’ says Gazza.
‘In a way it's like starting in football all over again.
‘Honestly, I'm as fit now as I was during the World Cup and my weight is down to what it was two years ago.
‘Everything is perfect.
The only difference between now and the World Cup is that I have a better suntan.
‘The knee?
I never think about it.
Obviously I get the odd pains from it because I'm doing things I haven't done for 15 months.
‘People are always trying to put me down and I have always come back better.’
Doubt
He refers to Ian St.John, who used the Saints and Greavsie show to publicly doubt Gazza's ability to come back.
‘Old pros like St.John were saying I would never come back from four knee operations,’ said Gazza.
‘I wouldn't mind if they were prepared to say they were wrong when I prove them wrong but they never do.’
The FA were worried about insuring Gazza for Spain.
But Lazio have told them that he is covered by the policy taken out by the Italians at the time of his summer signing from Tottenham.
Taylor has been to Rome to talk to Gascoigne, whose last serious outing saw him carried off in the 1991 FA Cup final against  Nottingham Forest with knee ligament damage.
He could play his first match for Lazio on Sunday September 13 at home to Fiorentina.
Gazza can't wait to get in the action.
He wants to prove that he is a new man — but still one of the greatest football talents in the world.
He has kicked the booze, lost weight, and he is itching for the Italian League to get under way.
Just to show he hasn't lost that wicked sense of humour, he keeps a chicken's head mask on the passenger seat of his car which he slips on whenever he is recognised.
‘I'm excited about the new season,’ he says.
‘From the day Lazio offered £5.5million for me I wanted to come here.
I accepted their offer straight away and couldn't get here quickly enough.
It's just great to be fit and back.
‘I know I'm going to be a marked man but I like it when people are tight on me.
It keeps me thinking and I know I'm going to enjoy the different style.’
ALL SMILES from Gazza as he prepares to make a sensational come-back — in England colours in Spain.
And the plan is OK with his bosses at Lazio.
Young guns go for it!
MATT HUGHES
ARSENAL star David Hillier joked yesterday: ‘Fifty games and I'm the most experienced midfielder in the team.’
Hillier, 22, played a veteran's role in the Gunners' victory against Oldham, guiding novice midfielders Steve Morrow, 22, and Ray Parlour, 19, through their big-match Highbury ordeal.
He said: ‘It was nice being the most experienced player out there, and it worked out well.
‘I sat back a little bit more than usual and made sure things were organised.
‘I enjoy being in the middle and I think a three-man midfield benefits us.’
Parlour and Morrow have played just 10 League games between them, making it one of the least experienced Arsenal midfields in club history.
And Hillier was full of praise for the young Gunners who made the crowd forget the absence of Anders Limpar and John Jensen.
Superb ‘Ray has been superb in the last couple of games, and Steve came in and did a good job.
‘It's nice for the manager to know that if anybody isn't fit someone else can do the job.
‘He didn't have to make a fuss of Steve before the game — he knew he was capable.’
Next to his engine room colleagues Hillier is an old campaigner, having made his Arsenal debut back in September 1990 and chalked up 47 League appearances since then.
He was one of six home-grown players on duty on Wednesday.
‘It's a great credit to the Arsenal youth scheme,’ he said.
‘I've played with Steve at youth and reserve level, but I hadn't played much before with Ray, because he's so young even by my standards!’
Hillier also thanked the media for spurring Arsenal back to form after two opening defeats.
‘We know the newspapers can't sell blank pages so they had to write something,’ he said.
‘But all the criticism only makes us want to prove ourselves even more.’
HILLIER: Old hand
FOLLOW THAT!
Kenny's chasing Brian to the top
MIKE LANGLEY
IS KENNY DALGLISH the management equal of Brian Clough?
Can he pilot Blackburn Rovers straight from the Second Division to the championship as Clough did with Forest?
Clough won League titles with both Derby and Forest.
He's the only post-war manager to do so with two clubs.
Can downbeat Dalglish —‘Our position doesn't matter at this point’— earn himself a half-share of Clough's record?
Well, Kenny's Rovers stand today on a level footing with Brian's Forest exactly 15 years ago this holiday week-end.
Top of the table!
Forest, as may happen to Blackburn yet, soon fell off the top.
The Manchester City of Brian Kidd and Mike Channon took over for five weeks until Clough climbed back and proved unshiftable.
He had four matches in hand when Forest won the title with a goalless draw at Coventry, the ground where Blackburn's 2-0 win has just made them leaders.
That's a little coincidence, like the fact that Clough meets Dalglish at Ewood Park on Saturday.
You look at these two and ask: ‘What have they in common, apart from their jobs?’
Then you think harder and see parallels everywhere.
Both were international forwards, both scored more than 200 League goals: Clough 251, Dalglish 230, although 118 of Kenny's were at Celtic.
Both have won the League as managers.
Both split suddenly with clubs where they'd been successful — Clough from Derby County in an almighty uproar, Dalglish from Liverpool in a still unsolved mystery.
Both rely on a trusted right-hand — Dalglish on Ray Harford and Clough, in his best years, on the late Peter Taylor.
Both spend big and neither are afraid nor ashamed of it.
Clough broke the goalkeeping record when he paid Stoke £270,000 for Peter Shilton and ignored all warning notices when buying £150,000 of bad news from Birmingham, Kenny Burns.
Shilton rightly won the PFA's player award, while Burns re-formed so impressively that we writers voted him Footballer of the Year.
What honours may shower upon Alan Shearer, Stuart Ripley, Kevin Moran and the rest of the Rovers should the championship come to Blackburn?
I pick out Moran at 36 because the defence underpins Blackburn's challenge.
Nobody has scored against them since opening day.
Forest were just as mean.
Ripley, a winger with wonderful control for his size and strength, can nearly do for Blackburn what John Robertson did for Clough all those years ago.
The same goes for a comparison of £3.3million Shearer and Mike Newell with Forest's Peter Withe and Tony Woodcock.
I feel that time favours Dalglish's chances of joining Arthur Rowe (Spurs), Sir Alf Ramsey (Ipswich) and Clough as the only post-war managers to follow promotion with the League title.
That's because the Premier League is not what it's cracked up to be.
One or two more bold strokes of the pen could wrap it up for Kenny!
LOAD OF PEA BRAINS!
MIKE LANGLEY
GEORGE Graham of Arsenal dislikes refs and linesmen in green.
So do I.
They emerge from the tunnel like an ad for mushy peas.
And I can only surmise that the green gear was ordered before the Premier League learned there'd be no sponsorship from Harry Ramsden's!
GRAHAM: No greens
CHARLES FAWCUS
CASTORET is looking for champagne compensation at Epsom today after everything went wrong at York, writes Charles Fawcus.
Trainer John Hills had high hopes of winning the Ebor with Castoret, but by the time the horse got clear the race was over.
‘Unfortunately, you don't win any prizes for a fast-finishing seventh and a race like the Ebor doesn't come round every day,’ he said.
‘David Harrison was convinced that he would have won with a clear run and while it's hard to be definite about that, he would certainly have been placed.’
Castoret landed some nice bets for for Hills stable when winning at the Derby meeting here and amateur Charlie Vigors is entrusted with the job of getting the York cash back in the Moet And Chandon.
‘Charlie is not as experienced as the top men from Europe in the race, but the horse is not difficult,’ added Hills.
Rain will make a high draw a big help in the sprint and Ashtina (4.15) is close enough to the stands rail to take advantage.
Gymcrak Premiere (2.30) looks set for his first win of the season at Ripon.
He's been second in good races at Royal Ascot and Doncaster and ran well again at York last time.
York winner Sabre Rattler will be backed for the big two-year-old race, but may not give the weight to Urry Urry Urry (3.00).
GORDON'S PLEA
COLIN PRICE
Bristol C 0, Sunderland 0
FED-UP Gordon Armstrong last night begged Sunderland: ‘Play me or sell me.’
Manager Malcolm Crosby wants to accept a £750,000 bid from Premier League Southampton — but his chairman Bob Murray vetoed the move and is holding out for £1 million.
That has set Crosby into conflict with Murray and left Armstrong kicking his heels instead of a football.
He was dropped from the side that shut out City's new goal-king Andy Cole for a well-earned away point from old boss Denis Smith.
Instead, he settled for a stint on air with the local radio station and said: ‘It's all very frustrating.
In May I was playing in the FA Cup final against Liverpool.
Now I don't know what is happening.
‘I have had a great time at Sunderland, but I am ambitious and want to play in the Premier League.
‘The whole business has dragged on for two weeks already and it looks like going on even longer.
‘But if it takes that long to sort things out I'd like to be playing for Sunderland.
‘No one likes playing in the reserves and everyone at Sunderland should know that I would always give 100 per cent.’
Crosby missed the match to watch Danny Wilson, the man he has lined up as Armstrong's £300,000 replacement, playing for Sheffield Wednesday at Arsenal.
But, with rumours already rife at Roker that Crosby is on borrowed time just months after signing a one-year contract, his chairman refused to clear the air.
ARMSTRONG: Talk-in
HOME BOY HITS FORM
Widnes 16, Castleford 6
FORMER Leeds scrum-half Bobby Goulding celebrated his League debut for his home-town club in style yesterday.
Goulding scored a super try early in the second half, beating two men close to the line to score near the posts — and he also created the chance for the final try which made the game safe for Widnes.
It was a tight game, marred only by the sending-off of Widnes winger John Devereux and Castleford forward Mike England after a late clash.
Widnes held Cas and led 4-2 at half-time but once they had the wind at their backs in the second half, they began to dominate.
Second-rower Richard Eyres, who had a storming match, scored a try after three minutes but Lee Crooks, who led Castleford well, booted a 12th-minute penalty.
Jonathan Davis put Widnes further ahead with a penalty early in the second half and then Goulding darted over with Davis converting.
Castleford hit back when Simon Middleton raced over to close the gap to six points.
But Widnes put the result beyond doubt when Goulding sent Darren Wright through and David Hulme finished off the move with a good try wide out.
GOULDING: Top debut
LINDNER LINED UP
LEEDS have wrapped up a two-year deal for Aussie Test forward Bob Lindner.
The Western Suburbs second-rower, who had a spell with with Castleford five years ago, had an outstanding Ashes series against Great Britain this summer.
He had been linked with Manly but Leeds have made the better offer.
But Lindner won't be available until late September if Wests reach the Sydney Grand Final.
Lindner lined up
Raging Rosenior
Bris C 0, S'land 0
BRISTOL City striker Leroy Rosenior accused referee Martin Bodenham of being ‘a disgrace’ because the official hassled him to get up after the former West Ham ace was knocked senseless.
Rosenior insisted: ‘I want to complain to the FA.’
Wakefield 10, Halifax 30
HALIFAX, who did a League double over Trinity last season, completed a hat-trick in this opening League game.
Scrum-half Paul Bishop, their £50,000 signing from St Helens, scored one try and made another while Gary Divorty, another close-season capture, also got a try striding through some weak Wakefield tackling.
Bishop looked to be held on the line by two Trinity forwards but wriggled like an eel to get free and touch down.
Trinity's makeshift pack were no match for Halifax's big six and Bishop was a great general behind them.
PAUL'S PERFECT TALLY
Hull 24, Bradford Northern 14
GREAT Britain winger Paul Eastwood started his bid for a World Cup final place by kicking six goals out of six at the stormswept Boulevard.
Eastwood's superb kicking was the vital difference between the sides, although he had little chance of grabbing the try he needed for a career total of 100 as Hull took a winning route up the middle of the field.
It was a perfect start for new Aussie coach Royce Simmons and a bitter disappointment for Northern after their shock Yorkshire Cup win over Castleford.
SAINTS ON THE MARCH
Doug's boys throw chance away
MARTIN RICHARDS
Leeds 14, St Helens 27
NEW-LOOK Leeds dug their own graves with a series of horrendous blunders — and Saints gleefully pressed the button for a Championship lift-off.
Doug Laughton's outfit, with six men making their debuts, had battled into a 12-11 lead soon after half-time when the game exploded in their faces.
Prop Mike O'Neill overran a ball over his own line for Tia Ropati to score on 55 minutes.
Saints twisted the knife with a glorious try from Tony Sullivan, set up by Gary Connolly.
And then the unfortunate O'Neill dropped the ball just outside his own 22 and Jonathan Griffiths kicked ahead to grab Saints' fifth try.
‘We put ourselves under pressure, which you do when you haven't played together,’ said Laughton.
‘Until the blunders it was one of the best games I'd seen for a while.’
Scrum-half Andy Gregory said: ‘We did some good things and some bad things.
We had our chances but didn't hold the ball long enough.
‘Saints are a tremendous side who will take some beating.
‘When we led 12-11 we had three free kicks against us which took the momentum out of our play.’
Connolly who grabbed the opening try after 10 minutes when he kicked through following good work from Griffiths.
Ropati added the goal but Leeds replied when Gregory turned the ball inside for half-back partner Garry Schofield to score on 16 minutes.
A Gus O'Donnell drop goal pushed Saints further ahead before a John Gallagher penalty brought Leeds back.
Then the chapter of accidents began for Leeds when hooker Colin Maskell threw out a wild pass for full-back Alan Hunte to race 55 yards to score on the left.
But three minutes after the interval Leeds skipper Ellery Hanley took Schofield's short pass to spin out of a tackle and go over for the try, goaled by Gallagher, which put Leeds in front for the first and only time in the game.
Then the ritual suicide began.
HALT!
Saint try-scorer Tony Sullivan gets some close attention from Ellery Hanley and Jim Fallon
Kevin's Swede music
Newcastle 2, West Ham 0
SWEDISH ace Kennet Andersson's ears were ringing after seeing Kevin Keegan's team run West Ham ragged in front of 29,855 fans — the biggest crowd of the day.
Andersson, about to start a trial with Newcastle, said: ‘Brilliant!
‘That's the loudest noise I have ever heard.
It was unbelievable.
I want to join.’
Keegan said: ‘Kennet was gobsmacked.
I don't think he quite expected what he saw.’
Goals from Gavin Peacock and David Kelly maintained Newcastle's 100 per cent start, while Hammers skipper Julian Dicks was sent off for elbowing Franz Carr in the 74th minute.
VIDEO GAMBLE
Peterborough 1, Notts County 3
BATTLING Aussie goalkeeper Bob Catlin spearheaded a quest for a place in English soccer with a 25-minute video of his goalkeeping heroics Down Under.
Notts County manager Neil Warnock liked what he saw and was even happier after the 6ft 4in giant foiled Peterborough in a storming debut.
Catlin's display was the base for County's first League win of the season and Warnock admitted he took a risk when dropping experienced keeper Steve Cherry, Meadow Lane's player of the year.
Warnock explained: ‘It was a gamble when I first signed Catlin.
But I'll always take a chance with players if I think they are right, and this lad really impressed me.’
Dave Smith put County in front, but Peterborough levelled through Bobby Barnes and after the break all the hard work looked like being wasted.
But Kevin Wilson scored a fine individual goal and Andy Williams put it beyond doubt.
WARNOCK: Delighted
SHATTERED
JINXED striker David Hirst was rocked by a fresh injury heartache last night that left his England dream in tatters.
The Sheffield Wednesday flyer yesterday learned he had cracked a bone in his ankle when he scored at Highbury on Saturday.
He had been gunning for a place in Graham Taylor's squad for next month's friendly in Spain but the 24-year-old now faces a month on the sidelines.
COX'S BREAK POINT
Watford 0, Derby C 0
ARTHUR Cox's £7 million Derby side picked up their first point of the season at the fourth attempt on Saturday.
And Watford boss Steve Perryman still backed them for promotion.
‘I think they will be there or thereabouts at the end of the season.
They showed in the first half why they were the bookies’ favourites,’he said.
‘They had so much possession and we just couldn't get the ball off them.’
Derby's best chance fell to Mick Forsyth after a mistake by Dave Holdsworth, but Watford goalkeeper Perry Suckling made a great save.
‘I was relieved to see Perry save that one.
But we must be very pleased with a point.
Derby will be there when the final fight for promotion takes place,’ said Holdsworth.
Derby boss Arthur Cox had no complaints about the sending off of Jason Kavanagh in the 66th minute.
‘We have to go by the referee's decision.
The rules are quite clear and the Watford lad didn't make a meal of the challenge,’ said Cox.
COX: No complaints
GOWER'S PLEA TO INDIA
COLIN PRICE
DAVID GOWER last night begged India not to cancel England's winter tour because of‘a throwaway line’ in his new autobiography.
He has caused a storm with his claim that their bowlers ‘scuffed up the ball’ during the final Test at The Oval two years ago.
The last tour of India was cancelled when they refused to allow Graham Gooch to lead England because he had toured South Africa.
Now India Cricket Board secretary Chandappa Nagaraj has blasted Gower for a ‘malicious statement made in very bad taste’.
It is feared the tour may be called off if Gower is included in the England squad to be announced in a week's time.
Gower said: ‘It is an unbelievable over-reaction to say the tour could be in doubt.
‘It is a single, rather flippant sentence in a book of 100,000 words — nothing more than a throwaway line.’
GOWER: New row
JACK'S ROVING EYE
DAVID MOORE
MULTI-MILLIONAIRE owner Jack Walker admitted yesterday he's ready to splash a lot more cash so Blackburn Rovers can win the League.
Walker, 61, watched Blackburn's expensive signings go top of the Premier League by winning 2-0 at Coventry City.
Then he promised manager Kenny Dalglish a lot more money to spend on the team.
Walker said: ‘We have only just started.
If we are in with a chance of the Championship going into the New Year, then I am determined we will not be beaten.
And I'm not in the habit of losing.
‘My target has always been to bring the English title to Ewood Park, and nothing has happened to change that.’
DALGLISH: Windfall
JITTERY
Wright goal at wrong end
Red-faced yet again
Tromso 1, Liverpool 2
RICHARD TANNER
LIVERPOOL were hit by the own-goal jitters again here last night — but still completed their European tour with a comfortable win.
After Paul Stewart had marred his debut by putting through his own goal in Oslo on Wednesday, it was skipper Mark Wright who was left with the red face this time.
Wright, attempting to clear a cross, only succeeded in sending a powerful header from 15 yards past a startled David James in the 68th minute.
Fortunately for Liverpool, they were already 2-0 up against their part-time Norwegian opponents.
Ian Rush, who had drawn a blank in the three previous tour defeats, broke his duck by tapping in a Steve Harkness cross from no more than two yards out just before half-time.
And new boy Stewart, bought to add bite and goals from midfield, struck his first for the club in fine style in the 58th minute.
The £2.2-million signing from Spurs took a Dean Saunders pass and strode clear of the defence before burying a shot from just inside the area.
Stewart slotted in well in his first full game and Liverpool should have won by a much bigger margin.
But they found keeper Tor Andre Grenersen in fine form — with Dean Saunders denied three times.
Liverpool were without Rob Jones (stomach bug) and Michael Thomas (bruised leg), but were boosted by the news that defender David Burrows will not need a cartilage operation.
BLACK MARK: Liverpool's Mark Wright scored an own goal
GHOST-MUSTER!
CHRIS LANDER
NEIL Mallender, England's Headingley bowling hero, must not be discarded for the crunch Cornhill Test decider with Pakistan at the Oval.
Somerset are furious over suggestions that ‘The Ghost’, who took 8 for 122, should be left out.
Cricket director Bob Cottam said: ‘Leaving him out would be the equivalent of dumping a batsman who had made a hundred on his Test debut.’
MALLENDER
RUBY ON CALL
CHRIS JUDGE
RUBY TIGER can roar back to form in today's Vodafone Nassau Stakes at Goodwood.
Paul Cole's mare won the race last year by seven lengths, but cracked a knee bone and missed the rest of the season.
However, the much travelled five-year-old showed a lot her old sparkle when running Market Booster to a length at the Curragh at the end of June and is reported well fancied to do the double today.
Richard Quinn gets on very well with her and said: ‘She's a wonderfully consistent filly and has recovered well from her injury.
I am sure  she'll run a big race.’
All At Sea, beaten favourite in the Oaks, looks sure to prove a tough rival.
She was well beaten by User Friendly at Epsom, but will be much more at home over this trip and the faster ground.
The critics of Spinning were swallowing large slices of humble pie after the reformed gelding completed a fabulous Goodwood double yesterday.
Two days after his win in the Tote Gold Trophy, Spinning popped up to foil gambled on Jahafil -backed to take £80,000 out of the ring.
‘Hurdling has been the key to Spinning,’ revealed trainer Ian Balding.
‘It taught him to settle and relax and it's made all the difference.
At home he has always worked like a brilliant horse.
He's been beating Selkirk and over seven furlongs.’
Penny's dream is sailing away
NIGEL CLARKE
A BROKEN centre board could end Penny Way's dreams of a windsurfing gold medal for Great  Britain .
Penny, three times world champion and favourite to take the Olympic crown on Monday, lost vital points when, as she lay fifth in the seventh race in her class, the centre board broke and she was ruled out of the race.
The British team immediately lodged an official protest that was later dismissed.
The grand jury sat again yesterday, and will now give their decision this morning.
If their ruling is upheld, Penny will lose points and places.
She said: ‘After three years training to have a race taken away through no fault of my own was devastating.
‘We expected all the equipment to be up to Olympic standard.
‘Imagine a 100 metres runner finding bricks and potholes in his lane when all the other lanes are normal.’
The board was supplied by the organising committee and team manager Cliff Norbury said: ‘We regard this decision as unsatisfactory and are taking the matter further.
‘We believe the organising committee has an obligation to supply equipment which is of a suitable quality.
They have failed to meet this obligation.’
WAY: Protest
Penny's hopes sailing away
PENNY Walsh's dreams of a windsurfing gold medal for Great Britain could be shattered by a broken centre board.
The three-time world champion and favourite to take the Olympic crown on Monday lost vital points when she was ruled out of the seventh race after her board broke.
The British team immediately lodged an official protest that was later dismissed.
WILD-MAN BOXER KO'D
IRISH featherweight Paul Griffin was banned from boxing for a year last night after being accused of trying to assault officials at the Olympics.
European champion Griffin argued violently with ringside judges after a doctor had decided his opening bout should be stopped.
He also kicked his gumshield out of the ring.
Despite his subsequent apology, the International Amateur Boxing Association have now banned Griffin.
IABA secretary Karl-Heinz Wehr said: ‘We will not allow anybody to fool around with us.
‘There was a need to take strong action.
The sentence could have been higher.’
Fast class post
POSTIES in Luton, Beds, are claiming a record after delivering a second class letter 75 minutes after it was posted.
JOY BOY
JOY BOY
INDIAN wonder boy Sachin Tendulkar wrote his name into the Yorkshire record books with a 69-ball century at Headingley yesterday — but still ended up on the losing side.
A 9,000 crowd had the satisfaction of seeing Tendulkar make the highest score in 22 years of Sunday League games against Lancashire.
Lancashire had run up their best total, 264 for three, to give the Tykes a mountain to climb.
Nick Speak's century spanned only 79 deliveries as the Yorkshire attack wilted.
Tendulkar and Richard Blakey hit back with a stand of 176 in 24 overs, but then Neil Fairbrother swooped to run out the Indian ace with a direct hit.
Despite passing their previous best of 244 against their arch-enemies, the Tykes ended four short and their hopes of Sunday League prize-money disappeared.
GOLDEN SOUVENIR
THE FASTEST MAN ON EARTH
NEIL SILVER
LINFORD CHRISTIE raises his arms in a triumphant salute after being crowned the fastest man on earth.
Britain's sprint sensation acknowledges the cheers of the 60,000 fans gathered in the Olympic Stadium to witness his magic moment in Barcelona.
Lightning Linford, the British athletics team captain, stands head and shoulders above silver medallist Frankie Fredericks of Namibia (right) and American bronze medal winner Dennis Mitchell — the men he beat with amazing ease to capture the 100 metres gold medal.
Seconds after Christie's heroic victory he said: ‘I just love hearing God Save the Queen.’
Then he climbed on to the winner's rostrum and became the proudest man in the world as the British National Anthem echoed around the massive Montjuic Stadium.
True Brit Christie's first action after storming to victory in just 9.96 seconds was to snatch a giant Union Jack flag from British fans and drape it around his shoulders for his rousing lap of honour.
Christie's critics had said that at 32 he was too old to beat the best sprinters in the world.
But after ramming their words back down their throats his enormous smile shows how delighted he is to be a golden oldie!
ALL WASHED UP
NEIL SILVER
HARD-UP Brighton have not paid their players for six weeks and backroom staff have not had wages for two months.
Brighton are £3 million in debt and losing £1,000 a day.
They needed an advance from the PFA to pay the players' wages up to June 20, but the players have not been paid since then.
One concerned player said last night: ‘It's not very nice but it's an ongoing thing and we know the club hasn't got any money.’
Team boss Barry Lloyd, who is also the club's managing director, is currently putting together a financial rescue package which involves the club moving from the Goldstone Ground to a new stadium.
BRITANNIA RULES THE WAVES!
Pair are a splash hit on rowed to glory!
Bovver boys put the boat in
NIGEL CLARKE
ROWING's Bovver Boy Bruvvers struck Gold with one of the most sensational finishes in Olympic rowing history.
Jonny and Greg Searle produced a last-gasp victory in the coxed pairs to follow Saturday's coxless success for fellow Britons Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent.
And they ruled the waves after trailing by more than three seconds with only 500 metres of the 2,000m course remaining.
The Surrey boys, 23-year-old Jonny and Greg, 21, refused to accept defeat against the brilliant Italians Carmine and  Giuseppe Abbagnale, and pushed past the double Olympic champions just two feet from the line with the crowd roaring.
Jon, as he proudly watched the Union Jack raised above his head, must have thought back to the days when, as Oxford University Boat Race president, the only flag he looked at was the skull and crossbones which hung in his study with a menacing message written underneath: ‘Death Zone — No Prisoners.’
Eccentric, uninhibited and controversial, Jonny does the shouting in the British boat while Greg supplies the power.
It is a combination that is so good that Redgrave, 30, is now looking over his shoulder.
Rowing team boss Brian Armstrong says: ‘Greg is the one coming through — he could be the next Redgrave.
‘He is the one who may partner Pinsent in the coxless pairs in the next Olympics.’
But it is Jonny who is the driving force, the black leather jacket may have gone, the cowboy boots were nowhere to be seen yesterday, but the earring is still in place and so is the intensity which stunned Cambridge two years ago.
Now he has channelled that aggression and raw talent to produce a golden combination of motivation and power.
He says: ‘If people say we are crazy that's fine by us.
‘In the race we just went for them.
All I could hear was my heart pounding.
There is a saying ‘Who's going to be the last one to pull their hands out of the fire?’
That was us.
That's why we won it on the line.’
Said Greg: ‘There is no-one I would rather row with and there is no-one I would trust more than Jonny.
‘We had a bad time for the first 250 metres and they didn't know where we were but our cox Garry Herbert was brilliant.
He kept on encouraging us, saying ‘How much do you want it?’
‘The Italians were bigger, stronger and older than us but in the end we just went for their throats.
It's a marvellous feeling.
Sheer ecstasy.’
MIRROR COMMENT: Page Two 
Brothers in arms Greg (left) and Jonny Searle let their feelings show after their sensational victory over the apparently invincible Italians Carmine and  Giuseppe Abbagnale — and an emotional cox Garry Herbert (right) joins the brothers as they celebrate their golden moment
FAITHFUL STAR, who finished fourth in the Digital Galway Plate Handicap Chase, is to join Martin Pipe.
Jacko nearly goes whacko
DAVID MOORE
COLIN Jackson was within a few inches of Olympic disaster last night in his bid for the 110 metres hurdles crown.
Welsh wizard Jackson, who took silver in Seoul, hit the fourth hurdle in his second round heat and nearly fell.
But Jackson, 25, who recorded a remarkable 13.10 seconds time in the morning heats despite easing up, somehow stayed upright.
He finished runner-up to Jack Pierce, winner of the US trials, and then vowed that this evening's semi- final and final will be a totally different story.
Jackson — forced to pull out of last year's World Championship final when he suddenly suffered shoulder spasms minutes before the race — declared: ‘I won't make the same mistakes again.
‘My coach, Malcolm Arnold, told me that you don't win gold medals performing like I did in the first round.
‘So I eased up…and perhaps I eased up too much.’
Tony Jarrett, who grabbed the bronze in Tokyo after Jackson's late withdrawal, was a smooth-looking second behind America's Tony Dees, and Hughie Teape made it three Brits in the semis as a fastest loser.
PETER POWER
MIKE LANGLEY
PETER Richardson, a 22-year-old from Middlesbrough, boxed brilliantly to reach the light-welter quarter-finals last night, outpointing Mongolian Nyanna Altamkahuyag 21-4.
He said afterwards: ‘I think I'm going to win the gold.
There's no-one here to beat me.’
But a graze above his left eye has raised worries that the doctors may rule him out.
Light-middleweight Robin Reid also reached the quarter-finals, outpointing awkward Lithuanian Leo Maleckis.
Flyweight Paul Ingle was eliminated on a 13-12 verdict by strong North Korean Chol Su Choi despite a last-round rally.
TWO IN A ROW
NIGEL CLARKE
JONNY and Greg Searle, the oar-inspiring young guns from Chertsey, provided Britain's second rowing gold here yesterday — by a whisker.
They pipped Italian brothers Carmine and Giuseppe Abbagnale just yards from the line to add a coxed pairs victory to Saturday's coxless triumph from Steve Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent.
The all-conquering Abbagnales — twice Olympic victors with a combined age of 63 — had no answer to the explosive finishing power of the Searles, combined age 43, who were goaded on by cox Garry Herbert.
While the brothers stood erect on the medal platform, it was Herbert who showed the full range of emotion, weeping uncontrollably during ‘God Save the Queen’ and leaping about in triumph after the anthem.
Herbert, a 22-year-old Reading University history student, said: ‘I wanted them to be prepared to die for it — and they nearly did.’
ROWED TO GLORY: Pages 26, 27 
Crying fame!
Greg (left) and Jonny Searle on the rostrum yesterday with emotional cox Garry Herbert
JAN'S BLOW
RICHARD TANNER
JAN MOLBY will miss the first month of Liverpool's Premier League title challenge.
The Danish midfielder has torn a calf muscle and has been sent to the Lilleshall sports injuries clinic for specialised treatment.
Molby, 29, suffered the damage on the opening day of pre-season training last month but the injury has proved more serious than he first thought.
It's a big setback for Molby, who faces a fight to regain his place following the arrival of Paul Stewart to bolster Liverpool's midfield.
Apart from Molby, two other members of Liverpool's Cup winning team could miss Saturday's Charity Shield clash with Leeds at Wembley.
Winger Steve McManaman, still working his way back to full fitness after a knee operation, is definitely out — and there's a big doubt over right back Rob Jones, who has a virus.
Manager Graeme Souness takes his squad across the Mersey to Tranmere tonight looking for a confidence-boosting display before the weekend showdown with Howard Wilkinson's champions.
MOLBY: Sidelined
BATTLE OF YORK
KOOYONGA has been confirmed a definite starter in the Juddmonte International Stakes, even if St Jovite is in the York line-up in two weeks.
Jim Bolger is still  considering whether to aim his Irish Derby and King George winner at the mile and a quarter contest, but that does not worry Michael Kauntze.
Kooyonga's three-quarter length defeat of Zaahi sets up a possible clash with top three-year-olds St Jovite, Dr Devious, All At Sea and Muhtarram, as well as Saturday's Nassau Stakes winner Ruby Tiger.
‘The York race is boiling up to be a good looking contest which is great,’ Kauntze said.
‘I am very frightened of St Jovite, but that is no reason to run away from him.’
Steve Cauthen's battle with the Jockey Club over his use of the whip begins in London tomorrow.
The American will appear before members of the disciplinary committee at Portman Square, having broken the rules twice in a day at Goodwood last Thursday.
A time for the hearing has still to be agreed.
Cauthen was suspended for four days for excessive use and for hitting Witness Box.
CLEVER FOLLY broke the £100,000 prize money barrier when winning at Newton Abbot yesterday.
ACES ROWED OUT
NIGEL CLARKE
ROWING heroes Steven Redgrave and Matthew Pinsent look likely to have to fly home early from the Olympics after an embarrassing official snub, writes Nigel Clarke.
Redgrave and Pinsent, who on Saturday thrilled the nation with a gold medal triumph in the coxless pairs, now can't get into the official athletes' village.
Says Pinsent: ‘We are being kicked out of our headquarters in Banyoles on Wednesday when the rowing finishes, and some of us want to get into the main village.
‘We've been told it's impossible because it's full up, and I for one am very disappointed.
‘Let's face it, the Olympics are only once every four years and I want to stay on until the end.’
REDGRAVE: Snub
Goran glee
GORAN Ivanisevic guaranteed Croatia an Olympic tennis medal with his fourth successive five-set victory.
The Wimbledon finalist hurled his shirt to cheering Croatian fans after reaching the semi-finals with a 6-7, 6-7, 6-4, 6-4, 8-6 win over Frenchman Fabrice Santoro.
IVANISEVIC: Medal
HOLY WAR
Lewis heading for showdown
MIKE LANGLEY
EVANDER HOLYFIELD expects to defend his world heavyweight title next spring in America against Lennox Lewis.
He sees the showdown between himself and Lewis of West Ham as the likeliest outcome of two virtual eliminators in the autumn:
Lewis v Razor Ruddock at Earls Court in London on October 31, followed by Holyfield against Riddick Bowe — the number one contender — at the Mirage in Las Vegas on November 13.
Holyfield starts training next month, but right now is watching the Olympics and doing nothing more testing than shadow boxing and jogging two miles a day around the Crystal Harmony, the Coca-Cola company's flagship in Barcelona harbour.
Shoulders
We talked yesterday in his cabin.
It's one of the choicest and largest, yet Holyfield — tapering from shoulders to waist like some gigantic gymnast — seems to fill it.
So much for being only a blown up light-heavy!
He said: ‘It should be a good fight between Lennox and Ruddock.
Yes, a tough fight for Lewis but he should win, I think.
‘It's said he's not aggressive enough.
But that may depend on who he is fighting and, anyway, Razor Ruddock isn't aggressive, either.
‘He moves back and is mainly a one-handed fighter.
That's why I pick Lewis, who has two hands.’
Holyfield speaks in a deep bass voice which makes everything he says sound as though it's carved in stone.
He moved on to his own fight and talked about Bowe.
‘He's very aggressive, which will make it a lot easier for me because of my experience.
‘I like a man who comes at me and who is a big puncher, like Bowe.
I do well against big punchers.
I'm able to hit them because they're trying to get me.
In fact, I think Bowe's style will make me look good.
‘Then it could be Holyfield v. Lewis.
He's a young fighter, but not as aggressive as Bowe and I would have to make things happen with him.
‘He has long arms and I think he'll use them to hold me off and make it a long bout.
But I think I'll know how to dig him out and take him in the later rounds.’
Holyfield keeps popping into the Olympic Boxing Hall where I've spent so many evenings in Barcelona.
In fact, he holds a bronze medal, although it could have been a silver or even a gold if a ref in Los Angeles hadn't acted too hastily.
In the light heavyweight semi-final Holyfield hit his opponent after the command ‘break’.
He was disqualified, but says:
‘The ref made a bad decision.
The name of the game is to hit the guy as hard as you can and to protect yourself at all times.
‘But I'm proud of my bronze medal and keep it in a safe with my World Championship belt.
When I look at the Olympic fighters here I see several with good styles and professional potential who should make it to the top if they get with the right coaches.’
Holyfield added: ‘I'll fight anyone who wants the title and is worthy of a chance — but that doesn't include Frank Bruno.
‘Frank has to prove himself by really beating someone in the top ten.
I'm not fighting anybody just because they've decided to make a comeback.’
Champ's target WORLD heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield forecasts that the challenger for his title early next year will be Britain's Lennox Lewis, whom Holyfield is tipping to beat Razor Ruddock in their eliminator in October
LEWIS: The champ's choice
Rick's ready
OLDHAM winger Rick Holden passed a medical yesterday to complete one corner of the £1.2million transfer deal between Manchester City and Oldham.
It leaves the moves of Neil Pointon and Steve Redmond from City to Boundary Park to be completed later this week.
City will get £300,000 as well as Holden in the deal.
Their secretary, Bernard Halford, said last night: ‘All the loose ends should have been settled within 48 hours.’
Defensive kingpins Redmond and Pointon can't arrive at Boundary Park a moment too soon after last night's embarrassing 4–2 friendly defeat at Stockport.
Everton substitute David Unsworth scored two minutes from time as the Blues beat the Irish League 1-0 in Belfast.
Beaten by girl Gazza!
NIGEL CLARKE
Britain 1, Germany 2
GREAT Britain's hockey gold medal dream was destroyed yesterday by an 18-year-old schoolgirl who loves Gazza.
They lost the chance of Olympic glory, beaten by a German side whose inspiration is Heike Latzsch, the new sensation in women's hockey.
Latzsch, who has played 56 times for her country, made the first goal then got Germany's winner with a sensational solo effort, after England equalised.
And she said: ‘When I am not training for hockey I play football.
I am an attacker, but I make goals just like your Paul Gascoigne.
I like him very much.’
Britain now face a play-off for the bronze medal against South Korea.
Britain had fought back bravely with a great equaliser from Jane Sixsmith after Germany had taken the lead through Nadine Ernsting.
ROBIN REAPS REWARD
MIKE LANGLEY
THE GRIM Reaper gave Britain cause to be happy last night.
Robin Reid, a betting shop manager  from Runcorn who calls himself the Grim Reaper, guaranteed his country's first boxing medal.
He qualified for the light-middleweight semi-finals by beating Norway's Ole Klemetsen.
He survived a hard blow to the jaw in the dying seconds to win 20-10.
But there were defeats for Steve Wilson and Peter Richardson.
In the archery, Simon Terry won his second bronze medal, joining Steve Hallard and Richard Priestman to take third place in the men's 70 metres team event.
And Lawrie Smith won a bronze to salvage Britain's disastrous Olympic yachting campaign by finishing third in the Soling Class.
But our showjumpers flopped, finishing seventh behind gold medal winners Holland in the team competition.
BLACK AGONY
Roger in quit threat
DAVID MOORE
ROGER BLACK yesterday revealed he will quit athletics if he cannot end the injury nightmare which shattered his Olympic dream.
Britain's golden boy who lost his shine when newcomer David Grindley beat him for the final place in today's 400 metres final is ready to take a year off from the track if it means he can beat the trouble.
After his exit from Monday's semi-finals, Black revealed that he had been struggling for five years with a ‘bio-mechanical’ problem which affects his body balance and leads to other injuries.
‘I've lived with it for long enough, but I didn't get away with it this year and I'm running out of time,’ said the 26-year-old European champion, who needed a pain-killing injection before the race.
‘If it gets any worse, I'll knock it on the head.
‘The time has come for me to get it sorted out — and I'd happily take a year out if it meant I'd have a few more years later on.
‘I need to be mechanically perfect to beat the best.’
BLACK: Problem
Jump jockey Willie Irvine was suspended for four days, August 14-17, after misuse of the whip at Exeter yesterday
Chelsea boss Ian Porterfield is making a shock swoop for Sheffield Wednesday left-back Phil King.
Porterfield wants King to fill his problem No 3 position and has asked Wednesday to name their price.
Wednesday are looking for £800,000 for the former Swindon player, who Chelsea value at closer to £500,000.
King has been unsettled at Wednesday for some time, and their summer bid for John Beresford appeared to be a threat to his future.
ANN GETS BOOT
BRITISH officials lost their bid to have Ann Williams reinstated for the 1500m semi-finals after her controversial heat yesterday.
Williams was disqualified after falling in the race, sending Sweden's Maria Akraka and Italian Fabia Trabaldo sprawling.
Despite protests from Britain that the Swedish athlete had tripped Williams, the Olympic appeal jury blamed Williams and put Akraka and Trabaldo through to the next round.
ANN: Blamed
Linford finds it too hot
JOHN REGIS and Marcus Adam battled their way into tonight's 200metres final after two races which left the crowd stunned in disbelief.
But 100-metres champion Linford Christie failed to make the 5.40 pm showdown and his dream of a sprint double died.
Regis equalled Christie's 20.09sec British record as he clung on to be second behind America's Mike Marsh.
But Christie found the pace too hot as Marsh scorched home in 19.73sec, only one-hundredth of a second outside the world record.
Then American Michael Johnson, one of the biggest favourites in the Games, flopped in the next semi-final, miserably trailing in sixth.
Adam sneaked into fourth place on 20.63sec, a quarter of a second slower than Christie.
Barrier
Regis said: ‘I don't blame Linford one little bit — appearing in the number of rounds that he has would have taxed the strength of a superman.
‘If I can crash the 20-second barrier in the final and nick a bronze, then I'll be one happy Englishman.’
Adam, celebrating his second victory over Johnson this week, gasped: ‘I didn't think I could get this far.
Now I've nothing to lose.’
Johnson said: ‘It just hasn't been there for me.
I was planning to get faster.
Instead I got slower.’
TOP GUNNELL
Sally's just pure gold
DAVID MOORE
SENSATIONAL Sally Gunnell joined Britain's Golden Greats last night with a wonder run here in Barcelona.
Gunnell gave herself the perfect wedding present when she unwrapped an Olympic gold medal in the 400metres hurdles.
Super Sally joined an exclusive club by becoming only the fifth British girl athlete to strike gold and only the second ever on the track, following Ann Packer in Tokyo 28 years ago.
She destroyed the field, streaking home in 53.23 seconds for a triumph which delighted the nation.
Essex girl Gunnell, 26 last week, joins Ann, Tessa Sanderson, Mary Peters and Mary Rand in the golden set — and Princess Anne and Prime Minister John Major were both in the VIP box to see her.
Sally, who slammed American rival Sandra Farmer-Patrick into second place and left world champion Tatyana Ledovskaya nowhere in sight, marries fiance Jon Bigg in Florida on October 18.
And the smooth-striding solicitor's clerk, daughter of a chicken farmer from Chigwell, joked: ‘I've warned him I won't be changing my name.
Giant
‘It's taken me so long to get ‘Gunnell’ up there on the giant Olympic scoreboard, I think I'm going to carry on being called that for athletics purposes.’
Gunnell, a real golden girl with glittering earrings and necklace as she attacked the barriers, pulled up alongside the exotic Farmer-Patrick coming off the final bend.
Sally, forced to settle for the silver medal in last year's world championships, revealed: ‘I was determined to prove after Tokyo that I could be the best.
‘The British fans in the crowd were absolutely superb.
I'd like to thank every single one of them.
‘The first feeling is one of relief for a minute or two.
Now I'm so high it is just amazing.
‘It's a real emotional roller coaster, and I suspect that a couple of days ahead I will be totally drained.’
CHAMPION!
SALLY GUNNELL clutches the Olympic gold after her superb 400 metres hurdles victory last night.
The Essex girl is only the fifth British Belle ever to win an Olympic track or field title
STEVE'S KEY TO SUCCESS
CHRIS JUDGE
BARNSLEY trainer Steve Norton can't wait to go off talent-hunting to America again in a fortnight's time.
He watched one of last year's American purchases Celestial Key storm home at his local Pontefract track yesterday and his trips have paid off many times in the past.
‘I have been going for 18 years and you get fan-tastic value for money,’ he said.
‘This one cost only 25,000 dollars, which is incredible for something sired by a champion sprinter.’
Astrac Trio, Norton's other Florida purchase last August, obliged at Southwell recently and Celestial Key impressed Kevin Darley by wearing down favourite Blow Dry inside the final furlong.
John Reid, who had five winners on Wednesday, teamed up with Richard Hannon to land a gamble in Brighton's opener on After The Last, backed from 7-4 to 11-10.
Hannon also saddled four winners on Wednesday and the stable's long-serving travelling head lad Taffy Williams quipped: ‘We are taking the stable cat to the races tomorrow, and Mr Hannon is sure he'll win too!’
Jumps racing looks sure to be scrapped at Wolverhampton at the end of this current season.
They plan to go All-Weather and floodlit.
Dad's on the Matt
MATTHEW
Yates blamed father Mike's coaching after he failed to reach the 1500 metres final.
Following the advice, the British runner tried to make all the running.
He led to the final 250 metres, before falling back to last.
He said: ‘I listened too much to Dad and as a result let myself down.’
With Britain's other 1500 metres hope, Kevin McKay, also missing out, we don't have a runner in the final for only the second time this century.
BARCELONA UPDATE
ATHLETICS
Men's 200m final: 1 M Marsh (US) 20.01; 2 F Fredericks (Nam) 20.13; 3 M Bates (US) 20.38.
Also: 6 J Regis (GB) 20.55; 8 M Adam (GB) 20.80. 400m hurdles final: 1 K Young (US) 46.78 (WR); 2 W Graham (Jam) 47.66; 3 K Akabusi (GB) 47.82.
Long jump final: 1 C Lewis (US) 8.67m; 2 M Powell (US) 8.64m; 3 J Greene (US) 8.34m.
Decathlon final standings: 1 R Zmelik (Czech) 8,611pts; 2 A Penalver (Spain) 8,412pts; 3 D Johnson (US) 8,309pts.
Also: 18 D Bigham (GB) 7,754pts.
Qualifiers for 1500m final: F Ruiz (Spn); M Chica (Spn); A Rakipov (CIS); R El-Basir (Mor); J Birir (Ken); J Chesire (Ken); D Kibet (Ken); N Morceli (Alg); J Spivey (US); G Hood (Can); M Sulaiman (Qat); J-P Herold (Ger).
Qualifiers for 5000m final: R Denmark (GB), Y Ondieki (Ken), M Versteeg (Hol), P Bitok (Ken), D Castro (Por), P Thiebault (Fra), A Sambu (Tan), S Antibo (Ita), W Bikila (Eth), M Issangar (Mor), D Baumann (Ger), R Kennedy Jnr (US), D Kirui (Ken), F Bayisa (Eth), M Boutayeb (Mor), A Rodrigo (Spn).
Women's 200m final: 1 G Torrence (US) 21.81; 2 J Cuthbert (Jam) 22.02; 3 M Ottey (Jam) 22.09. 100m hurdles final: 1 P Patoulidou (Gre) 12.64; 2 L V Martin (US) 12.69; 3 Y Donkova (Bul) 12.70.
Qualifiers for 1500m final: E Podkopayeva (CIS); L Rogacheva (CIS); D Melinte (Rom); M Rydz (Pol); H Boulmerka (Alg); Liu Li (Chi); M Zuniga Dominguez (Spn); Qu Yunxia (Chi); P S Plumer (US); T Dorovskikh (CIS); E Fidatov (Rom); M D L Mutola (Moz).
High jump qua'fing rnd: Group 2: 1= H Henkel (Ger) 1.92m, D Marti (GB) 1.92.
Marti qualifies for final.
BOXING
Bantamweight semi-finals: W McCullough (Ire) bt L Gwang-sik (N Kor) pts.
Welterweight semi-finals: M Carruth (Ire) bt A Chenglai (Tha) pts.
CANOEING Men's 1000m Canadian singles semi-finals: Heat 2: 1 P Sylvoz (Fra) 4:06.83.
Also: 4 A Train (GB) 4:09.94.
Train qualifies for final.
FENCING Men's team epee final: Germany bt Hungary 8-4.
Bronze medal: CIS 8, France 8 (CIS win 70-66 on pts).
HANDBALL
Men's semi-finals: Sweden 25, France 22; Iceland 19, CIS 23.
Women's semi-finals: CIS 23, Norway 24; South Korea 26, Germany 25.
HOCKEY Men's play-offs:(places 5-6) Spain 2, Great Britain 1.
SWIMMING Synchronized swimming solo final: 1 K Babb-Sprague (US) 191.848pts; 2 S Frechette (Can) 191.717; 3 F Okuno (Jap) 187.056.
Also: 7 K Shacklock (GB) 179.839.
TABLE TENNIS Men's singles final: J O Waldner (Swe) bt J P Gatien (Fra) 21-10, 21-18, 25-23.
TENNIS Men's singles semi-finals: M Rosset (Swi) bt G Ivanisevic (Cro) 6-3, 7-5, 6-2; J Arrese (Swi) bt A Cherkasov (CIS) 6-4, 7-6, 3-6, 6-3.
Women's doubles semi-finals: G Fernandez, M J Fernandez (US) bt L Meskhi, N Zvereva (CIS) 6-4, 7-5; A Sanchez-Vicario, C Martinez (Spn) bt R McQuillan, N Provis (Aus) 6-1, 6-2.
WATER POLO Group A: Australia 15, Czechoslovakia 9; United States 7, Germany 2; CIS 9, France 5.
Group B: Hungary 13, Holland 13; Italy 8, Greece 6; Spain 12, Cuba 10.
WRESTLING Heavyweight final: B Baumgartner (US) bt J Thue (Can).
Bronze medal: D Gobedjichvili (CIS) bt M Demir (Tur).
Welterweight final: P Jang-soon (S Kor) bt K Monday (US).
Bronze medal: A Azghadi (Ira) bt M Gadjiev (CIS).
FINED!
ALEX Higgins, snooker's bad boy, had a £1,000 fine slapped on him yesterday.
Higgins, came up in front of snooker's ruling body, the WPBSA, to answer charges of offences committed during last November's UK championship in Preston.
The board found him guilty of ‘verbally abusing’ tournament director Ann Yates and ‘intimidating’referee John Street.
He was fined £500 for each offence and reprimanded.
But a charge against him of swearing at Stephen Hendry was quashed.
AKA-BOY
COLIN PRICE
WASIM Akram shattered England in the Oval showdown yesterday and roared: ‘We are no cheats.’
England's chances of winning the Cornhill Test series all but disappeared when Akram became almost unplayable after tea with a ball that was 70 overs old.
He ripped through the fragile batting with superb swing bowling, taking five for seven in 23 balls to finish with six for 67.
That sent England crashing from a promising 182 for three to 207 all out and provided more ammunition for the snipers who claim Pakistan ‘doctor’ the ball.
Akram said: ‘We are all tired and upset at the accusations.
I know no England bowlers swing an old ball in the way Waqar and I do, but that is down to the way we grip it.
‘It's a secret that I don't intend passing on.
I have played here in England now for five or six years and no one has complained about the way I swing the ball.
‘Suddenly everyone is telling us that we doctor the ball.
The umpires check it at the end of every over.
‘But that is part of the game and we can't do anything about it.’
In addition to a post-tea batting humiliation, England were reduced to just nine fit men.
Alec Stewart was unable to keep wicket after being hit by an Akram yorker on his left instep and Phil Tufnell took two painful blows on a foot.
It all made grim watching for Prime Minister John Major, who saw the England batting collapse faster than the ailing pound.
But England manager Micky Stewart put a brave face on a day which destroyed his hopes of going into retirement with a series-clinching victory.
He said: ‘The ball suddenly started to swing at 90 mph after tea.
I know why.
‘Pakistan have two very skilful swing bowlers.
They were very effective.
‘I have never seen an England bowler swing so much a ball that is 60 overs old.
‘But if you look at their records they have been knocking over leading Test match sides in this way for years.
‘We wanted 450 runs on this wicket.
‘But I wouldn't write off our chances of winning this match just yet.’
AKRAM: Destroyer
Dean fury
DEAN Saunders last night pleaded with his Liverpool boss Graeme Souness: ‘Let's sort out my future.’
Saunders is fed up with speculation linking him with other clubs, Newcastle being the latest to show an interest, following Spurs and Aston Villa.
And as he prepared for today's Charity Shield clash, the £2.9million Saunders, 28, admitted that the question mark over his future is unsettling him.
He said: ‘I just wish it would be sorted out.
Nobody tells me anything.
All I can do is ask the manager about it.’
Meanwhile full-back Rob Jones misses Wembley — because of a virus contracted from sheep.
SAUNDERS: Unhappy
SOLID AS A ROCK
CHRIS JUDGE
STACK ROCK, trained just up the M6 from Haydock at Preston, can pull off popular local win in the Coral Handicap today.
Eric Alston's sprinter led the field for the first Sunday race at Doncaster a merry dance under Lester Piggott for just over five furlongs before fading behind Savoyard.
But before that he had run a real stinker in the Stewards' Cup.
‘I just don't know what happened that day.
It's a real mystery but he's in good form now,’ said Alston.
Stack Rock won over the minimum trip at Newbury earlier in the season and, with rain forecast in the Haydock area, he should have everything in his favour today.
Cantoris, who won the race in a blanket finish last year, looks sure to go well again and Double Blue cannot be overlooked.
Badawi romped home in an Ascot ladies race last time and looks the best bet of the day in the opener at the Lancashire track, while Young Buster will come in for strong support in the Rose of Lancaster Stakes after his defeat of Twist And Turn at Doncaster.
Richard Hannon fields two of the nine runners in the ‘Heinz 57’ Phoenix Stakes at Leopardstown and his Son Pardo can bring the prize back to England for the eighth time in nine years.
Son Pardo has come on in leaps and bounds since finishing fifth on his debut at Newmarket on 2,000 Guineas day.
He has since completed a splendid four-timer when making all to take the Group Two Richmond Stakes at Goodwood last week.
Joy for Jenny
NIGEL CLARKE
SCHOOLGIRL
Jennifer Capriati yesterday smashed Wimbledon champion Steffi Graf to take Olympic gold.
American Capriati, 16, beat the world No.2 and title holder 3-6, 6-3, 6-4.
‘It's the best day of my life,’ said Capriati after defeating Graf for the first time.
SIXTH SENSE
NIGEL CLARKE
JANE SIXSMITH yesterday grabbed the glorious goal that earned Britain's women's hockey team their first ever Olympic medal.
They beat South Korea 4-3 in extra time to finish with the bronze medal and set off scenes of joyous celebration that were watched by millions on TV back home.
Sixsmith scored the clincher after 81 minutes and team coach Dennis Hay paid tribute to her.
‘Jane's finishing is the reason we are up on the rostrum with a bronze medal in our hands.
She scares the life out of other sides,’ said Hay.
‘She is an inspiration to everyone and such a lethal goal scorer we call her Gary Lineker.’
Sixsmith, a carrot- haired killer in the box nicknamed Jasper, had earlier scored a stunning goal rated the best of the Games so far.
Britain trailed 1-0 after only four minutes, but Jasper made a sensational 35 yard run two minutes later then went round the keeper to ram in the equaliser.
After that the Koreans took the lead again but just before half-time the battling Britons got level with a Cathy Johnson goal.
In the 56th minute Susan Fraser put Britain ahead, but the Koreans hit back to send the match into extra-time.
In the heat of a sultry evening, Britain had the fitness and the heart to outlast the clever Koreans and it was Sixsmith who got the winner, poaching in the area after the ball had pinballed around from a short corner.
She said afterwards: ‘I'm just amazed at what we have done, and the interest we have created back home.
‘After the disappointment of losing to Germany, we showed we had the guts to come back.
I am already looking forward to Atlanta in four years time.’
OVAL AND OUT
Javed beats boo boys to put England on the rack
Miandad's at it again
CHRIS LANDER
JAVED MIANDAD'S valiant efforts to become cricket's Mr Nice Guy ended as he felt the scorn and fury of a capacity crowd at the Oval yesterday.
For all his  magnificence as a world-class batsman, the Pakistan captain has been stalked by controversy throughout his 16 years in international cricket.
Yesterday was no different.
He was booed and jeered by 16,000 spectators for not walking promptly after giving a desperately hard-to-judge return catch.
But at the end of the second day of this Test showdown, Miandad was the one who could sit and chuckle in the dressing room, whatever the sporting public think of him.
He is in a position which Graham Gooch must envy.
Pakistan are 275 for four, leading by 68 runs with three days left.
Hailed
At Headingley the man so often accused of being Test cricket's hottest firebrand found himself hailed by referee Clyde Walcott for his peace-making whenever there was a flare-up involving his players.
Yesterday he kept smiling — first when umpire David Shepherd reversed his decision over a double stumping attempt and soon after when Miandad was adjudged to have been caught and bowled by Chris Lewis.
It cannot be much fun to have a big crowd turn against you when you have come up with the top score of the day, inspired your team, and done your best to uphold the game's standards of decency and chivalry.
Miandad won't lose sleep over the crowd's abuse, especially if his pacemen polish England off a second time.
What Miandad's 59 did yesterday was to frustrate England's struggling bowlers and to set a platform from which Pakistan can give themselves a match-winning lead today.
England found nobody to do what the Pakistan quickies — Wasim Akram in particular— had done to them.
Devon Malcolm had enjoyed a spectacular two-for-four burst in 23 balls before lunch.
England were no doubt content to settle for that return from their spearhead bowler on such a benign pitch.
He scattered Ramiz's stumps with a near yorker, then induced Sohail into edging a catch for which Alec Stewart dived full length to his left.
The return of left-arm spinner Phil Tufnell gave badly-needed variety to the attack.
He was England's match-winning bowler against the West Indies here a year ago but he never got the same bite and purchase yesterday.
Tufnell deserved better than his final return of one for 71 from 31 overs on his Test comeback after that worrying time in hospital with a burst appendix.
He was entitled to look thoroughly cheesed off when Stewart made an awful hash of stumping Miandad.
The Pakistan skipper had been drawn down the pitch by Tufnell's flight.
Any county wicket-keeper would have done the job — but Stewart, unbelievably, completely missed the bails.
As Stewart had a second frantic go, Miandad had the speed of reaction to recover.
It all happened so quickly that Shepherd at first gave Miandad out.
Then he rapidly changed his decision, which was perfectly fair.
Poor Tufnell could only fret.
Luckily for England, Miandad was not given the opportunity to haunt them much longer.
The highly-athletic Lewis bagged him at 197, stooping and clutching a low drive.
Miandad stood his ground, not being sure about the validity of the catch.
That act, after all the histrionics from his team-mates in this series, sparked off an ugly reaction.
Shepherd had been unsighted — but Dickie Bird came to the rescue by quickly answering the unanimous appeal.
England were nearly as grateful when they dislodged anchor man Shaoib, whose solid batting played an almost as important part in Pakistan's efforts to take a stranglehold on this Test.
FIRST TO FALL DEVON MALCOLM scatters the stumps of Ramiz Raja to give England early hope at the Oval.
Four overs later he claimed the scalp of Pakistan's other opener, Aamir Sohail.
Then things turned sour for our boys.
GOTCHA!
Alec Stewart (right) and Mike Atherton celebrate the dismissal of Sohail
CHRIS LEWIS is bowled over after catching Pakistan skipper Javed Miandad off his own ball.
BIG HITS
GREAT Britain's hockey girls secured a bronze medal yesterday after a dramatic play-off with Korea.
Jane Sixsmith scored the crucial extra-time goal that earned Britain a nail-biting 4-3 win after they had twice trailed the Koreans.
Sixsmith's late strike gave the women's side their first-ever Olympic medal.
FULL STORY — Page 29
GOING CHEAP
EVERTON must pay Southampton £675,000 for Barry Horne, £25,000 less than Saints paid Portsmouth for Horne three years ago.
Saints boss Ian Branfoot wanted £1million for the tough-tackling midfielder but Everton boss Howard Kendall offered just £300,000.
HORNE: Bargain
CHRISTIE FURY
Linford blows his top in relay bust-up
But sprint aces get to final
DAVID MOORE
LINFORD Christie blew his top at his ‘sleeping partners’ yesterday — and then blasted them to the chance of an Olympic medal.
Our 4 x 100 metres squad will go into tonight's final, which includes the flying American quartet led by Carl Lewis, after an amazing behind-the-scenes bust-up.
Four members of the sprint squad missed the bus and arrived at the stadium later than they should have for the morning heats.
Marcus Adam, Tony Jarrett, Jason John and Darren Braithwaite overslept and arrived to find golden wonder Christie fuming in the dressing-room.
One insider revealed: ‘Steam was coming out of Linford's ears.
He doesn't like it when other people fail to live up to his own standards of professionalism.’
Amazed
National coach Frank Dick went to collect the quartet for the 7.15am bus to the Olympic Stadium, and was amazed to find them still asleep.
‘I couldn't believe it — I'd never seen anything like it before,’ he said.
‘It's true to say that Linford was less than overjoyed!
‘We also had problems with Marcus, who was suffering with a stiff and sore right knee.
There was no physiotherapist available.
‘Fortunately, the United States and Irish camps came to our rescue, and we got Marcus out on to the track.
‘The whole business was an absolute nightmare.
When Marcus, Tony, Jason and Darren dashed for the next bus, the driver didn't know where he was supposed to take them.
‘All in all, I'd have to call it possibly the worst morning in my entire athletics career,’ grimaced Dick.
But he demolished rumours of a furious row involving Christie and John Regis, who has agreed to rejoin the short sprint squad as well as running for our 4 x 400 world champions.
Dick declared: ‘These suggestions are totally untrue.’
With Regis replacing John, and Adam again shaking off his injury worries, the British foursome were runners- up behind Nigeria in last night's second semi-final.
On times they are fourth fastest, with the American hotshots and Cuba also in front of them.
But Christie and Co. were never at full stretch — and neither were the 4 x 400 boys, who cantered comfortably into their final this evening.
With Regis and individual finalist David Grindley set to link up with Roger Black and Kriss Akabusi, there is every chance of a fascinating battle with the Yanks, who want revenge for their sensational defeat at the world championships in Tokyo.
Gold medallist Sally Gunnell took the last leg as our 4 x 400 metres women qualified for their final.
She teamed up with Sandra Douglas, Phylis Smith and Jennifer Stoute to take second place in the semis behind the CIS.
REGIS: Recruit
JARRETT: Overslept
Leader LINFORD Christie shows the way for our sprint squad.
JOLLY HOCKEY STICKS
SIX OF THE BEST
NIGEL CLARKE
JANE SIXSMITH yesterday grabbed the glorious goal that earned Britain's women's hockey team their first ever Olympic medal.
They beat South Korea 4-3 in extra time to finish with the bronze medal and set off scenes of joyous celebration.
Sixsmith scored the clincher after 81 minutes and team coach Dennis Hay paid tribute to her.
‘Jane's finishing is the reason we are up on the rostrum with a bronze medal in our hands.
She scares the life out of other sides,’ said Hay.
‘She is an inspiration to everyone and such a lethal goal scorer we call her Gary Lineker.’
Sixsmith, a carrot- haired killer in the box nicknamed Jasper, had earlier scored a stunning goal rated the best of the Games so far.
She made a sensational 35-yard run, then went round the keeper to ram in the equaliser.
OUR hockey girls jump for joy as Jane Sixsmith scores the goal that clinched a bronze medal
LLOYD BANKS RUNS
GRAHAM LLOYD strengthened his claim for a place on the England ‘A’ tour to Australia with his fourth championship century of the season at Old Trafford yesterday.
Lloyd took half-an-hour to get off the mark but finished with 101 as Lancashire piled up 321 for five against Worcestershire.
The 23-year-old batted for 196 minutes, hitting 15 fours and a straight six off Graeme Hick.
Lloyd shared a second-wicket stand of 135 with Nick Speak, who continued his superb season with 71 to take his championship tally to 1,739 runs.
Neil Fairbrother chipped in with an unbeaten 61 as Lancashire cruised to maximum batting points.
MY HELL
Agony for Liz
DAVID MOORE
LIZ McCOLGAN'S lifelong dream of adding Olympic gold to her world 10,000 metres title turned into a soul-searing nightmare last night.
The Scots lassie wandered empty-eyed from the Montjuic track, staring vacantly ahead in utter despair after finishing only fifth.
The golden prize went to Ethiopia's Derartu Tulu, who took off at the bell to leave South African gazelle Elana Meyer in the silver medal position.
Denied
It was hell for McColgan as she was picked off in the run-in for a consolation bronze.
First America's Lynn Jennings went past her, followed by China's Huandi Zhong to deny Liz even fourth place.
McColgan's time of 31 minutes 26.11 seconds was nearly half-a-minute outside her British record — and more than 20 seconds slower than Tulu's.
McColgan, slumped in deep dejection, said afterwards: ‘It was just a bad race on my part.
‘I'm not looking for excuses — I had felt great all day and I was really relaxed until six laps from the end.
‘But after that, I suffered.
I wasn't breathing very well,’ revealed Liz, who is occasionally troubled by asthma.
It was Liz's worst scenario coming true, in front of hundreds of millions of television viewers.
McColgan went straight to the front in a bid to break the field — but in the end, she was the one forced to pay a devastating price.
Meyer, the sensational 25-year-old discovery from out of Africa, tracked McColgan every step of the way.
Then Meyer burst clear nine-and-a-half laps from home, dragging Tulu with her and cutting McColgan adrift in devastating fashion.
From that moment, 28-year-old Liz must have known there was nothing left but pain and near humiliation.
Tulu, the 21-year-old prison administrator from Addis Ababa, slapped her handcuffs on Meyer, using the South African as a towline and refusing her rival's offers to share the pacemaking duties.
While Meyer continually grabbed drinks from the feeding station on the crown of the first bend, Tulu stayed as cool as ice.
Meyer, lifting her country's first track medal following South Africa's 32-year exile from the Olympics, said: ‘My silver will inspire the entire nation.
Tulu deserves her gold, because she was so strong.’
But Meyer rammed the words of sceptics, who doubted her reported times from the Republic, back down their throats.
She said: ‘I think people will realise now that I have true ability.
The trouble is, some people think that we still have elephants walking on the streets in South Africa, and don't possess proper watches.’
Tulu admitted: ‘I knew what sort of race it would be.
Whether it was McColgan or Meyer, I was fully prepared so I could go faster than them in the closing stages.’
Jill Hunter, Britain's other runner in the final, finished 10th.
PAIN IN SPAIN: The anguish of Liz McColgan, beaten into fifth in the Olympic10,000m last night
THE GOLD BROTHERS
THREE arms go up in a golden salute as brothers Jonny and Greg Searle celebrate victory with Garry Herbert in the 2000m coxed pairs.
They overpowered the Italian pair to win in the last few strokes
CHRISTIE V LEWIS
Carl gunning for old crown
DAVID MOORE
LINFORD CHRISTIE and Carl Lewis could collide in the richest-ever race to claim the crown as fastest man in the world.
Moves are being made to tempt new Olympic champion Christie out to Tokyo on September 18, where Lewis will be waiting.
And Christie's slice of the action might reach as high as £70,000, with Lewis — idolised in Japan where he is given almost god-like status — pocketing £100,000.
The previous biggest share-out was when Zola Budd and Mary Decker-Slaney restaged their controversial Los Angeles duel at Crystal Palace in 1986, with the barefoot South African banking £90,000 while the American girl received £60,000.
Lewis, who swelled his incredible haul of Olympic golds to eight with a fantastic anchor leg in Saturday's 4 x 100 metres world record performance from the Americans, said: ‘I won't dodge Linford.
‘The fact that he took the 100m individual, when I couldn't attempt the hat-trick because I failed to qualify for the event at the US trials through illness, is bound to increase interest when we get it together.
‘It could be in Japan, who knows?
What's certain is that it will cost some promoter a lot of money.
‘They know where to find me — it's just a matter of starting the necessary talks,’ added Lewis, who is sponsored by Japanese sports equipments giant Mizuno.
History
Lewis, 31, went on: ‘Linford's name will go down in history as a well-deserved Olympic title-holder.
He's worked hard for this moment.
‘I don't feel jealous or bitter, although I must admit, I'm relishing the thought of running the 100m against him as soon as possible.’
Leroy Burrell, whose storming second leg set up the Yanks for their 37.40 seconds power show in the relay, commented: ‘Carl is in better shape than anybody who came to Barcelona.
‘It's difficult to speculate, but yes, I think he could have beaten Linford here.’
Christie, set to make his first appearance on British soil in Friday night's Lucozade meeting in Sheffield, said: ‘I've heard the suggestions about facing Lewis.
‘As far as I'm concerned, it's all hype at this stage.
We all have to wait and see what happens next.’
His advisers have told Christie that it would be foolish to confront Lewis in Zurich, because that race comes too soon.
Christie, whose normal appearance fee of £10,000 has now been doubled because of his Olympic success, was offered around £30,000 to go to Switzerland.
Now, with the Japanese brandishing megabucks under his nose, Christie looks increasingly likely to head off for the Far East en route to the World Cup final in Havana a week later.
GOLD STRIKE: Carl Lewis leads home the American sprint relay team
GOLD STRIKE: Linford Christie has struck it rich by winning the 100m final
CHRISTIE has already made his intentions clear
PIECES OF EIGHT: Lewis lands his eighth Olympic gold medal — now he wants a showdown with Christie
HWANG BANG
HWANG Young-cho of South Korea won the Olympic marathon last night after a gut-busting struggle up ‘suicide hill’.
He only broke clear of Japan's Koichi Morishita in the last mile and won in 2 hrs, 13 mins 23 secs.
German Stephan Freigang took the bronze medal.
BRING ON THE SAINT
CHRIS JUDGE
PETER Chapple-Hyam yesterday challenged Jim Bolger to let St Jovite take on Dr Devious in the Group One Juddmonte International at York next Tuesday.
The Manton trainer said: ‘Dr Devious is in great shape and on course for the Juddmonte International where I think the 10 furlongs will suit as long as they go a fast enough pace.
‘I don't know if St Jovite is running but I hope he does as we would like to have one more go at him.
‘I would fancy our chances of turning round the Irish Derby form over a mile and a quarter.’
The score between the two horses is one each with Dr Devious beating St Jovite two lengths in the Derby, but then in the Irish Derby the home-based challenger finished 12 lengths ahead of Dr Devious.
Chapple-Hyam added: ‘Dr Devious was definitely well below his best at the Curragh as he was suffering from the virus that affected my yard.
‘I took every precaution possible to ensure he didn't come into contact with the virus but he still came back with a very dirty nose and coughed very badly.’
Michael Roberts rode six winners in a day in Britain for the first time on Saturday.
Roberts, who now needs just three winners to reach 150 for the season, is 22 ahead of Pat Eddery in the jockeys' title race.
Richard Hannon landed a big-race double yesterday with Pips Pride at Leopardstown and the Lester Piggott ridden Mr Brooks in the big sprint at Hoppegarten.
Lady is no tramp
HARRY LLOYD
CONSISTENT Lady Riptide will be the darling of the betting shop punters if she cracks out in front at Bristol this afternoon,
And her confident trainer John Hicks confirmed last night: ‘She's home bar a thunderstorm.
But if it's belting down it could be a different story.’
With the humidity likely to lessen over the next 24 hours, Bristol's all-sand circuit should be in perfect nick for front-running Lady Riptide.
A £1,000 bargain buy from Ireland earlier this year, she has found her best form since switching to the outside.
From Trap 6 over the testing 620-metre course, Lady Riptide (5.59) should quickly draw clear to set up a commanding lead.
‘If she's two lengths up entering the home straight she should win,’ said John who considers Name Crisis the danger.
‘There's no doubt about her getting the distance, but in this top grade it's essential she sets off in front.‘
At Romford, horses-for-courses punters will make Simple Trend a good thing in the heats of the Joe Magnus Rose Bowl heats.
Course specialist Simple Trend (9.56), a closeup third in the £10,000 Mel Attreed Champion Stakes over tonight's trip last month, has an easier task this time.
Crayford punters will probably make consistent jumper Spot On Spur (9.06) a good thing in the Ladbrokes Freephone 524 Hurdle.
Horserace owner Wally Sturt is also one of greyhound racing's biggest fans.
Wally has a range of kennels at Hullbridge (Essex) where his trainer Jim Connolly sends out runners for BAGS track Hackney.
A couple to note in the Sturt colours are Scintillas Crest and Scintillas Silk — who have been pencilled in for Thursday's meeting.
The Ron Bazell Silver Collar semis at Walthamstow tomorrow should provide trainer in form Ernie Gaskin junior with a double.
Long Valley Lad (9.15) looks good enough for the first and Kick The Ball (9.45) has a perfect Trap 6 draw.
HANDY ANDY!
Gray of sunshine
ANDY GRAY and Martin Tyler are set to became soccer's next great double act on television.
With BSkyB taking over the lion's share of the new Premier League the two presenters aim to inform and entertain the millions of armchair fans — and replace Saint and Greavsie as the No 1 pundits on the box.
David Hill, head of Sky Sports believes former Scottish star Gray has been a major signing.
He said: ‘He's a brilliant performer both in front of the camera and with the microphone.
In TV terms he's our Gazza!
‘His natural Scottish wit, direct, authoritative , entertaining approach and instant awareness make him a TV natural.’
Gray became Ron Atkinson's assistant at Aston Villa last July but continued with his TV work.
Eventually he had to make a choice between management and working full time in front of the cameras — so he resigned at Villa.
Gray's new duties include presenting his own show ‘The Boot Room.’
Tyler, billed as ‘the voice of Sky soccer’ describes himself as a ‘frustrated footballer’having played for Corinthian Casuals
He said: ‘There has never been a channel to show so much live football.
It is a fan's dream come true to watch it and a commentator's dream to be part of it.’
Also on the team is Ian Darke, who teams up with Gray to commentate on live Monday matches.
Anchor man Richard Keys said: ‘This deal is good for football.
It means money for the clubs and we have a tremendously committed and talented unit who genuinely care about the game.’
TYLER: Dream
GRAY: Top signing
WEST Ham's Steve Potts opened the scoring against Ipswich in Frank Yallop's testimonial yesterday with a 63rd minute header only to see Neil Thompson equalise from a penalty.
LEEDS UTD 4 LIVERPOOL 3
LEAP FROG
It's Eric the striking!
HOWARD Wilkinson has revealed how he transformed Eric Cantona from a frog into a prince with a piece of plain Yorkshire talk.
Cantona, whose hat-trick lit up the Charity Shield at Wembley, had to be lectured by Wilkinson on the virtues of integrating into the English game.
Tune
Wilkinson said: ‘Players like Cantona can't always dictate the pace of the game, they can't say, ‘Hang on, this is all too quick.’
‘The band plays the tune and you have to dance to it.
‘I've been trying to get it into his thinking that he has to do more running, that he has to fight more and that there are defensive duties he has to do.’
Wilkinson went on: ‘He had to learn that there is much more emphasis on running, battling and defensive duties here in England.’
Cantona was a flawed genius in France, discarded, undisciplined and rescued by Wilkinson.
Now Wilkinson has turned the stale escargot into the galloping gourmet of the English game, a player who can be one of the shining lights of the new Premier League season.
But Wilkinson warned: ‘It is up to him now whether he improves.
If his performances this season measure up to his potential, then he's going to be very, very good.’
Wilkinson, who has cajoled and bullied to knock Cantona into shape, joked that the language barrier is still there because ‘If I'm saying nice things about him he seems to understand — if I suggest he works harder or I say nasty things, he finds that harder to comprehend.’
But Wilkinson, one-time teacher, added: ‘There has been a dramatic improvement in the last six weeks.’
Cantona, who relaxes by painting in solitude, can now take his place as a Renoir among the painters and decorators and fake impressionists of the English game.
As Cantona brushed aside Liverpool with brilliant strokes in front of goal, both on the ground and in the air, the canvas was not so pretty for Graeme Souness.
Farce
In fact, it was such a French farce that the Liverpool boss might end up saying ‘Au revoir Grobbelaar’ if his keeper doesn't pull himself together this season.
Bruce Grobbelaar was declared Souness's number one, but was far too charitable at Wembley.
It can only be a matter of time before England hopeful David James, watching from the bench, takes his place.
Souness, steely-eyed, said: ‘We were very charitable, extremely charitable.
We played very well, but we gave away goals and I'd hate to see throw-away goals like that on a regular basis.’
But Souness was well satisfied with his £2.2million capture Paul Stewart, whose display of nonstop aggression in Wembley's strength-sapping humidity suggested the huge outlay will pay rich dividends.
Souness said: ‘Paul's strong and he's a competitor.
And I like to think that if I was anything I was a competitor.
‘The way the English game is evolving it is becoming ever more fast and physical.
We were lacking in that department last year.
‘Now with Stewart and Michael Thomas in there, we can handle that situation.’
Souness adopted a new defensive system of three centre backs, captain Mark Wright, Nicky Tanner and David Burrows.
He said: ‘We've played every pre-season game so far with that system.
It suits the players I have at the moment.’
Grobbelaar's eccentricities certainly added to the entertainment value of the English season's curtain-raiser.
Little wonder Souness took great pleasure in announcing that Grobbelaar would not be released for international duty with Zimbabwe.
He'll be in the Liverpool squad for Sky's opening live TV match at Nottingham Forest on Sunday.
Cantona opened the scoring in the 26th minute with a slightly deflected shot off Burrows' shin, following a great ball from David Batty to Danny Wallace.
Ronny Rosenthal's cross enabled Ian Rush to head an equaliser.
But before half-time Leeds went back in front when Tony Dorigo's shot from a free-kick movement was wildly deflected off Rosenthal's backside past a stunned and wrong-footed Grobbelaar.
Batty conceded possession and Dean Saunders equalised again for Liverpool after Mark Walters' shot was deflected.
But this really was a bum day for Liverpool as Cantona won the ball in the air from Gary McAllister's free-kick, and the Frenchman reacted quickest when the ball bounced off Wallace.
Blame
The Liverpool keeper's one big mistake was to flap at a Wallace cross, allowing Cantona to head into a empty net and give Leeds a 4-2 advantage with a couple of minutes left.
Grobbelaar accepted the blame.
‘I decide when to go for it and I'll take the stick.
But the goal wasn't all down to me.’
From a Liverpool corner Wright's shot was back-heeled into his own net by Gordon Strachan, not long after he came on.
But by then Leeds were worthy winners.
WEMBLEY'S GOAL WONDERS
HAT-TRICK hero Eric Cantona and Tony Dorigo, Leeds' other scorer, share the spoils victory after Wembley's seven-goal thriller.
Pictures: BRENDAN MONKS and ARNOLD SLATER
OOH, AHH CANTONA
ERIC Cantona, whose goals stole the show at Wembley, feels the full force of skipper Gary McAllister's congratulations.
FIVE-OH!
KEEGAN SHOCKER
MATT HUGHES
Newcastle 3, Sporting Lisbon 5
BOBBY ROBSON seems to have the knack of upsetting Kevin Keegan.
Robson was the man who ended Keegan's England career — and yesterday he was the manager whose side punctured the optimism at St James's Park as Sporting Lisbon brilliantly lifted the four-team Super Challenge Cup.
The Geordies were seemingly cruising as they built up a 3-0 half-time lead.
But then they were torn apart by the skilful Portuguese, who scored three goals in eight minutes and then stormed on to victory.
Robson said: ‘I had some very harsh words with the players at half-time.
The result was that we were much more competitive in the second-half.
‘It was an important match for me.
It's my area and I came here to win this tournament.’
Keegan had a sorry end to a match that began with such bright promise.
He pulled no punches when he said: ‘We collapsed like a pack of cards.
I have told the players it's not good enough.
‘The thing is I would rather it happened here than against Southend when we start the League on Saturday.’
Keegan rested new signings Barry Venison, Paul Bracewell and John Beresford and striker David Kelly but all are set for a place in Saturday's line-up.
Yet in that first-half Newcastle still carried too much firepower for the aristocrats of Portuguese football.
Lee Clark has fought a patient battle to force his way into Keegan's plans and now he is rapidly proving indispensable.
His precision shot after 21 minutes was the perfect tonic for the hosts.
And Sporting looked down and out when the irrepressible Gavin Peacock struck twice on half-time to show just what a coup it was when Keegan persuaded him to stay at Newcastle.
But that was before Sporting's exhilarating fightback.
After 63 minutes Balakov hit Sporting's opener, then Bulgarian international Jordanov had rapped in two to level the scores.
Finally Cadette stepped in with two goals to round off a marvellous display.
ROBSON: Jinx
GAVIN Peacock (left) tussles with a Sporting defender on his way to a double strike just before half-time
FURY OVER FINAL SNUB
NIGEL CLARKE
THE WORLD'S Olympic athletes were last night forced to take second place here…snubbed so that TV might make another extravaganza of the closing ceremony.
Officials didn't even want them to appear on the track as they stage-managed another two-hour show for the audience at home.
Nothing was allowed to get in the way.
Marathon runners finishing after 2 hours 45 minutes found that they could not get into the stadium after a 26 mile 385 yard slog in 90F temperatures.
The gates were slammed in their faces so that preparations for the closing ceremony could take place.
But this is the athletes' show.
It is not about circus clowns tumbling along the track, and sideshows of beautiful women, stiltmen and floats.
Catalonia may want to brag about its exploits, but the Olympic Games is about those who compete, those who win and lose gloriously.
And so the Olympic flame flickered and slowly died, the 25th Games were over and Barcelona said adios among the controversy.
In a spectacle as lurid and as colourful as the opening ceremony two weeks ago the city and the people handed the Olympic flag over to Atlanta, USA and 1996.
Cops hold Ben
JOHN JACKSON
DISGRACED sprinter Ben Johnson, who was banned from the last Olympics for taking drugs, was arrested in Barcelona yesterday.
The Canadian was said to have manhandled one of the young local volunteers on guard at the gate of the Olympic village.
Police arrested Johnson, 30, the ex-world champion.
But he was later discharged after he was recognised.
The incident occurred as Johnson arrived without his accreditation.
A security official said: ‘We did not believe we would have to put up with this type of behaviour.
This was not necessary.’
Boks in
SOUTH Africa were yesterday given the all clear to enter the 1994 World Cup.
FIFA announced that the country, exiled for 28 years, would replace Sao Tome in Africa Group D.
Spurs after Owers
SPURS have made Sunderland's exciting midfielder Gary Owers their top target to replace Paul Stewart.
Terry Venables has been keen on the 23-year-old for months and armed with over £2million from the Stewart sale, is set to move in on the £1.2m-rated player.
Venables inquired about Owers several months ago and is now expected to move in again — with an offer Sunderland would find hard to refuse.
He's impressed a number of Premier League managers but Venables will be the first to make a move.
The Spurs chief is determined to beef up his midfield following the departures of Stewart and Paul Gascoigne.
Although Vinny Samways has now come off the transfer list, Spurs look light in the key area.
Paul Allen is linked with a return to West Ham and Steve Sedgley is also ready to quit.
Owers was inspirational in Sunderland's FA Cup run last season and it is understood he would be ready to make the big money move to White Hart Lane.
Should Venables fail, he will return to Nottingham Forest and bid for Kingsley Black, despite his continuing battle with Brian Clough over striker Teddy Sheringham.
ENGLAND MAKE ME SICK!
SALIM MALIK'S amazing attack on our Test moaners
WE WON FAIR AND SQUARE
‘Umpires found nothing wrong’
IT'S about time England stopped moaning and learned to play cricket like we Pakistanis — properly!
Then they might win something.
And, while they're at it, England might try to put their own house in order.
The way they carried on makes me sick.
They've been calling us cheats, but I had to call on our manager to try to put a stop to some of their own little tricks at Headingley.
At the same time they might even pick up a few tips from Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram instead of trying to put them down.
Then they might be able to bowl like them.
Not that any of it worries us.
All the criticism just rolls off.
We spent Sunday evening at a restaurant rejoicing at our victory at The Oval.
Weird
It was England who crept off, licked their wounds, and tried to come up with all sorts of weird and wonderful reasons for us beating them.
There was one reason, I admit.
And I'll tell you what it was.
We were a darned sight better than them.
All those pictures of Waqar scratching the ball — what do they prove?
I've played against him and Wasim in county cricket and, believe me, if they had been cheating I would have known.
What's more, I would have been the first to complain.
And how I would have complained!
Aqib Javed doesn't swing the ball like that pair — and he's in the same team, using the same ball.
He has a good action and if there had been anything wrong with the ball, he would have swung it too.
The umpires might also have noticed something at some point along the line!
I'm not a proper bowler, so I don't know the secret of swinging that old ball any more than anyone else.
But in Pakistan, where the grounds are rough and hard, the ball soon loses its shine and you have to be able to perform with the old one.
Ability
Sarfraz Nawaz was the first man I saw do it, but most Pakistan fast bowlers have the ability to swing the old ball.
And let's not forget that Waqar shot out the first four England batsmen in the second innings at The Oval with a new ball — and he was scarcely getting it off line.
We won and we won fair and square.
England should concede that bravely and be good losers.
This is not good sportsmanship.
The next thing, they'll be telling Mushtaq Ahmed not to bowl his googly as that's not fair either!
Since the start of the summer the papers have been saying this and that about us.
OK, sometimes we have been in the wrong.
We are all human.
Personally, I am sorry for the upsets at the third Test in Manchester, but many of our players are very young and keen.
They look up to the English players and try to copy them as they feel that is the right way to behave.
Sometimes they just go over the top.
But whatever the papers think, and whatever the English management says, there has never been any trouble between us and the English players.
Don't blame them.
The England players have all been friendly enough.
They talk to us on the field — nothing special, just talk.
When I was making runs at Leeds Graham Gooch came up and asked me how on earth I was batting so well on that pitch.
I just said: ‘Skipper, after what I said about your bowlers in the paper, I had to!’
But Leeds was where England beat us and I felt that, after the row at Old Trafford, the odds were stacked against us up there.
We didn't stand a chance — England were going to get away with anything.
At one point in my innings I thought that a number of England fielders were deliberately walking on the pitch and scuffing it up with their spikes.
I'm not saying who they were, but they know.
I made an excuse to call on our twelfth man and I asked him to tell our manager, Khalid Mahmood, what was going on.
I can't imagine where Ken Palmer thought he was when it came to the Gooch run-out.
You couldn't say he lost by a short head — he wasn't even in the frame!
Thank goodness we had Dickie Bird and David Shepherd at The Oval.
HIT FOR SIX
PAKISTAN batsman Salim Malik reckons that if the England Test team learn to play properly, they might win a few games of international cricket
UNDER FIRE Graham Gooch's team should stop grumbling, says Salim Malik.
MICKY GETS NO BACKING
CHRIS LANDER
ENGLAND'S cricket bosses yesterday divorced themselves from team manager Micky Stewart's attack against Pakistan's pace bowlers.
Triumphant Pakistan angrily refuted Stewart's claims that they had a secret method of making the old ball swing.
But Alan Smith, Test and County Cricket Board chief executive, was quick to make it clear that the governing body were not accusing the tourists of any malpractice with the ball.
He said: ‘All summer the umpires have made frequent and random checks on an assortment of balls.
‘They took a close look at the ball whichever side was in the field.
Checks were made at every interval and at the close of play.
Refusal ‘Clyde Walcott, the match referee, was entirely satisfied that nothing illegal had been done to the ball at the Oval and we want to point out that there was no suggestion of it being tampered with.’
Stewart's refusal to state his claims has angered Javed Miandad's men.
But he went a little way towards pacifying their incensed tour management when adding: ‘We were beaten and have no complaints.’
ROBBERY
CHRIS JUDGE
MICHAEL ROBERTS was cursing his luck yesterday that another South African champion jockey, Jeff Lloyd, has arrived in England.
Roberts took his tally for the season to 150 with a treble on Carousel Music, True Story and Shuailaan at Windsor, only for Lloyd to rob him of a four-timer by beating him on Brigante Di Cielo.
Lloyd rode his first winner in this country at Newmarket last Friday and is in England for seven weeks.
The 30-year-old rode 313 winners in South Africa this season to land his fifth jockeys' title in record style.
Lloyd, who was born in Essex, emigrated to South Africa as an 11-year-old and is a graduate from the same riding academy as Roberts.
‘I've always wanted to ride in England.
We race 12 months a year but I wanted a change as I was feeling a bit stale.
‘I would seriously think about coming here for a longer stay if the right opportunity arose, but I do have a lot going for me back home,’ said Lloyd, who spent his early years in Epping.
Family tie
COVENTRY signed another Gould yesterday when they made former Aylesbury manager Trevor Gould reserve team coach.
He joins brother Bobby, the boss, and nephew Jonathan, reserve keeper.
Everton bid for Harford
RICHARD TANNER
EVERTON boss Howard Kendall last night made a late bid to sign Luton striker Mick Harford.
Kendall, desperate to sign a striker before Saturday's Premier League kick-off, met Harford after agreeing a £300,000 fee.
Harford had already spoken to Chelsea, while Coventry also want the 33-year-old — but Kendall is now favourite to get his man.
Everton have been looking for a target man to bring out the best in Mo Johnston and Peter Beardsley.
HARFORD: Talks
WHAT A LOAD OF BULLS!
Dole meanies top Olympic hero's money
JIM OLDFIELD
OLYMPIC archery hero Simon Terry returned to Britain yesterday — to find he is being clobbered by his country.
Jobless Simon, 18, lifted the nation's pride by taking two bronze medals in Barcelona.
But he came back to a letter from dole chiefs telling him he would not get his income support cash for the 2 1/2 weeks he was away.
They said he did not qualify for the money — a desperately-needed £75 — because his absence from Britain meant he was not available for work.
Simon was greeted by neighbours waving Union Jacks at his home village of Osbournby, Lincs.
But after reading the letter, he said sadly:
I tried to do my country proud but they haven't done the same by me.
I feel bitter that while I was out there I was somebody but I've come back as a third class citizen.
If this is the best they can do when you are doing your best for your country, it stinks.
Simon, who is on a waiting list to join the police, added: ‘Now I have two medals which money could not buy from me.
But I've got nothing in my pocket.’
The decision to target Simon came soon after social security officials were bussed in to PAY benefits at an illegal ‘New Age’ travellers camp in Powys.
And it infuriated the archer's dad Mike.
He said: ‘They actually rang Barcelona.’
Simon, whose medal in the individual event was Britain's first for 84 years, is now so hard-up he has to rely on drinks from mates and his girlfriend.
A Benefits Agency spokesman said: ‘The rules don't say anything about the Olympics.’
But Shadow Sports Minister Tom Pendry called the decision an ‘outrage.’
He added: ‘On one hand we have John Major basking in Barcelona in the glory of our people winning medals and on the other this mean action.’
Bradford North Labour MP Terry Rooney said he would send Simon some cash personally.
He added: ‘We can have DSS men drive to deliver claims forms to hippie itinerants contributing nothing to this country.
‘Yet here we have a lad trying his best and they do this to him.’
SO PROUD: Teenage archer Simon Terry after winning his first bronze medal for Britain
Aussies out on a spree
WORLD rugby champions Australia celebrated their first match in South Africa for 23 years yesterday by crushing Western Transvaal.
The Wallabies led 33-3 at half time and finished 46-13 winners.
Their six tries came from forwards, with No. 8 Tim Gavin grabbing a brace.
Lancs pair bowled out
NEW boys Durham are likely to lead the chase for sacked Lancashire pair Graeme Fowler and Paul Allott.
The former England cricketers have been shown the door at Old Trafford just 24 hours after the departure of manager Alan Ormrod.
Durham, now pinned to the bottom of the championship table in their first season, have made a habit of signing golden oldies.
And Fowler certainly has a stack more runs left in him after Lancashire's biggest shake-up since manager Jack Bond and Peter Lever were axed in 1986.
He clashed with the county over controversial comments in a book by Pakistan all-rounder Wasim Akram.
Contract
While Akram escaped scot free and was able to negotiate a new £250,000 three year contract — the best in the world — Fowler was fined for criticising Lancashire.
It was that bust-up which ruined team morale this season and contributed to Lancashire's desperately poor season.
Chairman Bob Bennett revealed that the new purge had come at the end of a three-hour committee meeting.
He said: ‘I believe that positive steps were needed to build for the future, particularly with the wealth of young talent now available.
Fowler, 35, insisted: ‘There is no acrimony.
I have had 15 magnificent seasons with Lancashire and have no regrets.
‘Alan Ormrod's situation saddened me more than anything.’
Allott, also 35, was recalled from holiday in Wales to discover his fate, but it could hardly have been a surprise as he has not regularly figured in Lancashire's games this season.
Former captain David Hughes has been put in charge for the rest of the season.
ALLOTT: Out!
Derby's Robbo shaker
HUGH JAMIESON
MONEYBAGS
Derby have had an ambitious bid turned down for Bryan Robson, Manchester United's former England skipper.
Derby wanted 35-year-old midfield man Robson to follow in the footsteps of Dave Mackay and lead their charge for promotion to the Premier League.
They missed out in a play-off drama last season despite the arrival of new owner Lionel Pickering who has spent £9million on buying and rebuilding the club.
Inquiry
Pickering said: ‘Dave Mackay did a great job for Derby in his mid-thirties and we saw Robson as the same type of leader.’
But United are hanging on to ‘Captain Marvel’ leaving Derby boss Arthur Cox admitting: ‘We made an inquiry for Robson, but United turned us down flat and said he was not available.’
Relegated Notts County yesterday rejected a record £2.5million bid from Blackburn for defender Craig Short.
ROBSON: No deal
TOUR BOOM
GREAT BRITAIN hit the jackpot on this summer's Rugby League trip to Papua-New Guinea, Australia and New Zealand.
Mal Reilly's squad pulled in record tour profits from their 17-match programme of £233,645, more than double the previous best of £93,282 in 1974.
League spokesman David Howes said: ‘Our planning of a streamlined, higher profile tour certainly paid off and has set the pattern for future trips.’
All League clubs get a share of tour profits and the 39 tourists will also pick up an extra cash bonus on top of their weekly tour wages and Test win bonuses.
CRUNCH!
Keepers face make or break decisions
SPURS skipper Gary Mabbutt warned yesterday that the new back-pass rule could lead to a spate of broken legs for goalkeepers.
The experienced defender fears the law will result in forwards lunging at keepers who this season are banned from handling a kicked back pass.
Already Manchester City keeper Andy Dibble has broken his leg in pre-season, so has a German keeper.
Mabbutt said: ‘There could be a lot more broken legs among keepers.
The law puts them at risk from oncoming forwards and I can see a spate of potentially serious injuries.
‘This rule means a lot of managers might feel it necessary to have a goalkeeper as one of their five substitutes.’
The FA initially were opposed to the change, which was proposed by FIFA.
But their position changed at the International Board meeting at Newport on May 30.
FA chief executive Graham Kelly admitted: ‘It is true we had reservations but there was a lot of feeling within FIFA and UEFA to the get the principle on the statute.’
FIFA were anxious to cut out the long-range back pass which marred the 1990 World Cup final in Italy.
But Mabbutt predicts the change is more likely to hamper entertaining football.
‘It think it's a law that will encourage the long-ball teams like Wimbledon and Sheffield Wednesday,’ he said.
‘It is an invitation to hoof the ball forward rather than use the goalkeeper to play the ball from the back, as Tottenham prefer to do.’
And FA director of refereeing Ken Ridden yesterday warned that referees would not tolerate any ‘trickery’.
He said: ‘If a player flicks up the ball and tries to head it to his goalkeeper, or flicks it up for someone else to knock back, he'll be booked for ungentlemanly conduct.’
MABBUTT: Fears
Mick's night move to the Blues
COLIN PRICE
CHELSEA made a double swoop last night to land golden oldie Mick Harford and Scottish ace John Spencer.
Blues boss Ian Porterfield beat Everton and a string of other clubs with the £300,000 signing of Harford, who put pen to paper in a dramatic midnight deal.
And he showed he means to make goals a top priority with the £400,000 move for Rangers livewire front man Spencer.
Harford, 34, spent yesterday at Stamford Bridge talking terms with Porterfield but later had talks with Everton manager Howard Kendall.
Everton offered better personal terms but hit man Harford settled on Chelsea because he and his family want to stay in the South.
The former England forward is one of the game's best headers and Kendall will be unhappy at failing to find a target man to bring out the best in Mo Johnston.
The decision to sell Harford has come as a big blow to Luton boss David Pleat who said: ‘I didn't want him to go but the club needs the money.’
Harford has played for Lincoln, Newcastle, Bristol City, Birmingham and Derby and has had two spells at Luton.
HARFORD: midnight deal
RAY STOPS RIOT
QPR skipper Ray Wilkins revealed how he diffused an explosive situation in Monday's friendly at Luton.
The goalless draw threatened to flare into an ugly row between several players after Luton's teenage striker John Hartson appeared to be fouled.
There were less than three minutes to go and referee Brian Hill decided to call a halt — with a little help from Wilkins.
‘I asked the ref to blow,’ said Wilkins.
And Hill added: ‘There is nothing to report to the FA as far as I am concerned.
Everybody walked down the tunnel afterwards perfectly friendly towards one another.’
MEL'S HELL
MEL STERLAND was last night rocked by a new injury setback.
After being ruled out of Leeds' championship run-in last season, he's now set to miss Saturday's match against Wimbledon.
Following summer surgery on his damaged ankle ligaments, Sterland hoped to return in Jim Beglin's  testimonial against Liverpool.
But after failing to play in that, he revealed: ‘I've hurt the ankle again, and I don't know when I'll be back.’
Stone dead
STRUGGLING
Maidstone Town's future was thrown into further doubt last night when their Third Division game at Scunthorpe tomorrow was called off by the Football League.
Maidstone have just two registered players within their squad and are at least £650,000 in debt.
BETS PROBE
CHRIS JUDGE
BOOKMAKERS are investigating a large scale copycat betting coup on the first race at Hackney yesterday.
All six greyhounds have been dope tested and the results sent for analysis at Glasgow University's forensic department.
Betting shops in Hertfordshire, East London and Ireland were hit by trio, doubles and single bets.
In February five greyhounds were found to be doped after an £60,000 multi-bet coup in the first race at Canterbury.
Bookmakers were advised not to pay.
Said Betting Office Licencees' Association spokesman Frank Dixon: ‘We were aware of an unusual pattern of betting in the 1.37 race at Hackney.
‘We have advised our members to withhold payment pending our inquiries.’
The race was won by Currans Rock (5-1) with Fireball Jenny (4-1) second and 2-1 favourite Flying Tigress third.
Bart your man
MATT HUGHES SHEFFIELD
Wednesday won't be found wanting in the Premier League, says their absentee playmaker John Sheridan.
Owls take on Everton tomorrow without Sheridan, who last night insisted: ‘They'll cope without me.’
Sheridan will be out for several weeks following knee surgery.
But he believes that Wednesday manager Trevor Francis has a ready-made replacement in super kid Chris Bart-Williams, a £375,000 buy from Orient last November.
Sheridan said: ‘The team did very well without me last season and they can do the same again.
‘I only played half the games yet we were never out of the top five and qualified for Europe.
‘I'm not sure who'll be playing in my place, the manager has Danny Wilson, Chris Bart-Williams, Graham Hyde and John Harkes to choose from.
‘But whoever is picked will do a good job.’
Bart-Williams is favourite and Sheridan added: ‘Chris can become one of the best players in the Premier League.
‘He did brilliantly for us last year and has the ability to become a great player.
‘All he lacks is experience, he's got everything else, including a lot of confidence.
‘I am sure he'll be in the running for England one day.’
BART-WILLIAMS: Brilliant
Dish of the day
THE 22 Premier League clubs will today receive their first payment from the £304million TV deal with BSkyB.
The clubs will now each get a £500,000 payment after League chief executive Rick Parry yesterday signed the five-year contract.
League secretary Mike Foster said: ‘There's been a little bit of manoeuvring — but there has never been any doubt that it was going to be signed.’
Just not cricket
LORD'S — the home of cricket — could be about to open its doors to baseball.
The US Major League want to stage an exhibition and the TCCB will consider the plan.
ANTE-POST favourite Turgenev could be left on the sidelines in Wednesday's Tote Ebor at York.
The 9-1 shot will only get a run if six horses above him in the weights drop out.
Maximum field is 22, and 36 horses are still left in.
I'M FITTER THAN MY TEAM
Bionic boss Souness bounces back with title warning: You ain't seen nothing yet
Anfield king rarin' to go
RICHARD TANNER
GRAEME SOUNESS steps back into the pressure cooker of soccer management tomorrow, snarling at suggestions that heart surgery has taken the fire out of him.
There were fears that the Liverpool boss might have to quit the game when he went into hospital last April for triple heart by-pass surgery.
But he starts the Premier League campaign in better shape than three of his star internationals — Rob Jones, Jan Molby and John Barnes — who are all out crocked.
‘I feel fine,’ said Souness, looking tanned and relaxed before the FA Cup winners' opener at Nottingham Forest to be televised live on BSkyB tomorrow.
Souness, 39, is training with his first-team squad every day and has warned them he will be as demonstrative as ever in the dug-out.
Shouting
And the fearsome Scot scoffs at stories that the stresses and strains of top-flight management may now be too much for him.
He said: ‘The only problem I get is a shortness of breath on one side when I'm jogging.
That's because I had fluid on one of my lungs.
But it won't stop me shouting.
‘I am still doing exactly the same things as I did before the operation but at a slower pace.
‘I don't play in the five-asides but then I didn't play in them much before because I tend to get too argumentative and carried away sometimes.’
Souness has regained the weight lost during his five weeks in hospital.
And he has done it in his usual champagne style, taking sunshine trips to Arizona, Bermuda and Italy.
But the best tonic of all would be seeing Liverpool challenge for the title.
Souness is full of confidence after seeing his team hammer 14 goals in their last three warm-up games.
New signings David James and Paul Stewart have further strengthened a strong squad that has been rejuvenated in the last year.
Souness said: ‘I am looking forward to the season.
I'm just praying that we can avoid the type of injuries that we got last season.
‘If we can, then we will have a big say in every competition.
‘I'm more optimistic than this time last year.
Even though we ended up winning the FA Cup I feel we never really got started last season.
‘At no time could we field anything like our strongest team.
‘We've got a few injury problems now but I'm hoping they'll iron themselves out.
‘This time last year we had question marks against some players — whether they could play in the First Division.
Brightest
‘Now we know they can go in and do a job.
Inside 12 months we've gone from being an old side to having some very encouraging youngsters.’
His brightest prospect, Steve McManaman, could make a shock return tomorrow.
The whizzkid winger missed all the build-up games while he recovered from a summer knee operation, but he has been included in a 15-man squad.
Another boost is the return of Steve Nicol and Michael Thomas.
McManaman hasn't played since his match-winning performance in the FA Cup final.
Souness admitted: ‘The temptation is to give him some sort of outing whether it's half an hour or even a half.
‘He's that special.
He's short of games but he gives us something different.’
But Forest's own whizzkid Roy Keane has been ordered: ‘Stop trying to be Roy of the Rovers!’
As manager Brian Clough returned from a week's holiday in Majorca, his assistant Ron Fenton explained: ‘We want Roy to slow down a bit.
‘He wants to cover every blade of grass.
But we want him to put his foot on the ball and try to weigh things up.’
Fenton added: ‘He is a terrific player but now other clubs know all about him and look to shut him down.’
EASE UP: Brian Clough's order to Roy Keane (inset)
RED ALERT SUPER Souness is back, refusing to compromise or adopt any half-measures as he plots to put Liverpool back on top of the league
Stu the Celt
TONY STENSON
WEST HAM forward Stuart Slater last night became the most expensive player in Celtic's history — even though he hasn't scored a goal for 51 games.
The Scottish giants splashed out £1.5million for the 23-year-old Suffolk boy.
Celtic boss Liam Brady was once Slater's agent and targeted his young hopeful from the moment he moved into management.
Said Brady: ‘He is the type of player who will put bums on seats.
I bid around £2 million for him shortly after I arrived but it was turned down.
‘I managed to talk him round by telling him what he can achieve here.
‘We have a very demanding crowd but I hope people feel that it is money well spent,’ added Brady, who feels that the recent events have been too frantic to risk Slater against Dundee United today.
The 23-year-old failed to score a single goal last season but Brady adds: ‘When I was at West Ham I saw he was going places.’
Slater says: ‘I was looking for a new challenge and I am confident that this club will win honours.’
SLATER: Challenge
BRADY: Determined
WE WANT SHERI
Spurs go back for goal ace
NEIL SILVER
SPURS are preparing to make a fresh bid to sign striker Teddy Sheringham from Nottingham Forest.
But coach Doug Livermore said last night: ‘We've missed this week's transfer deadline now, so we won't move on any signings immediately.’
Spurs start their Premier League campaign at Southampton today with £1.7million summer signing Darren Anderton filling the vacant slot in attack alongside Gordon Durie.
But with Anderton more at home in a wide midfield role, Spurs' chief executive Terry Venables may be forced back into the transfer market — with Sheringham still their top target.
Venables' initial bid to sign Sheri for £2million last week was put on ice because Forest boss Brian Clough refused to let him go until he found a replacement.
But Spurs are keen to replace Japan-bound Gary Lineker, who scored most of their goals last season, and have £2million to spend from the sale of Paul Stewart to Liverpool.
Lineker and Paul Gascoigne have both been in touch with Spurs to wish them good luck for the new season.
Livermore said: ‘I answered the phone the other day and there was a strange voice saying: ‘Meester Livermore, Meester Livermore.’
‘I thought it was some weirdo and when I asked who was calling the voice yelled: ‘It's me!’
‘I knew then it was Gazza.
He was phoning to wish us all the best for the season, which was really nice.
Worst
‘We appreciate that, and the feeling is mutual.
We hope that Gazza does very well.
‘It was great to hear from him.
He obviously misses the lads because he got on so well with them.’
And former England skipper Lineker weighed in with his own good wishes for his old Spurs colleagues — he called in at the training ground.
‘It was nice to see Gary and baby George here,’ said Livermore.
‘Gary is always welcome — and it was great to know that young George is getting along fine.
‘Gary is enjoying his time off and said he didn't miss the gruelling work that the lads did in training.’
Spurs will be skippered at the Dell by Neil Ruddock — the man they bought back from Southampton for £750,000 this summer.
‘It's like I've scored a hat-trick,’ said Ruddock.
‘I'm back at Spurs, I'm captain, and my first game is against my former club.’
But it was partly due to Ruddock that Southampton start the season out of pocket — they've been fined £20,000 by the Football Association as punishment for their appalling disciplinary record last season.
They had 80 cautions and five sendings off, including Ruddock, who was ordered off twice.
Southampton must pay 25 per cent of the fine now and the other £15,000 will be suspended for a year to give boss Ian Branfoot time to sort out the worst record in top soccer.
And former Saints idol Kevin Keegan was in trouble yesterday — he slammed FA bosses who fined him £1,000 over a flare-up at Derby County last season.
‘It's O.T.T.,’ said the Newcastle boss, who was also warned about his future conduct.
READY TEDDY SPURS are set to renew their bid for the Forest striker Teddy Sheringham
TOP MARK
United boss puts his faith in Hughes
Sparky to do the business
KEN LAWRENCE
MARK Hughes was last night offered the chance to keep one of the biggest jobs in football.
After a summer of speculation at Old Trafford about the future of the Manchester United striker, manager Alex Ferguson insists the Welsh warrior still has what it takes to lead his side.
And despite the £1 million arrival of towering Dion Dublin, Ferguson is ready to give Hughes one last chance to prove he has the power to stay the club's No 1 hit man against Sheffield United at Bramall Lane today.
Bayern Munich, Tottenham, Aston Villa, Chelsea and Everton were all linked with Hughes — as Fergie spent his time searching for a new goal star.
But the United boss declared: ‘Mark Hughes has a lot of pride and he will not want to lose his position.
‘I would like to think that Sparky still has it as his major ambition to play here and not for any other club.’
Ferguson's phone has been hot all summer as opposition managers enquired about Hughes' availability.
Massive
And should United yet manage to acquire a top frontman — attempts to sign Alan Shearer and Dutchman Dennis Bergkamp failed — then Hughes might yet be the player sold to help fund a massive financial outlay.
However, Ferguson, despite some disappointment at Hughes' goal ratio — he struck only 14 times in 52 appearances last season — is prepared to wait for the Welshman's response.
He admitted: ‘There were enquiries about Hughes, but each time I said ‘No deal’.
‘I know that people suggest that because one striker comes in, another goes out.
‘Yet Arsenal have five strikers — Campbell, Wright, Merson, Smith and Groves — and they are not selling any, so why should we?
‘And the competition of another striker coming in can be good.
‘Mark has done well in pre-season and made it difficult for me because Dublin has also done quite well.
‘What is more, I need a big pool of players, especially as Bryan Robson is out for a month and Paul Parker will miss the opening game at Sheffield United with a leg injury.’
FERGUSON: No deal
PICTURE CAPTION WHITTINGHAM
IT'S A FACT
SOCCER 1992-93 kicked-off this week-end.
These are the names that will go into the record books.
It's a fact!
FIRST
Goal
IT took Andy Walker of Bolton Wanderers all of 49 seconds to open the scoring of the season against Huddersfield.
FIRST
Own goal
CARLISLE'S George Oghani took just two minutes to hit the back of the net.
Unfortunately it was an own goal against Walsall.
FIRST
Hat-trick
SMART Guy Whittingham scored all Pompey goals in their 3-3 draw with Bristol City.
FIRST
Penalty
OXFORD'S David Penney was spot-on after 16 minutes with the first successful penalty of the season against Bristol Rovers.
FIRST
Casualty
CHRIS Waddle limped off after 38 minutes with troubled knee ligaments after his £1million move to Sheffield Wednesday from Marseilles.
Sent off
UNLUCKY 13th minute for Millwall's Malcolm Allen — sent-off for a tough tackle in the game against his former club Watford.
28,545 was the biggest gate of the week-end in the First Division at Newcastle v Southend.
1,836 was the smallest: Hereford v Scarborough in Division Three.
212,558 was the total attendance for ten Premier League matches, comparing with the opening of ten First Division matches last year of
285,016
Wigan elbow Martin
WIGAN'S Martin Dermott has given the new season the ‘Big E’— by dislocating his elbow just weeks before kick off.
Champions Wigan won yesterday's Locker Cup match against Warrington, but lost hooker Dermott early in the game.
He faces a four to six week lay-off.
Oldham coach Peter Tunks is poised to make his seventh signing of the summer today — swapping Neil Flanagan for Huddersfield's centre Stuart Cocker.
Former GB tourist Des Foy and fellow centre John Henderson are also on their way to Fartown, with Oldham picking up £10,000 for the pair.
Oldham forward Keith Atkinson, who has broken almost every bone in his body, picked up £6,000 yesterday when 1,588 fans turned up for his testimonial.
The home side beat Leigh 18-16 at Watersheddings.
Kevin Tamati's Red Devils hosted and won the Salford Sevens for the second time in four years at The Willows yesterday.
Salford overwhelmed shock finalists Chorley Borough 40-16, who had knocked out holders Featherstone Rovers 36-4 in the semi-finals.
Halifax have signed Paul Bishop, St Helens' £55,000-listed scrum half, on a two-year contract.
Mike's feeling small
JOHN EDWARDS
Barnsley 0, West Ham 1
MIKE Small was branded ‘stupid’ by furious boss Billy Bonds after being sent off for swearing at a linesman at Oakwell yesterday.
The Hammers striker cursed the official after being called off-side seven minutes from time.
Referee Bob Nixon was told of the outburst and immediately showed the red card to the big target man.
Bonds fumed: ‘It was a stupid thing to do.
He was right next to the linesman when he called him a name and he deserved to go.
‘I've no sympathy for him and he will be dealt with under our code of discipline.’
That was the only blemish in a solid away performance that revived memories of the Hammers promotion campaign two seasons ago.
Prolific striker Clive Allen bagged the all-important goal in the 22nd minute with a flash of inspiration.
He side-stepped Gary Fleming brilliantly before tucking a shot past keeper Lee Butler.
David Currie rattled the bar from 20 yards in the 78th minute as Barnsley stepped up their quest for a point but the Hammers held firm.
Bonds said: ‘We managed a few hard-earned 1-0 away wins two years ago and this was a good start for us.
‘Clive's finish was special, the sort you would happily pay your entrance fee to see.’
And Barnsley boss Mel Machin added: ‘That proves Clive is still the best finisher around.’
ALLEN: Special
OFF TO THE DOGS
FARLOE STILL IN TUNE
HARRY LLOYD
DUNDALK'S International on Saturday was a replay of the Daily Mirror/Sporting Life Derby showdown in June with Farloe Melody again holding off Winsor Abbey.
The half-length success boosted Melody's prize-money to a record £75,000 — and produced another nice bonus for handler Matt O'Donnell.
The Tipperary trainer is reputed to be on 20 per cent of all Melody's earnings.
United saved
GOALKEEPING giant Peter Schmeichel saved referee Brian Hill from a fan attack that would have shamed Manchester United.
The great Dane threw an angry supporter off the pitch, preventing worse trouble for his side, who were upset 2-1 by Sheffield United at Bramall Lane.
But he may not be able to help his boss Alex Ferguson, who could face an FA charge for his verbal assault on Hill.
Sky's off to real flier
TONY STENSON
SUPER snapper Kent Gavin, the Daily Mirror's award winning photographer, gave a thumbs up yesterday to BSkyB's first live Premier League soccer coverage.
Gavers, an Arsenal fanatic and soccer nut, volunteered to cast an expert eye over yesterday's historic programme featuring the Forest-Liverpool match.
And his verdict: ‘Excellent.
But a bit too long at five hours.’
Gavers, naturally checking on his fellow lensmen, added: ‘The camera work was superb, especially the one running down the line on the rails.
It was also edited well.
‘I liked the comments of match ‘experts’ Andy Gray and Chris Waddle, while commentator Martin Tyler has always been a favourite of mine.
‘The man with the touchline ‘mike’ also did his job well.
He kept us involved in everything Graeme Souness was doing.
‘Minuses?
It wasn't  necessary to show the club and sky logos in one corner of the screen and a clock in the other.
They got in the way.
‘I also think producers should think again about a 4pm kick off time.
Some people are sleeping off their Sunday lunchtime pint by the second half.
‘The verdict?
Onenil to TV soccer…‘
FANS, though, snubbed the Premier League in their thousands.
The new League kicked off with a 25 per cent drop in attendances compared with the old First Division a year ago.
Crowds for the 10 matches (Manchester City and QPR play tonight) totalled 212,558, compared with 285,016 a year ago.
GAVIN: Soccer nut
NO 1
Mansell lifts world crown
TED MACAULEY
HEROIC Nigel Mansell was finally crowned King of Formula One motor-racing here yesterday.
Runner-up three times, Mansell finished second in the Hungarian Grand Prix— enough to clinch the world drivers’ title and become the first British champion since James Hunt in 1976.
For millionaire Mansell, 39, with eight Grand Prix wins already this season and five races still remaining, it was the end of a 30-year dream.
He revealed: ‘I've dreamt of this moment right from being a boy-racer at the age of nine.
‘And now it's happened I can't believe it.
It's so unreal.
People will have to tell me a million times before it gets through to me.’
He gazed across a sea of Union Jacks, stood like a guardsman for the national anthem and admitted: ‘This is a fantastic day for me.
It's everything I've hoped for — the pinnacle and the most exciting day of my life.’
But it nearly was not the perfect end for Mansell in Budapest.
He made his worst start for years, found himself jammed in fourth place and then thought his race for the title might be over when a warning light flickered in the cockpit of the 200mph Renault-Williams.
‘It was a puncture-warning device,’ he explained.
‘They spotted it on the equipment in the pits, so they were screaming at me to come in and get the tyres changed.’
The stoppage dropped Mansell into seventh place with 15 laps to go and his battle with race leader Ayrton Senna seemed to be going all the Brazilian's way.
Mansell's Williams partner Riccardo Patrese had shown there were no team orders by nearly shoving him into the barriers at the start and leading by 40 seconds until he carelessly spun off halfway through the race.
Inside three laps Mansell blasted from seventh to second and his radio suddenly crackled with a message from the pits: ‘Stay where you are…the title is yours.
You've got it!’
Even Senna, heading to only his second win of the season, checked in on his radio to be told: ‘Mansell's won the championship…‘
Puncture
And that left the reigning title-holder to coast to the line 40 seconds clear of Mansell — but 58 points adrift after 11 rounds.
Mansell, paid £8 million a year, added: ‘When I got the puncture warning I thought I'd had it.
What with that and all the traffic and backmarkers to get through, it was a hell of a tough race.
‘But my strategy was clear and once Riccardo had gone out — and he was really the last chance of anybody catching me — I just had to stay calm and not worry about winning.’
Mansell, whose trackside fans sang ‘God Save The King’ during the national anthem, had his celebrations marred when former champion Hunt, now a BBC TV pundit, suggested on air that Senna is prepared to replace Nigel in the Williams team for free.
Hunt said: ‘He has told me he would drive for Williams for 23 million dollars less than Nigel — and that means nothing.’
Mansell snapped: ‘Hunt is the old champion and I'm the new one.
It saddens me to hear him say such silly things that probably are not even true.’
I'VE DONE IT!
Nigel screams with delight as he revels in the applause after becoming new world champion Picture: ARNOLD SLATER
JUST FAN-TASTIC NEW world champion Nigel Mansell looks to the skies as the flag-waving British fans sing ‘God Save The King’ during yesterday's national anthem.
Picture: ARNOLD SLATER
WADDLE BLOW
JOHN EDWARDS
CROCKED Chris Waddle faces a race against time to be fit for Sheffield Wednesday's return to Europe.
The former England winger limped out of his Wednesday debut after twisting his knee in only the 38th minute at Everton on Saturday.
He was immediately ruled out of tomorrow's home match with Nottingham Forest — and could be sidelined for three weeks.
Frustrating
That would leave him little time to blend in with his new team-mates before they take on Luxembourg's Spora in the opening round of the UEFA Cup.
The £1 million summer signing from Marseille refused to set a come-back date but conceded: ‘It's very disappointing and frustrating to receive a setback like this right at the start of my Wednesday career.
‘The injury has come at a time when I would love to be looking forward to making my home debut against Forest.
‘Our physio Alan Smith reckons it will be about three weeks.
But I'm keeping my head up because I know there will be plenty of games after that.
‘You can't set targets with injuries, and I'm not going to start trying now.
Impressed
‘But it's not as if I'm facing surgery, or anything drastic like that.
It's just a sprain, and I'm lucky enough to be in the care of a top-class physio in Alan Smith.
‘I know Alan from the England set-up, and everyone has always been impressed with his work.’
Carlton Palmer and David Hirst both came through the 1-1 Goodison Park draw after recovering from knocks.
Paul Warhurst and Phil King are expected to shake off minor injuries in time to face Forest.
CHRIS Waddle looks like being out of Wednesday's side for three weeks.
Marwood's a marked man
JOHN EDWARDS
SHEFFIELD United forward Brian Marwood is being frozen out of football — because he's boss of the players' union.
That was the shock claim from Blades manager Dave Bassett last night after he failed to find a buyer for the 32-year old-winger.
The PFA chairman no longer figures in Bassett's first-team plans and has been available at a bargain £70,000 since the end of last season.
That fee is less than a quarter of the £300,000 Bassett paid Arsenal nearly two years ago, yet there are still no takers.
Blank
Marwood had a spell on loan at Middlesbrough towards the end of the season.
But nothing came of it and he is still kicking his heels at Bramall Lane after drawing a blank in his summer quest to find a new club.
And Bassett claimed: ‘Brian's union role is clearly a cross he has to bear because some managers simply don't seem to want the PFA chairman on their books.
‘I can only assume they either think he'll be too busy with other matters or that he'll be stirring up trouble.
‘But if that's the case, it is an indictment of the managers, not Brian.
‘They should judge him purely on his ability as a player and what they are actually saying is that their man-management techniques aren't up to scratch.
‘And, anyway, he's been absolutely no trouble to me at all.
If having Brian on your books is a problem, then give me plenty more of the same.’
MARWOOD: No buyer
SHAME OF ENGLAND
SCARED OF WEMBLEY AS FANS FUME OVER SWEDEN…
SUBH–– WHY are we running away from a game at our national home?
SCARED OF WEMBLEY AS FANS FUME OVER SWEDEN…
SUBH–– Fans miss out on trip to Twin Towers
SCARED OF WEMBLEY AS FANS FUME OVER SWEDEN…
SUBH–– ALL ABROAD Not quite home sweet home ENGLAND will shun their traditional Wembley home and the loyal fans while they try to rebuild shattered pride on an obscure Spanish ground
MIKE LANGLEY
ENGLAND are saving manager Graham Taylor from the angry fans by playing away next month.
It is a decision that could cost £500,000 in lost gate receipts.
Instead of facing the music at Wembley on September 9, Taylor's team will play for expenses only on a Spanish Second Division ground that holds only 25,000 spectators and has never before staged a full international match.
The switch has surprised Wembley, who expected a home game against Spain, and has disappointed the Spanish FA, who hoped they were being invited to London for only the second time in 20 years.
Javier Clemente, Spain's new manager, says: ‘Everybody knows how I admire English football and how I wanted Wembley as the perfect place for my debut match.’
So Clemente and his FA were taken aback when England returned from the Swedish disaster and began pushing for an away fixture at anywhere in Spain that could be called ‘cool’.
England didn't stipulate ‘remote’— but that's what they've got in Santander on the breezy northern coast that's home to golfing star Seve Ballesteros.
Not even Iberia, Spain's national airline, flies there from England.
They'll take you 250 miles further on to Madrid, then you catch a plane back.
The only direct route for supporters is a 24 hours sail from Plymouth — but yesterday Brittany Ferries said: ‘We don't accept soccer fans.’
Racing Santander FC, who will stage the match as a benefit for the Spanish PFA, said yesterday: ‘An England security man has checked our ground but nothing has been decided about segregation or tickets.’
It's clear from my inquiries that the FA originally envisaged Wednesday, September 9 as a triumphant homecoming for Taylor and his assistant Lawrie McMenemy —‘Just put your feet up and watch us win.’
They changed their mind after England's premature return from Stockholm in June following two miserable draws and a bad defeat.
The FA didn't wish to risk the boycott that hit Bobby Robson after losing all three matches in the 1988 European championship.
Wembley's West side was shut that night while the Royal Box side was boosted by schools and stadium staff on free tickets.
A gate of 25,837 was returned, representing a gross half million pounds loss.
The loss of that money is resented by at least one member of the England Committee, who told me: ‘Our football in Sweden was the worst in my lifetime, but we should be strong enough to face up to the situation.
Instead, we've got cold feet!’
TAYLOR: Protection
McMENEMY: Trip
MILLICHIP: FA boss
Italian mission
HARRY HARRIS
ENGLAND boss Graham Taylor travelled to Italy yesterday to determine the availability of star exiles Paul Gascoigne, David Platt and Des Walker.
Taylor will meet officials from Lazio, Bari and Sampdoria to make sure the three national heroes will be free to travel to Poland and Norway for World Cup qualifying games in May and June next year.
Meanwhile, Gazza is now almost certain to make his Lazio debut in their friendly against former club Tottenham on September 23.
TRAGEDY OF UNITED STAR
SHARPE'S BRAIN ILLNESS SHOCK
He's out for two months
KEN LAWRENCE
LEE SHARPE is suffering from viral meningitis and will be out until November.
Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson yesterday took the unusual step of revealing the exact cause of Sharpe's problem to try to end months of speculation about the one-time wonder boy.
Rumours have circulated Manchester for some time over Sharpe's future and they intensified after he was sent home from pre-season training with what United described as a virus.
But yesterday Ferguson, along with club doctor Francis McHugh, decided to clarify the true extent of Sharpe's problem.
Ferguson said: ‘There has been a lot of speculation about Lee Sharpe and we want to end it by saying clearly what is wrong with him.
‘At first we merely said he was suffering from a virus but we feel now we should clarify exactly the position with him.
‘The boy has viral meningitis and will be out for at least two months, during which he will do nothing else but rest.
‘He will then go through his own pre-season training schedule and be ready to return by the end of October.’
Sharpe's current illness apart, he also missed several months with repeated hernia problems which eventually led to surgery.
Ferguson said: ‘Lee has had a disastrous couple of years but is happy in the knowledge that while the illness is severe there will be no long-term after-effects.’
Dr McHugh stressed: ‘Lee has benign viral meningitis but the prognosis is excellent.
He requires no treatment other than rest.
‘The illness can take the form of severe food poisoning or acute migraine.’
United are already without Bryan Robson and Paul Parker, and they will be joined on the sidelines tomorrow night by Paul Ince.
He damaged ribs and his left hip in the opening day defeat at Sheffield United but should have recovered by the weekend.
Meanwhile, Ferguson confirmed his interest in Swedish star Patrik Andersson, 20, whom he watched play for Malmo against Gothenberg on Sunday.
Ferguson will watch the £1 million-rated midfielder or defender next week in Sweden's clash with Norway.
Ferguson also confirmed he is to report Kettering referee Brian Hill following last weekend's clash at Bramall Lane after insisting he did not want the official to control United's games in the future.
The FA are now awaiting a report from Hill before deciding whether to charge the Old Trafford manager with bringing the game into disrepute.
But yesterday, Ferguson refused to withdraw his complaints about Hill and stressed: ‘I have nothing to fear.
‘I was not only speaking out on behalf of Manchester United but their thousands of fans as well.’
WONDER BOY LEE SHARPE, hugely popular with the Old Trafford fans, must now rest for two months to recover from viral meningitis.
FERGUSON: No fears
Worthy choice
KEVIN KEEGAN has called up Frank Worthington to boost Newcastle's success bid.
The former England striker is scouting for the Geordies and last week checked out tonight's Coca Cola Cup opponents Mansfield.
Said Keegan's No. 2 Terry McDermott: ‘He's got a deep knowledge of the game and he's ideal for us.’
KEEGAN: Boost
Rideout tackles Dion shoot-out
RICHARD TANNER
PAUL RIDEOUT goes to Old Trafford tonight admitting ‘Dion Dublin did me a favour by joining Manchester United.’
Everton boss Howard Kendall bought Rideout after being beaten in the chase for £1 million hitman Dublin by Alex Ferguson.
Now Rideout, a £500,000 buy from Rangers, is determined to show Kendall got the best deal.
The much-travelled 28-year-old said: ‘I feel my best years are ahead.
‘I learned a lot from watching and playing alongside Mark Hateley at Rangers.
He's a tremendous target man.’
Out-of-favour Neil Webb is giving himself a two-month deadline to get back into favour at Old Trafford.
‘I will know within the next month or two how I stand.
Then I will take it from there.’
RIDEOUT: Challenge
BACK TO THE WALL
ARSENAL have agreed to ‘doctor’ their infamous North Bank mural.
The club have received complaints because NONE of the 8,000 fans depicted are black or female.
PAY HOMAGE doesn't want to get his whistle wet at York today, but he can still lift Andy Capp's cash.
Fast ground is what Pay Homage needs and trainer Ian Balding is confident of a great run in the Daily Mirror-sponsored race if the rains stay away.
‘Pay Homage should have won his last race at Goodwood and he's been in fine form all year,’ Ian said.
‘He's just the horse you need for a competitive race like the Andy Capp Handicap.’
Lester Piggott provided the York magic yesterday and he looks the biggest danger here on another unlucky Goodwood horse, Mudaffar.
LADY LUCK
TED MACAULEY
KING of the road Nigel Mansell last night paid tribute to the driving force behind his world crown — his wife Roseanne.
The British superstar hopes to settle his drive for next season with team boss Frank Williams this week, and after 176 races said: ‘I want to defend my title.
‘But if Roseanne says I should quit then I'd do it right away.
We make all our decisions together and if she wanted me to pack it all in I would.’
Thirty-seven-year-old Roseanne admitted: ‘It still hasn't all sunk in yet but it's a great feeling.
After all the years of hard work and sacrifice Nigel has done it.
‘And he has all the support I can give him to go for it next year.’
She added: ‘It was a joint decision when it was decided that he shouldn't retire a couple of years ago.
‘Our feelings flow from one to the other but ultimately, it will be Nigel's decision if he wants to drive again next year.
‘All I would say is that he deserves the chance to keep on going and defend his title.’
WILLIAMS: Talks
By TED MACAULEY 
WILLIAMS: Talks
AYRTON SENNA was last night accused by his cut-throat rival Nigel Mansell of trying to pinch his drive with the all-conquering Williams Renault team.
The Brazilian, reckoned to be on £10 million a year with McLaren Honda but wanting to get away, has been ruthless in setting his sights on getting the best car in the business for next season.
And that is the Didcot-based Williams team.
But Mansell, who has clashed verbally and physically with the triple champion said: ‘My boss Frank Williams has told me he can't stop people like Ayrton phoning him or coming to his room.
‘And I know that Ayrton has tried everything he can to get my drive.
He's a very persistent man.
‘But everybody seems to want me to stay on — it's up to Frank to give me the nod and I will sign.’
Mansell, who also revealed that he'd been offered more than twice his wages to go back to Ferrari, added: ‘Ayrton's spoiled, always has been — even when he was a kid kart racer.
‘When he was beaten his Dad didn't only buy the winning kart he bought the entire team for his son.
‘Now I know he's been trying everything he can to take my place and whatever James Hunt says, he doesn't want it for nothing.’
He added: ‘There's about a trillion to one chance of Senna coming in and I think Frank Williams would get lynched.
‘I'm dreadfully sad that my team-mate Riccardo Patrese won't be with me next year.
He's already been told to make other arrangements — and that's a shame.
I have every sympathy for him.
‘It's so sad because he's so quick, so experienced and he is the guy who made me raise my own game to come out of the blocks ahead of him.’
Mansell, having three days off before a test session at Monza, told me: ‘I think a decision will be made inside the next 72 hours.
‘I desperately want to defend my title and give a bit of a show back to all those fans around the world — that's what is motivating me.
‘But if Williams and I can't come to an agreement, and I insist it's nothing to do with money, then no problem — I'll just pack it all in.
‘We've given a lot of blood, sweat and tears and I don't just want to pass it all on for somebody else to inherit.
‘We've got a great team.
I know I could win the title again and I know that I could do Britain proud.
‘But I just want to make sure, and we are really close to it, that the agreement we have is to my liking.
‘I'm sure I will be racing for Williams next year.’
Mansell, who plans to winter in his £4m Florida mansion, stressed: ‘Whatever money there is — and there will be pay cuts for drivers this year — doesn't drive me on.
‘I was a millionaire almost overnight about ten years ago so I have never been motivated for money.
‘Sheer pride and being and wanting to be the best driver in the world has kept me going.’
SENNA: Want-away
BADAWI COPS CAPP CASH
Charles Fawcus.
TRAINER John Gosden made up for Brier Creek's narrow Ebor defeat when Badawi took the Andy Capp Handicap at York yesterday, writes Carles Fawcus.
‘I don't know what I was doing wrong with her in the middle of the year, but she's blossomed now.
Like a lot of ladies, she probably likes the sun,’ smiled John.
George Duffield got his second fright of the day when odds-on User Friendly was in trouble two out in the Yorkshire Oaks.
‘I was panicking I can tell you.
Everything was against her but she came good in the end,’ said a relieved George, who had survived the aircraft near-miss in the morning.
Pardew leaves it late
Cambridge 0, Charlt'n 1
MIDFIELDER Alan Pardew headed the clincher a minute from time to give Charlton two wins out of two.
By then Cambridge were down to ten men after skipper Danny O'Shea had been sent off in the 70th minute for a second bookable offence.
Pardew got his chance when Robert Lee's corner was headed on by Simon Webster.
Pardew — a free transfer from Crystal Palace last season — stooped low to nod the ball over the line.
The new Cambridge strike force of Devon White — a £400,000 buy from Bristol Rovers — and John Francis posed problems for Charlton in the first half.
Francis, signed from Burnley for £50,000, had a lively game.
But Cambridge looked nowhere near as effective after manager John Beck withdrew White at half-time.
But Charlton scarcely deserved to win an uninspiring game.
Alec is warned
ENGLAND skipper Graham Gooch last night warned Alec Stewart he could become a batting flop if he continues to keep wicket.
Gooch will insist that Stewart, who topped the Test batting averages, bats down the order in today's Texaco Trophy international at Trent Bridge.
And Gooch advised him to put England's needs before his own for the winter tour of India.
Said Gooch: ‘Alec has never let England down as wicketkeeper, but he has not maintained his batting form when doing it.
‘I think if Alec opens he should not keep.
‘That's not a criticism of his performances behind the stumps, because he's good enough to do the job at the highest level, but it is asking too much to do both.’
He added: ‘England's powers that be, in conjunction with Alec, must decide a definite policy if they want him to keep wicket.’
KRABBE SHOCK
DISGRACED
German track star Katrin Krabbe has been dumped by sponsors Nike.
The sportswear giants broke off their deal with the world sprint champion who's awaiting a four-year ban for drug abuse.
Spokesman Steve Miller said: ‘Contracts include a clause that athletes are forbidden from taking performance-enhancing substances.’
Walsh so sorry for new red shocker
DAVID MOORE
SHAMED Leicester City tough-guy skipper Steve Walsh confessed after his latest red card: ‘I feel like kicking soccer into touch!’
Walsh, 27, was given his marching orders after an off-the-ball incident with Steve Bull during the 3-0 defeat at Wolves on Tuesday.
The defender's career has been rocked by controversy.
He was once banned for nine games by the FA after an incident in which  Shrewsbury's David Geddis had his jaw broken.
A sad Walsh admitted: ‘What I did on Tuesday was just stupid.
I have let everyone down.
It was totally ridiculous, and at times like this, you feel like packing it all in.’
Bull once claimed the Filbert Street star feigned injury to get him sent off.
But Walsh said: ‘I deny there's bad blood between Bull and me, there's no vendetta.
‘But a lot of silly things were going on.
I got an elbow in the face as I went up for a header and I remember putting my head down and running straight into Bull's back.
‘You can't do that sort of thing and expect the ref not to take strong action.’
Walsh, who cost £100,000 from Wigan five years ago, stressed: ‘I'm well aware of my responsibilities as skipper and this business is no good at all.’
Leicester manager Brian Little confirmed that Walsh will be fined and insisted: ‘I didn't tell Steve to say ‘sorry’ If he did, it was on his own initiative.
‘He will remain captain, and while other people will inevitably paint him as a so-called bad boy, that doesn't wash with me.
‘He is a decent fellow, and has been a good skipper.
But equally, I am not happy with this latest turn of events.’
WALSH: Apology
DREAM FANTASY
CHARLES FAWCUS
MINI MARVEL Lyric Fantasy blitzed the big boys at York yesterday as Richard Hannon set out to win the trainer's title in one hit.
The pocket rocket became the first two-year-old for 36 years to land the Nunthorpe and the first two-year-old filly ever to lift this speedsters prize.
Streamlined jockey Michael Roberts gave Lyric Fantasy the chance to find her feet in the early stages, but a sudden surge of speed at the furlong marker clinched the money.
Stablemate Mr Brooks ran on to take second, with Canadian challenger Diamonds Galore a brave third, but only one horse counted.
‘I've been living on salad, fish and fresh air to be at my lightest for this, but it was well worth it.
She's something special.
‘She's only small, but she's got a big heart and that's what counts,’ said Roberts.
Hannon had picked up the first two races as well after starting the day with no confidence at all.
‘We'd done nothing on the first two days here and I thought it was all going wrong.
But we're back in business now,’ he smiled.
‘I've never had a winner in France and perhaps Lyric Fantasy can change that for me in the Abbaye.
Then we'll see if we can stretch her into a classic contender!’
Diamonds Galore's jockey Aaron Gryder could hardly believe that his horse had been murdered by a youngster.
‘She must be incredible.
It's unheard of for a two-year-old to race against older horses in America, but my horse has done well and I hope more will follow us over.
I'd love to come back.’
Experience told for Hannon's first winner Revelation, but the £400 fine for allegedly not trying with the horse at Kempton still rankles.
‘His jockey Steve Raymont was just looking after an inexperienced horse, but I suppose it's water under the bridge now.’
Easiest winner of the week was Cunning who looks set for a step up to better things.
Special
Hoko's French pay day
MATT HUGHES
PAUL Hodkinson defends his WBC world featherweight title in Toulouse on September 12.
He meets tough Frenchman, Fabrice Benichou, a former super bantamweight world champion.
Hoko's manager Barney Eastwood said: ‘Benichou is strong and hard to catch.
But it is a big pay-day.’
Hodkinson said: ‘He is my size.
I usually concede height and reach.’
Watty mixes it up
MIKE Watkinson's pick ‘n mix deliveries brought him ten wickets in a match for the first time yesterday as Lancashire thrashed Warwickshire by an innings and 25 runs at Edgbaston.
The 31-year-old all-rounder wrecked Warwickshire's second innings with six for 62 — the first three wickets with his medium-paced seamers and the rest with his occasional off-spin.
Alan Igglesden took five for 41 as Kent beat Leicestershire by an innings and 138 runs at Grace Road to move into second place, 25 points behind championship leaders Essex.
FULL TIME
MIKE LANGLEY
THE men who assess referees from the stands are getting younger.
Forty of these ancient watchdogs were pensioned off last weekend.
One last refereed a match in 1956.
He's 79.
I'M BACK
MATT HUGHES
BERNIE Slaven blasted a message to Middlesbrough and the Premier League following his two-goal demolition of Manchester City: Write me off at your peril!
Middlesbrough's evergreen striker, 32 in November, declared:
‘It looks as though they have been trying to get rid of me here for three years.
But I keep bouncing back.
‘I have been leading scorer at Boro for five out of the last seven seasons — but it has become a way of life to be talked about as the player who is leaving or out of the team.
My only answer is to keep scoring goals.’
The Eire international looks like keeping his place for tomorrow's visit of League champions Leeds.
SLAVEN: Demolition
Chris puts foot in it!
ALAN BIGGS
CHRIS Woods has given Sheffield Wednesday defenders a solution to the controversial pass-back rule — just forget it exists.
The ban on keepers' handling back passes has left dithering defenders panic-  stricken .
But Wednesday skipper Nigel Pearson is in no doubt that going backwards is the best way forward.
That is because Woods is as secure with his feet as with his hands.
The England keeper revealed some fancy footwork in the midweek victory over Nottingham Forest.
Now centre half Pearson is convinced his defenders should follow their old instincts.
‘We've come to terms with the rule fairly quickly,’ said Pearson.
‘We are not getting paranoid about it because the only difference is that the keeper can't pick the ball up.
‘If you have a keeper who isn't confident on the ball it can be a real problem.
‘But we have no worries with Chris.
His distribution is very good, as he showed against Forest, and that's an asset to us.
‘If anyone is in any doubt he can just knock the ball back for Chris to clear.’
WOODS: Safe
Cash lift for Ramps
COLIN PRICE
ENGLAND bad-boy Mark Ramprakash has been awarded a fat winter contract by Lord's.
Despite persistent disciplinary problems, he has been guaranteed around £15,000 to make himself available for one of the England tours.
Graham Gooch takes the Test squad to India and Sri Lanka while England A tour Australia.
The contract was drawn up before Ramps' latest bust-up last weekend with a spectator at Uxbridge.
Middlesex, who fined him around £750 for a foul-mouthed outburst earlier in the season, immediately dropped him for the game against Hampshire.
But England are sticking by the dashing 22-year-old with a self-destruct button, and will probably send him to learn self-control in the hard school of Australia.
He is one of nine players given winter contracts designed to prevent them seeking employment elsewhere during the close season.
Six have received senior contracts worth around £25,000 — Gooch, Alec Stewart, Robin Smith, Jack Russell, Phillip DeFreitas and Chris Lewis.
Ramprakash, his Middlesex team-mate Phil Tufnell and Lancashire captain Neil Fairbrother have been put on ‘lesser’ contracts worth 60 per cent of the full deal.
But there is nothing, after all, for Graeme Hick — originally thought to have been signed up — Allan Lamb or David Gower.
RAMPRAKASH: Tour
LET'S GO NAP
COLIN PRICE
GRAHAM Gooch last night told beaten Pakistan: ‘There is no way we are going to feel sorry for you.
We want a whitewash from the last two games.’
England took a winning 3-0 Texaco lead after recalling oldies Allan Lamb and Ian Botham.
But tyros like Graeme Hick, Robin Smith and Neil Fairbrother stole the show.
Gooch joked: ‘Our blend of youth and experience worked well.
The experienced players stood around watching the youngsters do all the work.’
England may call up Yorkshire wicketkeeper-batsman Richard Blakey for the fourth game at Lord's tomorrow.
GOOCH: Whitewash
TERRIF-HICK!
England are smash hits
COLIN PRICE
GRAEME Hick threw off his straightjacket yesterday — and led an incredible blitz of World Cup champions Pakistan to clinch the Texaco Trophy series.
The tormented Worcestershire star smashed 63 off only 42 balls as England's one-day wonders scorched to a world record score.
Their final total of 363-7 is the highest ever recorded in a one-day international.
And shell-shocked manager Khalid Mahmood admitted after his side were bowled out for 165 and a shattering 198-run defeat: ‘That wasn't batting, it was butchery.
It was like running into a thunderstorm.
‘We are not used to seeing our bowlers treated like that.’
Tonic
That was music to every Englishman's ears.
The Trent Bridge slaughter in no way compensated for that World Cup final defeat — or being outclassed 2-1 in the summer's Cornhill Test series.
But winning the first three of the five-match one-day series has supplied a crucial tonic at a time when TV pictures were being screened back live to Pakistan for the first time.
Pakistan were sunk from the moment Salim Malik — leading the side in place of tummy-bug victim Javed Miandad — won the toss and put England in to bat.
Robin Smith, later awarded Man of the Match, made a typically brutal 77 and Neil Fairbrother returned to the England fold with a glorious 62 as they plundered 129 off just 18 overs.
Merciless
And that set the scene perfectly for Hick, a man who doesn't seem to know where his next Test run is coming from, yet bats like superman in the knock-about stuff.
He treated the much-vaunted pace pairing of Wasim and Waqar as though they were tame medium pacers, not the men who had mercilessly destroyed the last threads of his Test confidence.
Yet England still aren't sufficiently sure of the young man from Zimbabwe — they have yet to offer him a guaranteed winter contract.
Manager Micky Stewart said: ‘His knock of 71 in the second game at The Oval AND this one here were absolutely brilliant.
‘I have never seen better.
‘He has played out of his skin twice now but he will admit that one-day internationals are a different game to Tests.
‘Today he went out with a big score on the board and 15 overs remaining.
‘But if he went out flailing with the score at 0-1 in a Test and got out, he would be crucified.
‘He wasn't put on contract because we felt he had to do a bit more to earn one.
‘But these contracts are not a firm indication of who is going to India this winter and who is not.’
Pressure
Man of the match Smith admitted he would not have been surprised if Hick had pipped him to the award.
‘Hicky played brilliantly.
He has been under a lot of pressure and he came out and played superbly.’
363: A SCORE TO MAKE ANY ENGLISHMAN PROUD
BAT OUT OF HELL: Graeme Hick lashes out on his way to a quick-fire 63 at Trent Bridge yesterday
DISHING IT OUT
HARRY HARRIS
SKY'S screening of Premier League soccer may prove an expensive flop unless they can persuade more people to buy dishes.
And Spurs, owned by Amstrad chief Alan Sugar, are giving away £600,000 of discount vouchers towards the cost of dishes at tomorrow's match with Crystal Palace, worth £20 per fan.
The satellite stations colossal £304million investment is in urgent need of an audience boost with fears that once Sky Sports goes to  subscription only the viewing figures will be lucky to hit 700,000.
Sky's Premier League debut netted them an average audience of only 820,000.
Last Sunday's showing of Nottingham Forest v Liverpool hit a peak of 1.03 million — compared to around 7.5 million achieved by ITV's ‘The Match’ last season.
Audiences dipped below 600,000 for Manchester City v QPR, the first of a series of Monday night specials.
The data comes from BARB, compiled from industry sources, and published in ‘Marketing.’
The  authoritative TV voice concluded: ‘The tradition of televised Sunday afternoon football means that Sky may find it difficult to maintain viewing levels on Monday evenings with viewers staying loyal to big terrestrial shows.’
BRAT'S YOUR LOT
Ramps on the rocks
COLIN PRICE
MARK RAMPRAKASH could leave Middlesex at the end of the season — in a desperate bid to save a career that is heading for the rocks.
His latest disciplinary bust-up has left senior Middlesex officials wondering whether they can ever tame the 22-year-old hothead.
And it is becoming increasingly likely that the England starlet will be allowed to move on to another county where he can make a fresh start.
He's become skipper Mike Gatting's problem boy, a player who bats like a dream but whose behaviour is becoming a nightmare.
Middlesex have twice had to carpet Ramprakash this season after astonishing flare-ups and another incident went unpunished.
England's retiring manager Micky Stewart promised to investigate the latest row at Uxbridge last Sunday but that is unlikely to affect the £15,000 winter contract already offered to the country's top players.
Middlesex dropped Ramprakash for the next championship match against Hampshire at Southampton but recalled him yesterday for their game against Sussex at Hove.
They considered the outburst as less serious than the disgraceful row at Cambridge University earlier in the season when Ramprakash launched a disgusting four letter tirade against the students' Marcus Wight, and he almost came to blows with John Emburey when the stand-in skipper intervened.
Swore
Ramprakash was fined the maximum two weeks wages — around £750 — for that and severely warned about his future conduct.
But he swore at a spectator who had provoked him during a game against Essex at Ilford and again on Sunday when he was racially abused on returning to the pavilion after scoring a half century which helped Middlesex clinch the Sunday League crown.
He ran into more trouble during the cheque presentation on the players balcony when he appeared in a vest.
Cricket chairman Bob Gale asked him to put on a shirt bearing the sponsors name while photographs were being taken and Ramprakash asked whether that was a direct order.
Gale told him it was and Ramprakash got changed, jumped into his car and zoomed off.
Now he has a fortnight to worry about whether that incident has cost him a place on either of England's two winter tours.
Graham Gooch leads the senior side to India and Sri Lanka, but after failing to make an impact in the Test team during the series against Pakistan he seemed more likely to go on his third A-team tour, this time to Australia.
That's where his fragile temperament would really be put to the test.
HOT HEAD AFTER his foul-mouthed outbursts Mark Ramprakash could be told to let his bat do the talking
LASHED: Ramps in yesterday's Mirror
IRON MAN WOOSIE
INCONSISTENT Ian Woosnam ironed out his flaws yesterday to put a stranglehold on the Volvo German Open.
Leaving his driver in the bag for all but three holes, Woosnam stormed to the best score of the day — a seven-birdie 65.
And it gave him the halfway lead of 132, 12 under par.
Now he leads by two from Berkshire's Barry Lane, who added a 70 to his course-record-equalling 64, Fijian Vijay Singh (68) and South African Gavin Levenson (66).
A week after scoring 80 and missing the cut in the US PGA championship, the Welshman has found Hubbelrath much more to his liking.
‘I'm still struggling with my driver but I'm hitting my one-iron plenty far enough and putting quite well,’ he said.
JONJO CALLS FOR WILLIE
CHARLES FAWCUS
WILLIE CARSON is out to do a friend a good turn at Chester today and be a TV star as well.
Carson opens up on Gipsy Fiddler in the high speed five furlong dash and Gispy Fiddler's trainer Jonjo O'Neill is looking for his first win of the season.
‘I can't remember riding for Jonjo before, but it would be great to get him off the mark and this horse certainly has a bit of a chance,’ smiled Willie who is closing fast on another century.
Gispy Fiddler put Jonjo on cloud nine with a Royal Ascot win two years ago and was having his first run for almost a year when shaping well behind Bit Of A Lark at Haydock.
Best bet
Willie has big chances in the other televised races — on in-from After The Last and Jahafil who has won a big race in Ireland since losing to Spinning at Goodwood.
Course winner Zalon looks the best bet at Sandown with trainer John Gosden's horses in top form and there is likely to be some heavy money this morning for Farat in the following race.
Ben Hanbury is flying as well and he picked up the big race there yesterday with White Crown.
Favourite Mukhamedov folded up tamely.
York flop Kooyonga had every excuse for her tame display behind Rodrigo De Triano at York on Tuesday.
‘She has come into season,’ said trainer Micahel Kauntze.
‘It's shame she ran so badly, but at least we know why.’
Lyric Fantasy's big autumn target is under review.
‘We could run into problems with the draw and the going in Paris and we are leaning towards the Cheveley Park at Newmarket,’ said owner Lord Carnarvon.
Darren Biggs hit the 50 mark for the season with his win on Iommelli at Sandown yesterday.
Budo signs
WEST HAM have paid £225,000 for Partizan Belgrade central defender Budimir Vujacic after the central defender successfully completed a ten-day trial at Upton Park.
Hammers are now waiting for a work permit for the 27-year-old, who won 18 caps for what was formerly Yugoslavia.
Manager Billy Bonds said: ‘He will be a useful asset and at the price it is not really a gamble.’
BATTLE ROYLE AHEAD
SOCCER'S two longest-serving managers — Oldham's Joe Royle and Nottingham Forest's Brian Clough — come face to face at Boundary Park today.
And Royle is hoping to outsmart the old master, just like he did last season.
The Latics beat Forest 2-1 in a thriller and Royle promised: ‘We'll be going for goals again.’
But he also remembers the 3-1 defeat at the City Ground, saying: ‘We saw how good they can be — they well and truly turned us over.’
Full back Neil Pointon returns for Oldham after overcoming a knee injury.
But defender Andy Barlow will be sidelined for a month after straining a calf muscle in training.
ROYLE: Test
MERSON: I WAS A FAST-FOOD JUNKIE
Arsenal ace opens his heart only to Mirror Sport
Now I eat only one meal a day
HARRY HARRIS
PAUL MERSON has kicked the booze, tamed the gambling and is now battling to beat his addiction to…crisps.
Merson is controlling his diet and craving for fast-food in a bid to lose a few pounds excess weight, but spoke out yesterday to nail the lies that he has had a bust-up with George Graham over the battle of the bulge.
No-one wins a dispute with Graham, so there's hardly any point indulging in a slanging match.
And Merson revealed: ‘The boss called me in on Monday and told me that it would be best if I played in the reserves on Tuesday rather than travel with the squad to Blackburn.
Problem
‘There was no heated exchange, no row, no cross words.
I just accepted it.
‘It was not simply a problem with my weight.
It was all to do with my ankle.
‘The worry was that the ankle might go during a game and that is why it was felt best for me to play in the reserves.
‘If the ankle had gone in the Blackburn game I would have been letting everyone down.
‘Now I have been working hard on my fitness and my ankle has improved.’
Merson doesn't hide the fact that he has been struggling with his weight.
In fact, he can joke about it, saying: ‘I don't think I'll make Slimmer-of-the-Year because there isn't that much I need to lose.
‘I came back for pre-season perfectly all right and fit, but I twisted the ankle in the first minute of our first workout game against Brentford at the training ground.
‘I didn't go on tour to Norway — I couldn't move.
‘It was so bad that I was put on crutches.
‘By the time the squad returned from Norway I had only had two days training all pre-season.
‘I was THREE pounds overweight, and the ankle was still weak.
‘I played in the friendlies against Wolves and Peterborough but I was not really fit enough, and still felt tired, but that was hardly surprising as these were my first two games.
‘By the time the season kicked off against Norwich it was felt I was ready but because of the heat I felt it hard going and I struggled.
The ankle was also sore.
‘When the manager wanted me to work out in the reserves I accepted it.
‘I've lost three pounds and I'm back to my weight of all last season, 13 stone, although I will be even sharper if I come down another couple of pounds.
‘I'm on a strict diet.
I've cut out the crisps, and that's not been easy.
‘I've been hooked on crisps for years.
But now they are out as well as all junk food, and I'm only eating one meal a day.
‘I don't mind if the lads have a laugh at my expense, that's all part of the dressing-room banter, but it does upset me that I'm supposed to have had a row with the manager.
‘George Graham has been very supportive in the last few years, during which I've come through a lot of problems.
‘I wouldn't be at Arsenal if it wasn't for him.
‘George has told me to look after my weight.
He is an experienced manager and he knows that if a player is sitting on the treatment table for two or three weeks they are bound to put on a few pounds.’
Merson has been riled by suggestions that his Arsenal future is on the line.
He said: ‘I am 24 now and I am signed up for the next five years.
I love the club and I cannot see myself playing for anyone else.’
BIG GUN PAUL Merson has been told by Arsenal boss George Graham to lose some weight, so he's given up his beloved crisps.
ALL FIRED UP
FRANK WIECHULA
ARSENAL face a trial by TV at Liverpool tomorrow with keeper David Seaman insisting: ‘We're really fired up for this one.’
Defeat for the Gunners in this live televised Sunday spectacular would be the title favourites' third straight loss and leave them still looking for their first point.
But Seaman, one of those criticised in the shock reverse by Norwich, said: ‘We've had a disappointing start but we are hoping to get off the bottom against Liverpool.
‘It's going to be a tough test for us and if we can get a good result there it should bring the confidence right back.’
SEAMAN: Confident
PLAY ME, GEORGE
Fatso Merson's big-match plea
HARRY HARRIS
OVERWEIGHT Arsenal and England striker Paul Merson last night begged his manager George Graham for a slimline tonic —‘Play me at Liverpool!’
The England forward insists he is ready for the match that struggling Arsenal dare not lose, even though Graham is worried that it might be a couple of weeks before Merson sheds enough pounds to be back to his peak.
Said Graham: ‘He'll get the weight off in a couple of weeks because he's working hard in training and then he'll be back in the side.’
But Merson has been added to the squad for tomorrow's clash at Anfield after being axed for the match at Blackburn in midweek.
And, in an exclusive interview, Merson told me: ‘I'm back to the weight I was all last season, 13 stone, but ideally I would like to get down to 12st 10lb.
‘I'm sure those couple of pounds less will make me even sharper.
Benefits
‘I've been running three or four miles every day for a week, and using a trampoline at home to build up my fitness, and I've been keeping a close eye on what I eat.
‘It's been sheer hard work, but worth it because I'm feeling the benefits.
‘I want to play at Liverpool, and I'm glad I'm back in the squad, which must mean I will come into consideration.
‘The manager has not given me any indication whether I will play but I am ready and it would be nice if I could.
‘Ian Wright is back as well so that can only be good for our chances at Anfield.’
Merson was a member of Graham Taylor's England squad in Sweden and wants to be part of the first international gathering in Spain early next month.
The England squad is announced next week and he said: ‘There's little chance of being involved with England if I can't get in my club side first.’
The Gunners were championship favourites a week ago but have made a shocking start with defeats at home to Norwich and at Blackburn.
Bench
Their most expensive signing, £2.5million striker Ian Wright, sat on the bench for the opening game with a thigh strain, and turned his ankle in the first minute when coming on.
The ankle strain kept him out at Blackburn and has restricted his training.
With Wright hampered by injuries and Merson's physical condition in question, Graham suddenly has problems in attack.
It could mean both Wright and Merson being involved in some stage of the match at Anfield, as there must be doubts over both strikers lasting the full 90 minutes.
GRAHAM: Problems
ON TRACK PAUL Merson models the new Umbro England tracksuit — which he hopes to be wearing in Spain next month.
That's rich
MIKE LANGLEY
RADIO Five on Saturday broadcast a fan accusing Aston Villa of pricing out visiting fans.
He'd gone to Villa Park with his son and daughter, 12 and 13.
The £34 in his pocket wasn't enough.
Admission was £12 each — no reduction for kids.
The ticket office said: ‘It's the Premier League.’
Extortion, I say!
OFF DAY
SPURS boss Terry Venables looks down at controversial new skipper Neil Ruddock, sent off during Saturday's 2-2 draw against Palace.
SKY HIGH
COVENTRY boss Bobby Gould is all smiles after watching his Sky Blues roar to the top of the Premier League — after a gritty 2-1 win against his old club Wimbledon.
In front of just 3,759 — the Premier League's worst crowd so far (see facing page)— Gould and Phil Neal (left) saw their unfashionable club maintain the only remaining perfect start to the Premier League campaign.
TEST STARS FACE RAP
WIGAN Test stars Martin Offiah and Kelvin Skerrett could face a League rap after missing the medal ceremony at yesterday's Charity Shield against St Helens at Gateshead.
Offiah also went straight to the dressing-room following the 1991 Premiership final at Old Trafford.
League spokesman David Howes said: ‘Offiah and Skerrett will be disciplined.
The maximum punishment is non-receipt of the medals and a disrepute charge.’
Wigan went down 17-0 to St Helens, with ex-Wigan scrum-half Gus O'Donnell playing a key role for Saints.
IT'S A FACT
34,961 was the biggest Premier League gate of the week-end — yesterday's clash at Anfield between Liverpool and Arsenal.
FORMER England manager Bobby Robson was disappointed by the failure of his new club, Sporting Lisbon, to achieve more than a goalless home draw at the start of the Portuguese League season.
GREEN SO GOLDEN
CHARLES FAWCUS
GREEN DOLLAR proved gilt-edged for his trainer Eric Wheeler on Saturday — and the gelding's still got plenty of work to do.
The horse's second trip up the M1 in a week netted the Great St Wilfrid Handicap at Ripon and the trainer joked: ‘I'm going to get him a HGV licence and he can drive the horse box himself.
‘Green Dollar is just a magic horse.
A small trainer like me has a job to tick over, let alone make a living, but he always comes to the rescue.
‘I've had my moments in this game, but they don't come very often nowadays!
‘I'm always having rows with his owner about where he should run, but it doesn't seem to bother the horse.
Rain
‘Your readers might wonder how he could win at Ripon after finishing down the field when Lester Piggott rode him at York, but there was nothing sinister about it.
‘The ground was very fast at York which he doesn't like and the rain came just in time for us on Saturday.
‘Once we get the old horse fit, he hardly ever gallops at home.
We just keep him busy on the racecourse and he runs again at Goodwood next weekend.’
‘It's got to the point where he looks at you in the morning as if he's wondering where we are going to send him next.
But he's done us proud and you could say he's an improving nine-year-old and there aren't many of those about.
‘The Great St Wilfrid is the Stewards’ Cup of the North.
To win it was fantastic.’
Crystal Jack and Gone Savage were the other speedsters on target on Saturday.
Franny Lee has the Ladbrokes Ayr Gold Cup planned for Crystal Jack, but Gone Savage returns to Sandown.
MICHAEL ROBERTS puts his title chasing ambitions on hold today to undergo treatment on his troublesome back injury.
The South African, injured in a fall two weeks ago, has made a successful return to action, but still feels considerable pain in the lower part of his back where he has pulled a muscle.
He has decided not to ride work for three days, but is in action at Brighton tomorrow.
WATCH OUT FERGIE
.
but Wark tips United for title
HARRY HARRIS
Manchester United 1, Ipswich Town 1
WHILE the Ipswich fans taunted ‘You're going down with the Arsenal’, Town star John Wark predicted that troubled Manchester United could still walk off with the first Premier League Championship.
But Wark warned that Alex Ferguson must release the exciting talents of Ryan Giggs in a more advanced attacking role.
Ferguson salvaged at least a point from another tough assignment, the first of the season at the third attempt.
United go to Southampton tonight still desperate for their first victory in the new Premier League with Wark forecasting: ‘I still fancy them to finish in the top three — even win it.
‘I would not be surprised if that happened because of the quality of their players and such influences as Bryan Robson and Lee Sharpe waiting to come in.’
Wark, at 35 still a major influence at Ipswich, has faith in fellow Scot Brian McClair and nothing but admiration for youngster Giggs.
He said: ‘When Giggs gets going he's a handful, particularly when he gets in those type of crosses.
‘But he should be playing a bit forward — maybe he's too concerned at the moment with his defensive duties.
‘As for McClair…he's a players’ player, the one that makes them tick.’
It is a symptom of Manchester United's current ailment that players like Giggs are suffering from the tension.
Ferguson admitted: ‘We showed a wee bit of nervousness in the first half, the sort of anxieties that were there when we were three down against Everton.’
Ferguson's remedy: ‘Chisel away at our game, it's a long marathon.’
One of the biggest problems for Ferguson is that opponents always raise their game against Manchester United.
And Ipswich manager John Lyall revealed: ‘A draw at Manchester United is like a win at most other places.
We matched their determination.’
Big centre half Phil Whelan was assigned to the left back position, and was outstanding.
His long throw allowed Chris Kiwomya to plunder the opening goal after 56 minutes.
Full-back Denis Irwin rescued United with a blistering angled drive just two minutes later.
Certainly Ferguson has not given up the ghost of trying to land the Championship.
He said: ‘No-one is flying away, certainly none of the top sides.
TIME ON SIDE AFTER three Premier League games Manchester United are still without a win — but Fergie refuses to panic and has told the players to keep plugging away.
Pictures: Albert Cooper
Bobby's a £3 million dazzler!
LEFT IN THE LURCH
Sheff Wed 3, Chelsea 3
GRAHAM STUART was placed in the £3 million bracket after a wonder goal that had Match of the Day's team, as well as his own, in raptures.
The Chelsea midfielder picked his way through a bewildered Sheffield Wednesday rearguard and rolled the ball past Chris Woods to produce an early front-runner for the Goal of the Season award.
Stuart is known as Bobby to his team-mates after graduating from the ex-England manager Bobby Robson's School of Excellence.
But no amount of tuition could account for a moment of sublime individual flair.
Vinny enthused: ‘That goal was out of this world.
I remember John Barnes scoring one like it in Brazil.
‘It put a £3 million price tag on his head, so what does that make Bobby worth now?
It must be £3.1million!’
Jones revealed how a half-time dressing down from manager Ian Porterfield transformed Chelsea after David Hirst had struck twice to put Wednesday 2-0 up.
Vinny grinned: ‘The boss subjected our earholes to a bit of GBH and we came back so strongly we were a bit sick at having to settle for a point after going 3-2 up.’
Chelsea keeper Dave Beasant received a post-match apology from ref Roger Dilkes, who provoked a storm of protest when he decided an accidental deflection constituted an illegal back-pass.
KEEP CLEAR: Ref Roger Dilkes ignores an angry Dave Beasant…. after giving a free-kick against Chelsea for an accidental back-pass…
BLYN: JOHN EDWARDS
Arsenal blast back!
RICHARD TANNER
SMILING George Graham revealed the secret behind Arsenal's stunning 2-0 win at Anfield yesterday — media criticism!
The Gunners bounced back from two successive defeats to restore their pride with victory over old rivals Liverpool in the live BSkyB clash.
And after seeing second half goals from Anders Limpar and Ian Wright end his side's Premier League duck, Graham said: ‘When Arsenal aren't doing well the media seems to revel in it.
But I'm pleased.
The more criticism we get the better.
‘I just pin the papers up in the dressing-room and it does my job for me.
‘We've taken a bit of stick and rightly so because we've had a bad week and had two disappointing performances.
‘But that's when we're at our best and show our character,’ Graham said.
Arsenal could easily have trebled their score as they ran Liverpool ragged in the second half.
And only a super display from keeper David James kept the scoreline down as the Gunners romped to their third Anfield win in the last five seasons.
After their stumblings against Norwich and Blackburn this was the mean-hearted fired-up Gunners who were made 3-1 title favourites by the bookies.
Every man played his part but Graham saluted the display of midfield rookie Ray Parlour.
In January the 19- year-old Essex boy had a debut to forget, giving away a penalty in Arsenal's 2-0 defeat at Anfield.
But he more than made up for that night by setting up both Arsenal's goals with a performance of poise and maturity.
Graham added: ‘Ray's got a great engine and he loves to attack.
He exploited it today.’
Parlour said: ‘I'm well pleased with my performance — this is a great win for us after the start we've had.’
A furious Liverpool bench claimed Wright's killing goal was offside — but TV replays showed he was just on.
And Wright, the Golden Boot winner after hammering 29 goals last season, said: ‘I knew I was onside.
I work on that in training.
Ray held it up brilliantly before putting me through.
‘It was second nature to look at the linesman but I knew I was on.’
The only sour note for Arsenal were cautions for Lee Dixon, John Jensen, Parlour and Tony Adams and a facial injury to Limpar.
The Swedish winger will have an X-ray on a suspected broken cheekbone today after taking an accidental blow in the face and is now in doubt for his country's international with Norway in Oslo on Wednesday.
STAYING PUT
Andy turns his back on Australia
MARTIN RICHARDS
ANDY PLATT, the world's best prop forward, turned his back on Aussie gold last night and decided to stay with Wigan for another two years.
And under the terms of his new deal Platt will not play an off-season in Australia.
Wigan chairman Jack Robinson said: ‘We are not being anti-Australian.
It's just that we feel the human body can take so much and the English season is a long and punishing one as it it.
‘It's a high-speed collision sport and a prop forward always takes the brunt of the punishment.
He needs the rest.’
Wigan are still haunted by the memory of Ellery Hanley's pelvic injury suffered while playing for Western Suburbs for which they haven't received any compensation.
And they are demanding massive insurance cover from Eastern Suburbs when Martin Offiah plays for them next summer.
Parramatta headed a clutch of Aussie clubs willing to take Platt on long or short terms deals after he had a tremendous tour Down Under with the Lions this summer.
Said Platt: ‘The haggling over the contract spoiled what had been a good summer for me.
But in the end I'm happy with the new deal although I have had to compromise.
‘I never wanted to leave Wigan — it would have been a downward step — but at the same time it had to be right for me.
‘I may have got a better deal by moving to Australia, and I still have ambitions to play there.
But I'll only be 29 when this contract finishes.’
Rivals
Platt's decision to sign a new contract ends anxious weeks of negotiation by Wigan who have already lost star names Gene Miles and Andy Gregory from last season's all-conquering team.
Wigan are hoping to complete a deal for a top Aussie centre, thought to be Western Suburbs' Andrew Farrar, in time for their first home match of the season against Hull on Sunday week.
Meanwhile close rivals St Helens have completed a short-term deal for Canterbury-Bankstown's Kiwi Test centre Jarrod McCracken who will be available for the home game with Wakefield Trinity on September 6.
Hull have swooped for experienced St George half-back Ivan Henjak to complete their  overseas quota.
Reports from Australia say he has signed a one-season contract.
A car accident has scuppered Leeds' plans to sign Australian Test forward Mark Geyer, who had been due to arrive this week.
He has a knee injury.
SPLATT!
ANDY Platt has turned down an Aussie gold bonanza to stay with Wigan in their quest for more titles.
NO HARD PHELANS
as new Maine man declares peace
Terry's £2.5m smile
KEN LAWRENCE
TERRY PHELAN last night made his peace with Sam Hammam following a world record £2.5million move to Manchester City.
The Republic of Ireland star became the most expensive full-back ever after Wimbledon owner Hammam finally received his asking price.
And Salford-born Phelan, who has signed a five-year deal, admitted: ‘My family and I have been through hell in the past couple of weeks and signing for City is such a relief.
‘I have got the fire in my belly again — that had gone at Wimbledon and I think they knew that.
‘But I am not bitter over how Sam Hammam handled things even though it had all become a bit of a nightmare for me.
‘Sam is a business man and he always seems to get what he wants.
‘I spoke to him on Sunday night and he wished me all the best, while I thanked him.
Sour
‘I had five great years at Wimbledon, winning an FA Cup medal, and they made my career — so there is no bad feeling from me for Sam Hammam.
There is no point is souring such good memories.’
Hammam's insistence that City boss Peter Reid pay £800,000 over his original offer almost saw Phelan move to ground-sharing rivals Crystal Palace.
‘The Palace deal nearly went through but it would not have been the same as this,’ said Phelan.
Disappointed Palace boss Steve Coppell refused to criticise Phelan's decision.
‘Terry did not string us along and was very open.
He said all along he wanted to go to Manchester City, but if he couldn't go there he would sign for Palace,’ said Coppell.
‘When I heard City had lost again on Saturday I thought we would not get him — I just know how I would feel.
If I was Peter Reid, I would be screaming blue murder to get this player.’
Meanwhile former Wimbledon star Brian Gayle returns to action against his old club tonight warning: ‘Write them off at your peril.’
The Dons are anchored at the bottom of the Premier League after crashing to defeat in all three opening matches.
But Sheffield United skipper Gayle is expecting no easy ride as he makes a comeback from a three-match ban.
‘People have been writing them off as long as I can remember, but they love nothing better than proving their critics wrong,’ he said.
Yesterday's Mirror
MAKING UP TERRY Phelan and Manchester City boss Peter Reid have teamed up after the £2.5m full-back left Wimbledon owner Sam Hammam (left) on good terms.
HOADS CLEARED
CHARLES FAWCUS
FATHER and son racing team of Roger and Mark Hoad got the green light from the Jockey Club at an all day inquiry yesterday, writes Charles Fawcus.
The trainer-jockey partnership had been accused of breaking the rules after winning a race at Lingfield last winter.
A racecourse cameraman alleged that Roger Hoad stuffed lead weights down his son's boots after the race to ensure that he passed the scales correctly.
But the stewards found no evidence to support the claim.
The Hoads had protested their innocence all along.
‘This has been hanging over us for too long.
All I did was to congratulate Mark by patting him on the thigh,’ said Roger Hoad.
But not everything went the Hoads way at the Jockey Club HQ.
Their ‘winner’ Carfax was disqualified for a breach of ownership rules.
Walter Swinburn is out until Monday after a bizarre accident in Newmarket High Street.
The jockey collided with a pedestrian, knocked himself out and is sidelined with concussion.
Court out
ITV may take the Premier League to court for banning their cameras from grounds.
Said Granada's Controller of Sport Paul Doherty: ‘I told the ITV lawyers that I consider this unfair restriction of trade and I want ITV as a body to challenge it in the courts.
‘It is fair enough for Sky to win the match contract, but to feel they have bought all clubs body and soul is dangerous as well as actionable.
‘When we had the contract last season I allowed Sky to do interviews on grounds.’
Smith is the hero
CHRIS LANDER
ROBIN Smith, Hampshire's defiant middle-order maestro, yesterday had the last word in his summer-long bitter duel with Waqar Younis.
His latest one-day assault on Pakistan ensured England took the Texaco Trophy series 4-1 with a sweeping six-wicket win at Old Trafford.
All season, Smith and Pakistan's lethal fast bowler have fought their own private war.
Their latest confrontation was an individual thriller within another excellent one-day display by England.
Smith took his third man of the match award and was named England's man of the series.
But before he cruised to his unbeaten 85 which sealed this victory with more than 11 overs to spare, he was put through quite an ordeal by the pumped-up Waqar.
With Graeme Hick looking far more relaxed in the one-day contests, England raced to beat the 254 target and booked themselves £25,000 in prize money.
The hugely gifted Inzamam-ul-Haq showed some of his undoubted class with an 86-ball 75 — but it wasn't enough.
SCOREBOARD
PAKISTAN
Ramiz Raja run out37 Aamir Sohail run out87 Shoaib Mohammad b Reeve9 Inzamam-Ul-Haq lbw b Cork75 Asif Mujtaba c Smith b DeFreitas10 Wasim Akram not out15 Naved Anjum not out12 Extras (6lb, 2w, 1nb) 9 Total (for 5 wkts: 55 overs) 254 Fall: 1-69, 2-90, 3-189, 4-210, 5-240.
Bowling: DeFreitas 11-1-52-1; Cork 11-1-37-1; Botham 11-0-43-0; Reeve 11-1-57-1; Illingworth 11-0-59-0.
ENGLAND
Gooch b Aamir Sohail45 Stewart st Moin Khan b Aamir Sohail51 Smith not out85 Fairbrother b Waqar Younis15 Lamb c Moin Khan b Waqar Younis2 Hick not out42 Extras:(7lb, 3w, 5nb) 15 Total (for 4 wkts: 43.4 overs) 255 Fall: 1-98, 2-101, 3-149, 4-159.
Bowling: Wasim Akram 8.4-1-45-0; Waqar Younis 8-0-58-2; Aqib Javed 6-0-42-0; Mushtaq Ahmed 9-0-48-0; Aamir Sohail 7-0-29-2; Naved Anjum 4-0-26-0.
Gloss finish
MANAGER Micky Stewart went out a winner yesterday as England beat Pakistan.
Stewart, who is retiring after guiding England for six years, watched four players who owe much to him play key roles.
Stewart's son Alec and captain Graham Gooch put together a stand of 98, then Robin Smith, whose international career has flourished under Stewart, and Graeme Hick, a Stewart protege, completed England's innings with a partnership of 96.
SAINTS 0 UNITED 1
THE MAN FERGIE LOVES
Dublin's toe job saves sad United
Dion a £1m smasher
HARRY HARRIS /TONY STENSON
DION Dublin last night came to Alex Ferguson's rescue with the late winner on his full debut — and didn't Fergie love every last minute of it!
Dublin's toe-job on the end of Brian McClair's downward header lifted United off the bottom of the Premier League and gave Fergie his first reason to smile this season.
And Fergie honestly admitted of his shock £1million signing from Cambridge: ‘We took a long time assessing him.
‘But from what I have seen already we haven't had a player like him since Joe Jordan.’
Striker
Jordan, of course, was United's Scottish fang-toothed striker who bit deep into defences during the Seventies.
Now, a relieved Ferguson believes he has found Jaws 2.
He added: ‘I always liked Dion's first touch but I still wasn't sure until I saw a video of his goals.
‘I watched in admiration.
I hadn't realised he could score like that.
‘I have been waiting to pick him for some time but our form was not good and it was not easy on Dion living in hotels.
‘He only got his chance because we had a few players out with flu.
‘I am delighted for him and us.
I thought we deserved it.
But our first win was certainly a long time coming.’
It was a double celebration for Fergie.
His 20-year-old son Darren supplied the goal that gave United their first win.
Dublin scored 70 goals for long-ball specialists Cambridge, but his arrival raised eyes with the Old Trafford faithful fed on the dazzling exploits of Best, Charlton and Law.
Dublin said: ‘I hope my first goal will now help me settle and show I can score more for the club and the fans who have been so good.’
With United heading for an embarrassing goal-less draw, the manager's son Darren knocked over a free-kick which was headed on by McClair for the unmarked Dublin to shoot past Tim Flowers from six yards.
Dublin couldn't miss, but United had been off target in their opening four matches.
In fact, Dublin joins Mark Hughes and full-back Denis Irwin as United's only goal scorers to date.
So important is Dublin's goal that United's first win of the season elevates them into the top half of the table behind reigning champions Leeds in 11th place.
Without that Dublin goal they would still be languishing in the lower reaches, their morale severely affected since their championship challenge disintegrated with a New Year's Day thrashing by QPR at Old Trafford.
Dublin has certainly become the new hero on the terraces, as the travelling fans chanted his name at the end.
It would be hard now for Ferguson to leave him out.
Ferguson's side have now managed only their eighth League win in 25 attempts this year.
With Ukrainian international Andrei Kanchelskis consigned to the substitutes' bench carrying an injury, the main thrust of United's attacks emanated from the skilful wing play of young Ryan Giggs.
His constant flow of crosses and ability to take on the Southampton defence created sufficient openings for United to have transformed their domination into goals.
Instead, an extremely average Southampton side occasionally broke out, threatening to punish a United side that only managed its first point of the season against Ipswich at Old Trafford on Saturday.
It was from one of Giggs' dribbles in the 20th minute that new signing Ken Monkou was committed to a saving tackle that referee Ray Lewis interpreted as a back-pass.
The indirect free-kick was positioned on the six-yard line with the referee physically forcing goalkeeper Tim Flowers and his fellow defenders to remain on the goal-line.
McClair stood over the ball with Irwin, but Flowers raced out, reaching the ball before it was even touched!
Flowers joined the list of sinning Saints, but there won't be a more bizarre booking this season.
The FA are closely monitoring Southampton's disciplinary record after imposing a £20,000 fine for last season's 80 bookings and five sendings-off.
Flowers becomes the eighth booking in a season where Southampton have already managed one sending-off in the Premier League and one in a pre-season friendly.
When the free-kick eventually took place, Irwin sidestepped a defender and squared the ball for Paul Ince, whose shot was blocked by Monkou.
That encapsulated the sort of goalmouth frustration United suffered throughout the game.
It was a nauseating night for those who like to enjoy their football where it should be watched — inside a stadium — rather than on satellite television.
Sky installed 10 giant loudspeakers suspended from the stand, creating an irritatingly restricted view.
The noise was deafening and it was poetic justice when the amplifiers stalled just before the start and the bevvy of dancing girls, caught in mid-step, were quickly ushered off stage-left.
NIGHT OF JOY DELIGHT for Dion Dublin as he hits the last minute winner on his full debut for United.
Picture: DALE CHERRY
DUBLIN: Winner
Slim hope
DAVID MOORE
ON-TRIAL Frank McAvennie is begging boss Ron Atkinson to let him be Aston Villa's slimline tonic!
Southampton have splashed out £1.5m on Perry Groves and Ken Monkou, with £750,000 earmarked for Sunderland's Gordon Armstrong.
But big Ron can net triallist McAvennie for nothing.
And McAvennie, 32, who laid on Dalian Atkinson's Villa goal to rock the Saints, says: ‘Ron had better sign me before I fade away completely.
The training here is so hard, I've lost 9lbs!’
He also hit out about his departure from Upton Park saying: ‘West Ham never showed me the door.
I had already negotiated my free transfer as part of the deal when I came from Celtic.’
McAVENNIE: Thinner
Coton — Pick me or I quit
MATT HUGHES
MANCHESTER
City goalkeeper Tony Coton last night presented England manager Graham Taylor with an ultimatum: ‘Make me your number two or forget me.’
Coton, last season's choice by his fellow professionals as the country's top goalkeeper, has been in England squads for two years but is still awaiting a first full cap.
Now his patience is exhausted.
‘All I've had is half a ‘B’ game,’he fumed.
‘I'm sick of reading that I should be in the England side.
I honestly feel I cannot do any more to prove myself.
‘I'm not prepared to go all around the world with England any more as third or fourth choice.’
At 31, Tamworth-born Coton is  running out of time to establish himself with England.
He trails behind Sheffield Wednesday's Chris Woods, David Seaman of Arsenal and Crystal Palace's Nigel Martyn in the current England pecking order.
David James, Liverpool's £1 million signing from Watford, is the brightest of the young stars challenging for an England call-up.
Coton's plea is likely to cut no ice with Taylor as he takes England into a qualifying campaign for the 1994 World Cup finals.
He is scheduled to announce a squad next week for the September 9 friendly with
Spain in Santander and it will be a major surprise if Coton is included, even though the keeper was with Taylor when he managed Watford.
COTON: Demand
RUDD ALERT
Bad boy skipper keeps his Spurs
Neil gets nod to carry on at Leeds
FRANK WIECHULA
NEIL RUDDOCK leads out Spurs at champions Leeds tonight and will not be fined after being sent-off against Crystal Palace on Saturday.
An immediate option for Tottenham was to have stripped the big centre-half of the captaincy at Elland Road and hit him with a hefty fine.
But Spurs, who have just introduced a strict new code of conduct, feel their new skipper was hard done in the flashpoint with Palace centre-back Andy Thorn.
Agony
Team manager Doug Livermore said: ‘I believe both Neil and Thorn were very unlucky to go.
‘It is a particular shame for Neil because there were far worse things going on in the game but some people only want to see the dark side of him.
‘All the good things he does are not always appreciated by outsiders and he'll captain the team at Leeds.
There has never been any question about that.
‘Neil has been tremendous since he came back here and anyone at Saturday's game will have seen many incidents where Neil in fact stopped trouble developing.
‘We've been more than pleased with him, we've been delighted.
‘He's a winner and there is aggression in his game, but he's now a more mature player who tries to keep out of trouble.’
Ruddock has considerably cleaned up his act since collecting two dismissals and a string of bookings with Southampton early last season.
And he refuses to accept that he has a bad boy reputation which goes before him with officials.
‘People are starting to tell me I'm a marked man but I don't believe that,’ he said.
‘I don't believe referees are prejudiced, they are too honest and professional for that.’
Fellow central defender Gary Mabbutt — linked with a possible swap deal for Nottingham Forest striker Teddy Sheringham — has said he is happy at Spurs.
First
Mabbutt, who is in his testimonial season at White Hart Lane, said: ‘This is an important year for me.
‘I signed a new three-year contract in the middle of last season and my future is hopefully at Tottenham.
Hopefully I will be fully fit and fighting for a first team place in two weeks.’
David Tuttle could keep his place in central defence ahead of Jason Cundy tonight, while midfielders Andy Turner and David Howells both return to the squad.
FLASHPOINT: Spurs skipper Neil Ruddock (centre) and Palace's Andy Thorn (right) were both sent off after a flare-up
DAILY MIRROR COMMENT
THE Pakistan team should be drummed out of England in disgrace if today's sensational charges of cheating are upheld.
If the Test and County Cricket Board have any courage and stature they ought to demand that Javed Miandad's team forfeit their £100,000 prize money from the Cornhill Tests, the Texaco Trophy one-day games and the Tetley Bitter matches against the counties.
How can England's cricket bosses allow them to scoop all that money if their bowlers have been tampering with the ball?
LAW 42.5 states ‘that no-one shall rub the ball on the ground or use any artificial substance or take any other action to alter the condition of the ball.’
The International Cricket Council insist that they will stamp out the growing controversial problem of ball doctoring.
Yet, strangely, Col. John Stephenson, the ICC's secretary, closed the case of the confiscated Lord's match-ball after studying referee Deryck Murray's report on the incident yesterday.
England's Test umpires were outraged last night when they heard that the ICC were taking no further action.
Now Allan Lamb's revelations must make the ICC stage a full-scale investigation into what really went on at Lord's last Sunday morning.
ANGRY PAT SLAMS BAN
CHRIS JUDGE
PAT EDDERY can kiss goodbye to the jockeys' championship after he losing his appeal yesterday against the careless riding ban imposed last week by the York stewards.
The champion jockey failed in his attempt to overturn a five-day suspension awarded for his riding of Silver Wizard.
The Jockey Club's Disciplinary Committee upheld the York stewards' judgement that Eddery had been guilty of interfering with Green's Bid and Splendent in the Gimcrack Stakes.
They also confirmed that Silver Wizard, second past the post, should be demoted to third, with Green's Bid promoted.
As well as Eddery and Silver Wizard's trainer Geoff Lewis giving evidence, were Alan Munro, rider of the winner Splendent, and Richard Quinn (Green's Bid).
After a three-and-a-half-hour inquiry, an angry Eddery emerged to fume: ‘I've got to say I'm unhappy with the outcome.
I wasn't worried about the championship — all I was concerned about was today's verdict.’
It is hardly surprising that Eddery is upset by the decision.
Although it was not a vintage Eddery ride, he was only doing his best to win and he did initially appear to have a gap to go for.
Eddery, 22 winners behind Michael Roberts in the title race, begins his suspension tomorrow, missing weekend fixtures at Goodwood and Newmarket as well as Bank Holiday Monday action.
He has had three previous bans this season, two for careless riding and one for improper riding, and has now lost 18 days through suspension.
The stewards decided to return the deposits of both Eddery and Lewis, who had appealed against Silver Wizard's demotion.
Another small field seems likely for the Coalite St Leger at Doncaster on September 12.
Just 13 horses stood their ground at yesterday's latest forfeit stage for the final classic.
Fifty-three were taken out of the reckoning, including 10 trained by Henry Cecil.
Cecil's hopes rest with Allegan, likely to have his prep race in the March Stakes at Goodwood on Saturday.
Other Leger possibles Anchorite, Rain Rider and Sun Seeker could be in opposition there.
The Queen's Colour Sergeant and Melottie, who won the race last year, are 20-1 joint favourites for the William Hill Cambridgeshire, at Newmarket on October 3, with the sponsors.
Evidence
Prep race
WE'RE NOT CHEATS
MATT HUGHES
PAKISTAN'S under-fire fast bowlers Waqar Younis and Wasim Akram last night angrily hit back at Allan Lamb's ball-doctoring allegations.
They issued a denial through their solicitor which reads:
We have read the various articles which have appeared in the Press over the last few days which accuse us of cheating in the recent Test series against England.
We categorically deny that we have ever cheated or tampered illegally with any match ball in any game during our careers.
The allegations made are deeply offensive to us and the entire Pakistani team.
We have played in this country for both Lancashire and Surrey county cricket clubs and have bowled hundreds of overs for both counties.
We have played in numerous county and Test games on a variety of grounds throughout the world and we have taken hundreds of wickets on all different types of surfaces.
At no time has any umpire, official or administrator had cause to allege we have done anything illegal.
These people are specifically given a job of making sure that the rules are obeyed and they have never accused us of doing anything wrong.
It is significant that these allegations are only now being made after we have beaten England in a Test series.
When we have been on the losing side in county or Test cricket nothing has been said.
It is very convenient to blame the failure of the English players' batting techniques on us.
The simple truth is that we have both bowled extremely professionally throughout the last series against England.
We are amazed that a fellow professional has stooped so low as to make such unfounded comments in the papers.
We can only guess at Allan Lamb's motives for his article in the Daily Mirror, but we hope that they are nothing so base as money or even worse our nationality.
The upset and damage which has been caused to us by these articles is an extremely serious matter.
We are taking details, legal advice and our rights to sue for damages are fully reserved.
AKRAM: Angry denial
Hallas in Oz bid
GRAEME HALLAS is close to turning his back on British Rugby League to play in Australia.
‘My future is in Australia and I hope to get fixed up before the start of their new season next March,’ said the 21-year-old Hull KR centre who is listed at a club record £180,000.
‘I definitely won't be playing for Rovers on Sunday unless they come up with a satisfactory offer and there's no chance of that.’
PUNTERS LEFT AT THE POST
CHARLES FAWCUS
THE JOCKEY CLUB are moving the goalposts next week in an attempt to update the sport -but most punters will still be left in the dark.
From Tuesday, racing's rulers will make trainers nominate jockeys by 3.30 on the day before a race instead of 45 minutes before as is the case now.
That should stop Pat Eddery or Peter Scudamore suddenly appearing on a horse instead of an obscure rider.
But because they have not reached agreement with the Press Association who supply newspapers with the racecards, it won't reach much further than racecourse punters who buy an official card.
‘The Jockey Club wants to charge us more than it costs us to obtain riding plans at the moment,’ said Gavin Bargate, the PA's Racing Service Editor.
‘Our lists of jockeys are 98% accurate.
We provide an excellent service and don't see any reason to change that.’
Trainers will still be able to change jockeys in exceptional circumstances — illness, injury or if another meeting is abandoned for example.
And there will be penalties for any trainer who abuses the new system.
‘We will also keep a better check on rider's allowances so we don't have a situation like the one where Adrian Maguire lost several wins through riding with the wrong allowance,’ said Michael Caulfield of the Jockeys Association, who are involved in the new system.
The Jockey Club is hoping to make better progress elsewhere, by making trainers report anything which may have affected a horse's running — good or bad -as happens in Ireland.
Michael Kauntze, well used to this, kept everyone informed on  Kooyonga's situation following her York flop.
THE PAKISTAN CHEATING STORM
THE TV INCIDENT THAT PROMPTED RICHIE BENAUD TO SAY: ‘STEADY ON THERE’
‘Never has there been such a farce’
MIKE LANGLEY
AQIB JAVED of Pakistan picked at the seam of a cricket ball in full view of BBC cameras at The Oval.
A nationwide audience saw him and there was a hush in the commentary box before an exclamation was heard from Richie Benaud: ‘I say, steady on there!’
The time was eight minutes past eleven on the final day of the fifth Test and my phone hardly stopped ringing yesterday with calls from people eager to say how the incident supports Allan Lamb.
They'd seen Aqib working away with his finger-nails while holding the ball in his other hand with the seam crosswise.
HE was walking towards his run-up marker and straight towards the lens of the camera at the bowler's end.
Importantly, his back was towards the umpire.
I went to the BBC TV Centre with a photographer yesterday on the understanding that he could take pictures from the video.
Alas and alack!
When we arrived by appointment, the tape had walked!
Mysteriously removed without authorisation, said the Beeb.
Would you believe it?
Perhaps, I said, there is another copy that they might let us photograph.
Of course, they agreed.
Unfortunately, it would be simply days before they could book a room and equipment for a screening.
I imagine the BBC had asked themselves: ‘Why should we stick our necks out when everybody else is bottling it?’
Look at some of the so-called quality newspapers on the Allan Lamb affair.
Instead of examining the truth of his charge that Pakistan deface the ball to increase its swing for Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, they attack Lamb's motives for speaking out.
TWO pillars of Lord's advance the novel notion that cheating doesn't matter.
‘They're all at it,’ said Christopher Martin-Jenkins of the Daily Telegraph and Mike Selvey of the Guardian.
Selvey was 10 years at Lord's as a Middlesex quick bowler and Martin-Jenkins is a member of MCC.
‘If Pakistan have cheated,’ said Selvey, ‘then so has virtually every seam bowler who has played first-class cricket.
Lifting the seam is common practice.’
Martin-Jenkins told his readers: ‘Pakistan are far from damaged by the allegations of ball-tampering.
Let him who has never lifted the seam of a cricket ball cast the first stone.’
We're lucky that these fine beauties are not running the Olympics.
They'd sack the drug-testers, saying: ‘Steroids are now so widespread that every athlete should be allowed to take them wholesale!’
SIR Neville Cardus, the most literate and incorruptible of cricket-writers, adorned the pre-war Guardian and I wonder in what contempt he'd hold advocates of expedience like Selvey and Martin-Jenkins — as well as that gutless crew at the TCCB, the International Cricket Council and Lord's.
From Sunday lunch-time to breakfast today, their mountain of prevaricating committees have laboured without bringing forth even a mouse.
Never has there been such a sporting farce over a straightforward issue: Was the ball out of shape through natural causes (Law 5.5) or had it been damaged deliberately (Law 42.5)?
Lord's know the answer.
They've known it since the ball was confiscated and changed at Lamb's insistence six days ago.
Their problem is not knowing how to phrase the verdict without inflaming Pakistan.
That's what has them on the run although, in the end, they'll be forced to give birth.
When they do, you can bet the mouse of Lord's will be both white-washed and sugared!
CAUGHT OUT PAKISTAN paceman Aqib Javed picked the seam of the ball during the final Test — and was seen by millions of television viewers.
BENAUD: Exclamation
BEN'S A TYKE
MATT HUGHES
YORKSHIRE were last night on the brink of pipping Worcester for the signature of West Indies' paceman Ken Benjamin to boost their weak attack.
The Tykes switched from Pakistan's Aqib Javed because he would have to be given a two-year contract under TCCB rules while 21-year-old Benjamin could sign for a year.
Yorkshire could then sign their original first choice Aussie Craig McDermott in 1994.
Sachin Tendulkar is ruled out because of India's Sri Lankan tour next July.
Yorkshire's chief executive Chris Hassall watched Benjamin play against Pakistan yesterday.
Benjamin said: ‘It would be tremendous to be Yorkshire's overseas player.’
Benjamin had a second XI trial with Worcester last week taking seven wickets.
TENDULKAR: On tour
FINGERED
We nail the Pakistani cricket cheat
COLIN PRICE
PAKISTAN fast bowler Aqib Javed was exposed as a cheat yesterday — thanks to the Daily Mirror.
A photograph taken from a BBC video clearly shows the young paceman doctoring the ball during the fifth Test match at the Oval.
He is seen digging away at the side of the ball with his thumbnail in a blatant breach of the laws of cricket.
Javed's gouging prompted commentator Richie Benaud to exclaim to millions of viewers: ‘Steady on there!’
The damning new evidence against Javed was supplied by the BBC after intense pressure from the Mirror.
When we asked to see the tape on Thursday, the Beeb said it had mysteriously disappeared without authorisation.
Whistle
The missing video was finally tracked down yesterday and the BBC ran it on their lunchtime news programme.
The newsreader said it showed ‘another pace bowler handling the ball less than delicately’.
The evidence of Javed's cheating fully vindicates England batsman Allan Lamb, who courageously blew the whistle on Pakistan's ball-gouging tactics in the Mirror this week.
In his now famous interview on Wednesday, Lamb pointed the finger at Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, who shared 45 wickets between them during the five-match Test series.
Lamb's reward was a two-match suspension and a heavy fine — imposed for failing to get permission to tell the truth — and a strong hint from England supremo Ted Dexter that his international cricket career is over.
In contrast, Pakistan have escaped scot-free.
They fly home today without any punishment over our exposure of Aqib's ball doctoring or Lamb's revelation that they cheated during last weekend's one-day international.
And yesterday the International Cricket Council astonishingly copped out of the whole issue.
The ICC issued a brusque statement which neither cleared nor convicted the Pakistanis.
THUMBNAIL SKETCH: Video shows Javed gouging ball
FURY: Bowler Aqib Javed is restrained after a Test bust-up
TUNE IN TO MASNUN
CHARLES FAWCUS
LOCAL HERO Masnun pops up the hill to Goodwood today all set to repeat last year's win in the Sport on 5 Handicap.
No wins have come Masnun's way in 1992, but he certainly hasn't been running badly and he's on his favourite track now.
‘He's a different horse here than anywhere else,’ explains trainer Roland O'Sullivan.
‘Our stables are just a few miles away at Bognor and it only takes a short time to get him there.
He doesn't seem to enjoy spending hours in a horsebox.’
Masnun was out of sight from a poor draw in his last race at Kempton, but ran much better in the Stewards' Cup here and he's well in today on his best form.
Selkirk looks best in the Beefeater Gin Celebration Mile where the stiffest test is likely to come from French challenger Steinbeck, who loves the mud.
Clive Brittain will withdraw Mystiko if there is heavy overnight rain, but the conditions were just right for his big winner yesterday — Love Of Silver.
‘I told anyone who asked that she'd win.
The ground was just too fast for her at Newmarket,’ said Clive, landing his 50th win of the year.
There are four televised races on Channel Four from Newmarket where Micahel Stoute provides a likely hotpot in Amthaal at 4.20.
No wins so far mean that Amthaal slips in the race on 7st 12lb and he showed plenty of promise at Chester last week — racing for the first time in five months.
WE'LL DO IT AGAIN
JIM O'BRIEN
HOWARD Wilkinson predicts a re-run of the Charity Shield goal bonanza when champions Leeds meet Liverpool at Elland Road.
The Leeds boss said: ‘It's hardly been a stingy start to the season.
‘I see no reason why this weekend can't be as exhilarating as the Charity Shield at Wembley.
‘This is our biggest game so far — it's like the traditional Old Firm games, or Juventus against Milan.’
Leeds' first four games have produced 15 goals and seven points and they are within sight of surprise leaders QPR — while Liverpool have conceded six goals and collected just four points.
Leeds have acting captain Gary McAllister fit after an ankle injury.
WILKINSON: Promise
TOP GUN WILKO
HOT-SHOT Middlesbrough striker Paul Wilkinson has warned soccer's elite ‘We're gunning for you.’
Wilko aims to help cement promoted Boro's impressive start in the Premier Division at Southampton today.
‘The top eight is our aim and we will surprise a lot of teams this season,’ he said.
Champion Leeds would agree with that — they were shot down 4-1.
Wilkinson has notched three goals in as many games after scoring 24 times last term.
And he says: ‘We'll always be in with a chance of scoring goals, no matter who we play.’
Power
Boss Lennie Lawrence said: ‘We have two home games after Southampton and it gives us a great chance to cement a top six place.’
But despite the bright start he is still keen to increase his firepower — he has a £400,000 bid in for Charlton striker Robert Lee.
Lawrence is also interested in Crewe midfielder Craig Hignett.
WATCH IT!
Richie warns Javed
JOHN EDWARDS.
WEST INDIES skipper Richie Richardson last night warned the shamed Pakistanis: ‘Don't try it on with us,’ writes JOHN EDWARDS.
The dynamic batsman, playing for a World XI yesterday against Pakistan at Scarborough, said: ‘A lot of eyes will now be trained on everything they do.’
His Windies team come face-to-face with Javed Miandad's side in a Test series in the Caribbean this winter, and Richardson added: ‘They will have to be very careful about what they do with the ball.
‘I believe in playing cricket hard.
But it should be equal for everyone and based purely on ability.
‘There should not be any question of a bowler getting any outside help — I am dead against that.
‘There is no doubt in my mind that if the Pakistan bowlers have transgressed the laws they should be stopped.
‘Rules are there to be obeyed, and it does not matter if you don't happen to like them.
‘I know that picking the seam has been going on for years, but tampering with the ball is a different matter.
It is an unfair practice and simply unacceptable.
‘If I saw any of my bowlers gouging the ball I would put a stop to it at once.’
COWARDS
The day cricket's rulers ran out of time
MIKE LANGLEY
LORD'S locked and guarded their famous Grace Gates yesterday.
They chained them against a world seeking answers, not more evasions.
A world that had hoped for the old uprightness, not for the collective cowardice of Colonel John Stephenson and his spineless masters on the International Cricket Council.
Father Time wouldn't have been alone in hanging his head in shame.
W.G.Grace, the patriarch and soul of cricket, would have stood equally aghast — but not for long!
Can't you see a reincarnated Grace lashing the Long Room with scorn and fury on hearing the vapid 68 words that purported to explain this summer's vilest scandal.
The Daily Mirror has been right all along in accusing Pakistani cricketers of obtaining extra swing over the years through illegally roughening one side of the ball by scratching it with fingernails or even ripping the red leather surface.
We produced a witness beyond reproach — Allan Lamb.
How did Lord's and their lap dogs repay Lamb's public-spirited action?
By reviling him.
By suspending him.
Yes, but what about the truth or otherwise of Lamb's accusation?
That's when you see the Colonel and his council playing pass-the-parcel with a hot potato.
The report by the two umpires had been delayed in the post, we were told.
The match referee, the ICC's own man, was precluded from comment, we were told.
We were told the lawyers of Lord's were worried that a statement might unleash a torrent of writs against newspapers.
A likely story!
So a week has been shilly-shallied away by the TCCB, the ICC and by those MCC chappies.
They messed it up right till the end.
For the statement intended to convey nothing and exculpate Pakistan, instead carries, as the Daily Mirror said from the start, an impression of the tourists' guilt.
Shamefully, it carries an even clearer impression of the ICC's terror of saying so directly.
LAMB: His behaviour was beyond reproach
SINTON SHOCK
MATT HUGHES
ANDY SINTON last night revealed he plans to quit QPR — just days after he helped steer them to the top of the Premier League.
The England winger wants the chance to play for one of the country's top clubs, despite signing a long-term contract last season.
Sinton said: ‘I am ambitious and want the chance to play for one of the country's biggest teams.
I want to show I can succeed at a bigger club in the future and fulfil my footballing ambitions.
‘But I don't want people to get the impression I am desperate to leave Rangers.
I am happy here for the time being but want the chance to move on to bigger things in the future.’
Sinton's views come after a summer of intense transfer speculation when he was linked with Blackburn, Arsenal and Manchester City.
He added: ‘Obviously it's a great thrill to be top of the table with Rangers because I haven't been in this position before.
‘It's ironic coming after a summer when I was supposed to be moving to a number of big clubs.
‘But I am ready to ignore any further transfer rumours for the time being and concentrate on making this a successful season for Rangers.’
SINTON: Ambitious
Sweet and sour Steve
LIVERPOOL'S John Parrott last night ruined Stephen Hendry's chance of a Chinese takeaway in the final of the £100,000 Kent Classic in Beijing.
Parrott, the UK snooker champ, scored a tremendous 6-5 victory over the world champion and world No 1 to claim the first title of the season and pick up a £25,000 cheque.
Hendry had been through sweet and sour on the weekend.
On Saturday he fought back from 3-0 down to defeat Steve Davis in a thrilling semi final.
But he couldn't quite repeat the performance against Parrot, recovering from 5-2 down to 5-all before losing the decider.
Hendry said: ‘My concentration was bad early on — I just left my recovery far too late.’
Parrott hadn't beaten Hendry for nearly two years and lost all five matches between them last season.
But he kept his composure in front of 2,000 excited Chinese fans and delighted a TV audience of more than 100 million with his last frame victory.
SILENT BLIGHT
MIKE LANGLEY
TIGHT-LIPS Taylor to-morrow meets the Press he's not been speaking to.
He's is the seventh England boss with whom I've dealt.
If he's determined to be awkward, roll on the eighth!
Martin misery
MARTIN Leyland, the Swinton winger who fractured his skull and cracked neck vertebrae last February, scored a try on his Rugby League comeback against Rochdale — but Swinton were beaten 14-10.
Oldham's tries in their 27-12 home win over London Crusaders were all scored by debutants — Stuart Cocker crossed twice with others from Mark Meadows and Sean Devine.
Featherstone, relegated last season, coasted to a 34-15 win at Huddersfield.
But promoted Bramley lost 18-10 at Carlisle.
There was mixed luck for the two relegated sides in the Third Division.
Ryedale York won 23-13 at Chorley but Workington crashed 18-2 at Keighley.
Haz hint
Swindon 4, C'bridge 1
SWINDON midfielder Micky Hazard had a piece of advice for England manager Graham Taylor: Look at David Kerslake.
He said: ‘England's problem in the European Championship was at right-back and David is one of the best in the country.’
Swindon boss Glenn Hoddle was delighted at overcoming Cambridge's big-boot football.
‘We're the best passing side in the First Division,’ he said.
Shaun Taylor and a Craig Maskell hat-trick put Swindon 4-0 up before a Phil Chapple consolation.
LORD'S PRAYER
BRITAIN'S first vicar from the Pakistani community yesterday prayed for divine intervention in the great Cricket Ball Row.
The Rev Geoffrey Peters, of Manningham, Bradford — a keen cricket fan — said a silent prayer for an end to the rumpus over allegations by England batsman Allan Lamb that Pakistani fast bowlers cheated.
Yesterday he joined a service at Bradford cathedral and said: ‘Being a cricket lover, I said a small prayer for a solution to the unfortunate crisis.
‘It was sad to see the dispute arise.
We have to live in harmony and, in its way, this is an example of the sort of work I face.’
LEAVE MY BOY ALONE
Liverpool warned off
No go son says Clough
HUGH JAMIESON
LIVERPOOL have had a sensational move for Nottingham Forest star Nigel Clough turned down — by his dad.
Forest manager Brian Clough insists on keeping it in the family after Liverpool boss Graeme Souness had made a move for Nigel.
Liverpool were ready to offer around £2million for 26-year-old Clough, who can operate just as easily up front as in midfield.
But Liverpool, desperate to reorganise themselves back into a title-chasing outfit, wanted the smooth-passing Clough for a vital role in midfield.
Clough, leading scorer at Forest for three of the last four seasons, has been wanted by a number of top clubs since his dad brought him out of local Sunday League football to Forest.
Italian club Torino tried to tempt him to the land of loads of lira, but Nigel's mother put the block on that move.
Searching
Now dad Brian needs him more than ever with Forest taking on Norwich at Carrow Road tonight reeling from three successive defeats.
And despite selling striker Teddy Sheringham to Tottenham last week for £2.1m, Forest are still busy searching the market for a replacement after being turned down in a £1.5m move for Arsenal's Alan Smith.
They have also been told that Sheffield United want a record busting £4m for Brian Deane, but Forest could give Standard Liege striker Shalom Tikva his big chance.
Tikva, a 26-year-old Israeli, has impressed on trial at the City Ground with the Belgian club pricing him at £500,000.
And while Forest also bid to strengthen their defence, skipper and left-back Stuart Pearce is involved in a contract row.
Pearce, set to be named as England's captain for the World Cup qualifying campaign, had been hoping to renegotiate new terms despite signing a five-year contract worth £1m two years ago.
Adamant
Manchester United have been ready to set up a £3m deal for Pearce with former Forest mid-field star Neil Webb returning to the City Ground.
But Clough is adamant, saying: ‘Pearce is not getting a new contract.’
CLOUGH: Daddy cool
STAY NIGEL Clough won't go to Liverpool