

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, PLEASE WELCOME…
Some months before each series, there is a frantic period of preparation.
We draw up the perfect guest list, and then go about extending the invitations — we haven't yet resorted to blackmail but it can only be a matter of time.
For every guest who actually appears on the show, there have been dozens of telephone calls.
We begin by finding out exactly what's going on — what films and plays are due to open, books to be published, records to be released, and we keep in touch with agents and promotion companies and keep tabs on where the big celebrities are in the world.
Choosing the names is the easiest part.
We can all think of the favourites, and if I could get the Pope, Frank Sinatra and the Queen I'd book them tomorrow.
We begin by drawing up a huge ‘A’ list of all the stars that everybody recognizes, and that would always include the Royal family and such people as Paul Newman, Robert Redford, Jackie Onassis, and so on.
I wouldn't object to a few ex-Presidents — Dickie and Ronnie and the lads would have some fascinating tales.
The Duke and Duchess of Windsor would have been marvellous and I suspect they might have done it, too.
Agreeing on names is harder.
Occasionally someone on the team will say, ‘Oh, we must have so-and-so,’ and someone else will shout back, ‘You must be joking, I can't stand him!’
In the end, we seek a second opinion — either we go out and accost a taxi driver, or we'll ring our families, who are so accustomed to being used as sounding boards that they are beginning to insist on a screen credit.
When we've decided on the names, we then have to find the best  person to approach for each potential guest, and that can be like a detective job.
In America these days stars don't just have an agent, they have publicity assistants and managers and accountants, who are becoming increasingly important.
Nobody ever got rich by just going on talk shows — well, not on mine, anyway — and when you're talking about actors who are paid millions of pounds for one film, then I suspect their accountants advise them against it.
Their publicity people, on the other hand, will see the advantages.
In special circumstances we'll cover some expenses and we pay them a token fee, which a lot of guests donate to charity.
We've now started to make forays into America when we're looking for guests.
A member of our research team will show a tape of one of the programmes and hopefully that will persuade whoever it may be that it might not be such a bad thing to appear on it.
Certainly Americans see it as being very different from their home-grown shows and for some reason they all seem to think that I ask rather cheeky questions, which I'll take as a compliment.
The point is that if you just ring America, you might as well be from outer Albania for all they care.
They have their own talk shows, and British TV is just one more headache.
They tend to say, ‘Can't we do one satellite interview that covers the whole of Europe?’
That's where I envy people like Johnny Carson, the most famous chat show host in America — and therefore the world.
Most of the guests on his show live next door — they just pop in on the way home from work.
They go on again and again and so Carson never has to sit at their feet.
He doesn't have to break any ice because they're all pals.
It's just chat — how's the family, here's the latest joke, how's it going — and that somehow makes for great entertainment.
Once a celebrity has agreed to be a guest, the researcher assigned to him or her will go along for an exploratory conversation.
This hopefully will provide a wealth of reminiscence and anecdote, and might take place anywhere from Putney to Paris.
The furthest anyone has had to travel was to Los Angeles and back, all in forty-eight hours, to persuade the reclusive Harrison Ford to appear on the show.
Once the researcher arrived though, Harrison was as friendly as you like, showed her around the house that he built himself, even showed her the pictures he'd painted, and best of all, agreed to be a guest on Aspel and Company .
A rather unhappier experience awaited the researcher who flew to Paris to interview Jodie Foster — she caught food poisoning on the plane and was ill  throughout their meeting.
Since then Jodie tends to sit at a separate table for interviews.
After asking them all about their latest film, their hobbies, their lovers, wives, husbands, children, and anything else of interest, our researchers will come back with their tape-recorded notes, pick out the best bits of their interview and write up a biography.
It usually ends up like a cross between The Sun 's ‘Things You Never Knew’ column and The Times Literary Review .
This can be anything from five pages on someone like Dame Edna Everage — because she's a fictional person (or didn't you know?) to thirty or forty pages for the Elizabeth Taylors of the world.
And that's not all the researchers will be doing.
They'll find out, for example, that Julio Iglesias prefers to be filmed only from the right — which could be useful for the cameramen.
Or if we're thinking of inviting an up-and-coming actor on the show, the researchers will find tapes of them being interviewed, usually from America, in order for us to watch them in action.
Someone who's brilliant on the cinema screen isn't necessarily a good talk show guest.
Indeed, one of the researchers' most important tasks is to ascertain for my benefit what kind of conversation we'll be likely to have — whether the guest talks nineteen to the dozen, in which case I'll need to prepare lots of questions, or if they take ten minutes to say ‘Good evening’— in which case I'll start praying.
It's very different on radio, which is where I've had most of my interviewing experience.
For a radio interview, I'd do my own homework, and I've always believed in doing it thoroughly.
Sometimes it seemed I knew more about my guests than they did themselves.
At the beginning of Aspel and Company I felt a bit daunted by this team of brilliant people who were, in some ways, doing my legwork for me, and the odd hiccup still arises from having lots of people on the case.
Like the time when we were having a well-established film star on the show, and the researcher suggested that I should say as an opening gambit, ‘You're still a very attractive man, aren't you?’
‘I can't say that,’ I said.
And she said, ‘But he is a very attractive man,’ and I said, ‘Yes, but you're a 22 year-old girl and I'm — well, I'm not.’
I have come to appreciate over the years, however, that the extra material they provide makes a great safety net.
I still add my own research, and usually something will come up during the course of the interview that means you can leave the game plan anyway.
The  material researchers provide makes a great safety net.
I still add my own research, and usually something will come up during the course of the interview that means you can leave the game plan anyway.
The worst thing an interviewer can do is stick rigidly to the questions, without really listening to the answers.
Clive James summed it up when he said, ‘It's one thing to ask the question but you've got to listen to the answer so that your next question follows on.
Otherwise you'll ask a question like, ‘What did you do at school?’ and he'll say, ‘Well, I was planning the Great Train Robbery and I murdered my mother….’
And then you'll say, ‘And then I suppose you went to university?’‘
There are always moments however, when you're extremely grateful for those planned guidelines.
The mind can go horribly blank, especially when you're thinking, ‘Did I hear that right?
Suppose I ask such and such, and why is the floor manager waving his arms about?’
You may not think the end result worth it, but there are an awful lot of balls to be kept in the air and some fairly nasty consequences if any should accidentally hit the ground.
The thing about talk shows is that you just never know how they'll turn out.
It all depends on the mood of the guest, the combination of people we have on, and a million other unforeseeable factors.
A ‘good’ guest, one who'll really deliver the goods, has to play the game.
It means knowing what the show requires and not what their ego needs.
When you've got a Mel Smith on or a Michael Caine or a George Melly, then you know it's going to be all right.
I remember Lauren Bacall talking on the show about her idea of a real man.
She said a real man is someone who knows what he's about, who knows himself and can be relaxed about himself, and I think the same could be said about the ideal guest.
Some guests, like Mel Brooks, are going to give a performance — you know that before they come on, but you also know that there will be a semblance of conversation.
I'm very fond of Mel, although he's given me some hard times.
The first time I met him was on radio.
‘You've got a much bigger nose than I expected, Michael,’ he said.
‘Isn't that a lovely dress you're wearing — and the shoes with goldfish in the heels — divine.’
When he came on Aspel and Company , he got me again.
Now we never set up questions on the show — we'll discuss areas that we might go into, but we never say, ‘You say this to me, and then I'll say that to you’, it just doesn't work like that.
Except on one occasion.
Mel said to me, ‘When we do it, ask me about my father.
Say, ‘You lost him at an early age, didn't you?’ and I'll say, ‘Lost him?
Michael, if I'd lost him I'd have gone out to look for him — he died.’’
It wasn't that funny, but I agreed.
Some months later I got a cheque for six hundred dollars — apparently a programme in America had done a feature on what can happen when you ask a stupid question and that was my fee for being included.
On reflection, it was probably the easiest six hundred dollars I'll ever make.
Michael Caine and I always have a good rapport.
We're exactly the same age, and have similar backgrounds, so we're on common ground from the start.
Talking to him is always like meeting him for the first time — he never comes out with the same old stuff and you can look forward to an interesting conversation.
There are quite a few Americans who go on talk shows and simply give a performance.
They forget that the magic of television means that we've probably heard it all before, so we really do make an effort to go for fresh material.
When we had Arthur Marshall, Dirk Bogarde and Joanna Lumley on the show together it was different.
Instead of the stock stories about Bogarde's early films, we went for a bit of drama as he lives in France and Arthur Marshall hated the French.
Dirk is an excellent guest.
I remember once when he was talking about acting on the continent, he said, ‘They like me because I act like a German.’
I said, ‘You mean, you push to the front of queues….’
He was man enough to smile, and it made Arthur Marshall laugh, which was always a wonderful sight.
Alan Alda is great company and so is Christopher Reeve.
Either would enhance any show because they're such good talkers.
I enjoy the company of extrovert performers far less than people who just sit and talk.
Not that I don't admire roaring entertainers, but a talk show requires some give and take, some exchange.
The secret of a sparkling talk show lies in the combination of guests.
I suppose the general aim is to get a huge Hollywood star, a singer, and perhaps a home-grown character, but it rarely works out like that and sometimes the most unlikely combination can really work.
Sometimes, of course, you don't have much say in the matter anyway.
People have pulled out of the show with just hours to go, and then it's not a question of who would go best with the other guests, it's a case of ‘Who's free?’
In moments of crisis like that you reach for the old dependables.
The late and sadly missed Roy Kinnear and Kenneth Williams would always help you out at a  moment's notice, and not only that, they'd come up with a great performance.
Su Pollard is good fun, and so is Jackie Collins — I'm very fond of her and I like the way she talks.
They're bankers, if you like.
You know that if they can do it for you, they will, and you know that when they're on screen, they'll do their  damnedest to make it all work.
But although it can be very frustrating when you've done your homework and somebody pulls out, it doesn't alarm me.
Yes, it's disappointing, but when someone comes in at the last minute then the adrenalin flows and you can have a very lively show.
One of the most interesting line-ups we had consisted of Judi Dench, Alan Bates and Michael Hordern.
It was slightly dangerous to have three actors — they might have almost cancelled one another out, and become so modest and self-effacing and aware of each other 's talent that it could all have come to nothing, but Alan Bates is famous for not wanting to do talk shows, and I think he felt that with the other two there, there was safety in numbers.
Judi Dench was a dream, so forthcoming and witty.
There was an obvious theme to the programme that week, but the following show we had Norman Tebbit, John Cleese and Julio Iglesias — and it's hard to imagine a stranger mixture of people.
Still, it worked, and that's all that matters.
Getting Sting and Dustin Hoffman together was inspired.
They had met once while on holiday, and not only was Dustin Hoffman a great fan of Sting, but he had written a song which they performed together.
To see Dustin Hoffman playing his own song on the piano, and looking up adoringly as Sting sang — well, you don't get many moments like that.
Of course, all the research in the world doesn't mean there won't be a few surprises.
We did a show with Sigourney Weaver, Robert Kilroy Silk and Julian Clary.
Sigourney was coming on last and we were going to move the seats around during the interval because we felt that she might not be able to concentrate sitting next to the heavily made-up and highly camp Julian.
Instead, a message came through during the first part of the show that Sigourney loved Julian, and was asking specifically to be seated next to him.
They got on like a house on fire and didn't stop talking afterwards — it was Julian and Robert who wound each other up.
It's particularly nice when you can get people together who've always wanted to meet.
George Michael was on with Jacqueline Bisset and he confessed that she had been his pin-up and he'd loved her from afar for years.
Yoko Ono, John Cleese and Boy George made a great combination.
Boy George was desperate to meet Yoko, he would have done almost anything to be on with her, and Yoko liked the idea of meeting John Cleese because John Lennon had been such a Monty Python fan.
Then there was Leslie Crowther, Tom Jones and Julie Andrews — Leslie was totally smitten by Julie Andrews and was thrilled to be on the show with her, Tom Jones is always good fun whatever the combination.
He really enjoys himself and will happily stay on afterwards for drinks.
He genuinely wants to talk to everybody.
One of my favourite combinations consisted of Patrick Moore, Alan Coren and Zsa Zsa Gabor.
Patrick, the lifelong bachelor whose main interests are astronomy, cricket and military marches, next to Zsa Zsa Gabor!
From time to time, Patrick would come out with a forthright remark about something we weren't actually discussing.
Zsa Zsa was enchanting — whatever I said to her, she'd just giggle and become even more indiscreet.
And in the middle of all that was the wit of Alan Coren.
It was a good show.
All the ingredients were there, and it just took off — I was never quite sure where it was all going, and that's just how it should be.
I don't have any rules about what I ask guests, or any interviewing ‘technique’.
The idea is really simply to relax people.
As David Frost said, ‘sometimes the most powerful men in the world can be really nervous of an interview, and sometimes it helps just to throw in a question to keep people quiet at the beginning.
Only you have to get the question right.
David remembers talking to  Isaac Asimov, the science-fiction writer, about God and so on.
When he asked: ‘Is there a force that we don't know about?’
Asimov replied ‘Well, there may be, but if there is we don't know about it!’
I just try to make sure I look at the person I'm talking to, and show them I'm interested.
You've got to be interested.
As it happens I usually am.
I'm fascinated by writers, as intrigued as anyone by film stars, and genuinely curious about people in politics.
A few people make the mistake of thinking that just because we have a politician on the programme, they're going to see Weekend World , but that's not our brief.
The idea is to present politicians as human beings — not always an easy job — and to offer a few insights into the person behind the tub-thumping.
One thing that doing the talk show has taught me is that people hear what they expect to hear.
When Margaret Thatcher came on  the show my nephew said to me, ‘You're not really welcome in this house after having THAT woman on the show.’
I said, ‘Did you hear me giving her a puff as far as her policies were concerned?
Do you remember us talking about politics at any point?’
It was simply a profile of someone in office.
In fact there was a lovely moment after that show.
Barry Manilow was on that same programme and afterwards Mrs Thatcher rushed up to him, got hold of his extremely expensive collar and said, ‘You know, this isn't very well made, the shape's all wrong, you should go to someone in Jermyn Street, young man, they'll sort your shirts out for you.’
Barry took it very well.
He just smiled and shouted, ‘Send for my tailor!’
Having sorted out Barry's clothes, she then went home to sort out the miners' strike.
Oddly enough, before the show Mrs Thatcher was distinctly nervous — or frit, as she would say.
As she stood in the wings, she whispered to her daughter Carol, ‘What am I doing here?’
But the moment she stepped on, she was herself again, even though it was all quite alien to her.
Later on, we had Neil Kinnock on the show.
He was talking about his childhood in Wales and how he had once wanted to be a detective.
Remembering the Welsh love of nicknames, I said, ‘Then you'd have been Neil the Squeal.’
I'm not sure he liked it much, because there's always the possibility of a label like that sticking.
I did the same thing, but on a different show, to Paddy Ashdown, the leader of the Social and Liberal Democrats.
He was a guest on This is Your Life , and I introduced him first as Peggy Ashdown, and then had to concentrate hard in case I called him Paddy Ashcroft…
I thought he might be called Peggy in the House for ever after.
It may be a consolation for them to know that I've been at the receiving end myself.
John Timpson once closed the Today programme on Radio 4 by saying, ‘That's all for today, Mike Aspel will be here tomorrow.’
A few days later he had a letter from a listener asking him why he'd told them that his gas bill was arriving the following day.
And Kenny Everett, who used to host the programme before mine when I was doing Family Favourites on Radio Two, was forever sending me up with his impersonation of Michael Aspirin — or was it Mike Collapsible?
The only thing I can say is that at least my mistakes are genuine.
Talk show hosts can also be on the receiving end of questions.
I've been the guest of Michael Parkinson, Russell Harty, Des O'Connor, and Gay Byrne on The Late Late Show in Dublin.
He's been going even longer than Johnny Carson and appearing on his show is a pleasurable experience, with great Irish hospitality thrown in.
I also discovered that being a guest on a talk show is pretty nerve-racking.
Yes, there's the relief of knowing you don't have to worry about where the next question is coming from, but that's simply replaced by the worry of where the first answer is coming from.
However, it can be fun.
These days I think I'd be a useful regular guest.
I know what's wanted and I'd do my best to deliver it.
As long as I had a sympathetic host, of course.
Somebody, an entertainer himself, once said to me that his idea of a perfect talk show host was someone you don't remember seeing at the end of the programme.
I don't go along with that, and not just as a matter of personal pride.
You've got to have some status, you've got to have some sort of relationship, however short-lived.
Yes, it's a spotlight for the guest, and yes, it's their show to a certain extent, but you can't hope to have a rapport if you don't exist.
COUNTDOWN
We hope that when you're at home watching the show it all looks like a relaxed, late evening chat — at least, that's how it's meant to come across.
But of course it's not that simple.
In fact nothing's simple about Aspel and Company .
For a start, there's a whole team of people who work to make sure it happens in the first place.
I won't go into too much detail — I remember Glenda Jackson talking about a theatre review she'd read where every single member of the cast was listed — and at the very end it said: ‘And Miss Yvonne Smith made a very good prompt….’
I'll try to spare you that, but I guess it's about time I came clean and admitted it's by no means a one-man show.
There's the producer, the associate producer, the director, the production assistant who works with the director, and the team of researchers.
There are the cameramen, the floor managers, the set designer…and indeed there is a lady with a prompting machine — in short, a lot of skilled people all dedicated to making the show run smoothly.
On the day of the studio there's usually a good atmosphere in the office.
It's tense, but it's fun, too, and once we have all the guests safely at our South Bank studios, we can really start to breathe easily.
A car picks them up from wherever they're staying and there's usually a phone, so they can ring us up if they get stuck in traffic jams, or if there is a last-minute change of plan.
In the afternoon, we have a rehearsal, but without the guests.
I just walk through the basic moves so the cameras can plot where everybody's going to be, and we try to work out how long people will take to walk down the stairs so we can play the right amount of music.
If they can make it, we like the guests to arrive before the audience starts to go in, so they can walk through it, too.
Those steps  down to the set can be daunting — I think it's everybody's nightmare, stepping out and falling flat on your face.
Dusty Springfield was wearing new shoes, with very high heels, and was terrified that she'd slip, so just before she was due to go on, one of the team was dispatched to look for some scissors to scratch the soles with.
Oh, the glamour of it all.
It's very rare that anybody arrives alone — Mrs Thatcher brought her daughter Carol, Paul McCartney came with his wife, Linda.
A lot of people bring their mums.
Fiona Fullerton and Maureen Lipman both had their mothers with them.
Emily Lloyd really made an outing out of it and brought her whole family — her mother, grandmother, brother, sister…
The researchers meet the guests first, and generally look after them from the time they arrive to the time they leave.
It can get a bit like M15 at times — each guest has his or her own dressing-room with a secret code number to get in — we're constantly changing the numbers so that nobody can sneak in.
It got even more complicated when Mrs Thatcher came.
It was in the middle of the miners' strike, and feelings were running high.
We had to make absolutely sure that her dressing-room number was kept secret, and tracker dogs checked for explosives before she arrived.
We even had a hot line set up between the reception at London Weekend and Number 10, and a call did come through, but thankfully it was after we'd done the show, when she was having a drink in the hospitality room.
We expected to have security problems with Mrs Thatcher, but in fact they were nothing compared with those posed by the other guest on that show — Barry Manilow.
There were hundreds of screaming women outside and we had to whisk him down to the underground car park and shut the gates behind him.
Once the guests are in, we'll give them a bite to eat or a drink — whatever they want, within reason.
Sometimes they'll want some sandwiches and fruit in their dressing-room, others will pop down to the canteen and grab a meal.
Tony Curtis wanted sausages, beans and mash and so he queued up with everyone else.
He'd been working and playing pretty hard since he'd arrived in London though, and after eating he felt so tired that he wouldn't get dressed.
A researcher kept popping in, saying, ‘Please, Mr Curtis, you're on soon,’ and Tony would say, ‘But I'm so tired.’
Ten minutes later, he'd still be in his underpants.
He was fully dressed for the recording.
In fact he wore his hat as well.
When Jim Belushi came, he wanted a particular American brand of beer and we had to search far and wide to find a few cans.
We managed that time, but sometimes they've wanted things that we just can't get hold of.
Dennis Waterman felt like going to the canteen so we took him down, got all the food to the check-out, and then discovered that nobody had any money!
We always try to give people an idea of what to wear before they arrive — or rather, of what not to wear.
Most people who are used to working with cameras will know that certain colours just don't work, but a few like to be reminded.
White, for example, can blur on television.
Stripes can go a bit fuzzy, too, and most people bring along a selection of clothes.
Hats aren't a great idea — they make life very difficult for the cameraman because you can't see the face underneath (which in some cases might be an advantage).
But Pamela Stephenson wanted to wear one of those novelty hats with a hand holding a hammer stuck on it, and Tony Curtis fancied a huge fedora.
They had their way.
I stuck to my usual balaclava.
Sometimes people's clothes give you problems that you just couldn't have imagined.
When Phil Collins came on, his jacket had such wide shoulders that I had to lean to one side to see the monitor TV set which the producer uses to scribble messages to me.
I usually follow fashion very slowly and creep in just as it starts to look dated, but then I think that's the way I should do it.
There's no point in me appearing with a pig-tail and diamanté donkey jacket.
Apart from looking ridiculous I'd feel uncomfortable, and if you feel uncomfortable, you do a rotten show.
So I'm put into the hands of what used to be called ‘Wardrobe’ but now has the grander title of ‘Costume Designers’, who are keen for me to join the twentieth century sartorially, which would involve climbing into one of those colossal suits.
I resist for two good reasons — a) they don't suit me, and b) I'm the wrong age for them.
I've stepped into some of those trousers and disappeared among the pleats.
When I sit down they billow up in front of me and I look as if I've got a water melon under there.
So I end up being pretty conservative about what I wear and draw the line at a discreet pleat here and there, usually around the chin.
The aim is to have about three suits per series — I certainly don't want to come prancing on every week in something different, but neither do I want people to groan when they see me in the same old suit.
All that fuss, and all that's wanted is for nobody to notice  my clothes at all.
My favourite line on the subject came from Michael Grade, who studied the jacket being worn by one of his trendier producers.
It was like an attack of migraine, all zig-zags and blobs.
‘If you had an outdoor aerial,’ said Michael, ‘you could get rid of all that.’
Most people have a dab of make-up before they go on, reluctant though some are.
You tend to look a little washed out under the lights without something.
A lot of people apply their own — Joan Collins was one.
Zsa Zsa Gabor brought her own hairdresser.
Sometimes the guests meet up while they're having their make-up done and it's a great ice-breaker, sitting there together with your hair scraped back and having your face powdered.
Before the show we have a little reception in hospitality, and if I meet the guests at all before the show, it'll either be in make-up or there, over a glass of orange juice.
It's certainly never anything stronger than that, for me at any rate, but the guests can have what they like.
I'd rather not talk to the guests much beforehand simply because I find it works better just to say hello, and thanks for coming, and leave it at that.
The last thing you want is to start an involved conversation because when you come to do it for real, it can all seem a bit stale.
Also, it could give my guests time to go off the whole idea.
About ten minutes before the show begins, the audience is seated — not too comfortably, we like them to stay awake.
On the set itself we've had, more or less, a different arrangement for every series.
First we had the idea of a desk, but I'm not supposed to be a bank manager.
On the other hand, I could put all my notes on it, and it would be somewhere to rest the elbows.
Johnny Carson in America always looks comfortable and authoritative behind a desk, and in a way I was sorry we abandoned that idea.
For the first series, we had little sit-up chairs on which we perched and swivelled, but then we were still experimenting.
In those days, too, when the guests entered they crossed between me and the cameras, which did strange things to the perspective.
This was particularly obvious when people like Clint Eastwood and Charlton Heston came on.
The difference between our heights, which was already sizeable, was exaggerated even more, and letters began to arrive asking, ‘Is Aspel a midget?’
It's silly things like that which get in the way of the actual show, so for the next series, I suggested a couch, low enough for me to put my arm over the back of it, but high enough to stop me sliding off on to the floor.
Mel Smith has  been on the opening show of two series so far, and it was the first thing he mentioned.
‘So glad to see you've got a new sofa.
The last time I came on, it looked like the corner of a pub — it's more like a Sloane Square wine bar now, very comfy,’ he said.
What we've got now, I suppose, is rather a curious set — chat in the round.
It was designed to make the audience part of the show.
The chairs are in the middle of the set, and the audience sits all around us, which may be a bit disconcerting for the people who've come to see their heroes, and spend the evening studying the backs of their necks.
The chairs we have now were actually designed with our chat show in mind, not so low that knees come up to chins and reveal too much sock, nor so wide as to encourage fidgeting, with an upright back to prevent slouching, and arm rests to give the nervous something to grip.
After all that, one of the arms fell off recently, reminding me of the time the same thing happened during a recording of Give Us A Clue .
In fact, due to a fault in assembly all the arms came off all the chairs.
I should have seized the opportunity and said to Una Stubbs, ‘Here's your next title,A Farewell to Arms .’
The first five series featured Ken Jones, a band leader who also composed the show's theme music.
He played the guests on and off and also accompanied the people who sang — Paul McCartney, Liza Minnelli and Tom Jones, and a few more unlikely names, too, such as Lenny Henry, George Segal on the banjo, and Patrick Moore on the xylophone.
He coped with whatever was thrown at him.
For instance, when Oliver Reed made his now famous appearance with slightly more than a little Dutch courage inside him, he suddenly took it into his head that he wanted to sing.
Completely unexpectedly, he stood up and said, ‘I'm going to sing a Keith Richards song’ and just launched into it.
The only person more surprised than me was Ken, who just had to follow along as best he could.
When Les Dawson was a guest on the show, we discovered that he and Ken had been at school together, and Les could not resist reminding him of those happy days: ‘The school we went to was so poor, if you put your hand up they thought it was a hold up.
Ken and I both went to music lessons and the first interest I ever had in music was the teacher at the school.
She was playing the piano and I stood there transfixed, a little kid with a pin through his jersey from the slums.
And she said, ‘Schubert —’ I said, ‘No, I smelt it when I came in.’
Do you know, Ken, you've never changed….’
‘Really?’ said Ken.
‘You still look a mess,’ said Les.
Sadly, Ken died in the spring of 1988 while on a ski-ing holiday.
His last words would have made a fine song title.
Half-way down a mountain he turned to his wife, Ruth.
‘Haven't we come a long way?’ he said, and collapsed.
Ken was a great character, and so is Bill Martin.
Before each show is recorded, the warm-up man will go out and do just that —‘warm up’ the audience.
We always have Bill, who is the best.
He'll go out, tell a few jokes and get people in a responsive mood.
Bill used to be half of a double act with Dave Allen.
He knows how to make people laugh, without whipping them into such a state of excitement that they feel a keen sense of anti-climax when the host of the show comes on.
We don't hold up placards telling the audience what to do.
Years ago they were instructed every inch of the way with placards reading ‘Applaud’, ‘Laugh’, and ‘Go home!’
The most tense part of the show is, of course, just before the guests come on.
Hopefully, everyone is ready, sitting in the Green Room behind the set, and then the music plays and on I go.
I've had a series of producers, all with very different personalities.
One used to slap me on the back and say ‘Get out there, son, and do it’, another would pluck at my sleeve and murmur, ‘Don't forget the one-liners….’
Now, you just can't plan one-liners.
You simply open your mouth and hope something comes out and you can only do that if you're relaxed.
Nothing destroys a sense of humour more than fear.
Nothing activates the bladder as much as fear, either, and this is the moment when the studio audience will often hear the clatter of heels across the floor as guests make a last-minute dash for the loo.
As soon as they're installed in the Green Room, guests are looked after by the Floor Manager.
He'll take them to the top of the stairs and make sure they know when to go on — usually by the gracious means of a prod in the back.
The music starts, the guest walks down the stairs, we shake hands — and we're off.
MAGIC MOMENTS
There have been a few moments during the making of Aspel and Company which have aged me considerably — but then I comfort myself with the thought that life would be very dull without any crises to get the heart racing.
Mostly, crises arise when a guest pulls out at the last minute and we're urgently looking for a replacement — sometimes we've had just a matter of hours.
Occasionally, it just looks as though someone's not going to turn up because for one reason or another they've been held up.
A few are just plain awkward and play the game of holding you to ransom.
Others try to demand their fee up front.
A difficult moment for me occurred when Phil Collins came on the show, simply because what I knew but he didn't, was that he was going to be my first guest on This Is Your Life the following week.
I was desperately trying not to let the cat out of the bag, and a few tricky moments came about just because of a few crossed wires.
That's what happened when we had Mrs Thatcher and Barry Manilow on the same show.
When we originally talked to Barry about it, we already knew that the Prime Minister would be guest that night, so we told him all about it, and he had this great idea.
‘I'd like to sing with Mrs Thatcher,’ he said.
‘Interesting thought,’ we all said, ‘we'll talk about that later.’
Negotiations went ahead but it all got a bit bizarre because at the time Barry's manager was called Larry, his road manager was called Gary and his assistant was called Harry — so we had Barry, Larry, Gary and Harry — in fact, I think there were two Gary's, just to make it confusing.
Anyway, at midnight two nights before the show, the director, Nick, is sitting at home when the phone rings.
‘Hi Nick, it's Gary.
We're at Los Angeles airport and we're just about to leave but  Barry's a little unsure about the song.’
'Which song?’ asked Nick nervously.
‘The song with Mrs Thatcher,’ said Gary brightly.
‘We were told that it was going to be arranged for Barry to sing ‘The White Cliffs of Dover’ with Mrs Thatcher at the end of the show.
And the thing is, that Barry doesn't really want to get on the plane until it's all sorted out.
So Larry's going to stay in the car with Barry, and Harry and Gary….’
Now, by this point Nick wasn't sure if it was all some ghastly joke or not, and then he realized what had happened.
Eventually he said, ‘OK, we'll call Number 10 tomorrow….’ but mercifully the idea was abandoned and we were spared.
I don't know though, it would have made great television.
A similar thing happened with Mel Brooks, only in reverse.
He decided he wanted to do a number on the show, and then knock the piano and the orchestra into bits — destroy the whole lot.
So the night before the show, the carpenters at London Weekend were working all hours, making a collapsible piano and orchestra.
The next day Mel came in and said, ‘Actually, I don't think it's such a great idea….
We said, YES, IT'S A VERY GOOD IDEA!
And in the end the demolition went ahead.
At least both of those incidents had humour — life can get pretty tedious when it's missing and it was very definitely absent the night Richard Gere was a guest.
Here's a man who's very good-looking, whose very name is enough to get women in an audience squealing with delight but who can't bear the thought of being a sex symbol.
The whole thing about a talk show is that you have to ask the questions that people are interested in — not in a way that puts the guest on the spot or makes them feel awkward — we're not out to ‘get’ anyone, that's not the idea of it at all— but certain things must be asked.
If the guest doesn't want to answer, that's up to him or her.
But Richard Gere took exception to the questions even being asked.
He even took exception to the introduction I gave him and when it came to the commercial break, he wagged his finger at me.
After the show he yelled at the researcher, ‘You betrayed me — you broke our word, you promised we wouldn't talk about sex symbols,’ and left the building.
And yet that part of the interview could have been dismissed with a laugh in five seconds.
He had plugged his new film, discussed his talented family, talked about his work in the theatre, and we had listened attentively while he outlined his search for spiritual enlightenment and concern about the problems in Tibet.
He feels very strongly about the atrocities being perpetrated there  and indeed gave his appearance fee to the Tibet charity which he supports.
What he didn't do was relax and enjoy himself.
When someone decides to take offence and be uncooperative during a show it can have a nasty effect on the atmosphere.
Everything goes very cold.
There's a kind of silence which has nothing to do with paying attention, it's all to do with people wishing they were somewhere else — and I'm referring to the audience.
I have had guests who have been speechless, monosyllabic, obtuse and recalcitrant, but more often because of nerves or discomfort than deliberately so.
People are rarely so rude that you can say, ‘Look, we're not enjoying this, are we?
Let's call it a day.’
Nerves can play havoc with someone's ability to tell a good story.
And it can get awkward when people take things too Literally — you say, ‘Hello, how are you?’ and twenty minutes later you're still listening to their philosophy of life.
That happened with one American actress whose very name now depresses me.
Every time I tried to change the subject, she'd close her eyes, hold up her hand and say, ‘I haven't finished yet.’
I thought, ‘I wish you bloody well would….’
Usually though, our crises are more to do with logistics.
The day that Seb Coe was a guest, he was opening a spinal injuries unit in a hospital in Birmingham.
We had organized a helicopter to get him down to London in time.
The only thing that could have stopped us was fog.
That day it was foggy.
So the researcher went to Birmingham to meet him and all the time he was talking to the patients, she was thinking, ‘We've got to go!’
There was a car waiting, but because of the fog they abandoned the idea of driving down and went to the railway station, caught a train with minutes to spare, picked up the car that was waiting for them the other end, rang the studio from the car phone to let them know where they were, and ran into London Weekend Television.
The first guest, Victoria Wood, was already on, and Seb had to puff his way on immediately.
I read in a newspaper recently that he'd said, ‘I've only ever done one chat show and I'll never do another one.’
Probably because of that, but he was really very good and I'm sure he doesn't mean it.
Do you Seb?
Seb?
Sometimes it seems that the problems are completely out of our control.
The second time that Yoko Ono came on the show, it was to talk about Albert Goldman's book on John Lennon.
In fact, she dismissed it with one word —‘rubbish’— but we'd just started the  show when there was a loud bang.
There was a firework display going on outside but it did sound very much like a gun, and Yoko absolutely froze.
She was obviously shaken, and who could blame her after what she's been through.
The night that George Harrison and Ringo Starr came on, it really did seem as though there was some mischief afoot.
They were talking, very movingly, about John Lennon's death, and about how Ringo had been aware of John's presence since.
Whether he was around that night or not we'll never know, but it seemed that everything that could go amiss, did.
Cameras went wrong, George's microphone wasn't working and we had to start the show again, a light exploded.
It was easy to believe that someone, somewhere, was playing games with us.
We had problems with spirits of a different nature the night Oliver Reed joined us.
I heard some uncertain footsteps and he lurched on, waving a jug of orange juice, which was not the drink he had obviously been consuming in huge quantities.
He was so rip-roaring drunk, in fact, that he made newspaper headlines the next day.
The front page of The Sun carried a picture of him, mouth wide open, eyes rolling.
Apparently a lot of people were outraged, and the switchboard jammed, but as one critic pointed out, it would have been more extraordinary if he had behaved like a bank manager.
I was aware during the encounter that it was very compelling viewing.
All I didn't want to happen was for him to become violent, which I didn't think was ever on the cards.
I was more worried that he might fall over and hurt himself.
Now, when I say hello to the audience before we begin recording the show, I point to the chairs, and say: ‘Elizabeth Taylor sat here, and Michael Caine sat here, and Oliver Reed was all along there….’
Another guest who kept the switchboard operators busy was Dave Allen.
He's a great observer of human nature, and the story that caused all the trouble was this.
(If it upset you the first time, please move on to the next paragraph.)
‘I like the word fart,’ said Dave.
‘I think it's a good word because it describes what it is.
I mean, if somebody comes up to you and says, ‘I had a touch of flatulence,’ you think, ‘You farted.’
My grandmother used to say, ‘Whose bottom coughed?’
But the funniest expression I ever heard was in New Zealand where I was staying with friends of mine and their young daughter.
Now, she was walking across the room when she farted, and her father said, ‘Did you whisper?’
Whisper was his  euphemism for fart.
But I thought to myself, one day somebody is going to say to the child, ‘Come and whisper in my ear….’’
Apparently hundreds of viewers took offence at that — but thousands more are still chuckling.
At least when a guest is misbehaving they're where we expect them to be.
The real problems can arise when they just don't turn up.
Sometimes it's all a ‘star’ ploy.
One American comedienne threatened to pull out with just one hour to go.
I don't know, maybe that's just the way it's done over there.
Her representative rang and said she wasn't coming on.
Simple as that.
And then put the phone down, and waited for us to ring back to find out what she was demanding.
She wanted everything changed.
She wanted to go on and talk to the audience before the show began: ‘Like me, please like me,’ she said to them, which is an approach not appreciated by British audiences.
She also wanted to go on first, not last.
We helped her with her problem because it meant she relaxed and gave a better ‘performance’.
Needless to say though she left the  studio offering no apologies, no thanks, no farewells.
It's true that the show has to go on but if such behaviour caught on I'd be bound to go on and say, ‘Ladies and gentlemen, so-and-so isn't coming’ because they not only want to appear on the show, they want to produce it as well!’
Sometimes it's nobody's fault at all.
Richard Dreyfuss was booked one week and on the night of the show a confusion over dates and times led his film company to arrange a business call that linked up Los Angeles, London, Australia and New York and he just had to be there.
He was sitting in the Savoy, only two hundred yards from the studio — we could almost see him.
That's why we never celebrate anything until it's happened.
At times like that, you call on your mates, and Kenny Everett kindly got us out of a spot of trouble there and agreed to come on at short notice.
So you can see we've had our share of tricky moments.
Another one was when Tony Curtis ended the show himself, long before we were ready.
He just stood up, said, ‘With that, I bid you goodnight,’ waved his arms and left.
Luckily by then we had enough material — together with a few more worry lines.
My favourite put-down of all came from Chuck Berry.
As he got up to go to the microphone, I asked him what he was going to sing.
‘Small fee, small hit,’ he said.
And there's really no answer to that.
Of course, there have been just as many happy moments making Aspel and Company as crises — the trouble is that they tend not to make such good stories!
Many of the best ones arise out of the preparations for the show and so are never shared by the viewers.
The researchers have had some interesting experiences when they've been out and about — it's not all work and no play — just mostly.
Like the time that Clint Eastwood was being interviewed by a researcher in Paris.
They finished chatting in the afternoon, and the researcher went back to her hotel room.
A little while later the phone rang.
The caller said, ‘Mr Eastwood would like to know if you're on your own this evening, and if you are, would you like to join him for dinner?’
It was all quite innocent, he was genuinely worried that she was on her own.
And of course she accepted.
It's agreeable to know that although star temperaments certainly do exist, there are just as many nice people as awkward ones.
Tony Curtis has a certain modesty.
We were to meet him at the airport, and when we were making all the arrangements with him on the  phone, he said, ‘Are you sure you'll be able to recognize me?’
He arrived, wearing a dazzling white suit and a huge hat, just to make sure.
Peter Ustinov was being interviewed in Geneva — in fact that interview was conducted in fluent German by Peter and the researcher.
After all, why talk in English when you can give yourself a little challenge?
Afterwards they went shopping together and she helped him choose some shoes for his wife.
On the summer's day that Michael Caine was being interviewed, he and the researcher sat and watched Wimbledon on the telly together for an hour or so before they got down to work.
Not all guests accept an invitation immediately.
It's often the result of months of chasing, and is very satisfying when that person is particularly famous, impossibly busy, or known to dislike talk shows.
Elizabeth Taylor, Margaret Thatcher and Clint Eastwood would all fit neatly into that line up.
Anita Dobson decided to come on our show and announce that she was leaving EastEnders .
That was quite a coup, considering that EastEnders is a BBC programme.
Chuck Berry and Dustin Hoffman were feathers in our cap, and so was Harrison Ford, who is known for being ‘a very private person’ as they say in Los Angeles.
Actually he simply likes to live a normal life and keeps himself to himself, but in the end he decided that he would do it.
He was on with Mel Smith, who had done a beer commercial in which he sent up Indiana Jones — Ford's most famous role.
We showed Harrison Ford this advert on the show.
He threw back his head and roared with laughter.
Afterwards, the representative from the film company said, ‘I've been looking after him for two weeks and that's the first time I've seen his teeth….’
I asked him if he would like a video of the show and he said, ‘No thanks, the experience was enough.’
He was still smiling — just.
I relished the moment during a rehearsal once when Mel Brooks suddenly boomed at the researcher, ‘Judith — go to my dressing-room and put on that thing I bought you!’
And the time that Dame Edna came on, kissed Claire Rayner firmly on each cheek and left her with two luscious pink lip prints for the rest of the show.
One of my favourite moments was when Nigel Havers was a guest.
He's a gem, always full of good humour, and he's been on a few times, now, but this particular moment was when I noticed in the studio lights a glint of trouser zip.
I thought, ‘I've just got to say something, and if it doesn't go down too well, we can edit it out afterwards’.
I said, ‘You  know I've rarely said this to anyone in real life and certainly never on television, but Nigel, your flies are undone.’
He was almost relieved — for one ghastly moment, he'd thought that I was going to tell him I loved him.
I enjoyed the whole of the Chuck Berry interview — I only wish we'd had longer.
He played a song at the end of the interview, and all he said to the band was: ‘When I kick, that means I'm going to start, and when I kick my leg again, that means I'm going to stop.’
That's all they had to go on — they didn't even know what key they were meant to be playing in.
I don't know how they felt about it, but the rest of us loved it.
THE ELIZABETH TAYLOR EXPERIENCE
Ah, Elizabeth — what memories I have of that show.
From my point of view it was a complete success — fun, interesting and the chance for me to meet someone whom I'd admired from afar since I was 14 years old.
One critic wrote of the show: ‘Of course it's great to see her but why was it necessary to have such a fawning and sycophantic performance?’
I think that's very unfair — Elizabeth was just pleased to see me.
Surprisingly I wasn't at all nervous that evening.
I was pretty certain of the approach I had to take and the fact that we're virtually the same age was an advantage.
I don't think the interview would have been so good with a younger man.
And Elizabeth knew that I knew all about her, and she also knew that she was the only person I'd ever written to for a photograph.
I was  fourteen then, I'd seen her in National Velvet , and had been barmy about her ever since.
So the ammunition was there, the time was right and I think she enjoyed herself.
She gives you ‘The Look’ in much the same way that Lauren Bacall does, and you play the game — Michael Parkinson set the rules with Shirley MacLaine.
So people may say that we're flirting.
That's one word for it.
Coaxing is another and sycophancy is another — you put your own interpretation on it but if it gets a good show, then it's all a matter of semantics.
Elizabeth agreed to do our programme after we'd spent five years gently hammering at her representatives — and of course we weren't the only people after her, the whole world was beating at her door.
But it turned in our favour and persistence paid off.
It would be nice to think that she woke up one day and thought, ‘I've got to do  Michael's show.’
What probably happened was that she suddenly decided the time was right for her to do some publicity and she had something to talk about, her book,Elizabeth Takes off .
She was also, I suppose, very pleased with the way she was looking, and rightly so.
In addition, she knew that ours was the kind of show which would give her the right sort of outlet.
But of course nothing's ever that straightforward, and we had our share of hiccups along the way.
Elizabeth said yes, she would do it, but that she didn't want an audience, she just wanted to record it with me.
Then she changed her mind and said she'd have an audience after all, and then, best of all, she said not only would she have an audience, but she'd like them to ask her questions.
That was completely her own idea and it worked brilliantly.
The audience turned out to be very efficient interviewers — I got quite depressed.
It sparked off some very good discussions, far more than we had time to transmit.
Now obviously Elizabeth Taylor can demand her own terms — she's one of the biggest stars in the world and she could easily have been a prima donna.
In fact she didn't demand anything, apart from a dressing-room on the ground floor because she was having great difficulty with her back at the time, and being in pain, was using a wheelchair most of the time.
Unfortunately, television studios are strangely designed and dressing-rooms are often miles away from the studio, so we had to find a place where she and her entourage could relax in comfort without the need to climb stairs.
The only thing on the ground floor that was similar to a dressing-room was a gents' loo, so we set about disguising its true purpose by dressing it up for the evening.
A researcher found out her favourite colour — a sort of purply-pink and we laid on her favourite drink — Perrier water with cranberry juice.
I had a feeling I was going to enjoy that show, right from the moment Elizabeth walked on to the set.
All the guests have to be wired up with a radio mike, and just before she went on, she said: ‘I've got this thing strapped between my legs — I hope it doesn't give way….’
I introduced her, she took two steps, and there was an almighty clatter.
The mike had given way and was trailing between her feet.
The laugh she gave was so dirty that I knew it was going to be all right.
From that moment, everybody relaxed.
In the end the show went on far longer than we expected and was fairly raunchy.
Now, for the benefit of anyone who missed it, here is  the whole, unexpurgated version.
Michael Aspel:
I've only once in my life written a fan letter to a film star.
I was fourteen at the time, so was she; she sent me a signed photograph which I keep in the breast pocket of my school blazer until both photograph and blazer fell apart.
Since then there have been other men in her life but tonight, the plans I laid all those years ago reach fruition as I proudly introduce my partner for the evening.
Ladies and gentlemen — Elizabeth Taylor….
Well, if it's all right with you, for the first seven hours can I just look at you?
Elizabeth Taylor:
I must say you look very good for your age.
Michael:
You were listening.
I should really say ‘Welcome home’ because you are British-born, aren't you?
Elizabeth:
Yes.
I still have a British passport.
Michael:
How long did you actually live here as a child?
Elizabeth:
I left when I was about eight.
Michael:
But you still feel British?
Elizabeth:
Yes, I'm half and half.
Michael:
Now, you're looking slim and lovely but, as the world knows, there was a time when you weren't quite as sylph-like?
Elizabeth:
I was the great white whale.
Michael:
We have in fact a picture here which I'm sure you won't mind us seeing, because of the context of your present appearance.
Elizabeth:
Isn't that pretty?
Michael:
How long ago was that?
Elizabeth:
About seven years ago.
Michael:
And how much did you weigh?
Elizabeth:
I would say about 185 pounds.
Michael:
What's that, 13 stone or something?
Elizabeth:
That's a boiling piece.
You can tell I really cared about my hair and how I looked — I was so together!
Michael:
And how do you feel now, seeing that?
Elizabeth:
I can't believe that I was really that desperate, that I let myself go that completely.
Michael:
Do you know why you got that way?
Elizabeth:
Obviously, I had a very deep sense of pain and loneliness — that wasn't a happy person.
Michael:
But were you always obsessed with food?
Was that part of it?
Elizabeth:
No, I could eat and get away with it.
I was one of those lucky ones.
But it was the combination of not doing anything, drinking too much and all my other addictions.
Michael:
The comedians and the comics were merciless, weren't they?
At the time, you were the butt of some very unkind jokes?
Elizabeth:
Oh, some of them got quite rich.
Michael:
What was the most unkind one that you can think of?
Elizabeth:
There is one rather funny one, I think: ‘Elizabeth Taylor was seen in town today wearing a yellow dress, and a group of children at the bus stop went towards her and boarded her.’
Michael:
You're laughing bravely, it must have hurt at the time.
Elizabeth:
Well, it did and then I laughed the loudest, but it hurt inside.
Michael:
So what finally made you actually do something?
Elizabeth:
First I did something with my insides.
I went to the Betty Ford Centre and cleaned myself up.
I was a mess.
And I admitted to myself that I was an alcoholic and I had a problem with prescription pills, and in order to survive — in order to live — had to change that.
And I wanted to live and be a whole, complete human being.
I spent about seven weeks there and I felt great inside but it was like I was wearing the wrong slip cover.
The outside didn't match the inside and I wanted them all to kind of get together.
Michael:
You were thinking thin and healthy but the outside didn't match?
Elizabeth:
Yes.
And my body was lumbersome and sluggish and it slowed me down.
So I thought, ‘Why  not lose the weight?’
Look as good on the outside as you feel on the inside?
Michael:
This Betty Ford Clinic is a famous place, but what were your first impressions of it?
Elizabeth:
One of sheer terror.
I guess it was the first time really in my life I'd been totally left on my own.
And the first night I arrived there, there was no one even to greet me.
They were all in a meeting, and they didn't quite know how to deal with me — I was the first celebrity ever to have gone.
And they were wondering whether I should have private classes or be with the group and have group therapy and they decided, yes, she is like everybody else.
And of course that was the best way to treat me because we were all there for one reason and that was to get over our addiction and to cure ourselves and be better.
Michael:
When you submit yourself to that regime then you are bound to do all they tell you?
Is it like that?
Elizabeth:
Oh, yes.
And part of it is discipline — you know, making your room up and one day you clean the porch, one day you sweep down the kitchen…you have different duties every day.
Michael:
Have you ever done that sort of thing before?
Elizabeth:
Well, I'd always been a bit too busy — and clever!
I get a maid to come in and do it for me.
Michael:
But did you find it humiliating?
Elizabeth:
No, not at all, it wasn't meant to be humiliating.
We were all there on the same level, we were all there with the same problem.
None of us was better off, none of us was worse off — none of us was a better human being or a worse human being.
Michael:
But the others not being celebrities, did they find it odd?
Did they give you a difficult time?
Elizabeth:
Not at all, they were very helpful.
Like when I had to carry the garbage out — because of my bad back, the girls helped me with my duty and  it was all right with the counsellors because of my back — it wasn't special treatment.
Michael:
Is it true that your own children testified, as it were, against you on this?
Elizabeth:
All except Marie, who had just had a baby; and my brother and Roddy McDowall.
I don't know if you have family intervention in this country.
It's when the family come in and they've been prepared by a doctor whose speciality it is, and they have lists of things that they have witnessed you do, that have embarrassed and humiliated them.
They say, ‘I love you mum, but I've seen you do this.
I've watched you do that.
And the reason I'm telling this to you, is because I want you to live.’
 Michael  : And what effect did all this have?
Elizabeth:
Oh, staggering, it leaves you totally speechless.
It's so sincere and done with such love that you know it must be agony for them and your one thought is, ‘Oh God, how could I have hurt these people like that?’
Michael:
It sounds almost as if it will be too agonizing for them.
I can't imagine people in this country putting themselves through that, no matter how much they love that person.
Elizabeth:
It is hard for them.
And some people in a family intervention turn around and say, ‘Bugger off, it's my own life, and I never want to see you again.’
So you always take that chance of ruining a relationship….
When I was at the centre, they don't encourage you to stop smoking, stop drinking coffee, or lose weight.
They just want you to do the things that you're there for.
And after about four months I thought I was strong enough to tackle the weight, and that it wouldn't be too much going on at once.
Actually, I had fun inventing my own diet because I had gone on diets before, I'd gone to fat farms, too, but it had never lasted.
So I thought, ‘Well, I'll devise a diet with the kind of  food I like, because I don't like going hungry.
I can't bear that feeling of rats gnawing at my stomach.
And I think it's unnecessary on a diet to feel unpleasant.
So I thought, ‘I'll invent a diet where you feel good and you can eat.’
Michael:
So dieting hasn't now become your new obsession?
Elizabeth:
Not an obsession, but I don't want to ever get like that again.
Michael:
There are a lot of fat people, of course, who quite like being fat.
Is it not possible to be fat and happy?
Elizabeth:
Oh, I think it is, and I'm not saying that everybody should be slim, in a size 6 or 8.
If you're happy in a size 14, that's fine.
It's for the people who aren't happy with the weight they're at, or if it's unhealthy — if it's endangering your health and you have to do something about it; if you've been told by your doctor to lose weight.
It's for people who want to lose weight.
Michael:
And do you allow yourself the occasional binge?
Elizabeth:
I call them pig-outs.
My favourite pig-out is that wonderful Southern Fried Chicken, mashed potatoes with dribbling gravy, broad beans and corn on the cob and then some kind of gooey chocolate dessert.
Michael:
Mmmmm, you'll make me dribble in a minute.
Is all this easy, and does the book explain that it is easy for someone who is not Elizabeth Taylor to achieve this?
Elizabeth:
If I can do it,anybody can do it!
Michael:
And what is the new you like?
What effect has this had on you as a person now?
Elizabeth:
I feel much more vigorous; more full of life.
I think I'm much more open, at ease, and comfortable with life — I find life a big adventure — I'm enjoying it.
And there are so many things  out there to do…and I'm doing them.
Michael:
I'll ask you what you're up to soon, but I've got to strap my safety belt for this question.
I have to ask, where does all the skin go ?
Has it involved plastic surgery?
Elizabeth:
I did have a chin tuck, and the lady who worked on the book with me said, ‘Now, Elizabeth, you know we're going to be together for months and we have to be absolutely honest with each other.
I've heard all kinds of stories….’
We were out by the pool and she said, ‘Now, we don't have to talk about it, but have you had suction, and tucks all over your body?’
I said, ‘Just a second, Jane,’ and I stripped off completely, twirled around for her, and she said: ‘Thank you, Elizabeth, you haven't.’
Now I'll do that for you here…but I'm sure you'll take my word.
Michael:
I was just going to say I didn't believe a word of it but….
Let me ask you then about the good life — you're a single woman again, are you enjoying every minute of that?
Elizabeth:
Yes, I am.
Michael:
Who are the men in your life?
Elizabeth:
They have been different, a few here and there.
Michael:
George Hamilton has been a friend for a long time?
Elizabeth:
Yes.
Michael:
And Malcolm Forbes — now he's a man of advanced years — he is in his seventies…
Elizabeth:
No, no, he's in his sixties.
Michael:
Oh, sorry.
He's a mad biker though, is that true?
Elizabeth:
Yes, we've gone on wonderful bike races together, and he's a wonderful balloonist.
He's very adventurous, a very young man.
Michael:
Younger than I thought, certainly!
And is marriage number eight on the cards?
Elizabeth:
I hope that one day before I die, I'll marry again, but I don't have anybody in mind, no.
Michael:
In your book you mentioned the two great loves  of your life so far, Mike Todd and Richard Burton — what were their special qualities?
Elizabeth:
Oh, they are too innumerable to go into, and it's just too personal to go into.
Michael:
If Mike Todd had lived, though, do you feel that your life wouldn't have taken any other direction?
Elizabeth:
If he had lived, I'm sure we would have stayed together — I'm sure.
Michael:
But you met Richard Burton filming Cleopatra , as again the world knows.
Was the chemistry instantly apparent, as it was to us?
Elizabeth:
Well, I had known him on and off for about nine years, and my attitude was resentful — you know, I'm not going to be another notch in his gun belt, and all that, was going on.
The first day on the set he was hung-over and very vulnerable, and his hands were shaking.
He asked me to hold the coffee up to his lips and I was gone.
He was so sweet.
Michael:
You and Richard Burton had a wildly extravagant lifestyle, planes were exchanged and diamonds….
What is the most extravagant thing you ever did, can you remember?
Elizabeth:
Oh Lord, we did so many extravagant things — all sort of at the last minute.
Like, we'd be in mid-air, flying from one country to another country, and all of a sudden we'd decide to fly to Venice for lunch.
Things like that.
Michael:
You were the original hijackers then, were you?
Have you found that other women have been jealous of your glorious jewels?
Elizabeth:
I don't think so.
I think women like to look at them.
I like to look at other women wearing pretty jewels — I don't want to grab them off and put them in my pocket…not frequently, anyhow.
Michael:
Do you let them try them on at all?
Elizabeth:
Oh yes, that's part of the fun of it.
Michael:
What is that monster on your left hand there?
Elizabeth:
That's the Krupp diamond.
Michael:
And do diamonds increase in value as the years pass, like property?
Elizabeth:
Yes, if it's a perfect stone — which this is — they retain their value.
But the price of diamonds can fluctuate, like property.
Michael:
And what did that one cost?
Elizabeth:
Golly, I can't remember what Richard paid for it, actually.
But I've been offered several million for it.
Michael:
Several million?
Elizabeth:
No, I'm not selling.
Michael:
Can I just touch it?
That's $30,000 I got there.
I'm told that Princess Margaret, too, was interested in your jewellery, is that right?
Elizabeth:
The first time I wore this, I'd had it for about two months and I was talking to Princess Margaret, but as we spoke, I could see she was following my hand with her eyes.
And finally she said, ‘That's the most vulgar thing I've ever seen in my life.’
But then she asked me if she could try it on.
Michael:
You have a little jewellery, don't you — you bought a Windsor piece…that cost a pretty penny, my dear.
Elizabeth:
Yes, but you see that was all right because it was going to the Louis Pasteur Institute for Aids, it's the only piece of important jewellery I've ever bought myself.
And I went through reams of guilt, but then I thought, ‘No, it's all right because it's going for Aids,’ and also it has a very sweet, sentimental story behind it.
Michael:
Something you could tell us?
Elizabeth:
Well, Richard and I knew the Duke and Duchess of Windsor quite well, and spent a lot of time with them in Paris, and this was our favourite piece of jewellery.
And actually, one day, because she knew it was my favourite, she said that I could have permission to have it copied and gave me the name of the jeweller, which I thought was so sweet.
I never did, but when it came up for auction, it just seemed like it would make her smile, and the money was going to a good cause, too.
Michael:
And you could do it, so that's fine.
But with all this wildly extravagant lifestyle, you were also expected to sit in pubs after rugby matches and sing bawdy songs…
Elizabeth:
Which I adored….
I miss pubs, and the bawdy songs, nothing is as good as English, Welsh or Scottish or Celtic bawdy songs.
Why is that?
Michael:
It's the richness of the language — that we know more filth than anybody else.
Elizabeth:
I'll drink to that!
Michael:
Why do you think your relationship with Richard Burton was so fiery — was it temperament or was it just the booze?
Elizabeth:
No, I think we were two very volatile people.
As a matter of fact we were like two atom bombs — we'd go off together and there would be this tremendous explosion but we'd come down together, too.
We didn't sulk and we didn't pout and it never lasted.
And we had a ball fighting…
Michael:
Worth it for the making up?
Elizabeth:
It was always exciting — and we knew it never meant anything.
Michael:
Do you think he wasted his life and his talent?
Elizabeth:
No, I don't, and I get very cross when people say that he wasted his talent.
Just because he went to Hollywood and was paid a lot of money doesn't mean he was wasting his talent.
He did some remarkable performances.
He was superb in Anne of a Thousand Days, Becket, Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf, The Spy Who Came in From The Cold, Where Eagles Dare — they've been innumerable.
He was nominated for an Oscar eight times — not many actors have achieved that.
Michael:
But how did he rationalize doing the rubbish?
Elizabeth:
Money.
Michael:
That explains it.
Do you think the Betty Ford Clinic would have helped him, and did he ever get tempted?
Elizabeth:
I don't know — the last time I saw him he was very curious about it, he was very proud of what I had done.
And he asked me a lot of very pertinent questions which seemed to me more than idle curiosity.
I think he was, perhaps, interested.
You're very much involved with working for Aids research, what is the name of the organization that you're the chairwoman of?
Elizabeth:
AMFAR.
The American Foundation For Aids Research.
Michael:
And did you get involved in this for very special reasons?
Elizabeth:
No, I was simply asked to be General Chairman of the first dinner to raise funds for Aids.
It was in Los Angeles and it was murderously difficult — no one wanted to be involved, no one wanted to talk about it, no one wanted to lend their names; no one wanted to come and entertain, no one wanted to buy a ticket.
There was this terrible stigma — it was like, ‘It's their problem, let them handle it,’ with ‘they’meaning the homosexual community.
There would have been no Hollywood without the homosexual community, and just as human beings, I felt we owed our fellow man a certain responsibility.
I became really angry at this very obvious silence.
No one was doing anything and I thought, ‘Well, hell, I'm guilty of doing exactly the same thing as everybody else is doing.
And I'm angry that I'm not doing anything,’ so I thought maybe for once I could use my name — my fame — in a constructive way and maybe make it heard above that dreadful silence.
Michael:
You were a great friend of Rock Hudson and Montgomery Clift before that, was it because of them that you wanted to fight this bigotry?
Elizabeth:
No.
Michael:
Just a general cause?
Elizabeth:
Yes.
Just man's inhumanity to man, and the ignorance and the cruelty and the lack of compassion that people were showing — and still are.
Michael:
You're a grandmother of how many children now?
Elizabeth:
I have four children, six grandchildren.
Michael:
Six.
And is it because of them that you're worried about the future — do you get depressed as a grandparent?
Elizabeth:
No, I don't — maybe I should.
Because it's in our hands, it's in our children's hands and it's in our grandchildren's hands.
And I'm an optimist — I think man will save himself before totally dissolving.
Michael:
You're an actress; you're a writer; you're a business woman — what's the pattern for the future going to be?
Elizabeth:
Keep on going…
Michael:
I certainly hope you do.
Now you have agreed to take questions from our audience here in the studio, on any subject?
Elizabeth:
Sure, anything.
Michael:
It's wide open, ladies and gentlemen.
You, madam, what would you like to ask?
Lady:
It is said that men mature as they grow older like a good red wine, but that a woman's beauty fades with age.
As one of the world's most beautiful women, how do you feel about this?
Elizabeth:
I don't think ageing and beauty really have anything to do with each other.
Some of the most beautiful people that I have ever known have been very old, ancient people, because the beauty radiates from within.
It's the experience of their lives and their lifetime and what they've done, how they've managed their lives, that shines through and becomes beautiful.
Man:
May I ask Miss Taylor if she has any nostalgic  memories of any particular British pubs?
Elizabeth:
There is one particular one, I can't remember where it is — I was there years ago…
Man:
Could it be in Wood Street, Barnet?
Elizabeth:
Well, let me tell you, you'll know which one it is in a second — I went back, obviously years later, and I was having my beer and I finally had to go to the loo and I went into the ladies' room and there was a big sign saying ‘Elizabeth Taylor sat here’.
Is that the one you mean?
Man:
It could well be, yes.
I think it might have been The Alexander.
Lady:
Miss Taylor, you went to Hollywood as a very young girl and during that time the young actors and actresses such as Mickey Rooney, Judy Garland and Deanna Durbin seemed to be channelled towards song and dance.
Were you given a comprehensive study of song and dance?
Because I wonder why you haven't made many musicals — you seem to have the personality and the looks for it.
Elizabeth:
I did, as a little girl in England, take ballet lessons — all little girls did.
I took singing lessons, too, and I actually sang in a couple of films, but if you saw the films you'd see why I'm not in musicals.
Man:
Miss Taylor, I think everybody is talking about your appearance but I think you're one of the greatest actresses in the world and I've enjoyed a lot of your films.
Last week I saw you in Suddenly Last Summer in which I thought you were incredible.
What I want to ask you is, in your last film,Young Toscanini , you played an opera singer — which opera singer did you base your character on?
Elizabeth:
I played a real opera singer from the nineteenth century, Nadena Burokhof and I based myself on her.
Man:
And why didn't they just pad you — why did you have to put on weight specially for it?
Elizabeth:
I didn't mind really…
I only put on ten pounds — in fact I did look rather skinny amongst all the other opera singers.
They're ample , it's a lovely word, I think, don't you.
Man:
Richard Burton apart, you starred with many leading actors — who has impressed you the most?
Elizabeth:
Apart from Richard, Spencer Tracy.
I think he started what they now call ‘method acting’.
I think Spencer Tracy was a sort of originator of under playing,under stating,under acting — he was brilliant.
Michael:
Were you very surprised when you yourself won your Oscars?
Elizabeth:
I certainly was — especially the first one.
I think I got that because of my tracheotomy — I think I probably should have gotten it before, but I'd been a bad girl.
Lady:
Miss Taylor, can you tell me what your hobbies are?
What do you do in your spare time?
We thought at one stage we were going to see you motorbiking.
Elizabeth:
Well, I have lots of hobbies, collecting things — like diamonds, people — I don't know, I don't really have any specific hobbies.
I used to love riding, but I went over a jump seven years ago and the horse stopped, but I kept on going, and I fractured my back, so I thought, I'm too old for that.
Lady:
Who had the most influence on your screen career.
Elizabeth:
I think I learnt from every director, every actor I've ever worked with.
I worked more with Richard than anyone else.
And we helped each other and we worked things out together — you know, at home, or when we'd run through the lines.
So I think there was more give and take between our performing than any other relationship.
Michael:
Research says that Mike Todd was the man who  awakened you as an actress and as a woman.
Elizabeth:
Where had I been before that?
Lady:
What do you think is the most important aspect of herself a woman should preserve as she grows older?
Elizabeth:
Just keep your sense of awareness, and always be true to yourself.
Lady:
You've obviously enjoyed your career very much and we've all enjoyed you over the years, would you be pleased if your grandchildren went into acting?
Elizabeth:
If that's what they wanted, certainly.
One of my sons is an actor and I'm very proud of him.
It's not an easy life.
One of my daughters is a sculptress, and one was a model but now she's retired and has a baby — whatever makes them happy.
Michael:
Your brother was a beautiful child, wasn't he, but he didn't want to be in the business?
Elizabeth:
No.
Michael:
Was it true that he did something dreadful on the eve of an audition?
Elizabeth:
He was up for a western, and he had the long hair, but after school he went to a barber and had his head shaved.
He didn't get the job.
Lady:
Miss Taylor, I've always wanted to ask you — what do you have to think of to make yourself cry in front of the camera?
Elizabeth:
If I started thinking about things…personal things in my life, I have the feeling I might never stop.
So I put my mind at the place where the character I'm playing is, and whatever is making her cry, I work on that and make that affect me.
So I become more the other person rather than utilizing and using up my own pain.
Lady:
But how do you actually bring up tears?
Elizabeth:
I don't know.
You just squeeze them out.
Michael:
I suppose you could just imagine that ring had slipped off your finger, that would bring a few tears.
Man:
Could I ask you a personal question, if it's not too rude — what do you think about when you're lying in the bath?
Elizabeth:
It depends on whom I'm dating.
Man:
I just always think that that's a moment when you think about — sort of your whole life has gone before you and I just wonder if you…
Elizabeth:
No that's when you're drowning.
Lady:
Have you ever been approached to appear in Dynasty or Dallas ?
Elizabeth:
No.
Lady:
And would you appear in them?
Elizabeth:
No.
Lady:
If you were only allowed one food for the rest of your life, what would it be?
Elizabeth:
Vanilla ice cream made from the thickest cream, and hot chocolate fudge.
Man:
If you were going to live your life again, how old would you think you'd have to be before you felt mature enough to make the decision to get married?
Elizabeth:
I think some people are never mature enough.
I don't think you can put an age sort of level on it.
I don't think there is such a thing as the right age or the wrong age — it depends on the individual.
I know I've made a lot of mistakes and there are probably a lot of things I should be sorry about but I wouldn't change my life, I would make the same mistakes because they've taught me so much.
The only regrets I have are if I've hurt anyone.
Man:
What was it like working with the late John Huston?
Elizabeth:
Oh, he was fabulous, he was a wonderful raconteur.
He spent most of the time on the phone with his bookie.
Lady:
What do you honestly feel about ladies over the age of forty appearing nude in centrefolds such as Playboy , and if approached yourself, with the body you have today — which is marvellous — would you do it?
Elizabeth:
I have been approached and no, I didn't do it and no, I wouldn't do it.
It's just not my taste.
Lady:
And what do you feel about ladies who do it, such as Joan Collins?
Elizabeth:
If it made Joan happy, fine.
Michael:
They say it made a few other people happy as well…
Lady:
You say in your book that many of your problems stem from the fact that you were the wife of an ambitious politician.
Do you think that many political wives have the same problems that you had?
Elizabeth:
Yes, I do.
I think Washington is the loneliest city in the world for a woman, for that reason.
Michael:
But aren't the wives of politicians chosen to be the perfect wife and therefore fully involved in what he does?
Elizabeth:
There is really no such thing, I think, as a perfect politician's wife, because she has to be so many things, and yet nothing at the same time.
Dispensable and totally indispensable.
She should be several people.
Michael:
But no real status at all?
Elizabeth:
None.
And you never know when your husband is coming home for dinner, or if he's coming home alone, or with his secretary or with a friend — I mean, you have nothing in your life to plan, not even that night, let alone the next day or the weekend.
Man:
Miss Taylor, you must have had a very eventful life — if you could choose to live a part of that life again, which decade would you choose?
Elizabeth:
Oh, I bet you could guess that one.
Michael:
Did it involve National Velvet and my asking for an autograph?
It took a year for that picture to come, you know.
Elizabeth:
That's because I mailed it myself.
Michael:
I knew you had!
I know you don't have regrets because that's not your style.
But do you  somehow wish that you had been reunited with Richard Burton?
Elizabeth:
I'm sure we will be, some day.
Michael:
That was the perfect answer.
Your own life has been remarkable for tragedies, and triumphs — it would make a good movie and a good book, are either of those things planned?
Elizabeth:
No, I'm too busy living today and looking forward to tomorrow to dwell on the past.
Michael:
Well, it's been a joy to meet you this evening, please can I have another signed photo to replace the old one?
Thank you very much, Elizabeth Taylor.
After we finished recording, Elizabeth stayed on for a drink, which was a bonus.
When we were having a photograph taken after the show, she turned to me and asked, ‘Have I got lipstick on my teeth?’
I said, ‘No, but I wouldn't mind some on mine….’
She just gave a dirty chuckle but later, in the hospitality room, I noticed her glossing up, and then she marched up, got hold of my face and planted a great magenta smacker on my cheek, and held it there for several seconds.
I struggled desperately, of course.
Lizzie, my wife, took an impression of it on a tissue, so now I have Elizabeth Taylor's kiss in the drawer of my bedside table.
What more could I want?
Don't answer that.
CHILDSPLAY
The year I was born was an eventful one — Hitler came to power, the Loch Ness Monster was first sighted, and the film King Kong was made.
Yes, a lot was happening in 1933, but my arrival still managed to create a bit of a stir in the ordinary, working-class South London family that I belonged to.
It took me quite a few years to realize that my timing was terrible — the repercussions of being born then were enormous.
Old enough to be frightened by the war, but too young to be involved.
Even afterwards, when I was a teenager, I paid for my bad timing, coming just too early to enjoy the fun and freedom that waited round the corner.
When I was six years old, my sister Pat eight, and my younger brother Alan three, war broke out.
At school they made us try on gas-masks for size, and there was talk of evacuation.
Then one day it happened — the three of us were dispatched to Chard, in Somerset, understanding very little of what was happening to us.
My sister and brother stayed together, and were sent to a terribly posh house to live with the ex-Mayor of Chard and his two maiden sisters.
I went to Rose and Cyril Grabham, a lovely couple who lived at No 4, Park Cottages.
At the time I wondered why Pat and Alan stayed together, but I reasoned that Pat, being the eldest, was there to look after Alan, the youngest.
I was obviously deemed old enough to look after myself.
Time was impossible to measure down in Chard — it always is when you're a child — and I remember one day chatting to Uncle  Cyril and feeling that I'd been living there for an age.
I reckoned it to be about nine months, so I asked him how long it had been.
‘Ooh, well, let's see now, I s'pose it must be getting on for six weeks, now,’ Cyril said.
But if they were strange times for us, I can hardly imagine what they were like for my mother.
One day she had a husband and three children, the next, no one.
My father was in the army, we were living in the country, and she stayed and worked in London.
The initial shock must have been terrible, but in fact she had rather a good war.
She had a lot of fun — somehow, people did.
Four-and-a half years later we were all reunited, back in the tiny flat in Wandsworth.
After the wide open spaces of Somerset, everything in London seemed to have shrunk.
Pat had returned to London two years earlier, unable to settle with her genteel family in Chard.
Alan came home as a Little Lord Fauntleroy, and we had a new baby brother, Geoff.
Those years apart did something to us as a family — it was hard to adjust to one another again after so long apart.
Alan and I used to fight — but that was just little boys striking out.
As adults we had a good relationship, sadly ended by his death in a motorbike accident in 1979.
At school in Somerset, I was a star pupil — keen, confident and bright.
The confidence was knocked out of me after I had won a scholarship at the age of eleven and was sent to a school in Hampshire.
I was never so self-assured again, though I rallied enough to get some good results in the School Certificate exams, and joined in enough activities — rowing, choir, dramatic society — to be dubbed as an all-rounder by the headmaster (a description which brought jeers from my schoolmates).
The highlights of our childhood were ‘Children's Hour’ on the wireless, and the cinema.
In those days, if you stuck an advert for the cinema in your window, you got free tickets, and long before I ever understood any kind of plot, we'd all troop down to the local flea pit and watch whatever was showing.
The wireless and the cinema gave me such enjoyment that I decided I'd become an actor, a film star.
But, that was before television came along…
Our childhood shapes the kind of people we become, and influences our choice of career, so it's a subject we often turn to on the show.
Some of my guests were born sucking on the proverbial silver spoon, others knew hard times.
To begin at the beginning…
PATRICK LICHFIELD
I had the great advantage of being brought up by a really traditional, old-fashioned nanny, who saw us through numerous disasters, one of which was the very memorable moment during the blitz when we were taken to a very smart tea shop in Curzon Street, a place where nannies met each other and their charges were just kept in tow.
My sister and I were sitting there, and the first doodle bug hit the building next door and the entire ceiling started to come down.
The waiters ducked under tables and there was a lot of stuff flying everywhere.
And this fascinated me because, I mean, the war was very exciting to a child.
The next one was a direct hit, and the whole ceiling did come down.
And then the dust cleared and there was Nanny, sitting on the other side, and me with my elbows on the table looking at her.
I said, ‘Nanny, what was that?’
And she said, ‘That's a bomb, dear.
Elbows off the table.’
I spent most of my life travelling from one house to another, from one grandparent or great grandparent to another.
It was very nice, I enjoyed it.
Some of the houses were haunted, though as a child I didn't know they were haunted.
My bedroom, for instance, had a ghost that used to come through it every night — it wasn't a visible ghost but it was audible — and I used to see the door open at the other end of the room when I was in bed and then would hear this ‘clunk clunk’….
I didn't take much notice of that, and then the door at the other end would open and close.
Strangely enough, it didn't occur to me as being odd until I saw my mother frantically spraying the room one day.
You know those old Enos bottles?
Well, she had some Holy Water in it, and she used to spray it about, and it used to keep them out for a bit, you know.
LES DAWSON
We used to live in a house in Manchester in the slums.
It was so small if you didn't pay the rent they didn't evict you — they used to flush you out with ferrets.
BILL WYMAN
My childhood was very hard.
I grew up in Lewisham, South East London, and it was awful because Dad was a bricklayer, and if the weather was bad, he didn't work.
He once went two months without working — with five kids.
It was quite difficult.
If they didn't have food for breakfast for us, they wouldn't wake us up in the morning.
They used to let us stay in bed, so it was a bit tough.
But it was also great, because we didn't know any different, so we never missed anything.
FRANK CARSON
We were so poor we had a chicken in the oven for Christmas, and I opened the door to see how it was doing and the fellow from next door was dipping his bread in the gravy.
The nearest thing we got to a jacuzzi was a fart in the bath.
Sorry!
ERNIE WISE
I was a child prodigy.
I was a railway porter's son and I was discovered by a man who had a discovery show just like Opportunity Knocks .
He took me down to London and I went and did an audition and I first appeared at what is now the Shaftesbury Theatre at the top of Shaftesbury Avenue.
I became a star overnight in 1939, and the money was very, very necessary.
We were a large family of seven and my father worked on the railway and he only had two pounds a week, but we could make three pounds and ten shillings just at the weekend by working the clubs.
I used to have a special gimmick — when I used to do my clog dance, I used to shout to the audience, ‘Throw pennies,’ and that's what they used to do.
And the faster I danced and the longer I went on, the more pennies I got.
So I collected them all and took them home.
We had enough, we had a roof over our heads and we had enough food and things like that, but nothing for luxuries or little extras.
JULIE CHRISTIE
One of my over-riding memories of childhood is being tied to a tree by a nanny…
I did wonder if it was a nightmare because it's so vivid…have you ever had something you remember from your childhood which was so horrible and awful that you're not quite sure whether it was real or a nightmare?
I think it was real, but sometimes I just can't believe anybody did that.
BRITT EKLAND
My childhood was all about manners and how to hold your knife and fork and which glass to drink out of, and we had to curtsey, and as for my father, well, if I was looking like this — with blonde hair hanging down and the red lipstick — he would say I looked like a slut.
He would just make me go and wipe it all off.
FELICITY KENDAL
When I was nine months old I was taken out to India by my parents who had a theatre company — they still have it, in fact, and they still tour.
But when I was a little tiny baby, we travelled all the time.
We went from one corner of the country to another and we stayed in palaces and magnificent hotels and played in beautiful little theatres, and then two weeks later, we'd be in a dark bungalow with cockroaches and snakes in the loo, where they  had desks tied together with string for a stage.
It was an extraordinary childhood.
BARRY McGUIGAN
I was an awful child.
I nearly gave my mother a nervous breakdown.
I remember when I was about two-and-a-half or three, they used to come in and say to her, ‘Mrs McGuigan, we don't want to alarm you but your son is on top of that thirty-foot pole out there,’ and my mother would say, ‘Oh, that's old hat, let's hear something new.’
JULIE ANDREWS
I guess I was a bit of a show-off.
My aunt had a dancing school for many, many years and I appeared in all her plays, and at school I appeared in school plays and I was very proud when I played Robin Hood.
I had to slap my thigh and cavort around.
I guess I loved to show-off, yeah.
But I didn't think I was a pretty child at all.
I had a boss-eye and buck-teeth and bandy legs…but my mummy loved me.
PETER USTINOV
I always wondered why my parents believed all this nonsense about Father Christmas — I was always very sceptical.
I remember being terrified of going into Harrods because I thought King Herod lived there, and that I wouldn't come out in one piece.
Funnily enough I believed that, but not Santa Claus, but my parents seemed to believe it, so I had to go along with them.
I was worrying how to break it to my own children when I was saved.
We were in New York, and came round a corner to find fifteen Father Christmases trying to decide whether or not to go on strike.
That rather settled the problem.
BERYL REID
I had an imaginary friend when I was a child called ‘Invigamise-who-was-born’— don't ask me why, because I don't know.
My mother used to say to me, ‘Beryl you've never been out by yourself again have you?’
And I'd say, ‘Of course not, Mummy, I know I mustn't do that.
Invigamise-who-was-born was with me.’
I was about three then, but I've got a new one now.
She's called Ruby Hind.
Now she is marvellous because whenever I don't want to do a performance on the stage, Ruby will go on for me.
She lives behind curtains and things in my dressing-room.
But she's no good at the classics.
If I'm doing a classical play she can't go on, but she's good with the commoner stuff.
Directors know when Ruby is on.
They come round at the interval and say, ‘Was Ruby on for the first half?’ and I say, ‘Yes.’
They say, ‘Well, get her off.’
TALES OUT OF SCHOOL…
PATRICK MOORE
I was ill for a lot of my boyhood, but I did manage one complete term at prep school.
I must have been six or seven — something like that — and we had drawing lessons once a week, taken, believe it or not, by a Mr Moore.
I was getting some drawing prep once and what I was actually told to draw was a towel hanging over a chair.
Only I misheard and thought he said a cow hanging over a chair.
So I did — my mother had that drawing for many years — and then Mr Moore rang my mother and said that it was so nice having me in his class because I was so interested and keen, but there wasn't really a lot of point, and wouldn't it be better if I played the piano?
HARRY SECOMBE
I remember after an exam in school, the geometry exam, the master picked up my paper and he said, ‘We've one boy here who scored a record for the school, no marks at all, nothing, no marks, not even one for neatness.’
I later realized that the reason I always did so badly was I just couldn't see the blackboard because I was so short-sighted.
ROY CASTLE
I wasn't terribly bright at school.
When I was a kid, I was very short-sighted and they didn't have compulsory eye tests at school until I was seven.
So until then, I just couldn't see, but, of course, I didn't realize that I couldn't see and it was all a blur, because I never knew what it was like to see objects in focus.
We used to have a clock and the teacher used to turn its hands round and say, ‘Now what time is it?’
When it came to me, I didn't know what time it was.
I couldn't see the clock — I didn't know they even had a clock.
But then when I got glasses suddenly the whole world came into focus and I thought, ‘So that's what it's all about, is it?’
The Hovis ad really is exactly the kind of place that I was born in.
It was one up and one down, terraced on three sides, so you could hear the people poking their fires on three sides.
In fact, we didn't have to have our fire on if the other three had theirs on — three hot walls, which was very nice.
My mother made me take up tap dancing, because I'd got sparrow legs.
As a kid I was one of those little wiry lads with thin legs, and they all said, ‘He's puny, is that lad.
You want to send him for dancing lessons.’
But it just got me into a lot of fights, that's all.
At school, the lads used to say, ‘Ha, you're going for your dancing lesson, hee-hee…you have to wear a ballet frock.’
JIM DAVIDSON
We used to have an old teacher, a great fellow, named Mr Davies who taught us woodwork.
He had a limp, he had a false leg, and of course, when you're kids it strikes you as very funny to have a woodwork teacher with a wooden leg, so he'd say, ‘What shall we make today, kids?’ and we'd go ‘Want another leg, sir?’and things like that.
DAVID ESSEX
I was confused at school because although I didn't like the way we would dismiss the teachers and what they were trying to teach us, at the same time I wanted to be the ace yob.
We had a lovely science teacher called Daddy Dyance.
His hobby was breeding bees and one day he brought them in in a glass cabinet and he was saying, ‘These are the workers and this is the queen bee, and they fly out of the window and come back with pollen and they make honey.’
So my mate Gabby Lawrence thought, ‘Well, great.’
He got the gas pipe from the Bunsen burner, stuck it in the glass cabinet and gassed the bees.
And I'll never forget Mr Dyance.
He was saying, ‘Now we'll go over to the bees,’ and he went over and they were all lying at the bottom.
He went nuts — he went crackers, got the cane, and he was wielding it, and it was at that time that the rest of the boys decided to pile up the furniture in the corner and set fire to it, so half the classroom was burning.
There's Daddy Dyance diving off desks and whacking boys with the cane — it was that kind of school.
They knocked it down later.
TERRY JONES
I got one prize at school — for an essay.
I spent the whole holiday writing this essay and I won the prize because nobody else entered for it.
PAUL McCARTNEY
John Lennon and I used to bunk off school and we'd go to my house, when my dad was out at work.
We'd just sit around in the front parlour of my house and smoke Typhoo Tea in my dad's pipe.
It was horrible, but we were teenage fools and we wanted to sit at home and do big grown-up things.
CLIFF RICHARD
I did quite well at school in the sports area, and for ages and ages I had the school record for the under-14's javelin….
And I ran quite well, too.
I hated rugby but I always played when they wanted me to because I was really fast.
I'd run, and no one caught me, so I never got walloped or anything.
I didn't box, although I had a lot of fights at school.
When I first moved from India (where I was born) to England, I obviously had a great tan, and I got called ‘Indibum’ and all.that.
It's just ridiculous really, but I fought a lot at school.
I came home bruised and in tears sometimes, but I gave as good as I got.
We used to listen to a lot of radio, but we didn't have a record player or anything like that for ages.
I never had a TV set until I bought one with my first lot of royalties and the only way we got the record player was because my dad won about £40 on the pools.
There was a big argument about what we should buy so we had a vote on it.
My mum and I voted my dad out and we said we'll have a record player.
TWIGGY
We didn't have a record player, but when I was about five, my sister, who's seven years older than me, was a great Paul Anka fan — he was the great love of her life.
I remember she went out and bought his record, ‘Diana’.
But we didn't have a record player, so every night we'd get it out and look at it.
It was hysterical…
I mean, that's really funny, isn't it — we didn't have anything to play it on but we still thought it was great.
NEIL KINNOCK
My first ambition was to be a policeman, and then a private detective.
I wanted to play for Wales — at anything, tiddly winks, snooker, anything at all.
If I could've worn a red jersey that would've been it.
I wanted to be a coal miner, and that was a serious ambition, too.
My parents went absolutely nuts because all my family are coal miners — my grandfathers, my uncles — and the idea was that if you got a chance you didn't go down the pit, but I wanted to.
That led to warfare for about three months in our house.
Then I  wanted to join the army and that was another two months of warfare, and then when I wanted to go in the police force my parents said, ‘You're trying to tell us something about your attitude to school, aren't you?’
They said, ‘Look, go to university and then you can do what you like.’
I conceded to that and went to university, and of course your whole life changes then.
At school I certainly wasn't a swot, but I wasn't a layabout, either.
One of the most flattering things ever said to me was by a teacher who said, ‘Kinnock, I'd like to call you lazy but nobody who's as big a nuisance as you are is lazy.’
So I wasn't lazy, I was busy at everything all the time, but at all the wrong things.
I really didn't have much time for school.
What I enjoyed doing most was having a laugh.
GEORGE MICHAEL
When I was very young — about 5 years old — I wanted to be a pilot because I had this girlfriend who was going to be a stewardess.
And then when I was about seven I went for an eye test where you get one of those cards with all the dots on, and, you're supposed to see fifty-seven but I could only see twenty-seven.
And I'm just slightly red/green colour blind.
It's not that bad, it's just that red and green are fairly important colours to people who try to wave down planes and things like that, so they told me that being a pilot was definitely out.
Luckily, that was about the same time that my mother and father bought me a radio, and all my other interests just disappeared once I had that…
I was one of those people who went through an incredibly  unfortunate period called puberty — basically, my face exploded.
Also, as a child I wore very thick glasses and was very overweight…all the best things that you can possibly be.
And I just generally didn't have a clue….
I mean, I was one of those kids who never even saw a mirror until I was about thirteen, and by that time it was too late.
So I gave up on the idea of girls until I was about fifteen, when I suppose my hormones calmed down a bit.
I was actually very shy, but girls initiated relationships.
I was all right from then on.
Even today, when I see a bad picture of myself, that thirteen year-old comes flooding back, you know, waddling along.
CLIVE JAMES
When I was an adolescent, I was worried because I didn't have spots.
All the other boys in the class sort of grew up overnight — they all grew a foot.taller and their faces were just full of acne.
But I didn't have the acne and I didn't grow.
So I got envious of them — even of their acne.
I was dying of jealousy for guys whose faces were just cratered with seeping yellow pus.
Dances were absolute torture, because I was so small and because my hands sweated a lot.
They still do, but I've learnt now to keep them in my lap so that the sweat coming off the hands soaks into the trousers.
In those days, the sweat would fall off my hands and I'd hear it hitting the floor.
It's very hard to ask the girl you adore to dance if you know your hands are running like taps.
FAMILY MATTERS
A family just keeps you down to earth.
It would be very difficult to do my job without one.
— Margaret Thatcher
The great thing about families is that they keep your feet firmly on the ground — sometimes more firmly than you'd like.
I've sat at home with relations, preparing to watch the show with them, and they'll sit through the opening music in respectful silence, but as soon as I start to speak, so do they.
Or they'll wait until I'm half-way through a sentence, and get up to go to the loo.
One evening when we were watching the show, I looked around and discovered I was the only person awake in the room.
Even the dog was asleep, and that was in the first five minutes.
I suppose that's the good thing about families — nobody pretends.
Of course there's no one more supportive when the chips are down, and no one is prouder of you when you've done well than your old mum….
JULIE WALTERS
I used to do impressions and my granny, I suppose, was the first.
She was Irish, a wonderful woman.
She survived two strokes, and my brother and I used to say ‘At the third stroke’— We did, it was a great joke — he was only twelve, my brother.
When I first decided to go into acting, my mother went mad — it was quite understandable, we didn't know anything about the acting profession.
And she went bananas when I said I was going to leave nursing, which is a really respectable profession and stable and all  that kind of thing.
But now it's ‘My daughter the actress — have you seen her latest film?’
I've only made one, but never mind….
BERYL REID
My mother was absolutely marvellous about me going on the stage.
She was a Scots Presbyterian from Edinburgh and knew nothing about the theatre, but just knew I was going to do it.
And that was it.
I went for an audition for a pantomime and she said, ‘Now don't forget, Beryl, there's nothing you can't do.’
And so I went to see Jack Gillam and he said, ‘What do you do?’
I said, ‘Everything.’
I was terrible, mind you.
No good at all.
He said, ‘How much money do you want?’ and I said, ‘Three pounds a week.’
And he said, ‘Do you know, all my life I've been looking for somebody who could do everything for three pounds a week.’
FRANKIE HOWERD
My mother was a very quiet lady but she used to enjoy being at my parties and what she used to enjoy most of all, oddly enough, was doing the washing up.
She was not one for  showing off, she just liked to do the washing up and be there and look after everybody.
I remember Richard Burton was very fond of my mother.
ANNEKA RICE
I think my mother worried about those hair-raising moments in Treasure Hunt .
She often rang up the producer and had a go at him and made him swear never to do anything like that again.
LAUREN BACALL
My grandmother would have disapproved of Bogie for religious reasons.
My mother disapproved of him because she was his contemporary, and she thought, ‘This man's been married three times, why wouldn't he love a beautiful nineteen year-old girl?’
She was very suspicious of him and you can hardly blame her.
But she came around and they adored one another.
They became really good friends because they were very alike.
MAUREEN LIPMAN
When I took Jack [Rosenthal]home for the first time it was my parents' silver wedding anniversary.
We had a photograph taken of all the family and my mother kept saying, ‘Could you move a little further over there, Jack, move a bit more….’
By the end of it he was standing on his own, and I said to my mother, ‘Why did you do that?’
She said, ‘In case nothing came of it, I could cut him off.’
TWIGGY
My mother won't travel.
I mean, she'll go on a bus but no further, and we tried everything to get her to come to America — she would have loved to see me on Broadway, and she wanted to get there.
If we could have beamed her down like in Star Trek , it would have been all right, but she just couldn't cope with getting on a plane or a boat.
DAD'S ARMY
CHARLOTTE RAMPLING
Mine was a military family.
My father was a Colonel and we wandered around England and ended up in France, which is the reason I speak French.
I live in France now, and I'm married to a Frenchman, but my introduction to drama was through an amateur dramatic society in Stanmore, where we were living at one time.
Each year they asked all the people to do little sketches, and as my sister and I spoke French, we thought it might be quite fun to do a kind of singing and dancing cabaret act — it was quite risqué at the time — I was fourteen — and in fact we were spotted by a talent scout who wanted us to come up and audition for a show in a London night club.
All went fine, and we were very chuffed and thrilled, until the producer of the show started to say, ‘Well, of course, you acted with belted raincoats and the berets and it's all very sweet, but maybe we could start to take off the belted raincoat, and leave perhaps just the fishnet tights….’
Well, you can imagine the Colonel at that stage said emphatically ‘NO’, and so my debut into cabaret was dramatically finished.
HELEN MIRREN
My father was born in Russia and his father was a colonel in the Tsarist army.
He was sent over to make an arms deal with the British government and being a military man he was extremely loyal and a little blinkered.
He really didn't think the Revolution was anything more than a few peasants kicking up a fuss, like they had been doing for hundreds of years.
So he brought his family over because negotiations were taking so long, and he basically got cut off.
So he went from being an immensely rich aristocrat in Russia to being a taxi driver — all in about four years.
My parents would go and stand outside the Aldwych theatre just  to see the audience going in to see me.
They'd just watch, thinking, ‘Oh, they're going to see my daughter.’
It was very touching.
ROBERT KILROY SILK
My father was killed during the war, and my mother married his best friend.
This man and my father had joined up on the same day, they went to the same school, played football together, both courted my mother and both fell in love with her — and she ended up marrying them both.
My name was Robert Silk, and his name was Kilroy.
He brought me up as his own son, and was very proud of me as his son.
But he refused to adopt me, and refused to change my name, because he said, ‘No, he's Billy's lad…
I'll bring him up as my own but he's keeping his own father's name.’
So I had two families then, the Kilroys, and the Silks.
It was my headmaster who suggested I used both names and so that's what I did.
DAVID JASON
My father was a porter at Billingsgate.
He was a bit of a character — he'd have to get up at about four o'clock in the morning to cycle to work, and during the war, he was hurtling along during a blackout when suddenly the road disappeared and he went careering into a bomb crater, about 50 feet wide and 40 feet deep.
When he came to about twenty minutes later he couldn't get out.
He started shouting for help and about ten or fifteen minutes later, two chaps arrived and a couple of torches shone down on my father at the bottom.
‘Go on,’ said my dad, ‘get me out of here, will you, lads?’
And one of these old chaps said, ‘Bloody hell, he's had a 50-ton bomb dropped on him and the bugger's still alive!’
NIGEL HAVERS
Just imagine being a kid and having such a legal background.
If ever I told a little lie, my father [Sir Michael Havers, former Attorney General]could tell just like that.
And I was always cross-examined over the breakfast table.
Then later, when I was at drama school, my father had a flat in the Temple which is where all these lawyer chaps hang out.
And I used to use this flat because although I had to pay Dad a bit of rent, of course, it was quite low.
People would come and stay the night and then they'd be there a month, you know how it is: ‘Can I stay a night?’ 'Sure, sure.’
Three months later and they're still there.
I remember one occasion when Dad turned up on a Sunday — a bit unfair, I thought — and there were fourteen people staying and twenty shirts quietly soaking in the bath.
He just said, ‘I want this place cleaned up in forty minutes.’
JOHN HURT
My father is a practising Minister, living in Scotland.
I think my parents got used to my outrageousness from an early age.
I really enjoyed getting people going — yes, I'm well acquainted with the wooden spoon.
GEORGE MICHAEL
I spent my whole childhood — from the age of  about seven until the day I got my record contract — having rows with my parents…specifically my father, because he's not very musical, to put it mildly.
I can't blame him.
I mean, he had no idea about what possibilities there were for me and he just looked at it as a very, very dodgy profession to want to go into.
Now of course he sits at home and waits for the cheques!
He's great, he came round very soon with a lot of dignity — he just accepted that he'd been wrong.
About two or three years before WHAM! started, Andrew Ridgley was already wearing two earrings.
And my mum and dad didn't like Andrew very much.
My dad said to me, ‘You ever come home with two earrings and you'll be out that door, right?’
My dad's Cypriot and I think he meant what he said.
And then the day after we got our record contract, I went to Selfridges and had both my ears pierced.
And I went home, through the door in absolute fear…and not a word was said.
Now my mum and dad come to just about every concert.
My mother's amazing — she's so reserved, and very English, yet the minute the curtain goes up, she's down at the front.
Half way through a number I've seen a commotion going on and it's Mum, trying to climb the barriers.
BARRY McGUIGAN
My grandfather had a very bad temper.
I used to work with him in my mother's shop — he worked there for twenty-five years, until he died a few years ago.
I used to weigh  spuds and fill the shelves and all that sort of thing.
And I remember one time he gave me a list of things to do in the morning — fill this with potatoes, put the beans up on the shelves, brush the yard and then you can go out.
So, it was a Saturday morning and my brother said, ‘Come on; lets have a game of football.’
I said, ‘No, Pappa said do this.’
So my brother said, ‘Don't worry about Pappa.’
So off we went out and we played our football, and I came back, and we were sneaking in through the back door and bumped right into him.
So he went at me, but I ducked and he hit the shelf — he broke his thumb in two places!
After that he always used to say to me, ‘Don't get me mad, now.’
PATRICK LICHFIELD
I had enormous parental opposition to being a photographer.
The army was all right, but then I should have gone into agricultural life.
I could have been a cricketer — I had two uncles who captained the English counties years ago — but a photographer, no.
In the '60s that was just considered the worst.
SIBLING HARMONY
GEORGE MICHAEL
I had the good fortune to have two older sisters around the house, who basically had to do all the nasty dirty work.
I was one of the typical Greek boys who were allowed to do exactly what they liked and nobody questioned it.
It's taken me about a year to realize that the things I put down don't actually disappear of their own accord.
And that if you don't pick them up and put them back where you got them from, they are still there two weeks later, and the house looks a bit of a tip.
And so now I'm just starting to become vaguely house proud.
CLIFF RICHARD
I've got three sisters, and did they spoil me  rotten!
I think it was fortunate that I was the eldest.
I think if you're going to be the only boy, you've got to be the eldest.
I kind of ruled the roost a bit, but we got on well.
My dad always brought me up saying you never lay a finger on a woman, never ever.
My sister — the one just younger than me — and I used to share all the jobs in the house — if she washed up one day I did the drying up and so on, but when my grandad came to live with us, he thought the world of her so he did all her jobs, and she'd come to me and taunt me, and that used to incense me.
So one day, I got a newspaper, I rolled it up and I walloped her like mad.
And when my father came home he said, ‘Your sister's crying, have you touched her?’
I said, ‘Never touched her, never laid a finger on her.
I have to confess that I walloped her with a newspaper but I didn't touch her.’
DENNIS TAYLOR
Alex Higgins once took a fancy to my sister Milly and I wasn't too pleased.
He came to our house and knocked on the door and asked if he could use the toilet, because it was a good way of getting in.
But my mother knew who it was, so she quickly hid Molly underneath the stairs and that was that, otherwise we might have been brothers-in-law.
TRACEY ULLMAN
Now that I'm famous, whenever I speak to my family, all they want is a signed photo for Enid or Ethel or someone at the office.
But they keep my feet on the ground — they don't treat me any differently.
GETTING STARTED
I was a plasterer.
I'm an electrician as well.
Do you know, I actually did a job in Belfast and I put a spade through a six-inch trunk cable and blacked out Northern Ireland.
They're still looking for me.
— Frank Carson
I began broadcasting when I was twenty-one — it was what I wanted to do more than anything, if you don't count an early ambition to be Hopalong Cassidy or Flash Gordon — and I don't think I've had many happier moments than acting in my first radio play.
I felt then that at last the ambitions I'd had for so long were possible, and that I could stop worrying about the gypsy who'd looked at me closely a couple of years earlier, and said: ‘You'll never come to anything, you won't.’
For a while it seemed that she might be right.
I left school at sixteen — a job in a publishing company came through the school employment system and that was it.
I've often wished that I had stayed on and tried for university, but I wasn't keen, and my family wasn't the sort to encourage it.
‘Not for the likes of us,’ was the philosophy.
These days we're more like the Americans — anyone can do anything and all that nonsense about where you come from and how you speak doesn't matter.
But undeterred by background or family opinion, I'd written to the BBC to let them know of my ambitions to be a broadcaster — and was dismissed without benefit of an interview.
Nothing put me off, I'm happy to say, but in the years before I got the chance to enjoy what I did for a living, I still had to pay the rent.
So after completing my National Service, I did all the things that everybody does when they're trying to break into show business, urged on by my father's insistence that I found employment  of some sort —‘Get a job, any job, just get one!
After all, I'd been out of the Army a full six weeks by then.
I became a shop assistant, a gardener's labourer, a furniture porter, a salesman — the list went on.
Eventually, in 1954, I went for an audition to the BBC in Cardiff.
I arrived at the studios laden with books containing pieces to read.
I've always had an ear for accents, and I gave them my best German and Italian and my speciality: French with a hint of Punjabi.
Just as I was leaving the studio, I was summoned back.
‘Mr — er — Aspel, could you do an Irish accent?’
Yes I could, and that's what landed me my first part — Captain O'Hagarty, a dastardly villain in a ‘Children's Hour’ serial.
I had to take time off work, which didn't go down too well with the furniture store which employed me, and I was promptly given the sack.
It didn't matter — I was on the way.
Many of my guests have followed similarly tortuous paths before finding their true metier.
Some of them could be useful to know…
DAVID JASON
I was an electrician before I went into acting — I did all the wiring in my house.
Anything you want, just let me know and I'll give you a good price.
GARY WILMOT
My first job was as a carpenter.
I started a five-year apprenticeship — and lasted three months.
I had to finish because I started trying to make everybody laugh.
And by the end of about a month, the guy I was assigned to work with refused to work with me because I was always cracking jokes — he said ‘I'm not going to work with you, if you crack one more joke I'm going to the supervisor.’
And I said ‘All right then’ and I cracked a joke and he did go to the supervisor.
But one of the happiest jobs I ever had was working in a place called Lonsdale Sports.
I was a messenger and then I got a job as a shop assistant, later, funnily enough, to be filled by Frank Bruno.
Can you imagine Frank as a shop assistant?
‘You gonna buy or not, Harry?
You did say keep the change, didn't you?’
At school they encourage you to get yourself a trade —‘Get yourself a trade and you can't go wrong,’ they say.
And of course show business isn't considered a trade or a craft, but it really is.
I was 22 or 23 before I decided to tread the boards.
JOANNA LUMLEY
I worked in a shop which sold very beautiful furniture and rather up-market Swedish glass.
I was only there for  about three months and then I went to a modelling school.
You had to go to a modelling school where you learnt how to get in and out of cars with your legs just so, so that nobody could see your knickers.
And you learnt how to say, ‘Thank you’ and wear blue eye make-up.
It wasn't really a great help.
I became a house model for the great designer Jean Muir and it was a wonderful foundation because she was meticulous.
You had to stand and have the clothes made on you, and just when I thought they looked wonderful, she'd go RIP! and snatch a whole sleeve off.
Then you had to show the clothes when the buyers came in — people from America or from the grand shops.
Sometimes you had to get sandwiches for other people's lunch and run errands, deliver clothes.
Once I remember having to work the switchboard when one of the girls was away on holiday — awful — I kept cutting people off.
Rows of little switches and lights: beep!
‘Yes, hello?
One moment, I'll put you through,’ click!
GRIFF RHYS JONES
I was a bodyguard for a little while — not a very successful one, really, I was the weediest bodyguard that you've ever seen, but I was hired to look after the Sheikh of Quatar — she's a female.
We just sat (there were two of us) one on either side, outside her door at the end of a long corridor in The Inn On The Park hotel.
I think the principle was that if the terrorists came round the corner, then they'd make such a noise shooting us that they'd wake up everybody inside and give them time to lock the door, and that was really our only role.
I did it for about six months here and there.
Extremely boring job, we just sat there, and did nothing.
Later on, we were on another job, looking after a defence minister from somewhere or other.
We'd heard he had thirty billion pounds to spend on tanks and things and we reckoned that when he left he'd probably have a little bit left over for a tip.
We finished our shift at 8 and he was going at 9, but at 8, instead of the usual people who came to take over from us, the managing director of the company and his next-door neighbour came in their golfing clothes to pick up whatever tip was being given and we were told to push off.
Well, we  weren't having that, so we stood around, we said ‘Well, we thought we'd just wait around a little bit, you know, just in case they might want to say goodbye to us.’
And at that moment, the two people that usually took over from us came round the corner, poked their heads round and said ‘Oh hello, fancy seeing you here, we just thought we'd pop round to say goodbye.’
We were all having a furious argument about who should be there to land this enormous tip and while we were doing that, his Royal Highness sort of sneaked out and didn't give anything to any of us.
JIMMY TARBUCK
I used to be a hairdresser.
I was awful, I was really, really bad, but I just loved it, life was great fun in those days.
One day an elderly lady with a hearing aid came in and I was doing her hair, chatting away and making her laugh, and I cut right through the wire!
But she was still smiling at me, so I just tied it in a knot and left it.
I worked at Butlin's in the kitchens first.
I was a chargehand and then I just drifted into being a Redcoat, and getting up and doing five minutes on stage and enjoying it.
They were great days.
It was like Hi De Hi backstage, very much so.
OLIVER REED
I was a mini cab driver once — when it was very unpopular.
We'd drop old ladies off at Victoria Station and the black cab drivers used to be very grumpy with us — in fact they used to punch you very hard in the mouth.
So when I used to drop the old ladies off, I'd always give them a kiss goodbye — then the other drivers would think they were my granny!
JAN FRANCIS
I was with the Royal Ballet company for four years professionally.
It was very, very hard work.
I've always said it's like being a race horse, you have to train so hard.
I don't think I'm really a naturally disciplined person, but now I can't help it.
I'm never late for things, I try really hard to be late, but I just can't be because we were told off so much about it.
My poor old feet did suffer and I had to have them sorted out not so long ago.
They were absolutely horrid and if I went on the beach, the first thing I did was to dig a hole in the sand to put the feet in and then just stay there all day….
Then I injured my knee, and during the time I had off to get my knee better, I discovered that there was life outside the ballet.
I went to the theatre, and met people — you know, I never met many people.
And  after that I couldn't really get back into it.
I just didn't have the enthusiasm.
CLIVE JAMES
I had many, many jobs.
I was a bus conductor for twelve days — eleven days of training and one day as a bus conductor.
Because when the bus came through Pitt Street in the rush hour — Pitt Street was the main street of Sydney — everyone was fighting to get on.
It was 100°F outside the bus and 140°F inside, and the bus was so jammed I couldn't move.
My job was to press the button to tell the driver to start the bus and then the automatic doors puffed closed and the bus moved off.
I only found out later that the back doors had puffed closed over the neck of an old lady who was trying to get on and her head, with a black hat with waxed fruit on it, was inside the bus, and the rest of her, carrying two full shopping bags was outside, running sideways.
Luckily, the bus wasn't going as quickly as it would have had there been no traffic, but it was still doing twenty-odd mph.
I finally realized something was up because people were yelling at me — I thought they were just trying to get on but then I realized what was up, and I hit the button again.
The bus crashed to a halt, the doors puffed open and she dropped to the road.
And then she apologized for causing me trouble!
ANNE DIAMOND
Many years ago I was a teacher but I was no good at that at all.
I taught at a private primary school for girls and really, compared with what some teachers go through, I had a terribly easy time, but I still couldn't cope.
There was one little girl there called Isobel, who must be twenty-something now, but she was about nine then, and a right handful.
In the middle of a French lesson I was taking, she stood on her desk and started to do a strip.
And of course all the other little girls were singing ‘The Stripper’— di da da da, di da, da da — and she was doing the full works.
I just didn't know how to cope so I sent her out of the room.
But by then various other children were misbehaving too, so I sent them out, and suddenly I realized that half of my class was outside the door having a whale of a time!
DAVID ESSEX
I started off as a drummer.
It was strange really because I didn't know what I wanted to do.
It was either small-time crookery or the docks, and I thought, well, the crookery's better, really.
I used to go on these escapades with a mate of mine who's  now a milkman, and we'd go to Soho, and I remember walking along Wardour Street and hearing this music coming out the basement.
I went downstairs, I was just so struck by musicians and live music.
I was about fourteen and, I just knew I had to be a musician.
The next decision was to find an instrument that I could learn quickly.
Bang a drum and it answers back, so I was working on a street market at the time and I went and bought a drum and started to learn.
NIGEL HAVERS
My brother, myself and two friends, had a bit of a pop group.
We were unbelievably bad but amazingly, we made a record.
We called ourselves January — so inspiring — and we made this record which sold 3000 copies.
There used to be a programme that introduced new records on the radio, and my father was sailing somewhere and he had this little transistor all primed up, and he said proudly to his friend, ‘This is my sons’ record' and at that moment a wave hit the boat and the radio went overboard.
He never heard it.
I think that record was doomed from the start.
I was never cut out to follow family tradition and stick to law — my brother did that for me, bless him.
He did all the right things and so I had a way out.
I always wanted to be an actor since I was about five and my parents would take me to the cinema and theatre.
It seemed to me a natural thing to do.
I was just surprised that not everyone wanted to be an actor.
I've now been in this game for about eighteen years and I suppose thirteen of them I didn't have two beans to rub together.
I used to do all sorts of other jobs to keep going — I used to be so confident that work was round the corner that when I became a cellarman in a wine shop, I said to my family, ‘Of course, I'll only be here for a week or two, you know,’ and a year later I was still there.
I became the manager of one shop, I was there so long.
Then I worked for Jimmy Young for quite a long time…he saved my bacon.
I worked as a researcher for him for so long I became part of the furniture, I really did.
OVERTURE AND BEGINNERS…
FRANKIE HOWERD
I trod the boards, as it were, when I was thirteen.
I was a Sunday School teacher — don't you see my halo  glowing?— and I was in the church Dramatic Society.
I used to stutter a lot in those days, I was a very frightened boy.
But they were very kind and they gave me a part in this play, it was called Tilly of Bloomsbury .
And I played Tilly's father with a beard on.
We got a few laughs and the local press gave me a good write-up, and the church warden came to me and he said to me ‘Frank, you should be an actor,’ and I thought God had spoken because in those days, he was representing God as far as I was concerned….
So I went in for a scholarship with the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts.
There was the board of governors sitting at the back on this cold grey Monday and I got up and I did some Shakespeare and by the time I finished, dawn was breaking.
So I went home, and it was just like Wuthering Heights where I lived.
I went into this field and I sat there and cried for hours in this pouring rain and I suddenly thought to myself, ‘This is ridiculous, this is no good — you're not meant to be an actor, you're meant to be something else — a comedian.’
And that was it.
MARGARET THATCHER
I can remember the moment I decided I wanted to be a politician really quite well.
I was at university and it was in recess and we were having a social evening in a village hall and I was staying with a friend.
And we went back late and just talked and talked.
She had quite a large party staying in the village and so we just gathered in the kitchen and talked.
And I was asked about my interests, and naturally I began to talk about politics.
But I had never really formed any ambition to become a Member of Parliament, I just talked about things which I love to talk about till all of a sudden one of the guests said: ‘You want to be a Member of Parliament don't you?’ and I said, ‘Yes’.
Someone else had to crystallize the feeling, but then I knew it was what I wanted to be.
‘Did I think, then, there could be a woman Prime Minister?’
I think I was asked at one stage, and I said ‘No, not in my lifetime.’
But you can't foresee what's going to happen, no one can.
LENNY HENRY
It all began when I won New Faces , but it gave me a very big head.
Girls, money, fast cars — it was the choice between that and working in a factory for the rest of your life, and I went for the girls —‘I'll have the girls and all the money, please.’
It was a case of, ‘I'll do anything, what do you want me to do?
Show biz?
Fine.’
ERNIE WISE
Originally, I met Eric [Morecambe]in Swansea of all places.
I was taller than him in those days, would you believe.
And  we stayed in digs together once in Oxford, and later I didn't have anywhere to stay and his mother put me up.
And from then on we did the double act.
The whole 45-year partnership was based on a handshake — no written contract at all.
You don't need contracts in this world, not if you trust people and you have an understanding — and let's face it, we needed the money, we stuck together.
JACKIE COLLINS
I first started to write at school and I'd charge a few pence for each story — you should have seen what I was writing for the girls.
I soon realized that if I made it a bit spicy, I'd get more than threepence for it, so I used to make up limericks, things like,
‘T'was on the good ship Venus ,
My God, you should've seen us….’
No, I can't go on any further!
VICTORIA WOOD
When I was at school I was hopeless, hopeless.
I was the one with the insulating tape round the glasses and a face like Dick Whittington's hankie.
I couldn't do anything.
We used to do needlework and we had to make a needlework apron in gingham, with lots of pockets for your buttons, and your thread, and your bottle of gin and all that….
And it took me longer to do that than it took me to do tapestry.
It was like an old dishcloth by the time I was finished.
I couldn't do anything, I was hopeless.
But I did write one thing at school, the school pantomime, which nobody wanted to be in anyway.
Later, at University, I used to do reviews and things like that.
I used to try and act in straight plays but I was so bad they made me act with my back to the audience.
They said, ‘Well, nobody will notice her if she's got her back to the audience,’ but all the audience wanted to know was ‘Why has that girl got her back to the audience, is she hideously scarred?’
But the reason I started performing was because of my boyfriend at the time — he writes Coronation Street now so he's doing all right, no sympathy.
We used to write songs together and then one day he wanted to get rid of me…
I remember, it was when flared trousers had just come in — remember when you had straight trousers and you wanted to make them into flares you sewed in a triangle of material?
Well, I was doing this for him in a loving sort of wifely way and he said, ‘Oh, by the way, I want to get rid of you’ and I said, ‘Thank you very much’and he said, ‘Well, finish the trousers and post them on.’
So I did — I can't believe it — I wouldn't do it now.
But  then I thought, ‘I'll show him,’ and I went in for the Pub Entertainer of the Year contest.
God knows why, because I wasn't entertaining and I never went in pubs, but it seemed a good idea at the time.
I went in for it and I came third.
There was a woman in hot-pants who won, I can't think why, and a man came second who was dressed as a skeleton who climbed out of a coffin and sang.
I came third.
But I didn't give up, I went in for another and I came third again, and then I gave up, so that was the end of that.
Then I did get a break because I was at a party where there were lots of television producers who like to relax and let their hair down, fall out of windows and things like that.
And they were all relaxing and I was playing the piano and people were all gathered round saying, ‘You hit it with the poker, and I'll lock the lid’— but somebody came on and said ‘This girl is marvellous, give her a job.’
And they did, because they were all drunk as well, and that's how I got where I am today.
JILL GASCOINE
I was in the Esther Williams Aqua Show at Wembley in 1956.
I was one of her daisies and it meant that we had all these hats on, which were very unattractive — a rubber hat and on top was the daisy, so when you swam around and the people looked down at you, they just saw these daisies.
We had on these green woollen leotards which got very heavy when they got wet.
And we had to hoist ourselves up out of the water and then go and dance — it was dreadful.
MICHAEL CAINE
My mother was prepared to back me in anything I wanted to do.
Mainly to get me out of the house, probably, but when I told my father I was going to be an actor he immediately thought I'd turned gay.
Except, of course, that gay used to be a word where people were having a happy time.
Back then it was called ‘nancy boys’ which was what my father used to call homosexuals, and he thought that all actors were homosexuals, so I couldn't tell him that everyone in the company that I first joined was homosexual — except me.
I remember going on tour with an all-male cast and every time we got to any town we used to run and get the paper to see if some show with a chorus was on, because we knew all the guys were gay and all the girls were free.
FELICITY KENDAL
I arrived from nowhere, I hadn't been to drama school.
I'd been to thirteen convents but I hadn't really been  to school properly because I was working by the time I was thirteen.
I stayed with my mother's parents in Eltham and I wrote to every theatre company and virtually every person in the world, but nobody would even look at me because I hadn't done drama school.
Then a film that I'd made in India opened, and the producer of the film gave me a list of agents' names, and said, ‘You are going to be a star.
This is the list of all the people you have to ring up.’
One of these unlikely people was Malcolm Muggeridge.
How I thought he could help me I don't know, but he invited me for lunch, anyway, and he was lovely.
I got a job eventually, but it took a long time.
DUDLEY MOORE
My first public performance was behind a chair — I refused to sing unless I had a chair in front of me.
I don't know why, I think it was that familiar feeling of being behind bars.
I wanted to be a violinist — that was my real ambition — but I was too anxious to really get to grips with the instrument.
In fact when I was about twelve, I wrote a piece of music called ‘Anxiety’— it was so silly that I framed it.
glasses because you'll look much more astute, like you're a technician.’
I didn't want to wear glasses, and I was thinking how I could get out of it but finally they brought in a bunch of pairs of glasses and I was trying them on in the mirror, and I tried on a pair and I thought, ‘Gee, these don't look too bad’.
In fact, I came to the conclusion that I looked rather good in glasses.
And then we started the rehearsal scene and Rock Hudson walks in and he took one look at me and says, ‘Where are my glasses?’
He said, ‘I'm the physician here, I think I should wear glasses.’
So he went through all the glasses until finally they said to me, ‘Take yours off,’ and they fitted Rock Hudson perfectly, and he looked in the mirror and said, ‘I think I look rather good in glasses.’
KATE O'MARA
My first ambition was to be a concert pianist, but I come from a long line of actors and I suppose it was inevitable really that I'd follow them.
I'm the fifth generation of a family that has been involved in the theatre…they've built theatres, run companies, been actors, married actresses.
And my mother was always making me and my sister perform regularly.
We always had to get up little plays and things and do concerts that were absolutely ghastly, but it was a good way of introducing one to it, I suppose.
STEVE DAVIS
I fell in love with snooker when I was about fourteen, but when I got to about sixteen or seventeen, I started travelling around and playing in junior competitions and realized that I was very good.
Having not gone outside my own area until that point I hadn't realized how good I was.
I remember my first-ever game, it was at a place called The Golden Sands Holiday Camp, and they had one snooker table, right next to the miniature railway — it used to be very off-putting when you were playing in the holiday camp competition.
I got beaten in the first round but my father was very good — he won the tournament and won a vacuum flask.
LULU
A lot of people say, ‘Oh how fantastic to have started in the Sixties.’
And it was but there was a lot of madness and I was pretty frightened by a lot of things that were going on.
There were a lot of mad parties — I'd be invited to quite a few of them, and people were walking around a lot of the time saying: ‘Hey man, I'm an orange….’
And I'd say, ‘Yes, that's right, would you like a cup of tea?’
I never could get into that.
GEORGE MICHAEL
Andrew Ridgley and I had both just come from school about nine months before we took off with WHAM!
Andrew was on the dole and I was doing two part-time jobs.
In interviews though, I said I was on the dole because it was very trendy at the time to be on the dole as far as the music press was concerned.
We then realized that we had to change that image, if you like to call it that, because we weren't really living normal lives any more.
That was when we went into this wholesome, sun-tanned, high-gloss image.
It worked and I think it was honest because we were filming in hot places.
PHIL COLLINS
I've only ever had one job.
I'm thirty-five and I've been playing drums for thirty years, almost.
And in that time I really only ever had one proper job and that was for two weeks.
The day I joined Genesis, they all went on holiday for two weeks, so there I was, with no money.
My girlfriend at the time was the daughter of an exterior decorator, and I hated exterior decorating — I mean, even at home just helping out — I hated it, but I did it because it was something to do.
And by the end of the two weeks I was just slapping paint here, there and everywhere and I painted over all the locks and things like that, because I didn't really care too much about it.
But after a few weeks my girlfriend's dad got a phone call from the old couple we'd painted the house for, they wanted to get in the coal shed and couldn't because I'd painted over the lock.
That was my one experience of a real job.
I feel very lucky to be able to make a living doing what I want to do.
PAT PHOENIX
It was a long time before I got the fame I was looking for.
My marriage failed and I was doing about one job every six months — I was on the fringe of things.
I didn't want to be dependent upon anybody, and I thought, ‘This is the day to end it all,’ but I didn't want to make anybody upset about it, so I put the cat out and I didn't leave a note and I thought, ‘I'll make this look very natural.’
So I put the gas on and I thought, ‘Right, this is it…
I shall be no trouble to anybody.’
About an hour later I woke up and there was a hell of a smell of gas and I was still there, and my friend came and said, ‘There's an awful smell of gas in this flat, you'll kill yourself one of these days.’
The shilling had run out, which was typical of me.
TRUE LOVE, HOLY MATRIMONY…
AND EVERYTHING IN BETWEEN I don ‘t really recommend being a bachelor — it's not really on, you know.
— Patrick Moore
Love, sex, marriage…where would we be without them, and not necessarily in that order, either.
I suppose you could say I was a something of a late developer in two out of three.
My encounters with girls were destined always to end in rejection until I'd left my teens behind me.
I caught up a bit during the '60s when I became the oldest teenager in town — in fact I was in my early thirties.
As for love, I fell easily and often.
I was lucky in that I didn't even have to know the women I worshipped, which opened the field up somewhat — I was happy to admire from afar.
I think I had quite good taste.
Elizabeth Taylor was my first love.
Ann Sheridan I adored, and I was desperately fond of Deborah Kerr, but that was a pure love, unlike my feelings for Lauren Bacall, which were pure lust.
All I know is that love, falling in it and out of it, and everything in between, is a fascinating subject to me and to many of my guests.
Let's start with the basic facts of life…
PETER COOK
I remember arriving at public school, and we were ushered into the housemaster's study, and he said, ‘Well, sex is a thorny subject.
You'll probably notice that all the boys at this school  are boys, and all of the masters and staff are men — apart from Matron.
But leaving Matron aside, you may notice that some of the older boys are half-boys and half-men.
And some of you younger boys may have discovered that some of the older boys have become attached to you.
You may have become attached to them, too, but don't, because sex is a precious gift from God.
And like all gifts, it should not be unwrapped before.its time, so don't unwrap your gift, or allow anyone else to unwrap your gift, or else God might, in His wisdom, come down and take it away again.’
And I don't think any of us really picked up much from that.
PETER USTINOV
I never knew anything about the facts of life — I didn't know until far too late.
We had those Russian dolls where you unscrew one and there's another inside, and I thought people were born fully clothed.
FIONA FULLERTON
I don't think I was told a great deal about the facts of life.
My mother was a Calvinistic Methodist, so you can draw your own conclusions.
I had to find out the hard way — to coin a phrase.
ARTHUR MARSHALL
I was born in 1910 and my parents were therefore Victorian, and in those days you were told absolutely nothing.
I knew nothing of the facts of life until I got to my preparatory school, when at the age of thirteen, all of the boys who were leaving were summoned to the headmaster's study.
Of course, we all thought some terrible crime had been discovered, but along we went, and for once he was looking really quite genial.
We were all asked to sit down — which was absolutely unheard of — and then he said, ‘Well, I expect you've all been wondering how you got here….’
Well, we hadn't been wondering at all, we'd come straight along the corridor, but of course he was speaking in a wider sense.
And he said, ‘You've got absolutely nothing to worry about because you see it's like this: when a lady and a gentleman love one another, there's a little thing that's provided by the gentleman and a little thing that's provided by the lady and the two little things meet up in the lady's cave and form a baby.
Now, are there any questions?’
Well, of course, we were full of questions but nobody dared to ask anything.
However, the word ‘thing’ became a dreadful joke with us, particularly when we had the hymn ‘All things bright and  beautiful’…
TEENAGE OBSESSIONS
BARRY NORMAN
When I was about twelve, I was in love with Doris Day — and that was before she was a virgin!
But I think it's permissible to be in love with Doris Day when you're twelve.
After that I was crazy about Marilyn Monroe.
CLIVE JAMES
You only kissed in those days.
When you were an adolescent in Sydney, Australia, in the '50s, kissing was as much as you hoped to achieve and even that was difficult.
Very very few girls  kissed, and the ones that did weren't necessarily the best kissers.
In fact, a rule of life which I should have seen in its perfect clarity, was already operating.
It is that the person who was best at doing something didn't want to do it — and the person who was available to do it wasn't good at it.
The girl that did most of the kissing was the worst kisser, I won't say her name although I remember it well.
There was a lot of spit and the teeth bumped into yours which meant that you were spitting chips of enamel afterwards, and she kissed with her eyes open and she had a very bad squint — so you always thought that she was watching something else.
None of my chat-up lines ever worked, probably because I learned them too early — I was heavily influenced by American television programmes of the '50s which we saw in Australia.
Do you remember 77 Sunset Strip ?
It.starred this kid called Ed Byrnes and he sat in a Ford Thunderbird or Chevrolet and he combed his hair like this, and he said, ‘Hi-ya chick, howd'ya like to take a three-hundred horse power plunge into the landscape?’
And I used this line but it didn't sound so effective because I was sitting on a bicycle.
In other words, you've got to have, shall we say, the equipment to go with the line.
BILLY CONNOLLY
I was sexually avoidable.
I thought I was OK, but I was all Old Spice and acne.
I was a trendy thing, a lilac tie and hanky but the hanky was only a wee thing with three points and when you pulled it out it was a piece of paper.
I said, ‘What if I go out with Deborah Kerr, and she starts to cry?
I can't go, ‘Here, darling, this is blotting paper….’
'I could dance but I couldn't turn corners.
So I danced till we got to the edge of the room and then I danced right out the door and up the street.
THAT CERTAIN SOMETHING…
DUDLEY MOORE
All I can say is that being called a sex symbol is better than being called a haddock.
ALAN COREN
It's very odd, but I find Margaret Thatcher enormously attractive — this may tell you much more about me than I really want you to know.
But I've spent time in her presence and she's a very sexy lady.
I think it's because she's got good legs.
DENIS HEALEY
I think power gives people attraction — Henry Kissinger, who was not the most handsome man in the world, became absolutely overwhelmingly attractive to women when he became dominant, and he used to take out Hollywood starlets.
I always remember him being asked why a chap with his responsibility spent his evenings with people like Jill St John and he replied, ‘Well, if you spent the whole day with Indira Ghandi you don't want to spend the night with Golda Meir….’
I think power can be a bit of an aphrodisiac.
BOY GEORGE
I once saw this great T-shirt in New York which said, ‘If you love somebody let them go…and if they don't come back, hunt them down and shoot them’.
I definitely believe in love, I'll do almost anything for love, even kill.
I think it's important to everybody.
When you initially meet somebody, you look at them and you decide whether you like what you see.
On the other hand, if you're married to somebody for forty years and they get fat, you don't just divorce them because they get fat.
I think people do underestimate what is sexually attractive.
Often you see a beautiful girl with an ugly guy and people say ‘Why is she with him?’ or vice versa, but that person may have something that you'll never have.
PAYING COURT…
DUDLEY MOORE
I remember taking a girl out once and I really did fancy her — oh, she was beautiful.
We went to this very flash restaurant and I was really nervous, you know the feeling — anyway blood was rushing, and I was looking at the menu — my French is pretty good — and I thought I'd fancy a pork cutlet.
But in fact, I hadn't ordered pork cutlet, I'd ordered pig's head.
And this little piglet head came and sat down almost by itself.
So there I am, during this rather romantic conversation, toying with the little hairs in it's ears, not knowing whether I should try and get in through the snout or what — but it had a happy ending.
HARRY SECOMBE
I'd been out the army about three days and I went to this dance with some army mates.
I didn't have my glasses on but I picked up this little dark pretty bird.
I was dancing with her and we made a date for the following day outside the Plaza cinema at six o'clock.
But of course I'd had a few drinks, and I hadn't worn my glasses anyway, so when the time came to meet her I wasn't quite sure what she looked like.
The Plaza cinema had columns outside it, so I got there at ten to six, got behind the pillar and thought, ‘If I don't fancy her when I see her, I won't come out.’
And I waited behind there till quarter past six and thought she wasn't coming, and so I got out from behind the pillar…and she got out from behind hers!
MASCULINE, FEMININE
LES DAWSON
W.C. Fields used one phrase which I've always loved — especially after all the years I've been married — he said, ‘Elephants are just like women — nice to look at, but who wants to own one?’
LAUREN BACALL
My definition of a real man is someone who knows who he is, knows what he's all about.
Someone who's not two years old, or has to be catered to and taken care of….
You don't have to be a star, you don't have to be rich, you just have to know what you're about, you have to have a point of view in life, and what I'm interested in more than anything else, is an exchange, being able to talk to somebody.
And I can tell you something, I don't want to talk about them all the time.
I don't want to talk about me either, but just be what you are.
THE TENDER TRAP…
KELLY MONTEITH
I didn't get married until relatively late.
I had to learn how to compromise.
I always wanted to find a woman who liked to do what I liked to do — but I could never find one who wanted to drink and chase women.
JOAN COLLINS
I was brought up in a generation where there were only two kinds of girls — girls who did and girls who didn't.
Nice girls saved everything until they were married and bad girls, well, bad girls did the opposite.
And so I decided that this was rather an unfair situation — why shouldn't women be able to do what a man did?
But of course it doesn't really work like that.
I don't know about marrying again — I think it's a bit doubtful.
But as for meeting somebody with whom you could be together, well, I wouldn't say no to that…
I think when you've been once burnt — or in my case, four times burnt — then you have to be a bit careful.
But I didn't get married four times because I like trolling down the aisle, I got married four times because I like the idea of being married and I like sharing my life with a man.
I think it's wonderful — if it works.
And if it doesn't work, then I think that you just have to end it.
I just don't want to ever make any more mistakes again.
And I hope I don't — touch wood!
SARAH BRIGHTMAN
I was auditioning for Cats and that's where I really first met Andrew Lloyd Webber.
I remember the first day I met him.
I went for an audition to his flat, and I took along my little piece of paper and music score and everything.
And I remember walking in the door and he was looking at me, and I thought, ‘Gosh, what's the matter?’ because he was just staring at me.
Of course, at  the time I was a punk and I had all this blue hair and everything and he must have thought, ‘My God, who is this strange girl?’
I remember I sang terribly, and he played rather badly, but in fact we ended up singing ‘Don't Cry For Me, Argentina’ and it was fine.
And I ended up being in Cats and then, a year-and-a-half later, marrying him.
But it wasn't love at first sight…
I thought he was rather a funny man and he thought I was rather a funny girl.
DAVID FROST
Many years ago — back in the early '70s, I think — Burt Reynolds called up Warren Beatty and me and formed Marriage Anonymous on the theory that if any of the three of us got tempted to get married we'd ring up the others and we'd go round and make them drunk.
LAUREN BACALL
I was 19 years old when I made To Have and To Hold , but Humphrey Bogart was never my idol.
Howard Hawks, who owned my contract, always said that he wanted to put me in a film with either Bogie, or Cary Grant, and I always thought, ‘Oh, Cary Grant, naturally, how great that would be.’
But Howard decided on Bogart.
Many actors would not have accepted me — after all I'd never made a film before.
But I remember I was on the way into Howard's bungalow, and Bogie was coming out, having just seen my screen test, and he said, ‘We're going to have a lot of fun together.’
And we did…
Bogie wouldn't have married me if I hadn't been prepared to agree not to follow my career.
In other words, if I was going to go on location and disappear from home for six months at a time, forget it.
He said, ‘Listen, I've been married to three actresses and if you want a career, I will send you merrily on your way.
I will always love you, but I don't want to be married to someone who's not going to be with me — that's not what marriage is all about.’
And I agreed with him.
Actually I was so anxious to have him that I would have said anything — but I did put my marriage first, I made that choice, and although it meant I had many, many years of frustration as an actress, I'm not sorry I made that choice.
I think it was the right one.
Of course, I was devastated when Bogie died.
I think I was in a semi-coma all the time.
It's not something you ever get over, and I don't really want to get over it.
I don't want to forget him — I couldn't forget him, he was too big a part of my life and much too important to me.
But of course I think about him in a much different  way as the years go by, and now I always smile when I think of him, because he made me laugh.
Whenever Bogie was at a party, that was where the fun was.
He was just a very extraordinary man and I was very fortunate to have had those twelve years.
I've not had anything close to twelve years like it, since, I can tell you!
JUDI DENCH
It wasn't love at first sight when I met Michael [Williams]— it was good friends at first sight, though, for nine years.
And then, suddenly, it was love.
I was working in Australia, and he flew out with his last penny, and without telling me he was coming, to pop the question.
He chose a wonderful day, a really glorious day, and we were going for a picnic, there were blue skies and white sand, and he asked me to marry him.
It was too perfect.
I thought, ‘This won't last when we're in Soho on a wet day,’ so I said, ‘I think you'd better wait.
Don't ask me now, ask me on a rainy day in London.’
People who knew us well before we married didn't think there was a chance of it working.
He is Cancerian and I'm a Sagittarian and he describes it as him rushing towards the dark, and me rushing towards the light, and we both drag each other back, into a kind of middle earth.
A lot of people say, ‘How on earth can you manage to work together in the theatre, and then come home and be together, too?’
But it's always been that way.
The first year we were married, we were at Stratford, and in nearly every play together.
It just seemed to form the basis of how it was going to be.
NEIL KINNOCK
We had a Debating Society in school which was pretty tough — if you dropped clangers, missed the point or otherwise made a clown of yourself, it was remembered throughout the following week until you had a chance to redeem yourself.
But when I went to university, I didn't bother at all until I encountered a girl who I got the impression would be immensely impressed if I could speak.
So in order to impress her I made a speech and it apparently did impress her because I'm married to her now.
That was the strict reason I did it, because I hadn't bothered before — I thought debates were boring.
Glenys is really a strong critic, she tells me the truth, that's the most important thing, because it simply wouldn't be any good living with a fan who said that everything you did was absolutely fine and perfect and wonderful, because nothing would have validity.
So when Glenys says it's good, it was pretty good, and when she doesn't  say it was good, it was pretty bad…
I think our marriage is pretty normal.
There are areas of contention — I can't really think of any at the moment — but I'll tell you I am in extremely good books at the moment, because I cooked Christmas lunch.
Glenys was ill, she had this ‘flu that was going around.
We had nine people for Christmas lunch — my mother and father-in-law came down from Anglesey and the kids and Glenys and myself and some friends.
And I cooked this superb lunch.
She sat on a stool in the kitchen and gave orders like an admiral, you know, and it was wonderful.
I've never ever attempted anything like that in my life before.
Not only was it edible, it was superb, we should've captured it on camera.
I couldn't get over the fact that it was so good.
And I'm very neat about things, so everything was in line, I had seven vegetables and it was piping hot, it really was, I'm going to say it again — it was superb.
It was a great achievement and I said to her, ‘How was it so good?’
And she said, ‘Because you must be the only person in Britain who cooked Christmas lunch today and did nothing else at all.’
I realized that I hadn't moved two feet away from the oven all morning, and I was exhausted.
How people do it I don't know.
IAN BOTHAM
I rely on Kathy totally.
What we've been through in the last few years has brought us a lot closer, and that's part of the reason I'm getting out of the rat race of international cricket…certainly for a few years, anyway.
Kath and the children are the most important things in my life now, whereas for years I think cricket was.
And when they banned me from playing cricket for a month, they actually did me a favour.
I spent a month at home with the children and I suddenly realized all the things that I was missing out on — watching the baby grow up, start to crawl, the first few words, things like that.
Whereas before I'd be home for perhaps two hours and then away for five months, now I appreciate that there's a lot more to life.
MARGARET THATCHER
My husband take a back seat?
Oh my dear, he doesn't.
Why should he — he has his own career, his own life and he's pretty forthright on many things — and a very good thing, too.
He does a lot of work, and he does a lot for many charities, for example The Sports Aid Foundation.
For him, rugby football is an absolute religion, so he goes out and he does his own thing, and my goodness he says some forthright things, too — marvellous!
BRITT EKLAND
I was twenty-one when I met Peter Sellers.
I remember when I married him but I don't remember when I met him, although I know it was just ten days between the two occasions.
He was a very tormented man, I know that now, but at the time I didn't understand it, and so it was a very tormented relationship.
I was twenty-one, I had just come out of Sweden and my eyes were like saucers.
I thought, ‘Here is this man who just begs to be loved, and who just wants to be a handsome, gorgeous leading man,’ but who really was not.
I mean, he was a comic genius, yet he still wanted to be something he wasn't.
TOM JONES
My wife does try to keep me in check.
She tries to get me to do things around the house, like changing light bulbs and things like that.
It keeps your feet on the ground, I think.
For me it was a good thing to get married young because by the time I got into show business the marriage was already solid.
We grew up together, we went to school together and that was it.
And it wasn't a shock when I got my first hit record because I was trying for that all our lives and so she backed me all the way.
Well to me, being on stage is the closest thing to actually making love, you know.
I mean it's the same kind of adrenalin.
EXTRAMARITALLY SPEAKING…
ROGER MOORE
My wife, Louisa, is Italian, and as you know, Italians are never jealous!
I'd go off to work, and she'd look at the script and say: ‘Who are you working with today, what are you doing?’
And I'd say, ‘Well, I wouldn't come to the studio today, because I have to be in bed with so and so.’
And she'd say, ‘All right, I understand you have to do this — just don't enjoy it!’
GEORGE MELLY
I remember once I was on the steps of a hotel in Liverpool, and a middle-aged woman wearing a maroon coat came up and said, ‘Hey, George, you know I've always loved you, could I have your autograph?’
So I signed, and then she said something that  rocked me back on my heels.
She said, ‘There's only two men I'd commit adultery with right off — you and Frankie Vaughan.’
And I had this strange image of myself and Frankie Vaughan sitting in her front room, spinning a coin to see who went first.
LOVE SCENES…
JENNY AGUTTER
Love scenes in the movies are never as romantic as they seem.
They always choose spots which sound wonderful, like beaches or haystacks or something, which in real life are extremely uncomfortable and not very nice to be in at all.
Or if they do manage to put you in a bedroom, remember that you've got a whole camera team there, and they usually want to do some extraordinary shot from very close up, so they put you right on the edge of the bed, probably on a board which you're about to fall off at any minute.
And the other actor you're playing with has probably got drunk so he'll be able to relax and feel comfortable with the scene, so you're also trying to avoid the fumes of the alcohol.
It's not very romantic.
MICHAEL CAINE
The most difficult thing I ever had to do in the cinema was to kiss Christopher Reeve.
I said to him: ‘If you open your mouth, I'll kill you!’
We prepared ourselves for the experience by drinking half a bottle of brandy each — I was worried about him until then.
It really wasn't a happy day.
For a start, Christopher's taller than I am so I was the fluffy one….
There was only one take.
Bombed as we were, we got that sonofabitch right the first time, I'll tell you.
FAME AND FORTUNE
The best thing is — nothing can beat this — when you pick up the phone and tell them who you are, the repair man will always come round.
— Britt Ekland
Fame?
Fame is never having to say you're sorry!
It's been said before that being well-known is a double-edged sword.
Sometimes it's nice to be recognized, and it's all right with me when people shout, ‘Hello Mike!’
But there are just as many times when it would be nice to be anonymous.
Sometimes people are rude to you, just because they know your face.
Or they can be over-generous in an embarrassing way: I've seen my wife offered the choice of a better cut of meat in a butcher's shop, when there are little old ladies queueing up.
On the other hand, when you go abroad to a country where you're completely unrecognized, you're reminded what it's like to be a member of the public, and that can be very sobering — life without the smiles and knowing looks.
It's reasonable to suppose that people go into this business in search of fame.
That wasn't the case with me, I just wanted the opportunity to do something that I knew I could do.
That was all I wanted, not to climb into a white Rolls-Royce and wave to fans at premières and all that.
But if you are well known, it seems foolish to pretend otherwise.
I can never see why people refuse to give autographs, for example— it puts such a dampener on things.
I saw it happen once to a dear old woman who went around a group of people, gently offering her book, and everyone signed except one.
He said, ‘No, I don't.’
And she offered the book again, and he said, ‘Why don't you go away and do something intelligent like read a  book.’
It was unforgivable.
Perhaps it's an attempt to pretend that fame is worthless and spurious and all those things.
Well, yes, we all know that, but if it gives the autograph seeker pleasure and it takes only a moment of your time, then it seems pointless not to oblige.
When I look back, it's impossible to pin-point a moment when it hit me that I was ‘successful’.
It took me a very long time because I don't have the kind of face which people immediately commit to memory, but if you keep popping up for thirty-five years, then inevitably people are going to say, ‘Don't I know you?’
There are times when you can feel successful when you've done virtually nothing — I remember when I became a radio actor, and I was pushing my motor bike, which had run out of petrol, up the main street in Cardiff, and I felt that I was a great star, and was very pleased with myself.
I suppose it usually hits home when you see your name in print.
I once played James ‘Rocky’ Mountain of the FBI in a ‘Children's Hour’programme, and when I saw my name in the Radio Times I just stared at it for ages.
I thought, ‘This name looks good in print,’ and that was quite a relief because Aspel is not a good name to pronounce — people always want to say Aspirin or Cesspool….
Something like Baker is much more sensible.
There are two other points about celebrity.
One is that along with being spoilt and all those nice things, it also makes you a target for being used and taken advantage of.
As one famous sportsman put it, ‘Agree to do something for nothing and they'll tell you where the bus stop is; ask to be paid and they'll send the limo.’
I was once asked by an ex-Director General of the BBC to open a fête.
It was about a 70-mile drive away, if not more, and I went up there and was given a drink and introduced to a few people, and then I opened the fête…and never saw anyone again.
I was called ‘Aspel’ throughout, which should have prepared me.
Another time I passed a colleague in the corridor, and he asked if I'd like to go to his wedding.
‘Fine,’ I said.
‘Will you be best man?’ he asked, and I was a bit taken aback, but agreed anyhow.
On the wedding day, he was holding his head and nudging his friends about the wild stag night they'd enjoyed.
As I hadn't been invited to that, I had to conclude that I was there to work, wearing my professional hat.
As a wedding present, I waived my normal fee.
The other thing about celebrity, of course, is that it can earn you a decent living — although usually only after years of struggle, as with most jobs.
I've always said that money itself isn't important to me — but I've still got young children and I'll always have to provide.
It's all relative.
As a child, money was tight.
We never starved and we were healthy kids but we didn't get any pocket money, there was none to spare.
During the war when I was evacuated, I used to do a paper round.
Then, when the shop stopped delivering, I thought I'd show a bit of private enterprise.
I went to all the customers and offered to carry on delivering for threepence a week.
It worked rather well, and I made far more by doing that than I ever had working for the paper shop.
When it was time to go back to London, Auntie Rose — my ‘mother’ for four-and-a-half years — had saved up all my threepenny bits.
They amounted to the grand sum of twelve pounds and ten shillings — a fortune!
I was 11 years old and had money to burn.
I spent it on a bike, carried on doing a paper round, and by the time I was 14, I was already contributing to the family coffers.
Later on, when I was living in Cardiff, I would often miss the last bus from my girlfriend's house and she used to lend me her bicycle.
Pedalling home, I used to play a game — that with every light I saw on in a house, I would get £1,000 a year.
Sometimes I'd get home earning £200,000 a year.
It was a good game.
In recent years, it's been nice to know that I could decide to take my wife Lizzie on Concorde and not have to ask permission from the bank manager, but I've never really gone in for extravagances — they all add up to too many paper rounds.
Most of my guests enjoy their fame, but they have discovered that, enjoyable though the trappings of celebrity may be, there is a price to be paid…
BOY GEORGE
Being wealthy is easier to handle than being poor.
I came from a pretty poorish background and now it's nice to be able to give my parents money, and let them do things like go on holiday.
That's the nice thing about being rich — especially when you've gone without because then you really appreciate it when you've got it.
BARRY McGUIGAN
When I fight, I never think of being hurt — the one thing I fear is losing everything I've worked for — the security for the future, for the kids and everything.
I'm afraid of losing that but not of simply losing, or getting hurt.
STEVE DAVIS
Everybody says, ‘Oh, you won £44,000 in the world championships, you must've been really pleased with that,’ but it's not just the money, it's being able to pick up the trophy at the end — that's the nice thing.
CLAIRE RAYNER
I blush to say this, but the number of books I've written is hovering around the seventy mark.
I've been doing roughly three a year since I started writing and that's twenty-five years.
Some of them are quite little books — some of them are enormous, mind you.
Half of it's fiction.
Frankly, that's what puts the jam on the bread.
It's not dealing with problems.
I'd hate anyone to think that I did well out of dealing with the problem page.
That's me doing what I was trained to do, but the novels are fun.
Thank God they make money.
STING
I tend to live a normal life.
I go to the pub.
I go to the betting shop and people say, ‘Hello Sting,’ or ‘I don't like you,’or whatever, but they talk to me.
Occasionally, people act very strangely — I was driving down Edgware Road once and a taxi driver pulled up by me, and said, ‘Sting!
You've got a flat tyre,’ and then he drove off.
So I pulled to the side and I hadn't changed a tyre for a long time, but I got the jack out of the back and started to jack the car up, and while I was doing it, these two ladies went, ‘Ah, it's Sting’.
Then I got the nuts off, by which time these two ladies had become a crowd of people staring at me changing this tyre, and then it becomes a performance .
You know, a lot of macho men are standing there going, ‘Go on, Sting, can you do this?’
So I got the tyre off, and I got the spare on, and put the nuts on, and at the end of it, I gave a bow, and they gave me a round of applause.
I'm just so glad I could do it!
GEORGE MICHAEL
Basically I don't spend money on anything but my profession.
I love being able to put money back into what I do.
I think more than anything I enjoy the freedom and there are two things in life that give you freedom.
One is success in your own particular field, and the other is money.
I've got no real regard for money, beyond security and comfort.
I'm really not a great buyer — if I can't wear it and I can't eat it, then I'm not that bothered.
I'm not trying to sound humble, but I've got a small house because it's all I need.
MICHAEL CAINE
The lean times seemed very hard, but the thing you think of when you have some success is how on earth did you survive them?
I suppose you survive them by not knowing anything else.
If you start at the bottom there's nowhere to go down.
The worst thing would be to go backwards, suddenly to go broke.
I suppose if I went broke, I'd just start working all over again.
DENNIS WATERMAN
One of my friends was at Sherborne and speaks very posh — I took him back to my place for a drink one day and my dad was going, ‘Dennis, listen to Tim, listen — go on, talk, say something’ and my friend says, ‘Well I don't know what to say really, Mr Waterman,’and my dad says to me, ‘Why don't you talk like  that, you could make a fortune.’
And Tim ever since has been going, ‘If only I could be a cockney, Dennis, I would have made a fortune like you.’
THE TRAPPINGS OF FAME…
DAVID ESSEX
A friend and I were in the back streets of St Tropez, looking for a taxi, and I was desperate for a pee.
So I did — and all of a sudden a man with a gun grabbed me round the neck and dragged me off.
I was still half-undressed!
Apparently I'd chosen to pee up against a police station, so they took me inside, and told me off, and of course I apologized.
And then the policeman said: ‘We'll let you off on one condition.’
'What's that?’
I said.
And he said: ‘You sign copies of ‘America’ ' — which was number one in France at the time!
So being famous can be useful sometimes…
JULIE CHRISTIE
One of the things that's left over from school is an absolute terror of hearing my name pronounced in public.
In fact when you introduced me, I thought, ‘Oh my God, I'm going to be brought up in front of the assembly for some heinous crime and be humiliated.’
And that was, I think, the feeling when I got the Oscar —‘I've got to go up there, what am I going to do?’
I think I burst into tears, to my shame.
GLENDA JACKSON
Awards are nice for the day, and they glitter — my mother has got all mine and she polishes them within an inch of their lives, she's polished all the gold glitter away and it's base metal underneath, and I think that's a fairly apt analogy of what a prize is.
They are nice for the day, but they don't mean anything, they don't make you any better.
And what irritates me about them more than  anything is the artificial device that actors somehow compete one with the other for the prize.
The actors have the least to do with those things — somebody else enters you, they almost run the race for you.
You have absolutely nothing at all to do with it, and I resent sometimes the implications that there is this kind of artificial competitiveness amongst actors, because it's been my experience that it doesn't exist.
There are few really good parts knocking around and it's the parts that get the award more than the performances, I think.
And we really are not out to kill each other in the way that quite often those awards would lead one to believe.
I felt truly honoured to be asked on The Morecambe and Wise Show and I still do — I regard my appearance with them as the apotheosis of my career and I don't say that lightly or gratuitously.
It was a genuine privilege to work with them because you could be the richest person in the world and then some, and still not be able to buy the experience that they carried within them.
My second Oscar was entirely due to Morecambe and Wise and they sent me a telegram to prove it: ‘Stick with us and we'll get you a third’, I think it was.
THE PRICE OF FAME…
GEORGE HARRISON
I think the mania got to me in about 1966 and around that time I got a bit tired of what they call the adulation.
I'm still not keen on that side of it — it's nice to be popular, it's nice to be loved, but it's not so nice to be chased round and to be on the front page of the paper every day of your life, with people climbing over the wall all day long.
TERRY JONES
The Sun had all sorts of details about my private life that I never knew about.
For example, it said I had a daughter called Samantha (which is not true), and it said that I had a Citroen car (which I don't — I drive a Renault) and that I spent three years at the Royal College of Art painting ten-inch red stripes on a piece of canvas and then it quoted me and it said:'’ I don't know why we did it,’says Terry.
‘It was a complete waste of time.’
' Well, none of it is true — I've never been to the Royal College of Art — or any college of art for that matter.
But I got my own back — at the time I was writing  a column for the Guardian , so I wrote '20 Things You Didn't Know About the Editor of The Sun ’— the Editor of The Sun wears his pyjamas over his head and he has twelve daughters, all called Spot.
CLIFF RICHARD
I don't mind what people say about me any more.
I think that people like us are up for grabs anyway.
We're public figures and so therefore we know we're in the firing line.
I just think to myself, ‘Well, I've survived twenty-six years of this, I'll manage another twenty-six….’
Once a girl sort of posted herself to me.
She put herself in a box and got someone to deliver her.
I thought someone'd given me a TV set — I was so excited, I ripped the box open and this girl went, ‘Can I have your autograph?’
LULU
Like most people, the time that I'm least able to control my temper is in the car.
If I'm cutting somebody up they should just let me cut them up.
They should not get annoyed, because if they shout or beep, I start shouting obscenities.
But then I see them point at me, and go, ‘Lulu!’ and I think, ‘Oh God, they'll turn off next time I'm on the telly!’
SEBASTIAN COE
I think you probably need an element of nastiness somewhere if you're going to be a winner…you have to want to be the best.
I think that's the one thing.
It's getting there without trampling on too many people.
I've tried, but it's not always been easy.
There have been times when in order to maintain that kind of standard, you had to do things that haven't been particularly popular.
WHAT'S IN A NAME?
CLIFF RICHARD
As soon as I chose the name Cliff Richard I came home, told the family, and they said, ‘All right, Cliff.’
From then  onwards, the only one who used to make a little mistake every now and then was my little sister, who'd say Harry and then quickly change it to Cliff.
They've never called me Harry since that time.
In fact now, when people think they're really being smart, they phone up stage doors and say, ‘Can I speak to my brother Harry?’
But I know it's totally untrue because none of my sisters or my mother would ever call me Harry again.
LENNY HENRY
My real name is Lenworth.
Lenworth George Henry.
My mum must have had a seizure of something when she had me —‘Let's call him Lenworth!’
LULU
Listen, my real name is Marie McDonald McClaughlin Laurie.
With my name on the front of the theatre, nobody else would get a chance.
I think I'll stick with Lulu — I'm not superstitious but it's been so good for me up until now that I'm not going to throw it away.
SUCCESS…
A PERSONAL VIEW…
PAT PHOENIX
Many years ago when I was in a play with Thora Hird she presented us all at the end of the show with a bottle of champagne.
I tucked mine under my arm and she said, ‘Aren't you gonna drink it?’ and I said, ‘No, I'll drink it when I make it’, and it's still on the top of my wardrobe, waiting to be opened.
Because I  think success is when you satisfy yourself.
No matter how they cheer, or what they do, when you do that one thing that you've always wanted to do, that's when you're a success.
It's not in other people's eyes.
MICHAEL HORDERN
I had a fishing fly named after me.
I tied a fly which was extremely successful and it was called Hordern Pheasant Tail Nymph.
And Hardy's were probably the best known fishing tackle shop in the world and it got into the hands of one of the Hardy's brothers and he said, ‘May we market it under your name?’ and I said, ‘My God, I'd rather have that than a knighthood’— this was some years ago — and then Hardy's were rationalized, which means of course that everything costs twice as much and there wasn't as much in the shop.
And my fly came out of that catalogue.
When it disappeared from the catalogue and by chance I was offered a knighthood, I always said that the Queen, coming as she does from an angling family, was compensating me for having had my name taken out of Hardy's catalogue.
MARGARET THATCHER
Let me put it this way, I'm doing the one job in the world which I really want to do, which I love — and work to me is pleasure, so I don't have very much time and even the things I do in a way are relaxation.
If I have to read things up, this is a relaxation — I love music, I love gardening and I love just pottering round the house.
Now for a housewife that's a bore, for me, it is a relaxation.
If I've got to turn out drawers or turn out the airing cupboard or get the kitchen tidy, it's a relaxation for me and I like it, or just going through some interior decoration books or moving the furniture round — I'm a great mover of furniture.
NO TURN UNSTONED
We had a good letter once, it said, ‘Dear Eric Morecambe, you can't sing, you can ‘t dance, and you can't tell jokes and you ‘re not funny.
PS.
Get rid of your partner — he's dragging you down.
‘— Ernie Wise
It's a fact of life that if you're in any way well known, then you're going to come in for criticism.
It's also a fact of life that it hurts and if anybody says it doesn't, I don't believe them.
Most performers can read ten glowing reports and one bad, and only remember the nasty one.
I remember walking down the steps on to the set of Aspel and Company once, seeing a wall of friendly faces — except for one belonging to a lady sitting in the front row, arms crossed and a baleful expression on her face.
It nearly threw me.
I kept stealing glances in her direction — she soon lost the baleful expression — people look quite benign when they're asleep.
In newspapers I've been called bland and ‘smoothy-chops’ so often that it almost goes over my head now, and people go on about my baggy eyes as if I made them that way myself — which I suppose I did, in a way.
But these days, if it looks as if it's going to be nasty, I take the easy way out.
I don't read it.
It seems to me that it's better to be an actor as far as the critics are concerned.
They might say you gave a good performance, or they may say you gave a bad one, but they rarely go into the realms of personal abuse.
Sometimes you might even be lucky enough to be endowed with the qualities of the people you play — John Wayne, for example, was held up as being symbolic of everything that was good and right about America.
Impressive though he undoubtedly was, if  you analyse his career, all he did was put make up on his face and pretend to be somebody else.
At one time or another my guests have all suffered the slings and arrows of outrageous critics…
GLENDA JACKSON
The ones you tend to remember are the worse ones, those that are particularly cruel.
But there was one which I liked very much and which still makes me laugh, which wasn't to do with my performance, but with my appearance.
It was ‘The face that launched a thousand dredgers….’
I think that's witty.
GEORGE MELLY
Cilla Black won't speak to me to this day because when I was a critic, I wrote a very warm piece about her, but during the course of it, I said, ‘She's quite good-looking, but she does have the nose of a rather careful boxer.’
Apparently, she was so upset by this that she had a nose job.
MIKE YARWOOD
A certain lady critic wrote, ‘Mike Yarwood did a totally unrecognizable René from ‘Allo ‘Allo .’
Yes, it does hurt, especially when I've worked so damn hard trying to get it right.
But the following day, I got a letter from Gorden Kaye, who plays the character, saying how much he enjoyed it.
I thought, ‘Well, if it's good enough for him, it's OK for me.’
MARGARET THATCHER
All the cartoons are very funny — I think cartoonists are marvellous.
Some of the other remarks, though — well, they hurt.
I find it very difficult when you have a journalist round, and you will perhaps cooperate as much as you can with an interview, and then sometimes they'll go and dip their pen in acid and write really horrid things.
I've learned to live with it, because if it  looks horrid, or someone tells me it's horrid, I won't read it.
ALAN BATES
I had a particularly gruesome review quite recently.
I did a film called Prayer For The Dying .
In London and America it had notices which ranged from very good to absolutely appalling.
There was one which came to me from America which said, ‘Alan Bates plays his part in a style which makes Bela Lugosi seem a master of nuance.’
I rather love that one.
GARY WILMOT
I don't collect criticisms, but the worst one I ever had was when they completely left me out of the write-up.
That said everything for me.
GRIFF RHYS JONES
‘It's the sort of performance we would expect from an understudy,’ was one review I had.
JUDI DENCH
The first part I ever did at the Old Vic was Ophelia, in 1957.
And the critic Richard Findlater, who later went on to become a dear friend, said, ‘How dare the English equivalent of a national theatre employ a schoolgirl, whom none of us has heard of, and who can't do it?’
And at the time I was desperately shocked by it, as you always are by bad notices — you always remember the bad ones and never the good.
But later, I realized that it had been quite good for me and stopped me getting big-headed.
JOHN MILLS
I remember one notice which said, ‘John Mills walks across the stage looking like a bewildered carrot….’
A bewildered carrot!
I thought it was fantastic!
SARAH BRIGHTMAN
We had a première of Requiem , and one of the main critics had a real go at it — and at me — and I remember sitting up in bed with Andrew and just wanting to weep.
It's quite a horrible thing when you've worked on something so hard, but you have to go through it.
And there are times, like with Phantom of the Opera , where we got wonderful reviews, so we were laughing and happy.
OUCH!
I remember asking John Lennon if those were his own teeth, and he answered, ‘Yes.
Are those your own spots?‘— Dusty Springfield
A good put-down, one that does away with your ego in one fell swoop, can be shattering.
It can also be funny and it can do you a power of good.
When I was a TV newscaster, I was enjoying my new-found fame, and signing some autographs up in Manchester, when an old lady said, ‘Who's he?’ 'He reads the news,’someone told her.
‘Well, what do you want his bloody autograph for, just because he reads the bloody news?’ she said.
She was right, of course.
I just wish she hadn't said it.
Another time I was lying in a hospital bed after a car crash — I'd been lucky and escaped with minor injuries, but I've always had a keen sense of drama, so I lay there feeling as though I'd just come through the Battle of Britain.
I could hear two nurses talking in the corridor outside.
‘Quiet,’ said one.
‘Michael Aspel's in there — the man who reads the news, he's smashed his car.’
'Oh dear,’ gasped the other.
‘Thank God it wasn't Robert Dougall.’
Quite often the real ‘you’ doesn't live up to people's expectations of the ‘television’version.
Once, in a crowded bar I was forced into conversation with two ladies who were so disappointed that I felt quite guilty.
‘Not as tall as you expected,’ I said.
‘No, not as good-looking, either,’ they said.
‘What a let-down.’
But at least they knew it was me.
Some time ago I turned up at Broadcasting House to meet someone for lunch.
I announced his name at Reception, and the girl rang up the guy and said, ‘Your taxi's  here….’
Not long after that blow to the ego, I turned up at a studio to do a commercial.
I stood there with a suit on my shoulder and said who I was.
The receptionist rang through and said, ‘Michael Aspel's clothes have arrived.’
Perhaps the best one of all happened again at the good old reception desk at the BBC, but this time not to me.
Apparently they were doing a programme about monarchs who'd lost their thrones and gone into exile.
Quite a number of them were turning up at the BBC and the harassed receptionist was heard to say, as she reported the arrival of yet another, ‘I'm sorry, where did you say you were king of?’
In my experience the smart rejoinder to a put down usually occurs to me on the bus on the way home, but at least some of my guests were quick thinking enough to exact their revenge…
VINCENT PRICE
The other day I was on a plane, and a man came up to me and was absolutely thrilled to see me.
He said, ‘Give me your autograph, Mr Karloff.’
So I did — and I signed it Peter Lorre.
DENIS HEALEY
One of my best-known remarks was when I was Chancellor and Geoffrey Howe was my opponent, and he made a rather damaging criticism of what I was doing and I didn't want to spend time on that.
I thought it was better to put my own thing forward so I dismissed his comment by saying that his rude attack on me was like being savaged by a dead sheep — and that became famous.
But when I became spokesman in opposition myself and he was the Foreign Secretary and we were sparring partners again, I made a nice remark about him and he said it was like being nuzzled by an old ram.
So I got up immediately and said it would be the end of a beautiful friendship if he accused me of necrophilia!
I think on the whole it pays to try to use humour, but it's better not to be too cruel if you can avoid it.
ROY CASTLE
My grandad was a barber and my mother was a hairdresser so they taught me how to cut hair and it came in very useful, especially when I did National Service.
There was one lad who was a real bully, and he says, ‘Give me a hair cut.’
So I said OK, and I gave him a real fancy one — it was like topiary, and I left him with a rude word on the back of his head.
PATRICK LICHFIELD
I remember a man coming up to me at Sandhurst and looking at the back of my hair and saying, ‘What regiment are you going into?’ and I said ‘The Grenadiers,’and he said ‘You appear to be growing your own bear skin.’
I love the story about King Hussein who was a cadet there.
Apparently he was fidgeting on parade and the Sergeant Major screamed at him, ‘Stand still, you idle little monarch!’
It certainly puts you in your place.
DENIS NORDEN
I love the story told to me by a make-up girl who used to work for a well-known London hairdresser.
Seeking to flatter one of his customers one day, he said to her.
‘Has anybody ever told you that you look like an older version of Jacqueline Bisset?’
And of course it was her!
MICHAEL CAINE
I was standing outside the Beverly Wilshire Hotel, in Los Angeles, talking to Cary Grant, when a woman saw me and she shrieked, ‘You're him!
She said, ‘I've been here for three weeks, I haven't seen one movie star until now,’ and she came over and got my autograph.
And then she turned to Cary Grant, and said, ‘You never see any movie stars, do you?’
And he said, ‘No, my dear, you don't….’
PAMELA STEPHENSON
I was once doing a live phone-in programme and this woman rang up and she said, ‘I used to think that your impersonation of Princess Anne was needlessly cruel and unpleasant, but now I realize that they were, in fact, your own teeth.’
JENNY AGUTTER
After my early success in The Railway Children , I thought acting was the most wonderful thing.
At 11 years old it was  magical to be making films — you were treated like a star, and I was very proud of myself.
And of course when you're playing a lead role, everybody's very careful that your make-up looks right and they come and powder your face and brush your hair before every shot.
I was having all that done one day and I heard one little girl say to another, ‘Why do they keep doing her make-up?’
And I thought, ‘Well, because I'm the star, of course.’
But the other little girl had a better answer.
‘Because she's so untidy,’ she said.
Years later, I was doing a scene where I had to murder my husband — it was a very dramatic scene and it was in the pit at the Royal Shakespeare Company, so it was just this tiny little theatre, with everybody sitting very close to you, and you can see everybody, and you can hear everything.
So I'm stabbing my husband and it all got quite wild and my hair started coming down.
And I heard one woman in the audience say, ‘Look, her hair pins have just fallen out.’
And this is just after I've murdered my husband!
DAVID FROST
I remember about six weeks into the first nationally televised programme I ever did, going into Harrods to buy something.
I took out my cheque book, and the guy behind the counter said, ‘Oh, Mr Frost, we never miss your show,’ and I said, ‘Oh, that's very nice,’and carried on writing.
He said, ‘You know, if my wife and I are out, we make sure we're back by 10.30 in the evening….’ and I said, ‘Oh, that's lovely, thank you.’
And he went on: ‘And if we're at home, we make sure we've eaten and washed up before the show.’
So I said, ‘How nice, thank you,’ and handed him over the cheque.
And he said, ‘Do you have any means of identification?‘
Now, I can't sing — I've never sung for anyone, I just can't do it.
But I was promoting a Neil Diamond concert and one day he got me up on stage during this tour, and introduced me to the audience.
Well that was OK, but then, to my horror, he got me to join in singing one of his songs.
I desperately tried to do it, but I was pathetic.
I'd told him before that I couldn't sing a note but he'd obviously ignored it.
But after the concert, he said to me, ‘You were quite right, you really can't sing.’
JACKIE COLLINS
Someone rang me up on a phone-in programme, and he said ‘I read your book, I think it's absolutely disgusting.’
And I said, ‘Well, why did you read it, it's hardly a secret that I write about sex.’
And he said, ‘I asked the librarian if she had something with big print so she gave me your book.’
VICTORIA WOOD
I've played in a certain town that makes linoleum where the audience did not laugh once.
Not once.
They went through the whole show in complete silence.
And then just as I left the stage, sobbing, I heard somebody say, ‘Well, I don't admire her dress-sense.’
PAUL McCARTNEY
I was once rung up by the great Frank Sinatra himself.
He said, ‘I've heard about you, have you got a song for me?’
Now, it's every song-writer's dream that Frank Sinatra will ask you for a song, and I had one all ready.
‘I've got just the one, Frank,’ I said.
And then he turned it down.
TWIGGY
I went to New York in the 60s and I had a funny experience with a man who was an unknown at the time, a new young comic called Woody Allen.
He wasn't exactly nasty to me but I was only sixteen and I hadn't done many interviews, and I was nervous.
We sat on our stools and I smiled at him, thinking he was going to ask me about my dress or where I lived or something, and he said, ‘Who's your favourite philosopher?’
Well, now I'd know what to do but then I just looked at him for help, and said, ‘I don't know any.
’ And he said,'Oh come on, you must have a favourite philosopher, everyone's got one.’
So I said, ‘I don't know any — who's your favourite philosopher?’
And he said, ‘Well, your Greeks and your Romans.’
And I said, ‘Yes, but what are their names?’ 'You know,’he said, ‘your Greeks and your Romans.’
And at that point he made his chair tip over because he didn't know any either.
GRIFF RHYS JONES
People usually remember Mel Smith because he looks like a potato.
I was picked up by a taxi driver once and we were going along and he said, ‘Oh, I know that voice — oh, don't tell  me — you're Jeremy Pascal, aren't you?’
And I said, ‘No, I'm not Jeremy Pascal’, so he said, ‘You should try going on the radio, you sound just like him.’
As we turned the corner Mel was ambling up out of an underground car park — he'd been parking his Rolls-Royce or something.
The driver said, ‘Look, there's Mel Smith over there, coming out of the car park,’ and I said, ‘Mel's supposed to be coming with me, we're supposed to be going to Television Centre.’
So I opened the door and I shouted to Mel.
But the driver said, ‘Don't call him over, for heaven's sake!’
But Mel got in the cab and the cabbie never said another word.
GARY WILMOT
Once a guy came running after me, he must have run fifty yards up the road, but I had to ignore it, because I can't be big-headed enough to turn round and go, ‘Oh, he's running after me.’
So I kept walking.
And he caught up with me, and went, ‘Oi!
You're — um — you're — er — you're — er —‘and I said ‘Gary Wilmot?’
And he went, ‘Nah…,’ and walked away!
FRIENDS, HEROES, COUNTRYMEN
I used to try and look like Elvis and sing like Little Richard.
— Paul McCartney
One of the best things about doing a talk show is that you get the chance to meet people you've admired for years.
The danger is that they might turn out to be entirely different from how you expected them to be.
They have every right to be different — it's very  presumptuous of us to invent personalities for them simply because we've seen them act on a cinema screen, but it can still be a shock when they're not as you'd hoped.
Disappointments are rare and sometimes people are even better than you'd imagined.
I've had a few of my heroes on the show — Elizabeth Taylor, Lauren Bacall, Deborah Kerr, and Daniel J. Travanti from Hill Street Blues , but I've still got a hit list.
It's sad that so many of the people I'm interested in are no longer around.
Three and four decades ago, I was a star-struck cinema-goer who could think of no better way to pass a morning, afternoon or evening than by visiting the local flea-pit.
That's the thing about heroes — they tend to reflect the goings-on in your life, and that's why I'm always interested to know who others like.
A few times, the show has been the catalyst in bringing fans together.
Joanna Lumley had always had a passion, as she put it, for Dirk Bogarde; Dustin Hoffman was a fan of Sting; John Lennon had been a great Monty Python fan, and so Yoko was delighted to meet John Cleese.
They all met for the first time on the show.
A lot of my guests will know each other already, and some, like George Harrison  and Ringo Starr, are close friends.
Others, like Stewart Granger, for example, will just come on and be wonderfully indiscreet.
And when chat turns to gossip — well, that's another fine show I've gotten you into.
DEBORAH KERR
When I arrived at MGM, I felt like I was going back to an enormous boarding school again.
I didn't see the same face twice for three weeks — there were so many sound stages and all these people, and on top of that, I was going to make a movie with Clark Gable.
Well, I sat in that room and saw this fantastic-looking man come through the door and I just didn't believe it.
Never in my wildest dreams had I ever thought I would even go to Hollywood, let alone work with people like him.
TWIGGY
When I went to Los Angeles, the people at MGM film studios said to me, ‘Do you want to meet anyone famous?’
‘Oh yes,’ I said, ‘I'd love to meet Fred Astaire.’
And they said, ‘That's a bit tricky because he's very private and doesn't go out….’
So I said, ‘Fine, I wouldn't infringe on his privacy but you asked me, and that's who I'd like to meet.’
Well, while we were having this conversation, there was a lady in the office who used to work for Fred Astaire and when I left she rang him up.
And she called me later, and said, ‘Excuse me, but I just talked to Fred and I told him the story, and he's invited you to tea tomorrow at his house.’
It was the dream of my life, it was great.
So we went up, and we got to know him, and he was absolutely gorgeous, of course.
The next time I went to Los Angeles, I called him and we took him out to dinner.
We took him to a Chinese restaurant where they serve those drinks in coconuts — they're quite strong and he doesn't really drink, but we made him have one anyway, and he quite enjoyed it.
And by the time we came out we were all a little bit tiddly, and as you know, Fred doesn't dance any more, but as we walked up the street to the car, he started to tap dance.
I couldn't believe it!
He did a double pirouette, landed on his knees and said, ‘Hollywood — I love you.’
It was great, and all those people driving past, saying, ‘You know, I think that was Fred Astaire dancing….’
ROBBIE COLTRANE
I went to see The Wild One many many years ago when I was thinking about becoming an actor and thinking maybe it was a bit of a poofy thing to do, and Marlon Brando was standing in front of this juke box and he had ‘New York Rebels’ on the back of his leather jacket and this girl came up and said, ‘What  are you rebelling against, Johnny?’and he says ‘What have you got?’and I thought, ‘Yeah, that's my man, I'll do that.’
CLIFF RICHARD
It was Elvis who kindled my interest in music.
The people who were on the radio when I first got into listening were really fine singers, people like Perry Como, Frank Sinatra and Bing Crosby, but good as they were, they didn't inspire me to be like them.
But when I heard Elvis, I couldn't, I really couldn't, believe the noise that came out of him.
The awful thing is that I had a chance to meet him.
In 1976 I went to the States to promote ‘Devil Woman’ and some journalist said to me, ‘If you'd like to meet Elvis, I can arrange it.’
But Elvis was going through a very fat period, and I thought, ‘Well, I'll wait until he's lost some weight,’ because my childhood image was of a real animal of a person.
And then of course he upped and died, far too early in life.
I always wish now that I'd met him.
DENNIS WATERMAN
I'm afraid George Cole came off worst from our partnership in Minder .
He taught me a great deal about The Times crossword, and I taught him how to swear.
GEORGE HARRISON
I believe that there was never a time when you didn't exist and will never be a time when you cease to exist.
The only thing that changes is our bodily condition, soul comes into the body and we go from birth to death, and how I look at it is that death is like taking your suit off.
The soul is in these three bodies and one body falls off.
And like that I can feel John around here…