

International Law of War and Peace
Nuclear Weapons, State Power and Legitimacy in International Law
SOL PICCIOTTO
I hope in discussing this question to try to examine, as frankly and fairly as possible, the relationship between legality on the one hand, and political organisation and political struggle on the other, in relation to this most vital of all issues for the survival of the human race, the control and elimination of nuclear weapons.
In international relations, as well as in social relations more generally, law provides a framework for regulating and legitimising relations of power.
Law is therefore rooted in economic and political power relations and processes of domination.
However, this does not mean that law is the same as economic or political relations, nor that it is a mere covering, a set of clothes or a veil, concealing economic and political reality.
It does mean that law is not a fixed, precise and immutable set of rules; and that not only its content but also its form are subject to interpretation, adaptation and change as part of and in response to social change.
It is especially important to remember this in relation to international law, which is based on what states have formally agreed to, or accepted as binding practice.
This can lead to an excessively narrow view of international law, unless we remember that states are in reality agglomerations of people.
They are dominated, it is true, by their elites and ruling classes, whose representatives are the ones who sign the treaties and send the diplomatic notes.
But those leaders are necessarily responsive, to a greater or lesser extent, to the political pressures from those they attempt to rule, as well as to historical necessity — in broad terms, the needs of survival and development of human society.
It is equally important to stress also that law is not whatever you please, nor what you would like it to be.
In fact, it is particularly important for any popular movement to avoid the all-too-tempting trap of merely asserting that the law is what we would like it to be.
After all, as I have said, it is our rulers who dominate the processes of formulation and enforcement of the law.
While they generally take care to express such formulations in the language of reason, justice and humanitarian concern that will command consent, they also take care that very little creeps into those formulations that will seriously impede their exercise of power.
Rather than merely assert that what we desire is already reality, therefore, I would argue that our job is to discuss the contradictions and possibilities in the law as it has developed historically, as part of and in response to political and economic struggles.
In this way the lawyer has a part to play within political movements, such as the peace movement, while acknowledging that it is not law alone that can bring about the changes we desire, but it is that movement as a whole that can and must do so.
THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE LAWS OF WAR
The laws of war emerged in their modern form from the last part of the nineteenth century.
This period saw the beginning of attempts by conferences of representatives of states to draw up treaties or conventions on different aspects of the law of armed conflict, what is referred to as the jus in  bello  , that is, the rules of how war should be waged if it should break out.
This period began in 1856 with the Declaration on Privateering adopted at the Congress of Paris at the conclusion of the Crimean War.
A major part was played by the international Red Cross movement, founded in 1863, and whose role was formalised in the Geneva Conventions of 1864 and 1906–7 on the treatment of the wounded and the sick, and which also played a major role in the movement to impose humanitarian principles to the conduct of war.
The period culminated in the two great Peace Conferences of 1899 and 1907 at The Hague, which led to the conclusion of thirteen Conventions and four Declarations, covering land and maritime warfare generally, as well as many particular aspects, such as the specific conventions covering the laying of mines, the carrying out of naval bombardments and so on.
It is very important to emphasise that in drawing up these formal  treaties covering the limitation and control of the methods and means of warfare, those involved did not see themselves as creating new rules, but as codifying existing principles and specifying how they were to apply to the rapidly changing conditions of warfare produced by political and technological developments.
The nature of these conventions as a codification of existing general principles of customary international law is clearly seen in the general Hague Conventions on the Laws and Customs of War on Land , the Convention II of 1899, revised in Convention IV of 1907.
It was made explicit by the inclusion in those Conventions of the famous provision in the Preamble which has been known as the Martens clause.
This states:
Thus the development of the laws of war has consisted of an effort to maintain and affirm certain basic principles, while developing and refining their specific application to the changes in methods of warfare and the continual and horrific increase in humanity's capacity to destroy itself.
The codification effort that culminated in the Hague conventions was an attempt to control the increased scale of warfare brought about by the transition from relatively small professional armies to large conscript ones, and the growth in the destructive power of weapons consequent on the growth of large-scale modern industry.
Hence there were general codes regulating the conduct of hostilities (covering matters such as the taking and treatment of prisoners of war, the use of spies, sieges and bombardments, flags of truce and armistices, pillage, regimes of occupation and so on), as well as conventions on the limitation and outlawing of specific weapons, notably expanding bullets and asphyxiating gases.
The fact that the Conventions on the laws of war rest upon underlying general principles which must be flexibly interpreted and developed to meet new situations was demonstrated in the trials of the major war criminals after the Second World War.
The Charters agreed by the Allied Powers which set up the International Military Tribunals  at Nuremberg and Tokyo and the judgments of those Tribunals made it clear that everyone, from the lowest private soldier to the highest general and statesman is required to comply with the humanitarian spirit and the generally accepted principles of the laws of war.
In fact, the 1907 Hague Conventions were not formally applicable to that conflict, because several of the belligerents were not party to them, and under the so-called ‘general participation clause’ the Hague Conventions could not therefore apply even between those who were parties.
Nevertheless, the rules of the Conventions were treated as formulations of the generally accepted principles of the law of war, and binding as such (Roberts and Guelff, 1982, p. 156).
The revulsion caused by the full awareness of the extent of fascist war crimes led to the conclusion under the auspices of the United Nations of the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide .
However, any further attempts at a more comprehensive codification to bring up to date the humanitarian controls of war were frozen with the onset of the Cold War.
Only the Red Cross had sufficient prestige to conclude a new set of four Geneva Conventions on the Treatment of Sick and Wounded and Prisoners and the Protection of the Civilian Population , in 1949.
It took almost twenty years to launch a new attempt to embody in formal texts some of humanity's yearnings for effective restrictions on war.
Renewed ferocious outbreaks of war, especially in Vietnam and the Middle East gave rise to fresh concern which was especially articulated by the newly-independent states of Africa and Asia.
A resolution of the 20th international conference of the Red Cross at Vienna in 1965 affirmed the minimum principles to which states must conform:
that the right of the parties to a conflict to adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited;
that it is prohibited to launch attacks against the civilian population as such;
that distinction must be made at all times between persons taking part in the hostilities and members of the civilian population to the effect that the latter be spared as much as possible;
that the general principles of the Law of War apply to nuclear and similar weapons.
This resolution was taken up through the United Nations, and the declaration of 1968 as the ‘International Year of Human Rights’ provided the impetus to take up the question of human rights in armed  conflicts.
The 1965 Red Cross resolution was affirmed by a unanimous vote of the UN General Assembly, but with the omission of the specific statement that the law of war applies to nuclear weapons.
This was the price of the Great Powers' support for the resolution, and is illustrative of their attitude to the question since 1945.
The Great Powers, and in particular the USA and the UK, further conditioned their participation in the new round of Geneva Conferences also on the non-applicability to nuclear weapons of the resulting agreements.
These were the latest and in many ways most impressive codification of the law of war, the 1977 Geneva Protocols additional to the 1949 Conventions.
The British and US governments, which have both signed but not yet ratified these Protocols, were the only signatories to make the explicit reservation ‘that the new rules introduced by the Protocol are not intended to have any effect on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of nuclear weapons’.
The absence in the 1977 Protocols, and indeed in any other convention on the law of war, to any specific reference to nuclear weapons, as well as the explicit refusal of the Great Powers to accept any such reference, is significant.
However, it certainly does not mean that the use of nuclear weapons is perfectly legal under the laws of war as they have evolved in this century.
As we have seen, the laws of war do not consist only of what states have formally agreed to accept in a treaty or convention.
On the contrary, the conventions have usually consisted of an attempt to formalise, under popular and humanitarian pressure, rules that must be considered as generally applicable.
Furthermore, those rules are based on general principles which apply to all armed conflicts and means of warfare.
It is plain that these general principles of the laws of war do apply to nuclear weapons.
The question is how they apply to these weapons, and why the Great Powers have continued to avoid any explicit acknowledgment that the laws of war can apply in any respect to nuclear weapons; and finally how should the mobilisation of world public opinion and political action be directed to ensuring the effective outlawing of these weapons.
It is to these questions that I now turn.
THE APPLICATION OF THE LAWS OF WAR TO NUCLEAR WEAPONS
The period of development of the laws of war up to 1914 saw the establishment of two basic principles which continue to be applicable  and are relevant to nuclear weapons.
The first is the principle of limitation of the means of warfare.
This was embodied in the Brussels Code of 1874 and the Regulations of the 1907 Hague Convention in the general rule that ‘Belligerents have not got an unlimited right as to the choice of means of injuring the enemy’.
It was further expressed in the outlawing of certain categories of weapon, ‘poison or poisoned weapons’ and ‘arms, projectiles or material calculated to cause unnecessary suffering’.
It has been in implementation of this principle that states have agreed on specific treaty obligations banning chemical and gas weapons, culminating in the 1925 Geneva Protocol banning Asphyxiating, Poisonous or other Gases and Bacteriological Methods of Warfare .
Once again, it is generally understood and accepted that the weapons prohibited are not limited to those specifically mentioned in this Protocol or any other treaty, but extend to all those that come under this description or have this effect.
The 1925 Protocol itself makes this clear by referring explicitly to ‘other’ gases.
It is by this inclusion also of other similar weapons that states have accepted that tear-gas is banned; the only exception to this has been the USA, which did not in any case ratify the Protocol until 1975.
The USA had taken the dissenting and somewhat paradoxical view that it would not be proper to prohibit the use in war of a gas which a state might ask its police to use against its own people.
When it finally ratified the Protocol in 1975 the USA further expressed its ‘understanding’ that the Protocol does not cover control agents and herbicides, although for itself the USA agreed to limit their use.
Britain's previously firm stand against tear-gas was significantly undermined by a government statement in 1970 that it did not consider CS and similar gases to be covered by the Protocol.
This was apparently justified by arguing that CS ‘smoke’ is different from the earlier types of tear-gas.
It is revealing that the British and American governments are reluctant to accept as illegal and inhumane in international conflicts weapons with which they are willing to arm their police forces for use against their own people.
This attitude is linked to their refusal to accept that the prohibition of inhumane weapons applies to nuclear weapons.
It is again an attempt to retreat to the position that only those weapons are prohibited which are specifically referred to in a ratified treaty.
This, as we have seen, is a rejection of the basic principles of the international humanitarian law of armed conflict.
It is not possible to evade the prohibition of asphyxiating, poisonous and other gases simply by calling the weapons ‘control agents and herbicides’.
It is  equally difficult to deny that the radioactive fall-out from a nuclear explosion in fact consists of a cloud of poisonous gases.
It may be possible, while accepting the underlying general principle, to argue against its applicability to nuclear weapons: for instance, by saying that a nuclear bomb is not a chemical weapon as such, the poison gas being a mere incidental by-product; or to go back to the fundamental prohibition of ‘weapons that cause unnecessary suffering’ and argue that the suffering caused by a nuclear weapon is not disproportionate to its military effectiveness.
Indeed, military effectiveness has long been argued in favour of the acceptability of new weapons however horrifying, going back to the British attempt to defend the use of ‘dum-dum’ bullets against ‘savages’in the Colonies (Best, 1980, p. 162).
Military necessity was never a strong argument and was frequently rejected even by many of the military who are only too aware of the dangers of cruel methods being introduced into a conflict.
However, military necessity has always been a dangerous principle when counterposed to the principle of humanitarian limitation of the means of warfare.
Military necessity should rather be seen as subject to, or forming an aspect of, the overriding principle of economy or proportionality in the use of force (McDougal and Feliciano, 1958, pp. 797–8).
The massive destructiveness of nuclear weapons makes it very difficult to justify them as ‘effective’ weapons in this sense.
This helps to explain why those who wish to justify the legality of nuclear weapons generally avoid the necessity argument, and prefer to deny altogether that the laws of war apply to these weapons.
The second basic historical principle is that of discrimination in the use of force: that the use of weapons should be directed at military targets and should as far as possible avoid damage to the civilian population and buildings such as churches, museums, historic monuments and hospitals, as well as neutral states and their nationals.
Thus the Hague rules prohibited the bombardment of undefended towns and villages.
In the 1920s and 1930s attempts to codify rules of air warfare based on this general principle failed to result in the drawing-up of a detailed Convention.
However, at the onset of the Second World War both Germany and Britain accepted that these principles applied to air warfare.
This is not the place to discuss in detail why it was that despite this both Britain and Germany indulged in ‘area bombing’.
A fairly dispassionate analysis by Best (1980) indicates that the initiation of area bombing of cities resulted from the rejection of strategic in favour of indiscriminate bombing by those in charge of British Bomber Command, and the acceptance of their  arguments by Churchill in August 1940, when the Luftwaffe's attacks on British airfields in the Battle of Britain was threatening to damage irretrievably the RAF's powers of retaliation (Best, 1980, p. 276).
Despite the change of circumstances by 1944, British Bomber Command continued area bombing, contrary to military advice, and alone, since the Luftwaffe had shot its bolt and the USAAF still held to precision bombing.
This policy culminated in the Dresden raid in 1945, in which the USAAF also joined.
The enormity and futility of this raid finally swung opinion against city bombing.
Nevertheless, it cannot be doubted that indiscriminate bombing of cities helped to prepare the (a) moral climate in which the atomic bomb could be used against Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The question that is raised is whether the history of indiscriminate city bombing and the actual use of atomic bombs on cities has vitiated the prohibition on indiscriminate use of weapons, especially the use of weapons not directed at military targets or which inevitably involve disproportionate damage to civilians.
Certainly the growth of ‘total war’ in the twentieth century has drawn populations into the war effort in ways that have made it increasingly difficult to maintain the principle of protection of the civilian population.
However, two major points rule out the view that this means that indiscriminate attacks (including the use of nuclear weapons) are how legitimate.
First, even the commanders who authorised such attacks did not justify them as legitimate in themselves, but only as reprisals : a use of means unlawful in themselves but legitimate in retaliation against unlawful attacks by the enemy.
In fact the unlawfulness of indiscriminate attacks was generally accepted and to a great extent maintained: although London, Coventry, Hamburg and Dresden were bombed, Paris, Rome, Oxford and Edinburgh were not.
The arguments among wartime commanders focused both on the ineffectiveness of indiscriminate bombing (there was strong evidence, confirmed in post-war surveys, that it did little to disrupt war production and had a reverse effect on popular morale), as well as legal and moral unacceptability.
Second, state leaders' own doubts about the acceptability of indiscriminate attacks, even as reprisals, were put beyond question by the revulsion that followed Dresden, Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
This moment was a significant turning-point.
The political and ideological factors that had led to popular support for and involvement in the inter-imperialist war of 1914–18 and the anti-fascist war of 1939–45 could no longer be used to justify the use of means of warfare which, it became clear, not only involved disproportionate  suffering but endangered the future of humanity.
Although Cold War ideology and initial public ignorance in the West of the horrific power of nuclear weapons at first muted the public pressures behind a renewed expression of the unacceptability of indiscriminate means of warfare, the growth of the popular movement for peace over the past twenty-five years and especially in its recent phase must now lead to a reaffirmation of the principle and its application to nuclear weapons.
An important phase in this was achieved in the diplomatic efforts initiated by the Red Cross Resolution of 1965 which eventually led to the 1977 Geneva Protocols , discussed in the previous section.
These Protocols restated, and in several important respects developed, the laws of armed conflict.
Article 35 of the First protocol restates the basic rules of limitation of the methods and means of warfare and the prohibition of methods and means ‘of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering’; to this it adds a prohibition of methods or means ‘which are intended or may be expected to cause widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment’.
Article 36 emphasises the general applicability of these basic principles:
This provision clearly attempts to prevent the development of any new weapon the use of which may be illegal.
In a number of provisions the 1977 Protocols seek to restate the principles of the laws of war so as to make as clear as possible the unacceptability of ‘total war’.
This is most clearly seen in the provisions for the protection of the civilian population, in Part IV of the First Protocol.
This begins with the basic rule: Article 50 gives a quite strict definition of civilian, and Article 51 outlaws attacks on the civilian population and indiscriminate attacks.
These are defined as follows:
(a)
those which are not directed at a specific military objective;
(b)
those which employ a method or means of combat which cannot be directed at a specific military objective; or
(c)
those which employ a method or means of combat the effects of which cannot be limited as required by this Protocol; and consequently, in each such case, are of a nature to strike military objectives and civilians or civilian objects without distinction.
Furthermore, Article 51(6) explicitly provides that ‘Attacks against the civilian population or civilians by way of reprisal are prohibited’.
This is especially important since, as mentioned above, the indiscriminate attacks of the 1939–45 War were generally justified as reprisals.
Moreover, ever since the failure of attempts to include restrictions on retaliation or reprisals in the Brussels Code of 1874 , there has been no explicit prohibition of reprisals in the codes of the laws of war.
The inclusion of this explicit provision in 1977 is undoubtedly a result of the experience of twentieth-century conflicts that the prohibition of attacks on the civilian population is ineffective unless it explicitly includes reprisals, and it therefore constitutes a highly significant development of international law.
The detailed way in which the 1977 Protocols spell out the principle of discrimination in the use of force and protection of the civilian population makes it plain that there are no circumstances in which nuclear weapons could actually be used without breaching this fundamental principle.
Since the breach of this principle is prohibited even in reprisal, the indiscriminate nature of nuclear weapons makes their use illegal even in self-defence or as second-strike weapons.
It may be possible, hypothetically, to imagine a use of a small nuclear explosion in a remote region in a way that does not necessarily involve indiscriminate harm to the civilian population or long-term damage to the natural environment.
But in practical terms even the so-called ‘tactical’ or ‘battlefield’nuclear weapons by their nature have indiscriminate effects.
They would not be employed in remote regions, but in ‘theatre’ warfare, most likely in populated areas such as central Europe or the Middle East.
They would not be employed singly but rather, once authorisation was given to employ them, it would mean tens, hundreds or even thousands of nuclear explosions, however  ‘small’.
Therefore even if we accept the military estimates of the ‘probable’ accuracy of such weapons (300 metres or more for ‘tactical’weapons, with somewhat greater accuracy for the ‘battlefield’types) this still means the statistical inevitability of some inaccuracy (Weston, 1983; United Nations, 1981; Krass and Smith, 1982).
Above all, however accurate such weapons may turn out to be in practice, their yield in terms of blast and fall-out clearly marks them out from ‘conventional’ weapons and necessarily entails indiscriminate effects.
It was these implications of the greater clarity introduced by the Geneva Protocols on the prohibition of indiscriminate weapons that led the British government, in addition to its general reservation excluding their applicability to nuclear weapons, to formulate further specific reservations in respect of what may constitute a military objective.
As part of the clarification of the prohibition of indiscriminate attacks, Article 52 of the First Geneva Protocol provided:
It further adds that an object ‘normally dedicated to civilian purposes, such as a place of worship, a house or other dwelling or a school’ shall in case of doubt be presumed to be making no effective contribution to military action.
The British government has attempted virtually to nullify this definition of military objectives by stating its ‘understanding’ that ‘a specific area of land’may be a military objective.
This seems clearly outside the spirit of the principle of discrimination.
Although one may talk of the ‘total or partial destruction’ of an object such as a building or a railway yard which may be a military objective, it is quite different, and unacceptable, to speak of the destruction of an area of land.
The provisions of the 1977 Protocols therefore consist of a reaffirmation of the existing general principles and their reformulation and adaptation on the basis of the experience of twentieth-century conflicts and to meet new needs.
In some respects they use new language and embody in a formal text rules that have not been specified in that way before; this has indeed been the way the laws of  war have developed for 150 years.
For example, the prohibition of weapons that damage the natural environment is new, although it is linked to and flows from the prohibition of means of warfare causing unnecessary suffering.
Even more so, the detailed provisions on protection of the civilian population restate, build upon and extend previous formulations.
Yet, as we have seen, there is a symbiotic relationship between the formal codes of the laws of war and the generally accepted rules which must apply if humanity is to triumph over warfare.
Just as it was possible to try the major war criminals after 1945 on the basis of generally accepted principles (to which the Hague and Geneva codes contributed), so the 1977 Protocols must be taken as the clearest formulation of the laws presently applicable to armed conflict, including the use of nuclear weapons.
Indeed, the explicit reservation by the USA and the UK excluding the ‘new rules’ in the Protocols from any effect on the use of nuclear weapons in a sense serves to confirm their appropriateness and relevance to the use of these weapons.
It is above all nuclear weapons that constitute a ‘total’ use of armed force.
By their very nature their use would breach the fundamental principles prohibiting unnecessary suffering, long-term damage to the natural environment and indiscriminate attacks harming the civilian population.
To deny that these clear and generally accepted principles apply to nuclear weapons is effectively to say that these weapons are outside international law, that nuclear weapons in themselves abolish international law.
Indeed, this has in effect been the argument made by many international lawyers in the years after Hiroshima.
Since it was impossible to envisage the use of nuclear weapons in any way consistent with the laws of war, and since great and apparently law-abiding Powers possessed and threatened to use them, they must be held to be simply beyond the scope of international law,
A different, and in some respects more constructive, approach adopted by some international lawyers (especially Cassese, 1979) points to the weakness in terms of effective enforcement of a prohibition of weapons based only on the argument that they cannot be used without violation of the general principles of the humanitarian law of war.
This view accepts that these general principles can apply to render illegal the use of weapons, even new weapons, which are not covered by any specific ban.
The difficulty is that the applicability of such general principles is subject to divergent interpretations; in the absence of any authoritative international bodies entitled to give an impartial view, Cassese argues that ‘the implementation of the general  principles on weapons turns on the military strength of belligerents: strong States can dodge the bans without fear.
The only ‘sanction’ against them is to resort to world public opinion' (Cassese, 1979, p. 165).
A slightly different argument is made by Paust (1983) who argues that general principles must be accepted as applying to new weapons, but they must be coupled with effective enforcement measures.
It is certainly true that states have in the past used methods and means of warfare not outlawed by any specific prohibition although running counter to general principles, and they have sought to justify this by reference either to the principle of reprisal or that of military effectiveness.
It is not clear however that it has been the stronger adversary which has done so, rather than a weaker party with its back to the wall.
Furthermore, it is important to consider carefully the role of ‘international public opinion’.
Those who rule states must always consider the ideological acceptability of their policies to their own people, as well as to people in other countries.
As we have already mentioned, there were many factors which contributed to the trends to ‘total war’ in the first half of the twentieth century.
Very few of these factors apply to the use of nuclear weapons.
There can be no doubt of the widespread feelings of horror felt across the world at the thought of the use of nuclear weapons, in however ‘limited’ a way, and therefore the unacceptability of the view that their use could be justified as legitimate.
Any legitimacy that nuclear weapons may have is in respect not of their potential use, but as regards their possession as a means of ‘deterrence’.
It is therefore important to analyse the implications of the arguments about illegality of the use of nuclear weapons for arguments about possession, deterrence and disarmament.
NUCLEAR STRATEGIES AND ILLEGALITY
As we have pointed out, the humanitarian laws of war are concerned with the jus in bello , the rules governing the legitimate means of conflict once it has started.
This is traditionally considered as quite separate from the jus ad bellum which governs the legitimacy of resort to the use of force.
Although the two are separate, they must be considered as clearly linked: if the use of a weapon is illegal in any or certain circumstances, then it is illegal to initiate a conflict by using it.
The two can also be seen to be linked in that the principles involved in the doctrine of reprisals (which is considered to form part of the jus in  bello ) are essentially the same as those of the doctrine of self-defence in relation to the initiation of conflict.
Finally, although arms control and disarmament have generally been dealt with by states in specific agreements, the progress (or lack of progress) on the outlawing of weapons has clearly been linked to the progress made in identifying weaponry whose use is illegal.
For example, the outlawing of the use of chemical and bacteriological weapons, which was made explicit in the 1925 Protocol, laid the basis for an acceptance by states that the development and possession of such weapons should be outlawed, which was agreed in the 1972 Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on their Destruction .
Furthermore, as mentioned above, Article 36 of the 1977 Geneva Protocol I imposed a duty on states to consider in the development or acquisition of new weapons whether their use would be illegal in some or all circumstances.
Although this does not actually prohibit the possession of weapons whose use is illegal, it is clearly moving in that direction.
For a number of reasons, therefore, it seems rather over-simplistic and legalistic merely to state baldly that, whatever may be the position on the illegality of use of nuclear weapons, their possession as such is not illegal (Brownlie, 1984).
Even in narrow legal terms, possession and use cannot be separated absolutely; but the notion of mere ‘possession’ breaks down when it is considered in its military and political context.
Nuclear weapons, like any other weapons, are not merely ‘possessed’: they are deployed , as part of a specific military strategy.
Viewed in this way it is clear why the separation of rules governing the use of means of warfare from those on the initiation of conflict has proved increasingly difficult to maintain.
The deployment of a weapon system involves a threat that that system will be used in certain circumstances which to some extent can be deduced from the characteristics of the weapon system itself.
The legality of the threat of use of a weapon therefore depends on an evaluation both of the characteristics of the weapon and of the possible circumstances in which it might be used.
Since 1945 the UN Charter has imposed on all states the obligation to avoid the use or threat of force (Article 2), while reserving to them the ‘inherent right…to self-defence if an armed attack occurs’(Article 51).
In general, therefore, military preparedness must be adjudged legally valid only to the extent that it constitutes a threat to use force in circumstances amounting to legitimate self-defence.
An argument can certainly be made that, since it is the very characteristics of nuclear weapons which make their use illegal, any deployment of nuclear weapons which involves a threat of their use is an illegal threat of force.
Most other weapons cannot be considered to have characteristics that make their use illegal whatever the circumstances; although some others perhaps do — for example, bacteriological weapons, which can equally be argued to be per se illegal.
As we have argued above, since all nuclear weapons are indiscriminate and inhumane, their use even in reprisal is illegal.
In addition to the principles governing reprisals, the legality of a threat of use of force in self-defence depends on compliance with the basic principles that self-defence must be a matter of overwhelming necessity and must be proportionate to the force used in the initial attack.
Applying these criteria, it seems to me that the type of deployment of nuclear weapons which can most clearly be argued to entail an illegal threat of force is one which involves a threat of first use of nuclear weapons.
Until recently, the nuclear deployments of the superpowers have been based on ‘countervalue’ targeting, within the doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD).
This type of deployment does not of its nature necessarily entail any first-strike threat, and indeed the ‘deterrence’ ideology justifies it as a retaliatory threat only.
Since the type of all-out attack involved in the ‘assured destruction’ scenario would clearly be indiscriminate and inhumane, and therefore illegal even in self-defence, it can be argued that even this type of deployment entails an illegal threat of force.
This seems to be the view of Weston, whose conclusion after an exhaustive analysis is that ‘the threat of a strategic first strike, a tactical first strike, a second countervalue strike, and possibly also a second counterforce strike as well as most tactical second strikes’ would fit the logic of illegality (Weston, 1983, p. 587).
However, influenced by the fact that the deterrence policy is firmly adhered to by the governments of the superpowers and has some political acceptability, and that the traditional doctrine of the laws of war did not apply to preparation for war, his eventual conclusion is that it would be difficult to state that any measures short of use are illegal.
Weston's difficulty once again seems to stem from accepting too readily an undifferentiated view of ‘possession’.
The flaw lies in his initial premise that if the use of a weapon is illegal, then ‘any threat of such use — including not only an ostentatious brandishing of arms (such as a menacing ‘demonstration burst’), but also their research and development, manufacture, stockpiling and deployment’ must be illegal.
He thus seems to go too far initially, and then shrink back to an  anodyne conclusion.
This emphasises the need to analyse within the political and strategic context whether a particular deployment amounts to an illegal threat of force.
Viewed in this political and strategic context, the possession of strategic nuclear weapons as part of the MAD strategy exhibits a stark contradiction.
As countervalue weapons, aimed at large-scale societal destruction, their use would be illegal even in retaliation.
However, their deployment is justified in nuclear ideology, not as a potential self-defence second-strike force, but on the basis that they will never have to be used, since their possession alone deters a potential enemy, and therefore it does not constitute a threat to use illegal weapons.
Nevertheless, none of the superpowers have been willing to say that they would not actually use these weapons in a second nuclear strike, on the grounds that for the deterrent to be credible the other side has to be convinced that a first nuclear strike would result in nuclear retaliation.
It is for this reason that all the superpowers have effectively conspired to exclude nuclear weapons from the ambit of the laws of war.
Yet it is this deadly logic of deterrence that condemns the world to live under the shadow of the threat of nuclear annihilation.
The determination and effective preparedness of the nuclear powers to mount an instant all-out nuclear counter-strike the moment it perceives itself to be under nuclear attack must be condemned as an illegitimate threat of force, and is rightly so condemned by the world's peace movement.
It is only saved from universal condemnation by the partial political acceptance of the argument that this nuclear readiness does not in practice involve a real threat and that nuclear weapons will in fact never be used.
The implication of this perspective is that it is possible to give only a limited and provisional legitimacy to strategic nuclear weapons deployed as a second-strike ‘deterrent’ threat.
Their deployment is legitimate only as long as the world can accept that there is no real threat of their use.
It must therefore be accompanied by an acceptance by the nuclear powers of (1) a renunciation of their use, including (and especially) a pledge of no-first-strike even in the event of a conventional attack; and (2) the acceptance of a duty to disarm.
These are essentially the conclusions of Richard Falk (Falk, 1983).
It is worth quoting in full the considerations put forward by Falk that must underlie a ‘beneficial international law regime for nuclear weapons’:
(a)
public support for the idea that any actual use of nuclear weapons would violate the international law of war and would constitute a crime against humanity,;
(b)
public support for the rule that a first use of nuclear weapons, even in a defensive mode in response to or in reasonable anticipation of a prior non-nuclear armed attack, would violate international law and would constitute a crime against humanity;
(c)
it follows from (b) that weapons systems (even at the research and development stage), war plans, strategic doctrines, and diplomatic threats that have first strike characteristics are per se illegal, and that those political leaders, engineers, scientists and defence workers knowingly associated with such ‘first strike’ roles are engaged in a continuing criminal enterprise;
(d)
a definite consensus that second or retaliatory uses of nuclear weapons against cities and primarily civilian targets violate international law and constitute a crime against humanity;
(e)
a clear obligation, recognised by all nuclear weapons states and by other states as well, to pursue arms control in the direction of minimising the role of nuclear weapons in conflict behaviour through negotiations in good faith; this obligation is a provision, art.
VI, of the widely-ratified Non-Proliferation Treaty, and is embodied in general terms as well in the Charter of the United Nations and in a variety of formal resolutions adopted over the years by the General Assembly; and
(f)
a definite mandate directed towards citizens to take whatever steps are available to them to achieve a law-oriented foreign policy for their own country, including, as both conscience and good sense dictate, non-violent acts of civil disobedience, and efforts to persuade members of all branches of government to overcome the gap that separates the normative consensus of the public as to the illegality of the use of nuclear weapons from prevailing official policies.
(Falk, 1983, pp. 537–8)
Falk advances these principles in the awareness that, pending the actual abolition of nuclear weapons, a different, and much more dangerous conclusion can be drawn from the argument about the illegality of nuclear weapons.
This argument has become an important factor in recent debates about a new escalation of the arms race and major changes of nuclear strategy involved in the Star Wars proposal (the Strategic Defence Initiative) as well as proposals for new weapons  systems based on new technologies.
An important ideological component of these arguments has been the illegality (and immorality) of basing the defence of the West on the threat of Mutual Assured Destruction.
Since the large-scale use of nuclear weapons would be clearly illegal, it is argued that it is immoral and unconvincing to base a defence on the threat of such use.
Furthermore, it is said, a defensive strategy based on such weapons effectively rules out the actual use of nuclear weapons.
The argument for a so-called ‘invulnerable’ defence system based on Star Wars, to replace the nuclear deterrent, therefore goes hand-in-hand with the proposals for the development of new weapons systems including ‘limited’nuclear weapons, whose use can actually be envisaged and planned.
The support that such strategic arguments seek to obtain from international law can be seen in a significant study done for the Rand Corporation (Builder and Graubard, 1982).
These authors argue that, in the absence of a specific treaty prohibition nuclear weapons are not per se illegal.
Although they accept that the laws of war apply to the use of these weapons, their conclusion is that ‘they can be used lawfully if civilians are not made the object of attack and if collateral injury to civilians is not disproportionate to the military advantage being sought’(Builder and Graubard, 1982, p. viii).
This however is a serious misuse of the principle of military effectiveness, which is especially horrifying in the context of discussion of the use of nuclear weapons.
As I have already pointed out, even so-called ‘tactical’ nuclear weapons are in reality indiscriminate in their effect.
To argue that it may be permissible to lay waste large areas of any country and its people in order to gain a ‘military advantage’ is to employ the justificatory arguments of the war criminal.
The implications which these authors seek to deduce is that, since it is wrong to base a strategic doctrine on a potential illegal use of weapons, the policy of deterrence based on assured destruction should be ‘declaratory’ only, and that actual plans should be based on the development, deployment and targeting of weapons which ‘should be intended for use only against military objectives and be as discriminate as reasonably possible in their collateral effects upon the civilian population and property’(Builder and Graubard, 1982, p. 51).
Since they accept that some types of nuclear weapons can be used in this way, the argument is designed to legitimise the development and deployment of tactical or ‘counterforce’ nuclear weapons and other weaponry associated with a shift away from Mutual Assured Destruction towards Nuclear Utilisation Target Selection (MAD versus NUTS: see Keeny and  Panofsky, 1981).
As Falk points out, Builder himself has argued for such a shift (Builder, 1979).
This new hawkish perspective builds upon a strand in US policy going back at least to Kennedy, which argues that the USA must possess a force structure that would enable a nuclear war to be fought and won (Ikle, 1973).
The recent reinforcement of this trend has been attributed to a weakening of credibility of deterrence based in what is seen as ‘America's strategic predicament’, defined as:
In other words, American imperialism demands military superiority over Soviet imperialism.
In the current political and strategic context, it seems right to conclude, with Falk, that in the application of international law to nuclear weapons it is of overriding importance to minimise reliance on nuclear weapons and emphasise the sharp distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons (Falk, 1983, p. 538).
The illogicality and immorality of the Rand study and similar approaches is in the pretence that a ‘limited’ use of nuclear weapons could be envisaged which would not be contrary to the humanitarian laws of war.
As Keeny and Panofsky put it:
THE DUTY TO DISARM
As I have argued above, the doctrine of deterrence and the deployment of strategic nuclear weapons can only be justified by the acceptance that the superpowers are genuine in their protestations that  they do not intend ever to use nuclear weapons, and that they seek disarmament.
This political reality translates into law as a duty to pursue disarmament actively and in good faith.
As Falk points out, this duty has already found legal form in Article VI of the Non-Proliferation Treaty , as well as in the UN Charter and General Assembly resolutions.
The effectivity of the duty to disarm is probably the most crucial issue in international law and international relations of this era.
The criticisms that have been levelled at the Non-Proliferation Treaty have at their base the inequality of the bargain between the major powers who have nuclear weapons and the non-nuclear powers who have accepted the undertaking not to acquire them.
Although the NPT has succeeded in retarding the spread of nuclear weapons, there is no doubt that the treaty will collapse unless significant progress is made towards nuclear disarmament by the nuclear powers.
As part of the duty to disarm I would also add the duty to control and limit the spread of nuclear power and nuclear technology generally.
Studies of the nuclear fuel cycle show that it is impossible to insulate the development of nuclear power from the capacity to build nuclear weapons.
Quite aside from the inherent dangers of establishing an energy system to any significant degree reliant on highly unstable nuclear technology, the implications of the spread of nuclear power for the extension of military nuclear capability must be taken much more seriously than it has been hitherto (SIPRI, 1979, 1980, 1980A).
A legal duty is in itself meaningless unless the political pressures exist to enforce it.
Indeed, it is quite clear that the only effective power that can enforce the duty to disarm is the world-wide popular mobilisation against nuclear weapons.
In advancing legal arguments and in taking direct political action those active in the peace movement can be reinforced by the knowledge that the hesitant political support given by others to the policies of nuclear deterrence is underpinned only by the belief that their leaders genuinely desire peace and disarmament.
There is therefore the broadest possible political consensus behind the pressures to enforce such a duty to disarm.
The only counter-pressure comes from the dark side of human nature, the tear of ‘the enemy’.
A major role for the peace movement is therefore to help to overcome this fear, and to work actively to put forward constructive disarmament suggestions, and to continue to take the necessary political actions to ensure that the issue remains in the forefront of public attention.
This is above all important today, when the process of disarmament is at a turning-point.
It is frequently pointed out that, compared with  the previous dismal history of negotiations for disarmament, the past twenty-five years have seen an exceptional success in the conclusion of nuclear arms limitation agreements.
Already, Japan and Germany had accepted the obligation never to maintain nuclear forces (the former under the MacArthur Constitution of 1947 , the latter under the 1954 Protocol to the Western European Union Treaty).
International non-nuclear zones have been agreed in respect of Antarctica (Antarctic Treaty 1959 ),Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco 1967), Outer Space (Outer Space Treaty 1967), the seabed (Seabed Arms Control Treaty of 1971 ), and the moon (draft Moon Treaty 1979).
Over ninety states have accepted the obligation not to acquire nuclear arms under the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty ; although this treaty has not prevented the detonation of a nuclear device by India and the covert acquisition of nuclear capacity also by Israel and South Africa, the total list of nuclear powers is relatively small, and perhaps less than may have been predicted a few years ago.
Nevertheless, the proliferation that has occurred is serious, since it entails an acquisition of nuclear weaponry by states whose ruling groups may become  desperate enough to use it.
However, it is not the world's statesmen that we have to thank for even this limited achievement in arms control, but the women and men whose political activity has ensured that some action must be taken.
These were also the pressures behind the limited progress made between the superpowers: it is the world-wide mobilisation against nuclear testing that ensured the conclusion and adherence to the limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963 .
Finally, the Anti-Ballistic-Missile Treaty and Protocol of 1974 has limited the development of new ABMs, and the SALT Interim Agreement (SALT I 1972 ) set limits to the growth of the strategic arsenals.
However, it is equally plain that these agreements have been no more than limited curbs on the growth of nuclear weaponry.
The central problem of arms reduction and the elimination of nuclear weapons remains.
Moreover, as the breakdown of the SALT II agreement shows, whatever the success of arms limitation, it does not overcome but in many ways merely highlights the problems of arms reduction (Jacobson, 1984).
In the writings and arguments of ‘experts’ these problems are frequently represented as technical ones, and too specialised for the ordinary person to grasp.
Disarmament, for example, is sometimes said to hinge on apparently technical problems such as the comparability of forces, or the possibility of verification.
The difficulty of solving such problems may be used to justify solutions based on a  ‘new technological fix’(rightly dismissed by Goldblat elsewhere in this volume) such as‘Star Wars’, which simply involves a new whirl of the arms race spiral.
It is therefore important for the peace movement to penetrate and politicise the apparently technical arguments of the ‘experts’, and to demonstrate that there is no technical inevitability, but they are social problems to which human solutions can and must be found.
It is in this spirit that I have attempted to analyse the technical-legal issues surrounding the debate about the illegality of nuclear weapons.
Legal issues, like other technical problems, can only be properly understood within their broader social context, and this is especially so when our purpose is not only to understand the world, but to change it.’
The Relevance of Laws of War in the Nuclear Age
ROBERT ADAMS
The laws of war ought to have a great deal to say about, or rather against, the use of nuclear weaponry.
They have, after all, been traditionally concerned with restricting the use of weapons which are considered indiscriminate or inhumane.
However, the numerous formal international agreements on the laws of war actually say nothing directly on nuclear weapons.
This apparent failure of the laws of war to tackle directly a class of weapon which is spectacularly indiscriminate and inhumane raises a number of questions, namely:
1.
What do the various international agreements on the laws of war say which has a bearing on the legality or otherwise of nuclear weapons use?
2.
Do other sources of law (including international custom, court decisions, or the opinions of writers) help to establish some definite laws of war rules about the legality or otherwise of nuclear weapons use?
3.
Why have the laws of war not addressed the nuclear weapons question more successfully?
4.
Despite their weaknesses, are the laws of war still relevant in the nuclear age?
5.
Could the laws of war be further developed to address the nuclear weapons question more directly and explicitly?
These questions are considered in turn in this chapter.
Some of them are of necessity considered briefly — even in shorthand form — and the reader seeking further elucidation is referred to the sources mentioned in the text.
THE LAWS OF WAR, AND RELATED BODIES OF LAW
The laws of war, otherwise known as jus in bello , govern the actual conduct of armed conflicts and military occupations.
It is an ancient body of law, largely customary in its origins, which, since the mid-nineteenth century, has come to be largely but not completely codified in the form of binding multilateral international conventions (Schindler and Toman, 1981; Roberts and Guelff, 1982).
A main preoccupation of the laws of war has always been placing limits on the scope and ferocity of war: hence the large number of rules restricting the use of indiscriminate weapons; and protecting neutrals, civilians and prisoners of war.
This whole body of law deals essentially with the use of weapons once an armed conflict has actually broken out.
It does not deal directly with possession of weapons, nor with the legitimacy of resort to war in the first place.
Apart from the laws of war, many other parts of international law have a bearing on issues related to nuclear weapons.
One is the body of law containing rules governing the resort to armed conflict (jus ad bellum ).
A second is the body of law governing the production, testing, stockpiling, transfer and deployment of weapons and armed forces (the law of arms control and disarmament).
These parts of international law, distinct from each other as they are, all overlap at one point or another and cannot be considered entirely in isolation.
Thus jus in bello turns out to have considerable implications for conduct in peace-time, including in time of crisis.
Furthermore, both jus ad bellum and the law of arms control turn out to have relevance to the actual conduct of armed conflict.
For example, modern jus ad bellum puts considerable emphasis on the right of self-defence in accord with Articles 2(4) and 51 of the UN Charter : the implication of these provisions is that any use of force, even after the outbreak of fighting, is prohibited if it cannot be justified by reference to the right of self-defence recognised in Article 51 of the Charter.
As Christopher Greenwood (1983, 223–4) has said:
Similarly, the law of arms control and disarmament may impose substantial restrictions on the conduct of armed conflict.
While some agreements in this area might not endure for long during a war, others might be more effective (Towle, 1980).
Furthermore, the various commitments by the nuclear powers, made in connection with the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty , not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear states, undoubtedly have the effect of limiting the freedom of action of nuclear powers even during an armed conflict (Goldblat and Lodgaard, 1980).
International Agreements on the Laws of War
Formal multilateral agreements are by no means the only source of the laws of war.
After all, the laws of war existed in some form long before the idea of the modern multilateral treaty had been invented.
Moreover, in dealing with a phenomenon as complex as war — which produces an infinite variety of situations and is conducted by means whose technical features alter almost from year to year — there are inherent difficulties in laying down the law in the form of treaties.
Thus it has always been recognised, and rightly so, that there is a large place in the laws of war for other sources of law: custom, general principles of law, judicial decisions, and the writings of highly-qualified legal experts.
Of the twenty-five-odd multilateral agreements on the laws of war which are currently in force, many contain either specific provisions, or important statements of general principle, which have potential relevance to the question of nuclear weapons use.
The first is the 1868 St Petersburg Declaration , which was indeed the first major international agreement prohibiting the use of a particular weapon in warfare — namely the explosive bullet.
Its preambular section says:
The 1907 Hague Convention IV on Land War contains further statements of broad principle which are seemingly relevant to the nuclear question.
In the Regulations which are annexed to the Convention, Article 22 states: ‘The right of belligerents to adopt means of injuring the enemy is not unlimited’.
In addition, Article 23 says that it is especially forbidden (a)‘to employ poison or poisoned weapons’;(d)‘to declare that no quarter will be given’; and (e)‘to employ arms, projectiles or material calculated to cause unnecessary suffering’.
The 1907 Hague Convention IV also contains an important provision in the preamble to the main convention, in what has come to be known as the Martens clause.
This was drawn up on account of the difficulty which the negotiators at The Hague had in agreeing whether or not irregular forces in occupied territory might or might not qualify for combatant status, but its words have a wider relevance:
Another agreement concluded at the same conference, namely the 1907 Hague Convention V on Neutrality in Land War , also has relevant provisions, especially Article 1: ‘The territory of neutral powers is inviolable’.
Any use of nuclear weapons which resulted in significant fall-out coming down in neutral countries, or which in other ways violated neutral territory, would clearly fall foul of this provision.
From the period between the two World Wars, the main surviving agreement on the laws of war is the 1925 Geneva Protocol on Gas and Bacteriological Warfare .
The parties to it declare that ‘the use in war of asphyxiating, poisonous or other gases, and of all analogous liquids, materials or devices, has been justly condemned’, and they ‘agree to extend this prohibition to the use of bacteriological methods of warfare’.
This Protocol has been cited as one ground for asserting the illegality of nuclear weapons, even in the absence of any specific written agreement about the latter.
Nuclear weapons might indeed be considered an ‘analogous device’ which, like bacteriological weaponry, is a potentially uncontrollable agent of mass destruction with an unprecedented capability to destroy the physical integrity of the planet and threaten our existence as a species (Falk, Meyrowitz and Sanderson, 1981, p. 31).
Since the Second World War many laws of war treaties have had important implications so far as nuclear weapons are concerned.
The 1948 Genocide Convention prohibits a wide variety of acts committed with intent to destroy a national, ethnic or religious group.
This only confirms already-existing customary law; and inasmuch as it depends on proving an actual intent partially or completely to destroy a particular group, it may be of only limited relevance as a basis for assessing the legality of nuclear possession or use.
The four 1949 Geneva Conventions reflect the principle that parties to a conflict should spare the wounded, prisoners of war, and civilians as much as possible from the effect of armed conflict and occupation.
Over 150 states are now parties to these conventions — by far the highest number of states parties to any laws-of-war agreements.
The central concern of all four of these 1949 conventions is the protection of victims of war, especially victims who in one way or another find themselves in the hands of the adversary.
The conventions say little or nothing about actual combat, and were seen as supplementary to the 1907 Hague Regulations , which remained in force.
The 1954 Hague Cultural Property Convention extends protection to movable or immovable property of cultural value, and obliges the parties to avoid actions (such as placing a military base next to a cathedral) which are likely to expose cultural property to damage in the event of armed conflict.
The 1977 UN Convention on the Prohibition of Military Use of Environmental Modification Techniques prohibits the deliberate manipulation of natural processes as weapons.
The techniques prohibited might include deliberate manipulation of earthquakes, tsunamis, changes in weather patterns, and changes in the state of the ionosphere, It may be presumed that under this convention such changes would be unlawful if achieved by use of nuclear weapons, just as they would be if achieved by any other means.
The 1977 Geneva Protocol I, on International Armed Conflicts , supplements the four 1949 Geneva Conventions in various important ways — not least in that it addresses directly two key matters: methods and means of warfare, and the protection of the civilian population against the effects of hostilities.
Article 35 echoes the terms of agreements of 1868 and 1907, as well as breaking some new ground, when it says:
1.
In any armed conflict, the right of the Parties to the conflict to choose methods or means of war is not unlimited.
2.
It is prohibited to employ weapons, projectiles and material and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering.
3.
It is prohibited to employ methods or means of warfare which are intended, or may be expected, to cause widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment.
Many other provisions of 1977 Geneva Protocol I might seem highly relevant to the question of nuclear weapons use, but there is a difficulty.
When signing the protocol on 12 December 1977, both the UK and the USA declared that they did so on the understanding that the rules in the protocol were ‘not intended to have any effect on and do not regulate or prohibit the use of nuclear weapons’.
Moreover, the UK and the USA have not ratified the protocol, mainly because of objections on other matters, and they are not likely to do so in the near future.
The UK and the USA are technically correct in indicating that this protocol does not apply to nuclear weapons — at least to the extent that this has been their clearly declared position throughout the negotiations, and the International Committee of the Red Cross had accepted that the negotiations did not deal with atomic, biological and chemical warfare (Collier, 1979, pp. 21–32).
But the effect left in the mind by this UK and USA reservation is unfortunate: it suggests, rightly or wrongly, that these nuclear powers are prepared to support the most elaborate codification limiting the use of conventional force, but at the same time want to keep their hands completely free so far as nuclear weapons use is concerned.
However, their position is in fact not quite so outrageous, as will be indicated in the next section of this chapter.
The tendency to restrict the use of conventional weapons, while apparently leaving the use of nuclear weapons almost untouched, is also evident in the 1981 UN Convention on Specific Conventional Weapons .
However, the preamble to this convention reaffirms certain broad humanitarian principles of considerable potential relevance to  the nuclear weapons issue, and inter alia it repeats almost word for word the terms of Article 35 of 1977 Geneva Protocol I , already quoted.
One general point about the international agreements on the laws of war: they have never been very successful in addressing directly either the general issue of bombing from the air, or the particular issue of the use of nuclear weapons.
They have much more to say on less apocalyptic matters, such as the treatment of persons who are in the hands of the adversary.
The main attempt to tackle the issue of bombing, the 1923 Hague Rules of Aerial Warfare , is an admirable and detailed interpretation of customary rules and general principles of the laws of war, but it was never adopted by states in legally binding form — partly because of the belief, widely held in the aftermath of the First World War that the important thing was to prevent war altogether, rather than to devise rules for how it might be conducted.
Ironically, a similar belief prevails today, in a slightly different mutation.
Today, in the minds of many, the prevention of war through deterrence is more important than the devising of rules for its conduct or limitation.
This may help to explain, even if it does not wholly excuse, the extraordinary silence of the laws of war so far as nuclear weapons are concerned.
In the forty years since 1945 there have been ten new international agreements on the laws of war, totalling perhaps 100 000 words, yet the words ‘nuclear weapons’ do not occur once in them.
This does not mean that nuclear use is permitted under the laws of war, for the fundamental principles regarding such matters as protection of non-combatants remain.
Just as within states murder may remain a crime even if not all possible murder weapons are specifically identified in the laws, so between states indiscriminate slaughter may remain a crime even if nuclear weapons are not specifically mentioned in the laws of war.
All in all, and despite the failure of the conventions to address the nuclear issue directly, a plausible case can be made that the general principles and fundamental purposes of the conventions are clear enough, and are incompatible with virtually any imaginable use of nuclear weapons in war.
This being so, possession of such weapons must also be called in question.
It is not surprising that this conclusion has been reached by a number of writers, including Falk et al .
(1981), Griffith (1984), and Delf (1985).
However, the conclusions of these writers may be open to certain lines of criticism, and some writers who have addressed the question of  nuclear weapons and the laws of war have reached conclusions which are significantly different in important respects.
Some of their views are mentioned in a later section.
OTHER SOURCES OF THE LAWS OF WAR
International Custom
Since the conventions offer an imperfect guide to the subject at hand, it is necessary to look at some of the other types of sources which are generally recognised as being useful in establishing what the law is, and in relating it to specific situations and technical developments.
International custom, which includes the actual practice of states and unilateral declarations made by states, is a source of prime importance, and is by no means barren so far as nuclear questions are concerned.
The first and most important consideration is that in the forty years since 9 August 1945, despite the fact that all the nuclear powers have been involved in wars at one time or another, nuclear weapons have not once been used militarily.
This mere fact suggests that there is an extremely strong presumption against their use.
The precise reasons why this is so may well be complex, and derive no doubt from considerations of deterrence as well as of legality.
But the long period of non-use can be said to amount to a custom, and to create a reasonable expectation that the pattern of restraint should continue in the future (O'Brien, 1967, pp. 79–80).
A related international custom which appears to have emerged is that the use of nuclear weapons can only be authorised by the highest political authorities in each nuclear state.
In the USA, for example, any use of nuclear weapons except under the highest authorisation would be illegal under US domestic law (Collier, 1979, p. 10).
This underlines the fact that in nuclear matters, as in the laws of war generally, domestic law may be very important both as a source of the law and as providing some sanctions.
Further, the authorities in a number of nuclear states have made unilateral statements of one kind or another which indicate that their nuclear weapons may not have escaped entirely from laws-of-war restraints.
For example, China in 1964, and the Soviet Union in 1982, made unilateral verbal commitments to a policy of ‘no first use’ of nuclear weapons.
Inevitably, doubts have been expressed about the credibility of such statements, but they may have some significance  nonetheless.
For their part, the Western nuclear powers (USA, UK and France) have been reluctant to make any ‘no first use’ statements, not least because of their traditional reliance on the threat of possible first use as a means of compensating for their presumed disadvantages in the conventional military balance.
However, the USA in particular has over the years been increasingly explicit in accepting certain international legal restraints on possible nuclear use.
It is true that the three US military manuals contain chilling statements asserting the legality of nuclear weapons use.
The naval manual (US, Department of the Navy, 1955, 6–4) is clear on this point, but also draws attention in a footnote to the relevance of the principles of the laws of war.
The Army Field Manual,The Law of Land Warfare (US, Department of the Army, 1956, p. 18) is extremely stark:
A later air force manual (US, Department of the Air Force, 1976, 6–5) is at least slightly more nuanced than this:
This US air force manual goes on to list six arms control agreements.
The three US service manuals are currently in process of being updated, and it will be interesting to see whether either they, or the new UK tri-service manual which is now in an advanced state of preparation, say anything more specific about possible limits of one kind or another to the use of nuclear weapons.
Apart from the military manuals, a number of other US statements  have suggested a certain influence of laws of war considerations.
The US Delegation to the UN General Assembly indicated on 10 December 1968 (Collier, 1979, pp. 19–20) that the following principles are statements of international law:
1.
There is a limit to the permissible means of injuring the enemy, a limit which is inevitably affected by the actions of all parties to any conflict.
2.
Civilian populations may not be attacked as such, but we recognise that the co-location of military targets and civilians may make unavoidable certain injury to civilians.
Moreover, we should recognise soberly that none of these principles offers any significant protection to civilians, in the catastrophic event of nuclear war.
3.
There are indeed principles of law relative to the use of weapons in warfare, and these principles apply as well to the use of nuclear and similar weapons.
Despite such statements, the USA continued to reply on a nuclear strategic approach which was and remains questionable on various grounds, including laws of war.
The first particular strategy which has been subject to criticism has been the reliance on possible first use of nuclear weapons as a means of countering presumed superior Soviet conventional power — a reliance which McNamara sought for a while to abandon when Secretary of Defense in the early 1960s, and which he openly challenged in a famous recent article (Bundy et al .,
1982).
The second particular strategy which has been subject to criticism has been the targeting of cities and other locations not of a strictly military character.
Many writers viewed this strategy as doubtful or worse so far as the laws of war were concerned (Builder and Graubard, 1982).
The Reagan Administration has shown some willingness significantly to qualify these dismal and heavily criticised strategic ideas.
President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative , announced in 1983, has always been accompanied by a strong element of criticism of existing US nuclear policy, but it may turn out to be a good deal less than the promised means of freeing the world from the scourge of nuclear weaponry.
Of great significance may be certain statements made by Secretary of Defense Weinberger in his annual report to Congress (United States, Secretary of Defense, 1983, pp. 55–7):
The report goes on to repudiate the whole idea of a ‘no first use’ pledge, which might enable ‘the Soviets’to ‘gain a unilateral conventional advantage’, would be ‘unenforceable and unverifiable’, and could ‘increase the chances of war and thus increase the chances of nuclear conflict’.
But it does add: ‘The very purpose of our effort to strengthen conventional forces is to prevent a situation in which it would become necessary to use nuclear weapons to stop a conventional attack’.
Apart from the USA, the other nuclear states have issued pronouncements of one kind or another indicating certain restraints on deployment or possible use.
It is noteworthy, however, that both the British and French governments, with their much smaller nuclear forces, have apparently stuck to a declaratory policy of targeting Soviet cities, and have not made statements repudiating purely anti-population strategy in any way comparable with the 1983 US statement quoted.
Court Decisions
Because the laws of war derive to a large extent from standards which have developed within states, and because they have always depended for their enforcement largely on national legal systems, court decisions have been a very important source of the laws of war.
However, there have been rather few cases which have addressed at all directly the question of the legality of the use of nuclear weapons, and even fewer judgments touching on this.
For reasons which are well known, after  the Section World War the International Military Tribunals at Nuremberg and Tokyo did not directly address the question of air warfare.
This led the Indian judge in the Tokyo tribunal to issue a detailed and lengthy dissenting judgment, in which he asserted that the US atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki was itself a war crime (Pal, 1953).
The one case in which the legality of nuclear weapons use has been pronounced upon directly is the Shimoda Case in Japan, in which judgment was given on 7 December 1963.
In 1955 five Japanese citizens started a legal action against their own government to recover damages for injuries they had sustained as a result of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
They argued that the use of atomic weapons violated both conventional and customary international law.
The Court dismissed these claims on the ground that the right of individuals to become claimants in international law is recognised only when approved by specific treaty, and that in the Peace Treaty Japan had waived all claims of Japan or its nationals arising out of the war.
However, the Court did conclude that the dropping of the atomic bombs on Japan had been in violation of international law.
The question addressed in the judgment was not whether the use of atomic weapons generally was forbidden, but rather whether the particular bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were illegal under international law at that time (Collier, 1979, pp. 6–7; Falk et al .,
1981, pp. 53–7).
The judgment stated:
The Japanese judgment is by no means immune to criticism.
It is based at least in part on a historical view that the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki may have been militarily unnecessary — a view which is strongly contested by some but by no means all historians  who have looked at the matter.
There is in fact a good deal of documentary evidence that the atomic bombings were not merely followed by the Japanese surrender on 14 August 1945, but actually led to it (Giovannitti and Freed, 1967).
But whatever criticisms might be directed at the Japanese judgment, it remains important as the one case in which a court has ruled on the legality of actual use of nuclear weapons.
In a number of other court cases, attempts have been made to raise issues relating to the legality of the use and possession of nuclear weapons, but usually without success.
National courts are notoriously reluctant to be dragged into judgments about the legality or otherwise of the security policies pursued by their governments.
Thus in the case of Greenham Women Against Cruise Missiles v.
Ronald Reagan et al .,
at the US District Court for the Southern District of New York, the judge in his decision on 1 August 1984 dismissed the lawsuit brought by British women opposed to deployment of American cruise missiles at Greenham Common air base in England.
In his twenty-one-page judgment he said that the court lacked the resources and expertise to resolve the issue of whether the missiles created a risk of nuclear war between the USA and the USSR.
He said: ‘The courts are simply incapable of determining the effect of the missile deployment on world peace’.
On 8 February 1985 a federal appeal court in New York upheld this judgment, stating that the decision to deploy these weapons was the responsibility of Congress and the executive branch of government.
(For further discussion of this and other court cases, see Part III of this volume.)
Opinions of Writers
Distinguished specialists in international law have reached a number of quite different conclusions about the legality of the use and possession of nuclear weapons.
They do agree, as a minimum, that there is a strong presumption against the use of nuclear weapons; and that nuclear weapons must be subject, at the very minimum, to certain basic laws of war rules on such matters as not targeting the civilian populations as such.
But beyond those modest crumbs of comfort there is disagreement.
A very early book touching on the subject, the third edition of Air Power and War Rights (Spaight, 1947, pp. 274–6) drew attention to the specific characteristics of the atomic bomb which made its use  questionable — namely the scale of devastation, and the after-effects of exposure to atomic radiation.
Spaight questioned the facile view that the bombings of Japan were justified because they saved lives in the end, and he indicated that atomic bombs, if they have the after-effects reported, ‘are condemned by inference or analogy if not specifically’.
He did not go into further detail about the morality or legality of nuclear use or nuclear deterrence, partly no doubt because he favoured an effective world-wide prohibition on nuclear weapons production (Spaight, 1947, p. 218) and therefore hoped that such issues would not arise.
With forty years of hindsight, we know that such hopes for a ban on possession of the bomb were sadly misplaced.
Georg Schwafenberger's book The Legality of Nuclear Weapons (1958, pp. 47–9) reached conclusions which came to terms more with the by then widespread possession of nuclear weapons.
He said that considerations of humanity are no substitute for prohibitive rules of international law and, by themselves, do not constitute evidence of rules prohibiting the use of nuclear weapons.
Further, he suggested that the principle of the exemption of the civilian population from being an intentional object of warfare had been so whittled down during the Second World War and in post-1945 treaties as to cease to offer reliable guidance except in the most unambiguous circumstances.
He did accept that the effects of radiation and fall-out could make applicable the rules against poisoned weapons, gases and analogous materials.
However:
Nagendra Singh, in his book Nuclear Weapons and International Law (Singh, 1959, p. 215) advanced the view, subsequently taken up by many other legal writers, that the first use of nuclear weapons would be particularly questionable in international law:
A number of American ‘just war’ theorists, who see the law of war as one part of the ‘just war’tradition, have favoured a policy of no-first-use of nuclear weapons, and no counter-city warfare.
They have also pointed to the need to replace reliance on nuclear weapons to the maximum extent practicable.
But they have not ruled out all imaginable uses of nuclear weapons (O'Brien, 1967, p. 87; Johnson, 1984, pp. 80–2 and 148).
To the extent that such approaches may suggest the desirability of changing over to a counter-force nuclear policy, they escape from the moral frying-pan of counter-city targeting into the strategic fire of counter-force, which has the twin disadvantages that it might put a premium on first strike and that it would in any case result in frightful civilian losses.
Johnson (1984, p. 142) recognises this problem.
Ian Brownlie (1963, pp. 262–4) expresses considerable doubt about the lawfulness of the use of nuclear weapons against an attack by conventional weapons.
However, he concedes that ‘state practice on this question is not unequivocal but indicates that the governments of the United States, France, Canada, and the United Kingdom regard the use of nuclear weapons as permissible against an aggressor state irrespective of the weapons employed by the latter’.
Bert Röling, the Dutch international lawyer who died in early 1985, having been the last surviving judge from the International Military Tribunal for the Far East at Tokyo, addressed the nuclear weapons issue as much in terms of purported prudential policy-making as in terms of legal principle.
He said in a lecture:
In contrast to Röling's approach, which in the above quotation is essentially similar to that of the policy-maker, those international lawyers who have stressed the illegality of nuclear weapons (for example, Falk et al .,
1981) have done so largely on the basis of comparing the known terrible effects of nuclear weapons with the key underlying principles of the laws of war.
Different modes of analysis, it seems, produce different results.
It is as if strict legal considerations  seem to pull in one direction, while supposedly practical policy considerations point in another.
Those international lawyers, such as Brownlie, who are sceptical about the legality of nuclear weapons use, but who at the same time take a practical view of the law and see it as closely related to what states actually do, are in something of a bind, as they do not hesitate to acknowledge.
There are many other types of source, besides those considered here, which in one way or another address the issue of the legality of nuclear weapons.
Many UN General Assembly resolutions have called into question the legality of the first use, or indeed all use, of nuclear weapons (Schindler and Toman, 1981, pp. 121 and 129).
However, these resolutions, important as they are, reflect some of the problems already detected in other sources.
For example, as Kalshoven has pointed out (Kalshoven, 1971, p. 345),General Assembly Resolution 1653 (XVI) of 24 November 1961 in one breath declares the use of nuclear weapons to be unlawful, and requests the Secretary-General to consult governments with a view to a possible convention on the prohibition of the use of such weapons.
There does not appear to have been any significant progress on this in the intervening twenty-four years.
WHY HAVE THE LAWS OF WAR NOT ADDRESSED NUCLEAR ISSUES BETTER?
The evidence of uncertainty and equivocation in the way in which the laws of war have, or have not, been applied to the problem of nuclear weapons is plain enough.
The record is by no means all negative, and many restrictions placed on the use of nuclear weapons are of considerable importance.
However, it cannot be said that the laws-of-war approach has resulted in clear and unambiguous agreement either among writers or among countries as to the precise restrictions to be placed on nuclear weapons use.
Nor can there be any claim that the laws-of-war approach has been at all decisive anywhere in illuminating the issue of the legality or otherwise of possession of such weapons.
How has this failure come about?
In part, perhaps, because of the great energy and attention directed to the question of nuclear arms control and disarmament.
It was a natural response to the advent of nuclear weapons to concentrate on means of limiting or even abolishing them; and this response has led to a long series of arms control and disarmament negotiations at Geneva and elsewhere.
However, these negotiations, important as they are, have led to only modest results.
They should not entirely supplant from political discourse and practical consideration the separate question of restrictions on the use (as distinct from possession) of nuclear weapons.
Another reason for the failure may be that law, including international law, is sometimes better at regulating small problems than large ones.
Just as within a state the law may be more effective in responding to armed robbery than it is at responding to a military coup d'état , so in relations between states the law may be better at laying down detailed provisions for the treatment of prisoners of war than it is at addressing the potential human catastrophe of a nuclear war.
A related reason for the failure is that in this century, as far as armed combat is concerned, the record of the laws of war has been distinctly uneven.
Such practices in the Second World War as the bombing of cities, the sinking of merchant vessels, and the invasion of neutral states, all cast doubt on the adequacy and effectiveness of the laws-of-war approach.
The lectures edited by Michael Howard (1979) and Geoffrey Best's fine history of the laws of war (Best, 1980) both trace the sad decline of the laws of war in the heat of total war.
Those parts of the laws of war which retained the greatest importance and practical relevance were the parts relating to the protection of individuals in the adversary's hands: prisoners of war, civilians in occupied territory, and so on.
A more fundamental reason for failure is the deep commitment of the governments of the nuclear powers to the idea of nuclear deterrence.
All these powers have had experience in living memory of the inadequacy of paper promises, and the extreme costs of all-out conventional war.
In their various ways, and with the help of nuclear weapons, all are insuring against a repetition of past disasters.
They are putting almost all their eggs in the basket of deterrence, particularly nuclear deterrence.
Their aim is not so much to alleviate the horrors of war as to make war so horrific that potential aggressors will fear to resort to it at all.
This is most clearly the case with NATO policy, which relies on possible first use of nuclear weapons and thus opposes one of the most obvious candidates for a laws-of-war rule on nuclear weaponry — namely, no first use.
There is an obvious tension between a laws-of-war approach seeking to minimise the horrors of war if it occurs, and a deterrence approach seeking to prevent war altogether by making it frightful.
There is little doubt, moreover, that in the nuclear age the deterrence mode of  thinking has by and large been the intellectually prevalent one.
Deterrence has developed a language, a range of scholarship, and a political influence considerably in advance of anything achieved in the name of the laws of war.
Moreover, there has sometimes been reason to doubt the relevance of laws-of-war thinking to the important objective of strategic stability in relations between the nuclear powers.
As already indicated, laws-of-war considerations may lead writers or policy-makers to advocate targeting missile bases rather than cities — but this might prove in practice an open invitation to compete in nuclear hardware or, even worse, an incentive to strike first.
Similarly, laws-of-war considerations might lead to advocacy of a very large nuclear armoury, on the grounds that only then can weapons be used discriminately — but this could only too easily be read as a threat by the adversary.
Alternatively, laws-of-war considerations can lead to advocacy of the enhanced radiation weapon or neutron bomb, on the grounds that it is aimed specifically to destroy military targets (Johnson, 1984, pp. 46–7)— but this could lead to pressure for first use of nuclear weapons.
One is even tempted to propound a theorem to cope with the bewildering thickets of paradox obstructing every path, namely: every attempt to ameliorate nuclear doctrine in one respect produces an equal and opposite effect in some other respect.
The apparent ascendancy of nuclear-deterrence thinking over laws-of-war thinking has been so complete that the idea of deterrence has come to be associated in the public mind almost exclusively with extreme offensive threats against the adversary's society.
The idea of deterrence by denial, of making one's own society hard to conquer, has a good historical record but has received far less attention.
There is one particularly notable exception to the proposition that the laws of war proved inadequate in limiting combat in the Second World War — the 1925 Geneva Protocol.
The prohibition embodied in this agreement, relating to the use of gas and other weapons, has been the single most effective prohibition of a class of weapon in the laws of war.
It is purely a prohibition on use — not on possession — and in view of the reservations made by states parties it can be viewed as little more than a ‘no first use’ pact.
Since 1925, it is true, gas has been used in some conflicts, including most recently in the Iran-Iraq war.
However, it was not used in the Second World War, nor in many other wars.
Why has this prohibition in the 1925 Geneva Gas Protocol been relatively well observed?
Most people who have looked at the matter have concluded that deterrence played at least some part in the process.
However unsatisfactory the ancient idea of belligerent reprisals may be, the threat of reprisals does appear to have been effective in this matter (Kalshoven, 1971, p. 348).
If that view is correct, as I take it to be, then the non-use of gas is one area in which the laws-of-war approach on the one hand, and the deterrence approach on the other, may have complemented each other.
This raises the question, discussed in the final section, as to whether there may be other respects in which the laws of war might actually be compatible with deterrence in some form.
ARE THE LAWS OF WAR STILL RELEVANT IN THE NUCLEAR AGE?
Even if one takes a sceptical view of the applicability of the laws of war to nuclear weapons, it does not follow that the laws of war are irrelevant in the nuclear age.
This is partly because what might be called laws-of-war issues — to do with legitimacy in the use of force, proportionality, restraint and so on— invariably lurk in the shadows of all discussions about nuclear weaponry, and would inevitably return to haunt those who cavalierly denied the importance of such issues.
It is also because nuclear weapons have not completely transformed the military and moral environment in which we live.
There is no sign that nuclear deterrence can prevent all conflicts.
There are still conventional armed conflicts, military occupations, counter-insurgency campaigns, naval encounters, captures of prisoners, and all the other manifestations of warfare ancient and modern.
In other words, the very things that led to the development of the laws of war in the first place are still with us.
Moreover, the risk that conventional conflicts may get out of hand and degenerate into nuclear disaster is one with which mankind will have to live for ever, and it strengthens the argument for attempting to keep conflicts within some kinds of bounds.
The laws of war may provide one possible means (though not the only one) of achieving this difficult object.
The increasing accuracy of weapons — even those delivered by aircraft and rocket — may reopen some possibilities for discrimination in targeting that seemed to be closed in the air operations of the two World Wars.
It may even be that the indiscriminacy of some of the air operations in the Second World War will come to be seen as something  of a historical aberration, and a mere temporary consequence of the undeveloped state of the arts of target acquisition and guidance.
The laws of war may have one other function in the contemporary era — helping to harmonise standards between allies.
The adoption of different standards by allies in key matters such as the treatment of neutral shipping, or prisoners, can cause serious problems.
The laws of war may be one means of bringing about harmonisation: the very first multilateral laws-of-war convention of the modern type, namely the 1856 Paris Declaration on Maritime Warfare , was concluded because there had been divergent practices among the allies involved in the Crimean War.
In the nuclear age, peace-time alliances seem a permanent fact.
Yet NATO has made only modest efforts to formulate a common approach to laws of war matters, for example, in the negotiations leading to the 1977 Geneva Protocol I .
There is a strong case for a more serious effort at collaboration on such matters within the alliance.
POSSIBLE FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS IN THE LAWS OF WAR
Could the laws of war be further developed to address the nuclear weapons question more directly and explicitly?
Forty years of extremely limited progress in the sphere suggest that optimism would be out of place.
There may even be some good reasons for keeping out of this no-man's-land.
Among some people who have been involved in negotiations at Geneva on laws-of-war matters there is a genuine concern that any neat set of rules limiting the use of nuclear weapons in one way or another might have the unfortunate effects either of weakening deterrence; or else, contrariwise, of seeming to legitimise such uses of nuclear weapons as are not covered in any agreement; or else of being nothing more than a paper accord, which would be of little real value in a conflict.
The implicit assumption here is that it may be best to leave nuclear weapons in a partial legal limbo, with an extremely strong presumption against the legality of their use, but with no formal and explicit rules turning this presumption into treaty language and adding detail to it.
On the other hand, there are powerful arguments for tackling the problem.
First, the nuclear states have got away too easily with only very limited restrictions on the vast destructive power in their hands, and with declaratory strategic doctrines which would be genocidal in  their effect if implemented.
Second, in the NATO member states, the relative lack of formal restrictions has contributed to the public unease about defence policy, which is associated in people's minds with threats of all-out nuclear war: far from assisting deterrence this situation is highly corrosive so far as effective defence and deterrence are concerned.
For these and other reasons, it cannot be taken as axiomatic that the most extreme threats are the most effective.
Third, in the event of there ever being a major conflict which risks escalating to the nuclear level, rules and associated practices and deployments which are specifically aimed at reducing the risks of escalation could play a valuable role.
Fourth, with the likely acquisition of nuclear weapons by at least some additional states in the next few decades, the need for some clear rules of the road so far as nuclear weapons are concerned may actually increase.
And fifth, the distinctly limited success of negotiations on arms control and disarmament reinforces the case for examining a quite distinct approach, dealing with restrictions on use.
It is not self-evident that all clarifications or developments of the laws of war have to take the familiar form of multilateral conventions.
In some cases, depending on the type of issue addressed, formal statements by governments, whether in public speeches, reports or military manuals, are at least as valuable or even more so.
On certain issues, such diplomatic forms as UN General Assembly resolutions may be more appropriate.
The issues which will inevitably come up in one form or another include ‘no first use’ of nuclear weapons, about which a good deal has been written, not least in No-First-Use (Blackaby et al .,
1984) and which is discussed by Goldblat in this volume.
Whether or not the NATO powers are able to subscribe to a formal doctrine of ‘no first use’, there is little doubt that they urgently need to get away from their present highly questionable doctrine of heavy reliance on first use.
Limitations on missions and targeting, including commitments not to use weapons above a certain yield, or not to use nuclear weapons against centres of population, or in certain geographical areas, may also have an increasing part to play (Collier, 1979, p. 41).
This leads inevitably into the complex, ambiguous, but probably unavoidable subject of policies, rules and deployments which might help to limit any nuclear war should it occur (Clarke, 1982).
As Laurence Martin has said: ‘It is impossible to refute entirely the criticism that the various strategies of limitation may appear to make the world safe for nuclear warfare and thereby hasten its onset’; but he concluded: ‘The proper  question may therefore be not, should we contemplate limited nuclear war, but, should we consider the ways of limiting the nuclear war which is henceforth always a possibility’(Howard, 1979, pp. 119 and 120).
Above all, the extremely strong presumption against the legality of the use of nuclear weapons needs not only to be reaffirmed, but also made more specific.
Nuclear weapons cannot escape from the kinds of restraints built up carefully in the laws-of-war tradition over the centuries, but there is a risk that they may be thought to be so escaping (especially in view of the UK and US reservations to 1977 Geneva Protocol I ) unless positive action in this direction is taken, The comparative neglect of the whole subject of laws-of-war restrictions on the use of nuclear weapons has endured for forty years, for reasons which can be understood if not approved.
It is high time for this neglect to yield to a more open discussion of these issues and a more positive approach.
Legality, Morality and the Nuclear State
Grasping the Legal Nettle: Towards an Understanding of Law and Peace
JOHN DEWAR and MATTHIAS RUETE
INTRODUCTION
Anti-nuclear campaigners are convinced of the justice of their cause.
This easily translates into the notion that law is, or ought to be, on their side; yet like other popular movements, the peace movement has found itself involved with ‘the law’ in a complex variety of ways, both passively and actively.
Law has been one, though not the exclusive, point of interaction between the pro-nuclear state forces and the anti-nuclear peace movement.
On the one hand, law is one means by which the political system wields its power against the peace movement, by prosecuting, fining or imprisoning individual protestors, by altering bye-laws or by controlling the very right to protest.
On the other hand, legal strategies have been employed by the peace movement to challenge the authority of state agencies, whether by setting up Nuclear Free Zones, challenging the sale of National Trust land to the Ministry of Defence, or the siting of a shooting range in Berlin (Guelen, 1985) 1 and suing the President of the United States of America for breaches of International Law.2 In other contexts, law has provided a forum in which the rights of individuals in the peace movement and the demands of the state have been adjudicated, for example in deciding on the validity of withholding tax contributions for military spending.
These examples of how the law may be used both by and against the peace movement point to the ambiguous and contradictory nature of the law itself, and the relationship between law and the peace movement generally.
Given this ambiguity, is there any way of ‘thinking about law’ which can further our understanding of this relationship and so guide law's potential contribution to political movements in general, and the peace movement in particular ?
We believe that there is, but that it has to be recognised that no single model of ‘what law is’ and how it relates to ‘justice’can provide any instant prescription for the tactics to be adopted.
This ought not to be surprising given the diversity of law itself and the increasingly diverse ways in which legal systems are developing.
A legal system is not a monolith, but is made up of a variety of legal ‘arenas’ in which many different ‘legal languages’are spoken, and while some of these arenas may well be prepared to listen to the presentation of a problem in one jurisprudential language, others might reject it completely (Ladeur, 1984; Sciolla, 1983; Dunsire, 1978).
A good example is the ‘right’ to tax diversion (see Dignan, Chapter 6)— while British Courts are prepared to listen to arguments based on statutory rights, and may well be prepared to listen to arguments grounded in International Law, they are far less willing, at present, to accept arguments based on concepts of (natural) rights.
However, such arguments will be more successful in a hearing before the European Commission on Human Rights (and not only because of the European Convention), and may provoke even greater interest amongst academic lawyers attempting to overcome the limitations of the dominant positivist approach to legal problems, and amongst the wider non-legal public.
Thus, we would caution against drawing general conclusions from analyses of specific areas of law, and we would argue that it is important to develop, not a theory of law, but a theory of the role of law in society to enable a clearer assessment of the extent or limits of law's importance.
In other words, we would argue for the need to place a perspective on the potential contribution of law and lawyers to the peace movement.
We will develop this further at a later stage.
For the moment, we would point out that traditional theories of law, such as positivism, are characterised by a lack of concern for such perspectives, tending to regard law as both a static and isolated social phenomenon; and insofar as they consider political struggle at all, they regard it as merely a struggle for the control of law as an ‘instrument’.
Our point is that a popular movement such as the peace movement carries within itself a notion of a just society and that law cannot be  considered merely as a ‘tool’ isolated from broader political and social considerations.
Once we have discussed some of the different ways of thinking about law which are raised by the contributions in this section, we will try to place these within a wider framework and so work towards an assessment of the potential role of law and lawyers within the peace movement.
‘NUCLEAR WAR CAN'T BE RIGHT'
When confronted with the prospect of a nuclear holocaust, peace campaigners sometimes search for a legal expression for their moral outrage, and some layers are indeed able to offer such legal comfort.
For some centuries, natural law theories have provided political and social groups, as well as individuals, with justifications for their actions (Bloch, 1961) but for even longer they have also contributed to an understanding and legitimation of institutions such as the church, the monarchy and the state.
It is possible to distinguish two phases in the development of natural law, the earlier phase based on religion and the more recent secular phase.
Although the now frequently-used concept of ‘the right to resistance’ was referred to in the older religion-based natural law theories, it is mainly the more recent, secularised version of natural law with its emphasis on human rights that seems to provide a theoretical underpinning for some of the assertions about the illegality of nuclear war and the justifiability of nuclear protest.
In crude terms, one could describe the essence of natural law approaches to be the view that the validity of positive law rests ultimately on its conformity with some ‘higher law’, whatever the source of the latter.
Some modern variants are sociologically based, asserting that certain fundamental values are empirically found to exist in similar societies (Rawls, 1972; Sparer, 1984; Moore, 1978); other variants are more speculative and derive their value-systems from a moral, ethical or other ideological source (Finnis, 1980).
The ‘higher law’ may also be formulated as a temporal limit — should the present generation have the power to bind, or even dispose of, future generations, or do these future generations have a fundamental right to live and structure their own lives?
(Jonas, 1979; Preuss, 1984; Hubin, 1976).
Thus we can see that there is a broad variety of approaches which we may group under the heading of ‘natural law  theories’ because they all rely on something other than state law to constitute the valid rules of a legal system.
In the UK, theories openly based on natural law have exerted little influence, at least since the nineteenth century.
Equally, there has been no need or opportunity to discuss concepts of rights in detail, since there are no entrenched constitutional provisions to serve as an automatic focus of attention.
Ronald Dworkin, in his book,Taking Rights Seriously (Dworkin, 1978), is one of the academic authors who has recently reintroduced a perspective reflecting these approaches into British legal theory through his argument that the fragmented process of legislation, adjudication and administration can at least be checked if not comprehended when measured against rights, rights which derive ultimately from the master principle of equal concern and respect.
This is Dignan's starting-point in his discussion in Chapter 6 of the legal problems of tax diversion.
Such a theory is based (as Dignan shows) on a vision of state and society as separate entities, with protection of individual liberties from state encroachment dependent on individual legal rights.
It is interesting that in the latter half of the twentieth century, this perspective can find such resonance.
The reason may lie in precisely those factors that make the theory outdated — the disappearance of the separate spheres of state and society, a separation on which liberal theory is based.
It is the replacement of this differentiation of state and society by a more complex web of interrelated systems which has led many lawyers to seek alternatives to positivist approaches which in many cases rely on the liberal model of parliamentary democracy as their underlying assumption.
The attractions of Dworkin's thesis can possibly be explained by this need for a new unitary formulation of legal theory — the irony, of course, is that Dworkin shares with other approaches this simplified view of today's society.
Dignan points to increasing state intervention and changing forms of law, and emphasises that these developments can no longer be understood by reference to traditional theory.
He thus diagnoses a crisis of legal ideology and democratic theory.
It is our contention that at least one of the functions of legal and political theory should be to assist in structuring a wealth of material as a means of revealing general principles behind the abundance of individual facts.
This process of the reduction of complexity on a theoretical level is only acceptable if the theoretical perception somehow reflects reality — the question, therefore, is whether a rights-based theory can help us to understand the complexities of twentieth-century law and government.
Dignan's answer is that it can, provided that the theoretical basis of Dworkin's ideas is revised and that the master principle, which is the grundnorm of all rights-based arguments, is reformulated in a progressive way.
Two questions, however, may be asked.
First, is it not the case that the whole idea of a right is inextricably linked with the liberal (or, as Dignan calls it,gesellschaft ) model of society?
How far can we continue to speak in terms of the sphere of society as being clearly separate from the sphere of the state?
In other words, how far can the distinction between ‘public’ and ‘private’be said to continue as a valid principle in which to base the notion of individual rights?
(Harlow, 1980; Horwitz, 1982; Kennedy, 1982; Benn and Gaus, 1983).
If we conclude that state intervention has eroded the theoretical basis of individual rights in certain sectors of society, are other sectors discernible where propositions concerning individual rights might still be valid?
This in turn raises a series of further issues about rights of crucial importance to the peace movement.
For example, can there be collective rights, or are rights necessarily individual?
If such rights depend for their enforcement on existing legal processes, how effective can they be?
For example, constitutional or statutory rights for blacks or women, such as anti-discrimination or equal pay, have not in themselves done much to change the social situation of those groups (Lustgarten, 1980).
It could be said that the existence of a legal right has provided a focus for political organisation — but does such a focus strengthen the movement or weaken it, for example, by diverting resources to legal rather than other struggles?(cf. the debates on ‘legislation’, Teubner, 1985).
Vogler argues that these are very real dangers (although in his view they can and must be overcome).
Would the peace movement, then, be strengthened by formulating some of its demands as legal rights?
Such a strategy presents dangers arising from the very abstract character of rights as, for example, the Trade Union movement has discovered when employment rights, which strengthen the position of employees, also weaken Trade Unions by undermining collective organisation (Mellish and Collis-Squires, 1976; Henry, 1982).
A second question is whether the ‘rights’ approach does not essentially depend on a non-controversial (that is, abstract and apolitical) formulation of the master principle?
Dignan's attempt to reformulate it in a ‘progressive’ way could therefore be seen as partisan, and therefore necessarily outside the ambit of a ‘rights’approach.
As Bruce Kent's contribution (in Chapter 8 of this volume) suggests, however, this does not mean that we have to reject all  approaches based on a rights theory, or even on natural law.
However, we should be conscious of the assumptions underlying these theories which, more often than not, despite the apparently general formulations, are valid and useful only within a specific framework.
Taking generalised formulations of legal theory seriously can often lead into the cul-de-sac of the unspoken assumption of that theory.
Although sympathetic to a progressive rights theory, Dignan attempts to avoid this problem by examining in some breadth and detail the validity of the assumptions made by Dworkin concerning modern liberal political systems, and argues that Dworkin's assumptions may help provide the peace movement with a legal theory.
However, Dworkin's argument depends on a master principle which is seen as ‘uncontroversial’, and whether Dignan's reformulation would be acceptable may be a matter of debate.
Another aspect of rights is discussed in the debate concerning the compatibility or otherwise of ‘rights’ with socialism (Campbell, 1983, 1985; Simmonds, 1985).
The relevance of this debate for present purposes is that much of it focuses on two competing ways of characterising rights which in turn have competing implications for a political movement such as the peace movement wishing to formulate its claims in the language of rights.
On the one hand there is the ‘will theory’, which regards the distinctive feature of a right as lying in the fact that it offers a ‘legally protected choice’(Hart, 1973), giving the right-holder the power to exact compliance, or not.
On the other hand, there is the ‘interest theory’ which regards rights as protecting some personal interest of the right-holder without necessarily offering a means of enforcement.
The point here is that given the institutional and political realities of the formulation and implementation of nuclear policy, it would be difficult to characterise any rights to which the peace movement may wish to lay claim (for example, the right to a nuclear-free world) as legally protected ‘choices’, especially given the insistence by some governments that nuclear policy is not a ‘justiciable’ issue (Weiss, Chapter 11; but see Offczors and Ruete, Chapter 13; Hickman, Chapter 12, all in this volume).
Any such claim would therefore have to be framed in terms of the interest theory; yet, as even the advocates of such an approach admit (Campbell, 1985, p. 20) this involves open-ended and controversial issues as to which interests deserve protection, and some have argued that it leads to a disintegration of any distinctive or effective notion of a right (Simmonds, 1985).
Ultimately, it depends on one's view of the potential of law to achieve social and political transformation.
In  Chapter 5 of this volume, Campbell expresses his faith (albeit limited) in such a possibility.
For reasons given in the next section, we remain sympathetically sceptical.
Despite these problems, natural law and rights-based theories undoubtedly have something to contribute to an understanding and development of law in a broader social perspective.
In particular, by stressing that law must itself contain an element of substantive justice, and that its validity cannot be purely formal, such theories clearly show that law cannot be isolated from its context.
INTERNATIONAL LAW: REALITY OR SYMBOL?
The peace movement cannot ignore international law, not merely because many existing provisions tend to provide legal support for the claim that the use of nuclear weapons would be illegal, but also because, in theory at least, it provides the means by which states can bind themselves to restrict the manufacture, storage and use of such weapons (non-proliferation treaties and regional nuclear-free zones are examples of this).
No-one can accuse lawyers within the peace movement of failing to seize these opportunities, and yet despite all the energy directed towards establishing that the use — or even possession — of nuclear weapons would be illegal, and drafting treaties and campaigning for their adoption by states, few lawyers have attempted to establish the assumptions on the basis of which this activity takes place.
One may detect a range of these.
First, there is the assumption that, provided international law can be made ‘effective’ in the sense that governments will abide by its provisions, then it will be sufficient for the peace movement merely to seek ‘enforcement’of those provisions conducive to its aims, and to campaign for the extension of those provisions.
In other words, implicit in this assumption is the view that law does restrain or is potentially capable of restraining, the international use of nuclear force.
This assumption is not theoretically neutral and arguably derives from a traditional positivist view of law which defines law or legal systems in terms of their effectiveness in establishing ordered behaviour.
Thus for Austin and Kelsen, for example, a legal duty depends on the ability of the state to wield a monopoly of force in the event of its violation, whether what is being transgressed is a ‘command’ or a ‘norm’(Austin, 1861; Kelsen, 1967).
For Hart, the existence of law and legal systems depends on a generally observable  pattern of social and institutional behaviour in which ‘rules’ are generally effective (Hart, 1961).
Thus, if we operate on traditional assumptions about the nature of law we are left with a political strategy in relation to international law which assumes either that law is effective (by definition) or that it is potentially effective (so that while it may not deserve the name ‘law’ it is at least potentially deserving of that description).
In other words, legal strategies and arguments assume a central importance.
Campbell's contribution in this book, by arguing the case for an ‘ethical positivism’, is based on a variation of this traditional assumption.
Thus for Campbell the effectiveness of law as a means of controlling international nuclear force would be enhanced by the introduction at an international level of the type of legal process found in municipal legal systems, such as legislatures, courts, enforcement and monitoring agencies.
This would enhance the authority of international law because of the inherent and self-evidently moral qualities of such an impartial legal process; the ‘bindingness’ of international law would be increased because the aims of the enterprise — the peaceful resolution of international conflicts — would be assumed to be universally desirable.
Thus both the nature and function of legal process would enhance international law's claim to authority.
Campbell's argument would imply a strategy for the peace movement that is heavily law-based, or at least centred on legal institutions.
We may regard it as sharing with positivism the view that the significant features of a legal system (that is, its aims and components) can be adequately understood without reference to the political or economic realities in which the legal systems operates.
Thus the question of whether a legal duty exists is for a positivist a relatively simple matter of examining the relevant commands, norms or rules of a legal system and does not involve a consideration of, for example, what this duty really means in political, economic or social terms.
Similarly, we may argue that Campbell's political strategy is founded in a view of the realities of international relations between states which does not, for example, reflect the fact that the usual benefits of legal process are not immediately obvious to individual states, particularly where nuclear weapons are concerned.
Campbell's argument is perhaps best regarded, therefore, as a ‘morality of aspiration’(Fuller, 1969)— indeed, Campbell himself accepts that his strategy ‘may seem fanciful in certain respects’.
It does not seem to us to be particularly fruitful to discuss highly  generalised theories of whether international law is or could be ‘law’ as such: if viewed from the perspective of ‘effectiveness’, international law may have to be judged differently, depending on whether, for example, the focus is on regional economic relations regulated by treaties, or on customary law applicable to the laws of war on a universal scale.
As we shall argue later, such generalised and monolithic views of the legal system are inadequate descriptions of reality, particularly when advanced as the basis of political action.
The recognition that the assumption of the effectiveness of law may turn out to be false in all or at least specific areas does not mean that all legal activity in relation to international law is worthless.
Indeed, lawyers and others may operate in the belief that international law is an important, though not conclusive, element of the political relationship between states, or that law has an important ‘symbolic’ role to play — in other words, it adds credence to the political and moral case put forward by the peace movement in a way that does not depend on international law being ‘effective’.
Indeed, breaches of international law are just as important, as evidence of the need to make the political or moral case, and as evidence of the ‘illegality’ of the opposing case.
But why is law such an apparently powerful symbol for the peace movement?
Or, to put it another way, what are the symbolic features of law that are worth emphasising?
Both Vogler and Campbell in this section refer to this ‘symbolic’ dimension of law.
Vogler regards international law as a useful ‘rhetorical’ device to be deployed in domestic courts whenever possible in the course of litigation involving the peace movement.
Campbell argues that ‘for many, the object of law is to control force’, and that it is only natural that a political movement seeking to control the ultimate force should turn to law.
However, it is possible that the attractiveness of law as a symbol for the peace movement is wider than the specific associations with international law and the control of violence.
For many, ‘law’ and ‘order’refer to the ideal of legality (or ‘the rule of law’)— and while it is clear that this does not refer to an uncontroversial notion, it is arguable that most people would agree on certain core features of the rule of law: a congruence of official action with a previously declared rule so as to preserve individual autonomy and freedom from arbitrary state power, and a notion of equal treatment of individuals in the eye of the law.
There are clearly strong links between the ideal of the rule of law and concepts of natural law, and many of the questions that we have already posed in the latter context could be reiterated here.
It is arguable that law has become  such a potent anti-nuclear symbol because the use and aftermath of nuclear weapons pose such a threat to these values.
There is no better example of the uncontrollable exercise of state power, resulting in perhaps the worst invasion of individual autonomy imaginable, than the decision to use nuclear weapons; and the aftermath of their use reveals the uncontrolled assumption by the state of virtually limitless emergency powers leading to the forced starvation of some of the population and the summary execution of others (as depicted for example in BBC's ‘Threads’)(Campbell, 1985; Laurie, 1983).
Indeed, it is arguable that the mere possession of nuclear weapons threatens legality given the measures apparently needed to preserve security and suppress protests depicted in part III of this volume.
The symbolic value of law involves more than a volitional commitment to legal institutions and legal process, or the rhetorical effectiveness of international law arguments.
It represents or embodies values which the peace movement seeks to achieve in relation to nuclear Weapons, and provides a focus for an otherwise disunited political movement.
However, this contains an important message for lawyers sympathetic to the peace movement, since if the symbolic appeal of law for the peace movement is founded in the view that law embodies certain political and human ideals which may be interpreted as being in sympathy with the aims of the peace movement, then it is clear that the attraction is to law as an ideal rather than to lawyers and legal process.
If this is the case, then the task of propagating the ideal of legality is not a specifically legal one.
However, we would emphasise again that many of the points we have made in relation to natural law and rights theories apply with equal force to arguments based on the rhetoric of the rule of law.
HOW NOW LEGAL THEORY?
THE DIFFERENTIATION OF MODERN LAW
The contributions in this book and our discussion in the previous sections show that positivist, rights-based or natural law approaches can provide suitable intellectual foundations for legal strategies.
At the same time we are faced with the dilemma that these theories appear to be mutually exclusive: does this mean that the peace movement should take a cynical ‘supermarket’ attitude to attempts to theorise law and take from the shelves whatever theoretical package is  best suited to the purpose?
Is there any precept that demands consistency.)
In the previous sections we voiced a scepticism of the basic assumptions of the two most important systematic attempts to explain legal systems from within, that is, positivism and natural law.
Similar criticisms of these explanations have often been formulated by sociologically-based theories which attempt to reflect the connections between the legal system and the political, cultural and economic systems.
These can be further distinguished according to their analysis of the relationship of state, society and economy and can be labelled variously as ‘realist’, ‘Marxist’, ‘functionalist’, ‘instrumentalist’ or ‘anarchist’.
Some of these critiques give mono-casual, but most give multi-dimensional, explanations of the links between law and society.
A common denominator both of these critiques and of positivism and natural law theories, is that most of them speak about the law — even if this is seen to have many facets.
The debate between legal theorists and their critics is about the degree of autonomy possessed by the legal system from economy and society, the role of historical, cultural and contingent factors (the ‘dynamics’ of the legal system) and about the possibility of giving a coherent explanation to the ‘internal’structure of the legal system, once its detachment from other factors is recognised.
The main assumptions of this debate are structured by concepts and social conventions which through the past centuries have helped us to understand reality: keywords of emerging bourgeois society like ‘individual’, ‘society’, ‘state’, ‘market’, ‘democracy’ have slightly different connotations in different Western societies and in different periods but — on the whole — form the common language with which we communicate about complex processes and attempt to understand and structure them.
In recent years these concepts have been questioned from diverse directions.
It has been shown that our thinking in terms of models such as‘democracy’, ‘individualism’ and ‘rule of law’does not always adequately reflect reality, and sociological theory has demonstrated that simple notions of causality do not explain complex effects of action (Luhmann, 1982; see also Prigogine and Stenger, 1985); also, theories of language tell us that we structure reality through the language we use (Lacan, 1968).
Our thesis is that our traditional models and ways of thinking do not allow us to understand complex processes and — which is worse: often mislead us about appropriate responses.
One reaction in the face of this complexity of social systems and the complex role of law has been ‘pragmatism’, a form of  resignation in the face of the difficulties of understanding the complicated role performed by law in complex societies.
There is, however, an alternative approach based on the development of a new understanding of law, which no longer assumes that the legal system is uniform but realises that law is linked into complex processes of communication between and within different sub-systems of society, which in turn form and influence the substance of a particular segment of law.
To put it another way, law forms both a sub-system of society and part of the environment of other sub-systems such as politics, family, education, economy, etc.
Law and the legal system thus have to be seen in a differentiated way, no longer consistently structured by one uniform language and one common principle (such as a hierarchy of values or a grundnorm), but as being to some extent split into a plurality of legal arenas (Lowi, 1972).
Some theorists identify a multitude of ‘dialects’ spoken within one legal system, while others point to changes in the process of law creation: traditional models tend to attribute this to parliament, government and the courts, whereas increasingly it involves those who are themselves subject to legal rules.
The increasingly open texture of regulation (Atiyah, 1985), already analysed by Neumann in the 1930s (Neumann, 1985), allows wider discretion to, and purposive interpretation by, the administration and the courts who turn — in a selective way — to the views of those subject to these rules as guides to decision-making.
In this way, the legal system can be said to become ‘self-reflexive’: it develops the capacity to reformulate the rules by which it functions.
There is not enough room here to look at the differences of nuance within this approach, which analyses the crisis of the uniform legal system and the monolithic concept of the state.
There are considerable differences in the implications of these analyses as to the possibilities and limitations of actors in these networks of legal arenas, and the role that power plays in predetermining access to these arenas.
These are precisely the questions that the peace movement has to address when it contemplates the use of law and many of these aspects are discussed in Part III of the book.
This analysis of the differentiation of legal systems is also borne out if we take a comparative perspective.
Law undoubtedly plays an important role in structuring modern capitalist and socialist societies; comparative analysis, however, shows significant differences in the relative importance of law in societies organised along similar economic lines.
The question again is whether we can develop a  satisfactory theory of the law and the legal system, or whether we must be both more general — taking into account the role that institutions such as family, church, schools, media, police, army, economy, play — and more specific — differentiating the different legal arenas such as courts, administration, police, prisons, etc?(see Johnson, Chapter 10 of this volume).
Comparison also points us to an important dimension of law already discussed: besides regulating behaviour or social relations, legal systems also — in different societies to different degrees — contain a symbolic or rhetorical dimension, in other words, law forms part of the ideological system of a society.
Thus law often has a dual role to play, not only providing the basis for the ‘smooth’ functioning of society, but also forming part of an interrelated system which functions to provide legitimacy, cohesion, integration and unity.
In this context broad concepts like ‘rule of law’, and entire bodies of law like ‘international law’ or ‘human rights’, gain an additional dimension: they form part of the everyday discourse of politics and are points of reference in interest conflicts without directly forming part of the legal system.
This does not however mean that one can clearly distinguish a concept of ‘rule of law’ in the legal system from ‘rule of law’as part of the ideological system.
There is a complex interrelation of both systems and we can again distinguish different countries in which this dual function of law plays a greater or lesser role: the UK for example, without a written constitution, without a constitutional court, without a long tradition of legal science but with a multitude of extra-legal institutions and ideologies does not rely on legal ideology to the same extent as other countries, for example , West Germany and the USA.
Legal concepts, together with the symbolic use of law, play a much greater role in structuring general ideologies in the latter countries (as Chapters 11 and 13 of this book show).
The result of our cursory glance at the attempts that have been made at a new perspective on law and the legal system is thus both clear and complicated: the legal system can no longer be understood to be monolithic, but is differentiated, and this differentiation is structured by its relationship to other social sub-systems; law, moreover, has a different ideological role in different national legal cultures.
The consequences for the peace movement — or for that matter any political movement — are thus equally complex: general theories about the role of the law, or the state will often be misleading.
There is no single answer to questions as to whether the use of law is right or wrong.
Each situation under which law is being used either against or  by the peace movement will have to be analysed extensively by looking at the specific arena and the specific legal language spoken.
Generalisations may be helpful to a certain extent but we have to take into account complex variants which are law-related but not necessarily legal: Richard Vogler (in Chapter 7 of this volume) for example, leads us to ask whether the use of law will lead to a bureaucratisation and disintegration of the peace movement as in the 1960s?
What were the factors that contributed to this disintegration — was it ‘law’ or did other factors play a role?
Are there similar factors today?
Will the legal system react in a similar way?
At the same time, however, we have to add a proviso.
Although we have argued for the view that law is differentiated rather than monolithic, we have to stress that there do exist common factors and interrelations, both within specific arenas and within the legal system as a whole, that have to be considered.
These common factors are those normative elements of the legal system which help to achieve its internal cohesion.
In other words, different legal arenas are not entirely severed from each other, and political movements such as the peace movement will have to bear in mind the impact of its legal activities on legal arenas other than those with which it is immediately engaged: for example , does the encouragement of judicial activism by the peace movement, or an invitation to adjudication based on natural law, open floodgates which — although they produce desirable results in the short term — one would in the long term prefer to remain shut?
(See Chapter 13 of this volume.)
Natural law and rights theories, positivism and contextualism, are in this sense no longer incompatible theories of the law but enter into the legal languages or dialects which are spoken in different or even in the same legal systems.
Their function can vary from time to time and place to place.
Thus, we cannot give the reassuring answer one expects from theories.
Instead of arguing that there is one correct answer to questions about the use of law we would advocate a close scrutiny of its context.
Legal theories help us to understand and analyse this context in two ways.
First, they help to unlock the immanent structure of the legal language spoken in a specific arena.
Our argument is that a discussion about whether positivist or natural law theories are correct is as useful as a discussion about whether Italian or Greek is the correct language to speak: it is however useful to recognise that someone is an Italian speaker if one wants to communicate with him.
The second aspect seems even more important: it warns against false generalisations and implicit assumptions.
For example, the use of law  in litigating the illegality of nuclear war may be sensible in the USA and quite foolish in the UK; while reinforcing legal ideologies may seem sensible in the Netherlands, it may be dangerous in West Germany.
It is our view that the ‘differentiated’ view of the legal system for which we have argued provides insights into the structures and processes of the legal system which traditional theories do not, and perhaps more importantly, points to the necessity of analysing both the social context of, and power structures associated with, the legal system when deploying legal arguments on behalf of the peace movement.
Moreover, it alerts us to the fact that short-sighted tactics may thwart the overall strategy.
Beyond this, however, it can offer no generalised or ‘off-the-peg’ answers to concrete and specific questions, and would caution against attempting such a task.
Can Law Control Force?
TOM CAMPBELL
Few thoughtful people do not now fear nuclear catastrophe within a period which is infinitesimal when set against the history of mankind.
It appears that we may not have long to go.
I say nuclear catastrophe partly because any exchange of nuclear arsenals will bear no resemblance to anything that could be called war.
There will be no invasions, no developing strategies, no war cabinets, no protracted national efforts, no armistices, no peace settlements.
It will all be over in a matter of hours; an unimaginably horrible episode, but hardly a war.
I say nuclear catastrophe rather than nuclear war also because the episode which ends civilisation is as likely to be an accident as it is to be a monstrous design; the result of human error or foolishness rather than of deliberate choice, an ultimate irony to mock the rational pretensions of the human race.
Given these fears and the imminence of their object, it may seem to be rather worse than fiddling while Rome burns to raise in a series of lectures on law and disarmament that essay-worn jurisprudential topic ‘is international law really law?’.
However, that is precisely what 1 wish to do.
I make no real apology for such academicism but 1 will offer an explanation.
There are at least two contrasting ways of opposing force: one is with greater force, and the other is with reasons which might influence those who use or are liable to use force to refrain or desist from doing so.
The latter way, in addition to its obvious moral appeal may also, in many circumstances, be more effective.
While force and the means of destruction are primarily physical realities, the path to their deployment in the manner we now fear is through the emotions and decisions of beings who are able to achieve a measure of control over their actions.
This control depends crucially on the way in which they perceive the world including the alternatives to the use of force which they can comprehend and accept.
For this reason the manner in  which law is presented and understood becomes one facet of the development of a non-violent approach in the control of force.
Changing our conception of international law could therefore have a bearing on our capacity tor achieving peace.
Conceptual clarification and reordering are, however, hardly sufficient as means of controlling force but they may be a necessary prerequisite for attaining this objective.
In opposing human spirit to human force I am not simply setting cognition against physique.
It is doubtless the affective aspect of the human soul that is most decisive in our behavioural choices.
Envy, greed, hate, fear and the desire to dominate are likely to be the real fingers on the trigger of our destruction.
But such emotions are themselves informed by the way in which we see the world, by our conceptions of what it is that we find desirable or fearful.
Moreover the control of these emotions and their congruence with other more benign feelings, such as love and sympathy and joy in living, require the exercise of our minds, not only for the calculation of the technical means to achieve our chosen objectives, but for the formulation of the terms in which we describe the world we think we live in, and the reality within which we have to make our choices concerning the use of force.
Whether we think in terms of territory or sovereignty, of freedom or property, these or other concepts are crucial ingredients in our world views and hence in the choices which determine the use and control of our physical movements and so ultimately our survival.
Concepts, therefore, do have a significant role in the management of force.
I am not in fact optimistic about our ability to control the sort of force which is now at large in the world.
The capacity of a few — perhaps a very few — people to inflict extinction on us, will gradually extend to more and more small groups of human beings, all of whom are liable to exhibit the self-aggrandisement and irrationality which have led to so much unnecessary suffering in the history of our species.
But we must try.
Our dignity requires that we struggle in the net, however slight the hope of escape.
Where, then, may we look for hopeful areas of peace, ways in which this new overwhelmingly destructive and readily deployable force may be contained, not just for a few years, but in our minuscule timespan, for ever?
The balance of power, now a balance of terror, the fear of mutual destruction between nation-state;, is an obvious avenue to explore.
An equality of influence in the world between superpowers in the capacity to annihilate each other(and ourselves) may, for a while, alter the course of human history from one of repeated wars of a more or  less controlled sort of strictly limited skirmishes in ‘away from home’ territories.
This is not a particularly reassuring prospect.
States have shown a capacity for self-destruction in the past and wars have come with a regularity which would be monotonous were it not so horrifying; history belies the claims of statesmen to be in charge of events.
Moreover, deterrence rests on fear and fear may lead to panic and panic to the sort of mistakes that will no longer be recoverable.
This situation is in turn exacerbated by the internal political pressures on governments, democratic as well as despotic, to maintain a climate of Cold War in order to achieve their domestic objectives.
Yet if we are to be realistic in our starting-point we must accept that the relationships which give rise to nuclear catastrophe are likely to be relationships between sovereign states, each able to possess and deploy armed force for their own interests.
We must therefore look for some accommodation between states, and this in two important respects: we must seek to further binding agreements between states which limit and reduce the possession as well as the use of nuclear weapons and we must work to control the lesser hostilities whose escalation will always be one of the chief threats of total destruction.
This brings us inevitably to international law: the rules which make agreements between states binding; the rules which seek to limit from the outside the kinds of actions which states may take in relation to each other and provide a framework within which they may negotiate.
Certainly it is natural to look to law in some form or another as a force-controlling mechanism (Watson, 1982, p. 71).
Indeed, for many the object of law is to control force: law is for order and order may be taken to mean the elimination of dispute settlement by the physical power of the parties involved.
Legal institutions may employ force but, so it is said, they only use force to combat and overcome those who disrupt order by the use of their own force.
This perspective is unduly restrictive of the role of law in its socially instrumental aspects and unduly kind to those who have power over the legislative and judicial functions of states in that to define law in terms of the pursuit of order seems unwarrantably to exclude the use of law to foment disorder when this seems desirable to the politically strong.
Indeed a major element of constitutional law concerns ways and means of preventing the abuse of the force given to lawful authorities for the purpose of enforcing the law.
By abuse here 1 mean not only illegal uses of violence by those who are in defined circumstances entitled to use force, but the legal use of force where the  objectives are antithetical to social order or for some other reasons morally objectionable.
Nevertheless, given that it will not do to define law as a means to institutionalise dispute-resolution and so inhibit unregulated conflict, we may surely expect the control of force to be a major objective of law.
Municipal legal systems uniformly restrict the use of force, very markedly so in the case of the ordinary citizen, while the occurrence of riots and other manifestations of violence are taken as serious breakdowns of law.
Little wonder then that those who seek peace (that is the absence of violence) between nations as well as within them should look to law as a means of regulating and reducing the international use of force.
Until comparatively recently this hope looked greatly at odds with the realities of international law which was prepared to acknowledge the sovereignty and hence the legality of states whose boundaries or existence are the result of force, uphold treaties imposed by coercion, and in general allow that war is an international sphere.
These practices appear to recognise rather than replace the use of force in international relations.
We have, however, now outlawed war.
The legitimate waging of armed conflict is now confined to self-defence — an exception which is generally permitted in municipal law.
This may be seen as a move to make international law into proper law, or at least international law with one of its essential purposes, the control of force, and, of course, there have long been laws to restrict the type and degree of force used even in legitimate war, and some restrictions on the very legality of wars, for instance when they are in contravention of treaties.
Allowing then that international law, at least at present, sets out to control force and therefore to preserve peace, those who would deny its status as law can point to its failure in this respect.
The twentieth century is as much a century of war as any other in human history and there has been no diminution in the external use of force by states since war became illegal in 1945.
Of course, no municipal system succeeds in totally eliminating the use of force.
Crimes of violence do not negate law, they merely require its better enforcement.
A legal system must take steps to control the use of force but it does not have to be totally successful in order to remain a legal system.
Insofar as municipal systems set limits to the use of force and punish at least some of those guilty of crimes of violence it has some success as law and an undisputed claim to be regarded as law for as long as the officials of the system pursue these objectives by  taking steps against non-compliance (Hart, 1961, pp. 79–88 and 213ff.).
But can the same be said for international law?
It would appear that states prefer to act legally where possible and it is not possible to claim that states are unaffected by legal prohibitions on war, but the regularity with which such a large proportion of states are prepared to use force illegally — despite their total commitment to law-abidingness within their territories and the apparent lack of any retributive consequences of such illegalities (unless defeat in war is unhelpfully labelled as a punishment)— raise doubts about the parallels between municipal and international law in terms of the parameters of the concept of law.
Crucially, it is argued, international law lacks the necessary sanctions and hence the definitionally necessary characteristic of enforceability.
It is therefore a matter of morality, depending on the moral conscience and practical discretion of states, not a matter of law.
International law does not control force because it is not law.
Such an approach to the status of international law is not theoretically neutral; rather it is a manifestation of that most popular of all jurisprudential theories, the sanction or imperative theory of law in which some version of Austinianism is deployed to say that international law is not a command backed by the effective threat of the use of force against non-compliance and is therefore not law (Austin, 1861).
Extrapolating from the Austinian view, therefore, having outlawed the use of force in international affairs, the next logical step is to make this a genuinely legal matter by deploying superior force against those who commit the relevant illegal acts, so turning moral injunction into legal prohibition.
World peace, on this view, requires a proper world court, and most important of all, a world police force.
International law will then control force and it will do so because it is real law.
Following the pattern of development of municipal law we will be able to outlaw self-help in the enforcement of international law, remove the weapons of violence from the hands of those who might break the law and ensure that no state is a judge in its own cause when it comes to questions of legitimate self-defence or disputes about allegations of aggression.
This may be thought to be the legal way to control force.
I would counsel against taking this imperatival path, first on the rather weak ground that it is not necessary to do so.
As a conceptual analysis of the idea of law, sanction theories of the traditional  Austinian type are largely discredited.
Too many laws do not fit the required command-backed-by-threats formula for the theory to have credibility (Campbell, 1983, ch. 4).
Even if we accept the enforceability criterion for the existence of a law this can only be a necessary requirement of law if ‘enforceability’ is taken in a weak sense to mean that the rules in question are by and large adhered to, which need not, of course, be the result of threats.
If at least some people and states obey some laws for other reasons, such as moral conviction or non-coerced self-interest, then it is possible that all persons and states might do so.
What matters is conformity and not how this conformity is obtained.
To define law in terms of one means of obtaining conformity, especially when that means is a manifestation of one of the very phenomena that we are seeking to eliminate (the use of force) is to foreclose on other perhaps more defensible methods.
More practically I suggest that an extension of the sovereign-power theory into international law is an unhelpful and dangerous thing to do, at least insofar as the avoidance of war is concerned.
That which would be required to unite the community of nations includes the use of force on the scale of war and is inherently divisive and self-defeating.
The creation of an effective world police force would involve the creation of a military force which we have not the political means to control.
A world state, even assuming that it is a highly-devolved federal state, would involve compulsory and sanctioned jurisdiction on a wide range of issues at present regarded as central to the existence of the individual sovereign states which would have to become the subordinate parts of a world state.
To bring that about in a timescale which meets the present crisis for world peace would be likely to create the very wars we are seeking to avoid.
A situation would arise in which the very order which is the objective of law would have to be violated in order to achieve that objective, and this is unacceptable since international law is not an end in itself, but an instrument to be justified largely by its contribution to the limitation of violence.
The paradox of using force to overcome force is here a real contradiction.
Further while municipal law can survive a fairly high incidence of order-violation and still fulfil its ordering function, the nature of international conflict is such that comparatively few violations, perhaps only one attempt to resist the lawful force of a world state, might be more than enough to undermine the rationale for the whole edifice of peace law.
If traditional positivism is a misleading and potentially catastrophic jurisprudential approach to the control of force in international law, to what theory should we turn?
At this point I think we can make many mistakes.
The first mistake is to adopt a form of natural law theory to endow the ‘moral’ conventions of international so-called law with a degree of quasi-legal authority.
Treaties must be kept, genocide is forbidden, war is to be indulged in only when vital national interests are at stake.
This sort of moral principle, which may be thought to have the backing of international Opinion, and therefore be part of the positive morality of the international community, can readily be dubbed part of natural law, that is, of binding rules of universal application, and at the same time regarded as general principles of international law.
I do not think that we should be against such moral principles.
They, or something like them, are admirable and important and we must strive to make them political realities, but they are not in themselves law and nothing is gained by pretending that they are law.
Indeed, there is much to be lost by so doing because it hinders the conceptualising and hence the realisation of law's distinctive contribution to peace.
Moreover, I doubt whether calling moral principles of this sort ‘natural law’ is in accordance with any natural law theory, which standardly requires a form of authoritative promulgation in addition to rational justification, something which is not a feature of existing international law.
Nevertheless it is not a mistake to look to a municipal model, for our interest is in what international law can be, not simply what it is.
On one such model what law has to offer are certain types of humanly contrived institutions: legislatures, courts, enforcement agencies, and a certain way of going about making and applying binding rules.
Although these are hardly the dominant features of international law at present, on this paradigm international law could control force by having courts to make decisions about conflicts of interest between states on the basis of authoritative rules and impartial and effective procedures for the accurate and fair application of these rules to specific circumstances.
As such it could be seen as an alternative to armed conflict, an alternative to blind acceptance of an unsatisfactory and perhaps explosive status quo in the control of disputed territory, and even as an alternative to democratic political methods of dispute resolution which can so often lead to legitimately and dangerously dissatisfied minorities.
Such a system might have much more to offer in the way of conflict-resolution than the present system of customary  principles as a loose framework within which states enter into negotiations.
Without entering into the fine detail of what is required for a system of institutional international law it is clear that merely historically-established conventions followed according to the discretion of the participants in international relationships between states is insufficient to constitute law and is better regarded as a form of anarchy.
Insufficient because it does not provide what law has to offer, which is first, an authoritative means of deciding what the rules to be applied are: second, an impartial method of applying those rules to particular circumstances, and third, a way of marking that the rules and resultant decisions are binding or non-optional on the parties.
At this point it is likely that we may make a second mistake and go for a purely positivist view of law, the view that the nature of law can be appreciated purely by reciting the elements of positing and applying law without reference to its objectives or functions, so that we have a legal system as long as there are institutionalised ways of selecting mandatory rules and some arrangement for an authoritative application of those rules to particular situations.
Conceptually this mistake can be pointed out by indicating that unless the rules in question had important relevance to central areas of human concern we would not think of them as constituting a system of law.
More importantly, the weakness of such pure positivism is that it detaches law from any rationale which could explain its bindingness.
Law binds not because it says it does (although it does say just that) but because there are good reasons for accepting its claim to mandatoriness and these good reasons have to do with what law can do for us in certain situations of social opportunity, difficulty and peril.
In the case of international law what the institutions of positive law have to offer is a means for settling dangerous disputes and limiting the destructive powers which could be used to resolve those disputes in an unacceptable manner.
This device depends on the existence of institutions which can actually adjudicate on and, one hopes, resolve disputes in a relatively impartial way on the basis of impartial rules whose decisions are binding on the parties in question.
This is an alternative to war which states could in theory accept without giving up their own moral values, going back on their own factual claims, losing their dignity in the community of nations, or giving up their political endeavours to persuade others to their point of view.
Law cannot fulfil this function unless the decisions of the legal  institutions are binding or non-optional.
The whole point of the legal process is to get a decisive determination which will end the dispute in question.
The acceptance of the decision, whether or not they believe it to be morally correct, is of the essence of the legal device, the very idea of law.
But the narrow idea of bindingness does not in itself take us to a real ‘ought’, to a genuine obligation; it only says that if you are going to play the game of law this involves taking the rules and decisions as mandatory or non-optional.
The reasons for playing the game, the source of the ‘ought-bindingness’ is the ethical function of law, the purposes which the system serves.
It is possible to have a theory of law which stops short of explaining legal obligation as we are aware of it in practice, that is the obligation which articulates the morally-sound reasons for compliance.
For this purpose some version of traditional positivism may well do.
But such theories are parasitic on an implicit understanding that law is a type of instrument adapted to specific important purposes, and such theories are of little guidance in thinking through the role of international law in controlling force for they can suggest no more than a mimicking of the institutions of municipal law without regard to the purposes of having such or similar institutions in the international context.
The theory which I commend as a guide to the fruitful development of international law in the control of force may be called ‘ethical’ or perhaps ‘functional positivism’.
‘Positivism’ because it requires the standard institutions of positive law for making, recognising and applying binding rules.
‘Functional’ because such institutions have to be seen as serving certain value objectives, in this case primarily the avoidance of war and mutual destruction.
‘Ethical’ because fulfilling this function it seeks to follow a method which has the ethics of impartiality embodied in it, being the ultimate foundation of its bindingness: the ethical imperative of securing a morally justified indeed morally overriding goal in a morally acceptable manner.
‘Ethical’ is to be preferred to ‘moral’because to speak of ‘moral positivism’implies that the role of law is simply to apply the moral rules of society, whereas the theory is that law deals with conflict in a way which at least in part transcends the moral disagreements endemic in societies of men or of nations.
‘Functional’ is to be preferred to ‘instrumental’because the task of dissolving conflict and dispute is not done by a legal method when it is purely conciliation and compromise of a political sort.
The legal method involves the effort to apply rules fairly without regard to the comparative political and military strengths of the disputants, so that the goal of order is approached only obliquely or indirectly in the actual judicial process.
Perhaps the most important thing about ethical positivism is that it is incompatible with force being the main focus of law's methods and impact.
Force is indeed antithetical to its nature at least until its non-coercive authority has been generally accepted in a community.
For this reason it neither defines law in terms of force, legitimate or otherwise, nor does it point to literal enforceability as the essence of law.
As a theory of law it requires us to accept that there is something intrinsically moral in the legal method.
To this extent it is a form of natural law theory; nearest to Fuller's procedural form of natural law (Fuller, 1969).
However, it is not suggested,pace Fuller, that the internal morality of law is inherent in the most efficient methods of subjecting human conduct to the governance of rules, although there is more strength than has been generally granted in the view that government can only be compatible with the dignity of man if Fuller's eight requirements for making law are satisfied (Nicholson, 1973–4).
In fact it is best not to think of ethical positivism as a theory of natural law because this may lead to consequences which are directly contrary to those sought, namely, the appeal to ‘higher’ laws as a basis for disobeying positive law, and the pursuit of an external validation for the devices of positive law which posits the existence of metaphysical rules to be discovered by a process of moral inspection.
For ethical positivism law is a contrivance not a discovery of men.
In the case of ethical positivism what is more in focus is the morality which arises from the impartiality of law, the moral authority which comes from a method which places the application of general rules in the hands of impartial judges.
In my view legal process embodies some properties which tend to increase the law's trustworthiness as a moral guide although not one which simply incorporates the moral consensus of ordinary life with the rules of the polity.
This view is based on the weight which attaches to the processes by which decisions are reached as well as to the content of the decisions made, that is to process or procedural rather than end-state principles.
This distinction is familiar enough to the jurist for whom the fairness and therefore the acceptability of a trial may be more a matter of the way in which the trial was conducted than whether or not the verdict reached was in some further sense the right one.
A fair trial is one conducted according to certain procedural rules and perhaps one to which the participants bring certain appropriate judicial attitudes, rather than one which reaches the correct verdict.
The point here is that we do not have an applicable criterion of a correct verdict other than the one which results from a fair trial (Rawls, 1972, pp. 83–9).
Now it is clear that we do sometimes have alternative ways of determining guilt and innocence to our own satisfaction and it therefore makes sense to think of a fair trial as a trial designed to produce the correct verdict where correctness is assessable by some other objective standards, but in many cases this is not so and in practice the correct verdict is simply the one which is reached after a fair trial.
Thus, in moral deliberation it is not necessarily a confusion of validity and truth to give weight to the way in which a decision is reached as well as or perhaps rather than to the content of the decision reached.
Just as we give more weight to the views of an impartial judge, one who is not a party to the dispute in question, than to a partial one, so we give more weight to an impartial moral opinion, one expressed by a person who is not directly involved in the situation being assessed, than To an interested party.
Similarly we give more weight to an informed moral judge than to an uninformed one: more weight to the moral opinions of someone capable of extensive reflection and commitment than to a person incapable of concentration and careless about self-contradiction.
The moral authority of law gets a foothold in the idea that it is rational to give special consideration to views which result from a process of impartial, informed and capable reflection, and this not simply because this process helps us to know more precisely what will promote independently ascertained moral goals but also because it is liable to result in superior judgements about what goals we ought to pursue (Campbell, 1971).
Much could be said about all these characteristics but of most significance for our purpose is the role of impartiality in relation to legislative and legal reasoning.
Impartiality is a concept which has been used to convey many things.
In this context we may distinguish (i) the impartiality which is part and parcel of making moral or legal-judgments on the basis of formulating universal rules permitting or prohibiting certain types of conduct as distinct from making decisions only about particular persons and particular occasions: the impartiality not just of universalisability but of rules which actually are to be universalised;(ii) the impartiality of being a non-involved person which is particularly relevant to the position of the person who is applying legal or moral rules to particular circumstances and which is  directly to do with the characteristics of the judge who according to this standard must have no personal interest in the outcome of the case, but which may also be relevant in the process of legislation since legislators may have particular and personal interests in the outcome of the legislation in question;(iii) there is the idea of impartiality as a norm of moral and judicial reasoning which has to do with giving due consideration to all relevant factors, a practice which may further but is not guaranteed by impartiality of the first two types.
If we are looking for advice on a particular situation which affects us then impartiality of the second type is particularly important; for instance, the judge who assesses the relevant facts and selects the relevant moral or legal rules must not be someone who has something to gain or lose by the outcome, although this presupposes the correctness of the rules to be applied and so takes us back to the impartiality normally associated with legislators, which is a matter of their involvement in determining rules which are not only universalisable but are actually to be universalised, at least within a given community, and to their impartiality in the third sense namely the adequacy of the consideration given to the various relevant considerations.
If we regard our guide as simply looking for advice as to what moral rules are correct, unrelated to a particular decision which he is called upon to make or to a particular situation in which he is involved then it will be impartiality of the first and last types which are particularly relevant: that is, the formal requirement that legislation is to be universalised, and the material requirement that the decisions made are based on a consideration of all relevant factors.
My suggestion is that impartiality of one type or another and perhaps other qualities of decision-makers might be the basis for regarding the law as a locus of moral authority.
This would mean that the question of the law would depend on an examination of the processes of lawmaking to discover the extent to which it conforms to norms such as that of impartiality.
If it could be shown, for instance, that we know sufficient about the deliberation of legislators, political and judicial, to be assured, for instance , that they were better informed than we are then this might be a reason for giving weight to the content of the law in deciding what is morally right or wrong in areas where we felt that we lacked sufficient knowledge.
Moreover, if the moral judgment which we require to make is one which involves our own personal interest we might reasonably look to the relevant law as representing a less partial view of the matter than our own; for, without attributing to the law a non-partisan impartiality at variance with most available knowledge about the actual political and legal processes, it might still happen to be less partial and more informed than we are when making judgments about cases which affect us closely.
Further — but more debatably — if we feel that our own moral values are based on relatively restricted experience and inadequate consideration of alternative values, we might concede that the lawmakers are in a better position to give due and adequate consideration to all morally relevant factors which bear on the critique of moral values.
These are I think the various areas in which it is reasonable to raise the possibility that the law could be a moral authority.
Ethical positivism is thus a theory of or approach to law, perhaps a way of viewing law, which explicates law as a human contrivance which is appropriate for attaining desirable social objectives in a morally acceptable manner.
It bases the idea of obligation to law, reasons for acquiescing in or committing oneself to legal process, on the value of the ends which thus become attainable.
For instance, a good reason for observing a law whose content you find objectionable is that it is a law and therefore part of a system of mandatory rules which has value as a system because of its overall results, results which are dependent on subjects observing laws which they find objectionable.
This approach to law is an attempt to ethicise legal obligation, and posits as its ideal a situation in which all subjects can obey laws out of a sense of the ethical value of law, a sense which does not require them to be in moral agreement with any of the laws of the system in question.
As such it not only rejects the analytical approach to law as a form of sanctioned command or rule, unless sanction is taken to include the force of acceptable self-interest in the absence of humanly-contrived threats designed to alter behaviour.
Beyond this the practical stress of sanctions is seen as unhelpful in the development and maintenance of law, since the person who is threatened is not only psychologically less open to accepting the ethical demands of law but may indeed by virtue of the threat be under a reduced ethical obligation to conform to the sanctioned law.
Applying this to the realities of international law, the ethical positivist in the first place rejects the search for an intuited or reasoned ‘natural law’ on which to base international law, for he views law as a human creation to serve those human objectives which survive ethical criticism.
The natural law method, it is alleged, distorts moral reasoning, is ontologically unsound, dangerously anarchical and  distracts our attention from the essential task of contriving positive laws of justiciable form and content.
Further the ethical positivist will reject the move towards giving the organs of international law teeth of a physical sort to any significant degree, on the grounds that this undermines the ethical authority of the system and in present circumstances renders impossible the move towards the developments required in international law if it is to act as an acceptable method of dispute resolution.
The ethical positivist is likely to seek the development of three broad directions; first, the drafting and annunciation through the UN of a comprehensive set of rules applying to the relationships between states, including where necessary cognisance of those aspects of internal affairs which are of international significance.
These rules must have that generality and universality which make them ingredients in impartial determinations and sufficient precision and bite to be used in making genuine resolutions of disputes, for instance, over territory; second, the extension of the role and jurisdiction of juridically sound international courts on the model of the International Court of Justice, to which there will be compulsory reference of disorder endangering disputes to be decided by the application of the relevant set of reformed international laws, and the decisions of which would be mandatory with no reservations permitted; 4 third, the massive extension of non-coercive jural agencies in the area of enforcement where this is taken to mean the monitoring of the behaviour of states in relation to international law and the decisions of international courts.
Such a programme may seem fanciful in certain respects.
Can we expect to achieve sufficient political agreement to formulate the necessary dispute-resolving rules in an ideologically divided world, even if the avowed intention is to establish rules which are neutral as between such ideologies, the acceptance of which would not be taken as manifesting more than a commitment to getting some agreed rules?
Further, can we expect states to agree to accept such a system, particularly with compulsory reference to international courts and mandatory application of their decisions, even if there are not sanctions attached to non-adherence?
And can we expect states to allow non-coercive jural agencies to gather information in an effective manner when this involves the divulgence of state secrets, even if this is seen as the only way to secure confidence in, for instance, disarmament treaties?
Again, can we devise a system in which judges will be appointed and  will function independently of the particular political interests of member-states and view their decisions in terms of law and not politics?
These are all very real problems but a great deal will depend on the extent to which mutual destruction is seen as a real possibility, and on the extent to which international law can be presented as an effective contrivance for the acceptable resolution of international conflict.
Much is contingent on the intelligence of our political systems and the chances of world history which may yet give us such a fright that something commensurable to the strides made by the creation of the UN in 1945 will be made possible.
Also of practical importance is the rejection of the imperatival path of sanction deployment as if international law could emerge as some form of ultimate deterrent.
This requires the intense work of international political theorists in relation to the creation of a legislative process for international law.
Also required is the exponential growth of the existing cohort of impartial international judges, and their effective protection from partial political pressures.
In conclusion I will make some comments on the requisites for effective rules relating to the control of armed conflicts.
What is required here are rules which courts can use to distinguish between legal and illegal armed conflicts, and between legal and illegal methods of conducting legal armed conflicts.
Clearly the current situation in which the use of force is illegal except in self-defence is inadequate.
Quite apart from the need to withdraw from states the right to make up their own minds as to what counts as self-defence, a set of rules more in accordance with historical change and moral consensus is required.
Some place must be found for the principle of self-determination as a basis for altering international boundaries and the controlled and limited use of force in the service of this principle, and, in order to establish the boundaries of such legitimate force, it will be necessary to establish rules to which appeal can be made for the settlement of territorial disputes by international courts as an essential precondition of the legitimate resort to force.
Then there is a need for rules which legitimate the intervention of one state in the internal affairs of another where this is a matter of urgent humanity.
There is no point in having a law forbidding such wars which outlaw such events as the recent Tanzanian intervention in Uganda, an event which was met by a stunning silence from the international community insofar as the evident illegality of the operation was concerned.
Such a situation is one which allows other  countries to put aside international law and act according to their own judgments.
The development of the law of peace along these lines would not be a return to the acceptance of the legality of armed conflict as an instrument of national policy, but it would involve the articulation of a theory of the just war, however dangerous this may seem.
Only such a theory can generate rules which can be accepted as having the sort of ethical authority that is required for international law to be taken seriously as the ultimate arbiter of international relations.
It is not that the outlawing of all war apart from the overwhelming necessities of self-defence is unrealistic and therefore inevitably unefficacious as a means for controlling force, but rather that it runs counter to the sort of moral consensus on which the ethical authority of international law could be based.
The move to develop justiciable and acceptable rules for the control of armed conflict is simply one aspect of the programme for using international law to control force which follows from the approach of ethical positivism.
It may well be that such an approach is incommensurate with the difficulties presented by international disagreements and internal conflicts but it does suggest a way of looking at law which enhances its potential as an instrument for peace.
If law can contribute to the control of the sort of force which threatens nuclear catastrophe then it is likely to be law seen as a morally authoritative contrivance for securing the overriding objective of human survival.
A Right to Tax Diversion?
The State and the Citizen
JAMES DIGNAN
The idea of refusing to pay tax, based on a person's moral opposition to the purpose for which it is raised is not a new one.
Among the earliest known tax-resisters were the early Christians who refused to pay tax to finance the building of Caesar's pagan temple in Rome (Mayer, 1969, p. 133).
Subsequently, however, tax-resistance on moral grounds has been centred largely, though not exclusively, on objection to ‘war tax’.
As such, it has not hitherto constituted a particularly significant form of protest either numerically or politically.
In part the practical difficulty of withholding tax most of which is deducted at source has prevented it from ever assuming large-scale proportions, while the fact that opposition has in the past tended to focus on specific wars, of which the Vietnam war was the most prominent recent example, ensured that it was usually a relatively transient phenomenon.
However the recent revival of interest in the practice, which can be traced back to 1977, represents a new departure, rendering it of far greater potential significance than it has previously assumed.
This is partly because of a number of important changes that have taken place in the scale of the protest, the targets against which it has been directed, and the tactics that have been employed, but particularly because of some fundamental changes in the broader political social and economic context in which the protest is now taking place.
In 1977 growing social opposition to the scale of military spending in general and the priority accorded to it over other heads of government expenditure, linked with a more specific objection against nuclear weapons culminated in the launching of political campaigns, in both the UK and the USA, to put the issue of tax-resistance onto the  legislative agenda.
What had hitherto been a sporadic, locally-based protest movement directed against specific wars thus acquired an international dimension of steadily increasing significance and coalesced around these two much broader issues which are of considerably more lasting and widespread concern.
The emergence of these two campaigns also marked an important tactical shift in the response to the failure of earlier attempts by individuals in both the UK and the USA to secure judicial recognition for the practice of withholding tax destined for military expenditure.
Thus, both the Peace Tax Campaign in the UK, and the campaign to promote a World Peace Tax Fund Act in the USA adopted a primarily political strategy which was aimed at giving conscientious tax-resisters a statutory right of tax diversion, and at establishing appropriate machinery to make that right effective.
Although litigation in support of such a claim has by no means been abandoned, the switch to a more overt political campaign raises the possibility of developing a more co-ordinated test-case strategy — in place of the ad hoc response previously resorted to — of the type developed in pursuit of civil right advocacy in the.USA, and welfare rights advocacy both there and in the UK, to try to influence the course of social change.
Important though these changes in the nature of the tax resistance movement are, however, perhaps it would be a mistake to view them as an isolated phenomenon, and to try to assess their moral and legal implications without also addressing some even more fundamental contemporary political, economic and social developments with which they are closely associated.
First, and of most immediate relevance as far as the tax-protest movement is concerned, the past two decades have witnessed a remarkable change in the nature of political dissent which has increasingly assumed unconstitutional and, on occasions, violent forms.
While this has sometimes been aimed at the complete subversion and overthrow of the established political order, as in the case of the Bader-Meinhoff group in West Germany and the Italian Red Brigades, more recently it is concern over nuclear weapons, and specifically the installation of cruise missiles that has engendered extra-constitutional forms of dissent both in this country and abroad.
No doubt this tendency may be attributable, at least in part, to a lack of responsiveness on the part of the authorities to widespread fears and legitimate demands, even when these are expressed in a constitutional manner by broad sectors of the public, particularly as in the case of the recent deployment of cruise missiles.
Moreover, the reaction of the  authorities to these initiatives has in turn itself violated constitutional principles, 4 thereby engendering further disillusionment and protest.
Although the Peace Tax Campaign has so far eschewed the use of extra-constitutional forms of dissent, confining itself for the most part to orthodox expressions of protest such as parliamentary lobbying and legal action in the courts, the failure of conventional forms of political protest to influence the prevailing defence strategy/taxation policy could have important implications regarding the future choice of tactics to be used.
Second, despite the state's vast law-enforcement apparatus it appears increasingly incapable of securing and maintaining for its citizens the wholesomeness and amenity of their physical environment, or even the long-term physical well-being of the citizens themselves.
Moreover recent events at Sellafield indicate that that enforcement apparatus is more likely to be used against environmentally-conscious groups such as Greenpeace at the behest of public bodies like BNFL which are responsible for inflicting the damage on the environment in the first place.
This particular example highlights two additional shortcomings which afflict our conventional political institutions.
First, despite the growing realisation on the part of a sizable minority of the population of the damage done to the environment and the quality of life, in the interests of economic growth and national security, this increasing public concern is a constituency that is not adequately represented in our decision-making processes at whatever level.
Second, a vast increase in the level of state intervention in a variety of spheres (Friedman, 1971 and 1972, ch. 10) has been accompanied by the development of new forms of state regulation in which discretion and informal controls exercised through devices such as circulars, tax concessions and various methods of state economic management (Daintith, 1979) are accorded much greater prominence than formal ‘legal’ measures.
As a result, large spheres of state activity and numerous forms of state regulation are beyond the reach of conventional levers of legal and political control.
Third, the so-called ‘welfare state’ has so far appeared unable to remedy any but the grossest forms of economic and social deprivation or effectively to restrict the range of wider socio-economic inequalities, in spite of the fiscal burden imposed on the population and the productive system as a whole.
This must be a matter of concern for any group advocating a right to divert taxes on moral grounds, if only because of the ‘floodgates’ argument which it is likely to provoke  in response.
Moreover any rights theory which would justify a right of conscientious war-tax diversion without addressing these inequalities would appear defective to many.
Fourth, and perhaps most significant, the state appears increasingly unable to sustain an adequate level of economic growth in the face of inflationary and recessionary trends.
If this state of affairs continues the state will be denied an important source of legitimation for its own authority — namely the promise (which it has held out in the past) of a steady increase in the level of material well-being enjoyed by the population as a whole (Poggi, 1978; Winkler, 1975; Poulantzas, 1978; Habermas, 1971, 1976).
It may also bring to a head a number of crucial questions about spreading priorities — for example, defence versus social security spending — when the oil revenues begin to decline over the coming years.
Seen in this much broader context the campaign over the peace-tax issue is obviously at most a relatively minor skirmish in a very much larger battle, one that is being fought, as is the peace-tax issue itself, on the terrain of classical political and constitutional theory — namely, the relationship between citizens and the state.
For the interconnected problems outlined above call strongly into question the ability of the present institutional apparatus of the state to respond in an appropriate manner to the various challenges which currently confront it.
Not surprisingly, these developments have been accompanied by calls from various quarters for a thoroughgoing theoretical reappraisal of our contemporary political and constitutional wisdoms.
Thus Professor MacPherson has provided an analysis of the principal shortcomings of current liberal-democratic theories and has offered a revised model which he calls ‘participatory democracy’, and which is based on a humanist Marxist perspective (MacPherson, 1972, 1973, 1977).
More recently, professor Griffith has spoken of the need for a new jurisprudence for public law, which he suggests might best be founded on some (unspecified) modern variant of utilitarianism (Griffith, 1981).
Tony Prosser (Prosser, 1982) meanwhile has also argued for a new critical and objective theory of public law, in his case derived from Habermas's work on communicative competence.
Although the details of the prescriptions advanced in each case may vary, there is some similarity in the nature of the diagnosis which each offers for what it is that currently afflicts our ailing body politic.
At the risk of being accused of being a pedlar of yet another quack remedy I wish to argue that a rights-based theory, derived in part from  the influential rights thesis recently put forward by Ronald Dworkin (Dworkin, 1978), is also capable of addressing some of these difficulties confronted by our orthodox political and constitutional theories, in addition to its more immediate relevance with regard to the specific issue of tax diversion (Dignan, 1983), and other civil libertarian issues; though to do so it stands in need of some revision.
In tentatively proposing such a theory I take it that any acceptable political or moral theory must be capable of satisfying the following demands.
First, it must address itself in a relevant fashion to the kind of issues identified above, that is, it must be grounded in the moral social, economic and political problems of the late twentieth century, in contrast to our prevailing political and constitutional orthodoxies which originated in, and address themselves almost exclusively to mid-nineteenth century concerns.
Second, I would agree with Tony Prosser (Prosser, 1982) that any theory should be based on an analysis which makes it possible to describe and explain existing social relations and the operation of state institutions; and that it should provide the means for an effective critique of the latter and point the way for their future development.
Third, it should combine pragmatism with realism.
Thus, consideration should be given to the way in which policy goals may be effectively translated into political and legal reality, based on both a realistic perception of the obstacles that have to be overcome and an accurate assessment of the contribution which lawyers and litigation may make in promoting desirable social change.
PROBLEMS CONFRONTING OUR CONVENTIONAL POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS
In seeking to account for the shortcomings which have previously been identified in respect of our conventional political institutions it may be helpful to make use of a typology developed in a slightly different though related context by Kamenka and Tay (Kamenka and Tay, 1975; Kamenka and Tay, 1980).
Our current system of representative government based on a democratic franchise was fashioned in the mid-nineteenth century during the era of competitive liberal capitalism.
This has been characterised by Kamenka and Tay in terms of one of three great paradigms of social ideology, social organisation, law and administration, which they call the gesellschaft model of  society.
This gesellschaft model presupposes a society made up of atomic individuals pursuing private interests , in competition with one another, in which the principle of individual enterprise constitutes the chief mechanism for the allocation of resources.
The role which it envisages for the state is limited to that of providing the minimum framework necessary for the regulation of competing private interests, while the gesellschaft model of law is conceived in terms of formally defining the equivalent individual rights that are required to make the market work.
Macpherson has argued convincingly that it was in the context of just such a society that the case For a representative democracy was initially accepted, first as a logical requirement to protect acquisitive, self-interested and conflicting individuals (from rapacious governments and from one another) and second to establish and nurture a free market economy (MacPherson, 1977).
It is now widely accepted that since the era of competitive liberal capitalism, fundamental changes have taken place, particularly as regards the increasingly interventionist role of the state.
This has even displaced the market mechanism as an allocator of resources in certain areas, thereby politicising spheres of activity formerly left to the market to perform.
Such developments are perceived by Kamenka and Tay as betokening a shift away from a gesellschaft model of law and society, towards a bureaucratic administrative social and legal order.
The central presupposition in this model is not the atomic individual, but a non-human abstracted ruling interest or public policy, for example that of efficiency in the running of a transport system.
This shift is considered to have generated a crisis in law and legal ideology for under bureaucratic administrative regulations law has increasingly become a means of implementing programmes of action to advance political goals which are identified in terms of the public interest.
Such laws frequently confer considerable discretionary authority on public administrators.
Moreover this form of regulation is closely associated with the emergence of new institutional machinery such as quangos, and regulatory agencies, which are not easily assimilated into orthodox public law concepts.
The latter are still for the most part wedded to the gesellschaft model — hence the crisis in legal ideology.
As a result, the vast extension of government administration into so many fields formerly subject to private determination has outgrown the capacity of traditional judicial machinery to subject it to control.
In the political sphere also it is possible to detect a parallel crisis developing in respect of orthodox democratic theory based on the  conventional model of representative democracy, For one thing the traditional mechanisms of political control and accountability exercised through parliament have been rendered increasingly ineffective by the ascending power of the executive.
This is based in part on the growth of effective party organisation, which has steadily weakened parliament's original critical role, and in part on the emergence of a complex civil service structure with access to information and technical expertise that are denied to ordinary Members of Parliament (Poggi, 1978; Crossman, 1963 and 1975–7).
In conjunction with these developments, the increased involvement by the state in the quest for economic growth, and a growing preoccupation with national security has had the effect of converting issues of political policy into purely technical ones.
The need for political choice from among a range of policy options is thus played down, in favour of a managerial and technical response to practical problems.
As a result the public interest is increasingly defined by expert professional administrators, and administrative decisions designed to promote the public interest are articulated in a language that screens them from effective parliamentary criticisms and public debate.
It should perhaps be noted that in spite of the shift from a gesellschaft to a bureaucratic administrative type of law and social regulation which has been outlined above, private (essentially property-related) interests continue to be well-served by the existing representative model of democracy, in spite of its imperfections as a means of exercising political control and accountability over policy-making.
This is partly because the effect of the state's role in the economic sphere has largely been in support of continued private capital accumulation.
But also the party system itself is credited by MacPherson as being chiefly responsible for the preservation of the institution of private property and the market mechanism, notwithstanding the extension of the franchise which took place during the nineteenth century.
For he explains that the function of the party system has been to blur the conflict of class since each party has been obliged to appeal to ‘the common good’ in pursuit of long-term majority support.
As a result it is highly unlikely that a party with a serious commitment to any substantial change in the institutional form of the market would ever get elected as it would be portrayed and perceived as being ‘too extreme’.
The net result of this state of affairs is that there exist citadels of private economic power (Unger, 1983)— that is, relatively small groups  of people who are in a position to control the basic terms of collective prosperity by making crucial decisions about investment and deployment of capital.
These decisions are not, of course, subject to any effective process of democratic accountability and, for the reasons already outlined, these citadels of private economic power are themselves effectively beyond the pale of normal party political conflict.
So, in both the public and the private sphere, there are now substantial accretions of power that are not subject to any effective means of either political or judicial control.
Perhaps the most serious defect of the current representative model of English politics though is that it disenfranchises, in a double sense, the broader electorate which falls outside the established consensus.
Disenfranchisement in the first sense relates to the virtual exclusion of certain substantive issues from the ordinary political agenda.
These include, first, any calls for a radical restructuring of society in which new structures and processes of government are sought which would significantly alter the balance between governors and governed; second, calls for greater priority to be given to social, community and ecological factors in decision-making and lower priority to be given to economic and technological factors which are geared towards reproducing or sustaining the kind of society that exists at present; and, third, calls for a significant change in defence policy, for example , a renunciation of nuclear weapons, neutralism or disengagement from military alliances such as NATO (McAuslan, 1980, p. 6).
Thus political programmes that envisage an alternative form of society, or even major institutional changes in the way that existing society is constituted, are effectively disenfranchised by the current model of representative democracy.
Disenfranchisement takes place in a second, procedural, sense, by virtue of the almost total absence of opportunities for ordinary people to take part in, and effectively contribute to the decision-making process at whatever level, in the outcome of which they feel they have an interest.
The interest which is most frequently, though not exclusively, excluded from participation is one based on feelings of ‘public concern’, for example, over the environment, or quality of life, as opposed to private, property-related interests, or the public interest, which is articulated by professional public administrators.
Moreover, even where such opportunities for participation in the decision-making process do appear to exist, as for example in the public local inquiry, they frequently turn out on closer inspection to be disingenuous as McAuslan and others have demonstrated in respect of the Windscale Inquiry (McAuslan, 1980; Breach, 1978).
Thus gestures in the direction of participation are very rarely premissed on the basis of any considered political theory, much less on the adoption of any fundamental moral position.
It is time now to consider what contribution a rights-based theory might be able to make in developing such a moral position, and how that position might relate to a revised, more radical form of democratic theory.
A RIGHTS-BASED APPROACH
In formulating any rights-based theory, the obvious starting-point is the influential theory of rights recently advanced by Ronald Dworkin (Dworkin, 1978).
His theory is of particular interest, first, because of the way he characterises rights as stopping principles.
Where rights (at least in the strong sense in which he uses the term) are in play, they operate like political trumps to defeat arguments founded on appeals to general social utility which would normally be accepted as a sufficient justification for overriding the wishes of an individual.
In effect they confer on the individual a sphere of immunity against interference by the state, other organisations and other individuals.
The only ground on which such a right could be defeated, according to Dworkin, would be a competing right advanced by another individual, and even then one such right could not be taken automatically to subordinate another.
The second feature which is of interest in Dworkin's formulation is the way in which the content of rights is derived from two non-controversial ultimate moral principles.
One is the notion of human dignity which has come to pervade modern ethical and social thought in the West.
It is closely associated with Kant's assertion that there are ways of treating a man which are inconsistent with recognising him as a full member of the community so that such treatment is profoundly unjust.
The other is the idea of political equality which presupposes that ‘the weaker members of a political community are entitled to the same concern and respect of their government as the more powerful members have secured for themselves, so that if some men have freedom of decision whatever the effect on the general good, then all men must have the same freedom’(Dworkin, 1978, p. 199).
These two principles which are both firmly embedded in the liberal political tradition are run together by Dworkin to provide a master principle of equal concern and respect.
So individuals may only have rights against  their government in the strong sense of being immune to the countervailing claims of general utility if those rights may be derived from that overriding principle of equal concern and respect.
How does this theoretical approach fare in relation to the problems which were outlined in the opening section?
I have elsewhere tried to show (Dignan, 1983) that as far as the peace-tax issue itself is concerned the principle of equal concern and respect does generate a right to divert an appropriate amount of income tax from military to peaceful expenditure.
The argument rests on an analogy with the right of conscientious objection which is supported by Dworkin.
For, just as the individual has the moral right not to kill in violation of his own moral principles, a right recognised by law in this country since 1916, so also it can be argued that he has the right not to be required to contribute through his taxes towards the maintenance of a professional army equipped with weapons of mass destruction to kill on his behalf.
In each case the principle of equal concern and respect requires the government to take account of the individual's convictions.
Failure to do so constitutes an invasion of personality which the state is not entitled to commit if its claim to respect individual rights is to be taken seriously.
Moreover, as Steven Lukes has persuasively argued, the idea of autonomy (of which conscientious reflection is a crucial component) is also intimately related to the idea of equal respect for persons.
For one way of denying someone the respect to which he is entitled is by failing to treat him as an autonomous agent, for example, by unreasonably restricting the range of alternative courses of action from which he can choose.
Yet when tax is deducted at source, as is the case with a Pay-As-You-Earn scheme, that is precisely what happens.
The individual is denied even the opportunity to break the law on conscientious grounds.
If a right to conscientious tax diversion can be established in this way, then, if it is to mean anything at all, it must be proof against standard utilitarian objections, for example , those relating to the cost of administering such a scheme.
However there is one powerful objection that must be considered, namely the so-called ‘floodgates’ argument, which is based on the fear that if such a concession were granted to war-tax protesters, the door would then be opened for other tax-refusal campaigns in opposition to various other governmental activities, including, perhaps, opposition to paying tax for welfare.
In fact, a close reading of Dworkin's theory indicates that there is no inconsistency in both advocating a right of conscientious war-tax  diversion and denying such a right in the case of the welfare-tax protester.
What is also indicated, though, is a serious shortcoming in the scope of Dworkin's theory in relation to the broader issue of social and economic inequality to which reference was made earlier.
As has been seen, the only ground on which a right in the strong sense can be defeated is an even weightier competing right advanced by another individual.
In the case of the conscientious war-tax protester it is difficult to conceive of any such competing right which may be plausibly argued against them since their action neither threatens direct violence to others nor does it appear significantly to increase the risk of violent attack from elsewhere.
Dworkin himself suggests that no one has an individual right to have enforced all the laws of the nation, only those which he would have a right to have enacted if they were not already law.
While laws against personal assault probably fall into this category, it is clear that no one has an individual right to a particular defence policy.
As for the case of the welfare-tax protesters Dworkin implies that they have no right in the strong sense to withhold their tax.
Presumably this must be because, unlike the war-tax protesters, they do succumb to a competing individual right which is capable of being derived from the principle of equal concern and respect.
This would only be the case if the latter entitled the individual to look to the government for the provision of certain welfare benefits.
A great many liberal writers, Dworkin included, would support just such a proposition which is consistent with Rawls's well-known thesis that the individual, and particularly the least well-off, do have certain economic rights against the state, founded on justice, which not even the welfare of society as a whole can override.
However, like Rawls, Dworkin's commitment to equality in the economic sphere is somewhat limited.
Thus, he differentiates between two different ideas which might be encompassed by the concept of equality.
One is the right to exactly equal treatment , that is, to the same distribution of goods or opportunities as everyone else has.
The other is the right to treatment as an equal, or, as Dworkin puts it ‘the right to equal concern and respect in the political decision about how these goods and opportunities are to be distributed’(Dworkin, 1978, p. 273).
Dworkin makes it clear that he considers the second principle to be the more fundamental one under a liberal conception of equality.
What this means is that overall economic policy should be dictated by utilitarian considerations, aiming to improve the general welfare.
Only if some people, ‘because of their special circumstances — because they  are crippled or lack talents prized in the market, or for some such reason — end up below the minimum standard of living required to lead a decent, self-fulfilling life at all ’(Dworkin, 1978a, pp. 244, 258) would they have a right to ‘a minimum standard’, even at the expense of the general welfare.
It is true that this formulation of treating a person as an equal is consistent with the traditional liberal conception of equality, amounting to the familiar idea of equality of opportunity, and even this restricted concept of equality appears capable of generating a competing individual right which is strong enough to defeat the welfare-tax protester's claim to be allowed to divert some of his tax into non-welfare spending schemes.
However, as MacPherson and others have pointed out, such a formulation fails to come to terms with the central dilemma confronting liberalism, which is that in an unequal society, where some people come to depend on provision made by others in order to pursue their livelihood, all are not equally able to lead a fully human existence.
Indeed Lukes has very plausibly argued that equality of opportunity fundamentally conflicts with the idea of equal concern and respect (Lukes, 1973, p. 126).
At any rate, the scope of Dworkin's rights theory as currently formulated is plainly too narrow to generate the kind of economic rights that might be consistent with an equal right to self-development.
Even more seriously, the same criticism is applicable also in respect of Dworkin's treatment of the public law sphere of decision-making and dispute-settlement processes.
For Dworkin's rights thesis is put forward in the context of an institutional environment which operates a clear division of labour between courts and other institutions in terms of the kind of argument which may be deployed in each (Brownsword and Harden, 1981).
This division of labour rests in turn on a fundamental distinction drawn by Dworkin between arguments of principle on the one hand, and arguments of policy on the other.
Dworkin's theory of adjudication makes it clear that the function of the courts is limited to that of reaching decisions based upon arguments of principle, that is, arguments which justify a decision by showing that it secures or respects some individual or group right.
Courts are not authorised to use directly arguments of policy in defence of their decisions.
Thus they are not to ask how their decisions can best promote the general welfare.
Other institutions, on the other hand, are entitled to use arguments of policy in support of their decisions.
This very rigid institutional division of labour has rather serious  implications in the public law field of decision-making processes, however.
For the category of policy issues is taken to embrace not only substantive political decisions, such as the decision whether to build a nuclear power station, or a motorway, but also procedural political decisions such as those relating to the form of the decision-making process itself.
An example of just such an issue was provided by the controversial case of Bushell v. 
Secretary of State for the Environment , in which the question arose as to whether objectors to a motorway scheme were entitled to cross-examine the Department of the Environment's witnesses in the public local inquiry considering the scheme.
Dworkin makes it clear that as the question of what form the public hearing should assume is itself a policy question, it is, accordingly, beyond the remit of the courts to interfere with this.
Accordingly, he considers that individuals have no procedural rights to participate in what are plainly policy decisions, beyond their right to participate periodically in the election of governments — unless, of course, such rights are specifically conferred on them by some statute.
However, the justification for excluding such background policy issues from the jurisdiction of the courts would appear to rest on two grounds, both of which may be open to question in the light of the foregoing analysis.
First, there is the assumption that it is fair and safe to con fine policy decisions to institutions other than the courts.
It is clear that Dworkin does make this assumption.
For he suggests that parliamentary democracy is an egalitarian way of deciding certain policy issues, such as what the criminal laws of a community should be (Dworkin, 1978a, p. 258), and elsewhere, in respect of a more restricted class of (moral) policy issues, he has this to say: ‘Under certain circumstances that issue should be left to democratic institutions to decide, not because a legislature or parliament will necessarily be correct, but because that is a fair way, in these circumstances, to decide moral issues about which reasonable and fair people disagree’(Dworkin, 1981, p. 208).
However, if it were true, as has been suggested, that certain issues and constituencies are systematically disenfranchised by the traditional representative model of English politics, this would greatly weaken the justification for reserving to the legislature the exclusive right to determine the form of second-level policy-making institutions such as public local inquiries, and to decide what procedural entitlements should be afforded to objectors at them.
The recent work by McAuslan and others (supra) in respect of the functioning of the Windscale Inquiry casts further doubt on the fairness of our current  practice of leaving it solely to the legislature to determine the form and procedure to be adopted at such inquiries.
For although purporting to provide a degree of public participation in the making of a major policy decision, detailed examination of the institutional machinery provided by the government revealed that it was far from being a neutral forum in which the choice of options remained open until determined by the Inquiry.
Instead the structure chosen for the Inquiry ensured that it could only be resolved in favour of the course supported by the government.
Now if the decision-making process consistently advances policies which unfairly benefit or disadvantage certain groups it does not seem desirable in principle to prevent the courts from reviewing the fairness of that process by confronting the background policy issues involved.
Of course it by no means follows that the courts themselves are any less immune from the risks of unfairness or inefficiency in their pursuit of policy objectives, especially as currently constituted.
Nevertheless it does seem undesirable that our present institutional framework should be beyond the scope of effective challenge by either political or legal means.
Indeed if we recall Dworkin's own formulation of the principle of political equality which lies at the heart of his master-principle of equal concern and respect it would appear to support the criticisms just advanced.
This idea of political equality, he suggested, presupposed that ‘the weaker members of a political community are entitled to the same concern and respect of their government as the more powerful members have secured for themselves, so that if some men have freedom whatever the effect on the general good, all men must have the same freedom’.
In fact, however, Dworkin's rather rigid division of labour, and the inflexible institutional framework in which it operates appears ill-equipped to ensure that the best or fairest policy decisions are reached, particularly during a time of rapid political economic and social change.
The heart of the problem appears to be that this institutional framework is itself founded on a conventional gesellschaft- type representative model.
As a result the function of second-level policy-making institutions such as Public Local Inquiries is seen in terms of merely affording an opportunity for those whose private individual rights and interests may be affected by a policy proposal, to make this known to those responsible for making the decision.
As far as this representative model is concerned procedural entitlements are viewed in purely instrumental terms, according to the contribution they may be expected to make to the accuracy of the underlying  substantive policy judgments, and since no one has a right to a particular policy outcome, no one has aright either to any particular form of decision-making process.
This brings us on to the second of Dworkin's grounds for excluding such background policy issues from the jurisdiction of the courts, for if no one has a right to any particular form of decision-making process — whether a right to a hearing itself, a right to cross-examine witnesses or to be given reasons for a decision -this can only be because such a right cannot be derived from the master principle of equal concern and respect.
However it is by no means self-evident that the latter is incapable of generating a right to participate in the policy-making process, at least where fundamental issues of policy are concerned.
Once again Steven Lukes rather more persuasively argues that:
But the reason why Dworkin's rights thesis appears too narrow to generate a right of participation is because it too is firmly grounded in a gesellschaft model of law and society in which virtually the only interests which are considered capable of generating rights in the strong sense are those appropriate for abstract individuals pursuing their own private interests.
Thus, although he does not enumerate a catalogue of rights it seems clear that it is chiefly the conventional political and civil liberties, including a right to freedom of conscience, that are associated with the traditional doctrine of liberalism which would qualify as rights in the strong sense.
Dworkin confirms this himself when he points out that Rawls's basic liberties ‘are in fact rights in the sense I am using’.
It should now be apparent that for any rights theory to be capable of satisfactorily addressing the broader problems which now confront our traditional representative institutions it will need to transcend the essentially liberal principles which lie at the heart of Dworkin's thesis.
The most promising way of achieving this might be to take more seriously Dworkin's own master principle of equal concern and respect, for, as has been seen, this does appear capable of generating a  right of equality which transcends that of equality of opportunity, and a right of effective participation in the decision-making process which would go far beyond the right to vote in a general election once every five years.
For a right of participation to be meaningful it would obviously require as free a flow of information as possible and the development of institutions securing equality of access and influence for all participants.
The principle of equal concern and respect would also entail an obligation for those in authority to provide those affected by a decision with reasons for it and appropriate institutional mechanisms for challenging it.
The principle of equal concern and respect thus appears to offer a promising theoretical foundation for the parallel development of a participatory form of democracy and the generation of a public-law theory of adjudication.
Assuming that Dworkin's rights thesis is capable of being modified along the lines proposed, is it possible to identify any strategies — long-term, medium-range and short-term strategies — which could be expected to contribute toward the realisation of an expanded right of equal concern and respect?
STRATEGIES FOR THE REALISATION OF A RIGHT TO EQUAL CONCERN AND RESPECT
The complete attainment of either objective would clearly require a fundamental transformation of our entire institutional order.
New mechanisms would need to be fashioned in order to assert political and judicial control over the very extensive citadels of private power, on the one hand, and the growing accretion of central government authority on the other.
It is in this context that proposals emerging from the Critical Legal Studies movement in the USA are of considerable interest, and in particular Roberto Unger's conception of a self-revising institutional structure ‘that would provide constant occasions to disrupt any fixed structure of power and co-ordination in social life’(Unger, 1983).
He takes as his starting-point the preconceptions of liberal legal and political theory, and suggests that they be pushed to their logical conclusion to fashion a programme for the reconstruction of the state and the rest of the large-scale institutional structure of society.
Chief among these liberal preconceptions is a belief in the liberating effect produced by a weakening of social divisions and hierarchies in society.
Thus the ideal aim of any system of rights should be to try to prevent  social divisions and hierarchies from becoming insulated against the ordinarily available forms of challenge.
Hence he envisages that for every sphere of public- or private-sector activity there should be established some arena of potentially destabilising and broadly-based conflict over the use of that power.
Perhaps the most novel aspect of this proposal is its recognition of a category of destabilisation rights, to be enforced by ambitious forms of injunctive relief, which would afford an opportunity for individuals and interests to challenge and disrupt established institutions or forms of social practice which had achieved immunity from conventional legal and political measures of control.
Rather more modestly, but perhaps more realistically, some British public lawyers are now also beginning to explore alternative institutional forms to the traditional English representative model of politics, with a view to involving broader constituencies in the decision-making process (Lewis and Harden, 1982).
One of the devices thought to have the best potential for ensuring participation in policy-making is the American administrative law initiative of ‘hybrid rule-making’.
This has the advantage over our conventional representative institutions of being based on a new model of decision-making, one which seeks to ensure adequate consideration of all competing interests, including even poorly organised ones.
Regulatory agencies in America have been required, as a result, not just to involve others in the decision-making process but to take a ‘hard look’ at all the relevant issues and alternatives, including abandoning a project, to give reasons for decisions and to make continuous disclosure of the facts and assumptions which it relies on in promulgating a rule.
Meanwhile in Britain one encouraging development at local level is an increasing willingness to engage in policy-planning exercises, involving the general public, on the part of participation-minded local authorities such as Sheffield MDC, in its pursuit of alternative strategies to combat the recession and the centripetal tendencies of central government.
Finally, are there any short-term strategies which may be capable of being pursued within the context of our existing institutional arrangements?
If law is to be used as ‘an instrument for casting an alternative political vote by exposing the decision making process to contending views of public necessity’(Lewis and Harden, 1982, p. 68), the most obvious way in which such an aim might be pursued is through the development of a test case strategy.
Similar tactics have after all been deployed in the USA in respect of civil libertarian, social welfare  and environmental issues, and more recently in Britain as part of an attempt to improve the position of recipients of state welfare benefits and other disadvantaged groups (Prosser, 1983; Scheingold, 1974).
In this concluding section I would like to consider, specifically in relation to the peace-tax issue, what the prospects of such a strategy might be, in the light of experience gained elsewhere in these other fields.
It might be as well to differentiate at the outset between the direct and the indirect effects which test-case litigation might be expected to achieve in promoting a change in the law on tax diversion.
First, as far as direct effects are concerned, the most obvious way in which litigation might be used to secure a change in the law is to challenge the interpretation by the courts of a particular point of substantive law.
One method which has previously been tried, albeit unsuccessfully, seeks to invoke principles of international law that would allegedly relieve taxpayers from their liability to pay tax on the ground that their assessments are rendered invalid by the unlawful purposes to which the taxes levied are to be applied.
This international law argument was originally tested in the well-known case of Cheney v.
Conn which until recently was the only British case in which a superior court had been asked to rule on the validity of tax assessments in the light of the purpose to which some of the tax-revenue was to be applied.
Mr Cheney refused to pay his income tax on the ground that part of it would be used to build nuclear weapons for use in circumstances which would be in breach of the Geneva Convention Act 1957, and that this illegal purpose rendered his tax demand invalid.
The argument was rejected, in part, because the provisions of the Geneva Convention had not been fully incorporated into English law, despite being ratified.
All the 1957 Act had done was to create certain criminal offences, none of which were of any direct assistance to the taxpayer because they were not themselves in direct conflict with the Finance Act 1964.
This decision, and its reasoning, is still being relied on in the growing number of tax-diversion cases that are currently coming before the inferior courts in England and Scotland, and it has most recently been affirmed as decisive by the High Court once more, in Boulton v.
Oestreicher .
s It had been argued, on Canon Oestreicher's behalf that Cheney v.
Conn was distinguishable because it was decided before the Genocide Act 1969 had been passed, and that the latter made a critical difference.
Although this argument was also rejected the somewhat superficial reasoning employed by the court raises the question  whether a further appeal to the Court of Appeal may be worth considering.
For the judge suggested that the legal effect of the Genocide Act and that of the Geneva Conventions Act were indistinguishable for all relevant purposes, since neither fully incorporated the respective Convention into English law but merely created new criminal offences to give effect to that convention.
In respect of the Genocide Act, the judge said, it created criminal offences described in the Genocide Convention that were not previously criminal.
While this is true as regards the specific wording of the offence of genocide, it was pointed out in the parliamentary debate relating to the Genocide Bill that almost all the offences included in the Convention were in fact already offences under English law.
This was certainly not the case in respect of the Geneva Conventions Act where the offences were newly created solely to give effect to the Convention, and were described as being hardly applicable to the case at all.
However it is still not apparent that there is a direct conflict between the provisions of the Genocide Act, and those of the Finance Act, which merely authorises the levying of taxes.
In any event the latter, being subsequent, would impliedly repeal, and so prevail over, any provisions in the earlier Act with which it was not consistent.
Notwithstanding the possible ground for distinguishing between the two cases, therefore, there remains a fundamental doubt as to just how much policy innovation can reasonably be expected from the British judiciary especially in such a politically sensitive area as defence policy.
Certainly, previous judicial pronouncements in such cases as Chandler v.
DPP , and Cheney v.
Conn afford little ground for optimism on this score.
In any event, even a successful challenge of the courts' interpretation of the effects of Britain's obligations under international law would be of somewhat limited value.
For any effective right of tax-diversion would require legislation to set up a Peace Tax Fund; to prescribe the uses to which tax resources diverted into the fund might be put; and to authorise the Inland Revenue Commissioners to take into account a person's conscientious beliefs in determining which account that person's taxes should be paid into.
Moreover, as Scheingold (Scheingold, 1974, p. 95) has somewhat bitterly commented, in the light of his experience with American civil rights test cases, even judicially acknowledged rights should still be treated as contingent resources and not accomplished social facts.
And that was true in respect of even such momentous rights as the right to desegregated schooling — established in Brown v.
Education Board of  Topeca , one of the most famous test cases of all time.
He was surely right to caution that the declaration of a right by a court is perhaps best viewed as the beginning of a political process in which power relationships loom large and immediate.
For, ‘Two decades after the Brown decision’ he wrote in 1974 ‘we are still struggling inconclusively with school desegregation’.
Rights, in other words, should not be seen as ends in themselves.
Furthermore, as Tony Prosser has recently pointed out with reference to the Child Poverty Action Group's (CFAG's) social welfare test cases, there is always the danger that ‘successful test cases which threaten established policy, especially by increasing expenditure, will meet with quick nullification by legislative or administrative action’(Prosser, 1983, p. 74).
As far as the direct effects of test-case litigation are concerned, therefore, experience both here and in the USA suggests that it would be unwise to look to the courts alone to secure a right of tax-diversion.
That does not mean, however, that legal challenge is unimportant as part of a broader political strategy canvassing for change, only that the indirect effects of test cases may be more significant than any direct changes in the law brought about by them.
Among the most important of these indirect effects is the role which test cases can play in politicising issues by forcing them onto the political agenda and once there in keeping them alive.
Two tactics which might be worth considering with this aim in mind are the use of test cases first as policy-changing devices and second as political catalysts.
A policy-changing strategy involves the use of other institutions and techniques, apart from the domestic courts, in the hope of securing a change in the law or policy, or at least of putting pressure on policy-makers to bring about such a change.
The most obvious way of doing this would be by seeking to invoke the protection afforded to freedom of conscience under Article 9 of the European Convention of Human Rights .
However, the prospect that such a strategy might succeed appeared somewhat remote from the outset given the rather equivocal commitment to freedom of conscience under the convention as a whole (not least of which is its failure to incorporate a right of conscientious objection to compulsory military service (Dignan, 1983)).
Moreover, the preliminary decisions of the Commission as to the admissibility of two cases submitted by British tax-protesters appear to have dealt a fatal blow to any remaining hopes that the European Court of Human Rights might be used as an additional forum in which to exert pressure for a change in the existing  law and policy regarding tax diversion.
For the Commission did not accept (nor, it must be said, did it appear directly to address) the proposition that tax diversion is a necessary manifestation of a person's political beliefs, as opposed to a practice that is merely consistent with, and motivated by such a belief.
As such, tax diversion was not entitled to protection as a manifestation nf a philosophical belief in practice in the way that other acts, more intimately linked to the belief (for example, acts of worship) would be.
Since there is no appeal against the opinion of the Commission, these findings do appear to exhaust the scope of this particular policy-changing strategy for the time being, though given the interest shown by the parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in extending the right of conscientious objection, a change in the provisions of the Convention itself cannot be entirely ruled out.
Finally, and perhaps most significantly of all, test cases may be used as political catalysts ‘to spark off a process in the political arena,(Prosser, 1983, p. 5) in the hope of extending the rights of those concerned.
Indeed commentators on test-case litigation in both the UK and the USA appear agreed that the main value of test-case litigation derives from its contribution to the broader process of political mobilisation rather than from any direct change in the law which it might be expected to bring about.
The useful, though subordinate, role which litigation might be expected to play in this mobilisation process extends to publicising areas of law such as tax diversion which stand in need of reform, and so helping to politicise the issues and raise the general level of political awareness on the part of peace protesters and the general public alike.
Litigation may also have a valuable contribution to make in activating and mobilising a constituency of common interests, thereby helping to establish and strengthen a collective political identity on the part of otherwise somewhat amorphous interests groups such as environmentalists, or peace campaigners, among whom there may be less cohesion and common identity than is the case with other campaigning groups.
But if political mobilisation is seen as the key strategy with litigation as a contributory tactic, as Scheingold suggests, then it follows that legal challenge should not be conducted in isolation from other forms of pressure-group activity.
That is, test cases, to be effective, must be accompanied by intensive lobbying and such cases, may in themselves provide valuable resources for use in lobbying, a case in point, being the sympathetic comment made by the judge in Bolton v. 
Oestreicher in respect of the ‘serious arguments which are worth of consideration…which have been and ought to be addressed to Parliament’.
In the light of these remarks, the following very tentative conclusions may perhaps be advanced.
The switch of tactics on the part of the war-tax resistance movement which can be dated back to 1977 is potentially of great significance because it provided the conditions in which a broad-based political campaign may be mounted, calling for a statutory right of tax diversion and relying on litigation as an auxiliary and subordinate weapon, instead of depending exclusively on litigation to try to bring about a change in the law directly.
But the peace-tax issue is itself only one small part of a much broader campaign involving peace environmental and community groups to try to make our somewhat outmoded decision-making structures more responsive to the needs of wider constituencies than those which for the most part are represented by our conventional political institutions.
On a theoretical level it would seem desirable that any revised theory of public law or democracy should also be capable of satisfactorily addressing these broader long-term issues as well as the more immediate concerns of the peace-tax campaigners.
A modified theory of rights seems to be promising on this score.
On a practical and tactical level it suggests that groups with common aspirations should seek to engage in broadly-based political alliances to further their shared interests, through a combination of lobbying, pressure-group activity and litigation.
Of particular relevance here is the common interest which the peace-tax movement may have with the more progressive local authorities who are opposed to the new government civil defence regulations.
For although these have been substantially revised there is still a considerable element of compulsion involved in the duty to train and exercise staff, and an absence of any conscientious objection clause analogous to that of which combatants may avail themselves.
Finally, however, it has to be conceded that it is one thing to articulate a right of tax-diversion or participation in policy-making, and quite another to secure legal recognition for such a right.
The latter will depend on the outcome of sustained political campaigning in which litigation may be expected to play an important though auxiliary role.
Much will depend on the overall political climate and whether this can be changed sufficiently by a combined strategy conducted over a sustained period.
The outlook, particularly since the general election which saw the defeat of two of the Peace-Tax Campaign's principal supporters in parliament — Mr A Lyon and Mr F Hooley — is not too  encouraging.
But perhaps like Tony Prosser I might be allowed to conclude by citing the words of Edward Sparer when assessing the future after the failure of the US sequential test-case strategy: