

EDITORIAL
Well, summer is well and truly with us — though as I write I can't decide whether to pack my industrial strength waterproofs or my total block sun cream when I go off to the Peak District this weekend.
Whatever the weather throws up though, I know I'm in for some good walking.
The Peak District is a favourite walking area of mine.
I got to know it pretty well when I was living in Sheffield and I'd recommend anyone to take a walking holiday there.
In fact there are so many great areas to take a walking holiday in the UK, it can be hard to decide exactly where to go.
So with summer holiday time coming up we thought we'd help the late planners among you with a few ideas on great areas to go walking.
We asked six of our regular writers to tell us about their favourite walking areas in the UK.
They've chosen quite a diversity of places, from wild and lonely Wester Ross to the spectacular north Cornish coast.
Turn to page 14 to see which takes your fancy.
When I was asking them which was their favourite area, not unsurprisingly a couple of them mentioned the Lake District — anytime except in the summer holidays.
I can't say I blame them — for many of us walking is about getting away from the crowds, and summer in the Lakes is not quite the time to do that.
But I am trying to work out when I can walk Paul Buttle's circuit of the Lakes, devised especially for Outdoor Action .
I think it's a brilliant idea because it's so flexible.
The whole thing takes around 12 days to complete and takes in all the best Lakeland peaks, but the beauty of it is that it can be divided into any number of day sections and there's always a lowland alternative route in case the weather is really awful on the tops.
All details of public transport and local accommodation are included as well as route details.
Part one featuring the first four days of the route is on page 18 and we'll be publishing parts two and three in our August and September issues, so September might be a good time to do the whole thing — if you can wait that long.
Looks like it's going to be a very full summer ahead!
WHAT'S ON
OUTDOOR EVENTS
If something's going on in your neck of the woods, we want to hear about it.
Send your event details two months in advance to  
Walking in the Lakes
July 6, 12, 19, 26.
There are four opportunities to discover the beautiful countryside of the Lake District on a free guided walk organised by the national park.
Each Sunday a voluntary park warden will lead the way on a six hour walk to Silver How.
The walks will start at 10.30am and last for around six hours.
Meet at the Grasmere Information Centre and bring a packed lunch.
For more information about the walks contact .
Biking in Calderdale
July 5 and 19.
The event on the fifth is aimed at teaching beginners biking skills and how they can enjoy more the Calderdale area on their bike.
This event will also give advice about equipment, routes and safety and will involve trying out new skills on a cycle orienteering course.
Bring your own bike, a helmet and lunch.
This event costs £4 and the price includes a south Pennines OS map.
You need to book in advance.
Contact:.
On the 19th there are two free guided rides — one in the morning, one in the afternoon — in the north-west of Calderdale.
You need to book in advance but not until after July 9.
Sailing in Yorkshire
July 24 and 31.
Beginners have two chances to learn the basics of dinghy sailing in separate events organised by the North York Moors National Park.
Both events take place at the Scaling Dam Sailing Club, where qualified instructors will help you master the basics of the sport.
You must be over 12 to take part and confident in the water.
Wear trainers, warm clothing and waterproofs and don't forget to bring a packed lunch and a change of clothes.
The event costs £12.50 and must be booked in advance.
To book your place call the Moors Centre on  between 10am and 5pm.
Walking in Northumberland
July 11.
A fine farmhouse tea awaits those who complete this medium paced walk in the unique Cheviot landscape of Northumberland.
The walk is suitable for all the family and places must be booked in advance.
The walk lasts for three hours and starts from the car park of Middleton Hall, two miles south of Wooler ().
Price: £4 for adults, £3.25 for OAPS and £2.75 for children/UB40s.
Contact: to book your place.
Activity event in Perthshire
July 10–12.
Head to the beautiful banks of Loch Tay in Scotland for a non-stop weekend of exciting activities to raise funds for the Telethon Appeal.
To take part you can either go on your own or form a team of eight.
Each competitor will participate for around three hours in events including river rafting and a mystery challenge.
There is a £10 entry fee and each participant should raise £50 in sponsorship in order to take part.
There will also be live music, celebrities, watersports and barbecues.
For more information or to obtain a booking form contact:
Guided walk in Yorkshire
July 28.
Discover the dramatic scenery of the Yorkshire Dales on a guided walk designed for all the family to enjoy — it's part of a series of family walks organised by the national park called Going Places.
This walk is leisurely paced and covers between three and five miles through the stunning countryside of Wensleydale.
There will be various activities to keep the children amused along the way.
Contact:.
For details of other Going Places walks contact .
JULY DIARY DATES
4 See birds, bats and moths on a circular evening walk around the dykes, grazing marshes and peaceful waters of Horsey Mere in the Norfolk Broads. 8pm to 10pm from Horsey Mill car park.
Wear wellies or stout footwear.
4 Six hour discovery walk via little Langdale and Blea Tarn in the Lake District National Park.
Optional pub lunch and opportunity for farmhouse tea afterwards.
Seven and a half mile route.
5 Wildflower walk on the chalk grassland of the Downs.
Starts 2pm from the car park of the Red Lion pub at the east end of Compton in Berks.
9 A late evening walk to search  for glow worms in Folkestone.
8.30pm to 11.30pm.
Starts from East Cliff  Pavilion ,
11 Three hour walk to the lost valley of Clicket in Exmoor.
Starts 2pm from Timberscombe  
11 North Tyne Bike Hike.
A 12 mile cycle tour starting from Hawkhope to the Holt, returning via the pub at Falstone.
Hire a bike or bring your own.
Bookings only.
12 Free guided walk to Goosey Foot Tarn in the Lake District.
Starts 10.30am for two and a half hours.
12 Conservation day at Colden Clough, Calderdale.
Bookable after July 3.
12 Learn how to use a map and compass on a beginners' Pathfinder day organised by the Yorkshire Dales National Park.
Involves indoor tuition before practising skills in the countryside.
18 Overnight expedition organised by Northumberland National Park.
Starts 8pm with a torchlight walk in the Cheviot foothills, then greeting the sunrise on Old Fawdon Hill.
Bivvy bags and snacks essential.
Poorly equipped people will be turned away.
Starts at Ingram Bridge car park at 8pm.
19 The Wansfell Round — a scenic six hour walk in the Lake District.
Starts 10.30am.
21 Orienteering event at Sutherland Lodge, Pickering organised by the North York Moors National Park.
23 Mountain Biking event organised by the North York Moors National Park, 10am to 1pm and 1.30pm to 4pm from the Moors Centre, Danby.
26 Three mile walk in the secluded South Foreland valley of East Kent, looking for butterflies and wild flowers.
Starts 2pm from St Margaret's Bay car park next to Coastguard pub.
LETTERS & QUERIES
Got any problems?
Something you want to get off your chest?
Anything going on in the outdoors which interests, irritates or simply makes you laugh?
If so I'd like to hear from you.
I'll do my best to answer any questions on the outdoors and to let you have your say, so there's no time to waste — get scribbling now.
Write to me  .
WIN A LOWE DAYSACK
Each month the writer of the best letter published wins this super Lowe Alpine Walkabout 25 daysack
COUNTRYSIDE UNDER SIEGE
This month's prize-winning letter writer is PA Widdows of Heacham in Norfolk.
Following the ongoing story of access on the Letterewe estate, perhaps other readers share similar experiences to ours in Heacham, where we feel we are virtually a village under siege.
We are situated on the Norfolk coast of the Wash, and a very pleasant situation it would be, if only we could enjoy it.
To the west there are several very large caravan parks.
Two years ago a large building company bought up the remaining fields between the sites and the village and filled them with retirement homes.
To the west of the caravan sites, owners of caravans and beach huts have tried to close off an access road along the back of the sea defences.
Development of a beach club and boat park complex, which again will not be used by the majority of villagers, now threatens to re-route a public right of way.
To the north east, the route of the old railway track and the fields around are owned by an outsider.
There's no access here, mainly because of shooting parties from what I have seen.
To the south-west, owners of beach holiday homes are trying to claim new beach thrown up by the latest sea defence scheme and to prevent non-owners from walking along the top of the beach.
They have previously tried, unsuccessfully, to prevent access through their area to a coastal park beyond.
To the south, a large estate has closed off a public right of way because of vandalism in the woods where pheasant are bred for shooting.
Estate land swings round in a crescent to the east, up to the A19.
This road is solid with unyielding traffic for the duration of the holiday season.
The remaining land between the estate and the village is under threat by a builder who wants to put hundreds of houses on it.
Forbidden Britain?
I suggest you come and look at us.
You might just make it — if you know someone with a balloon!
IN DEFENCE OF ARMY LAND USE
I am writing in response to the letter from Gordon Lewis about the Ministry of Defence in your May edition.
Firstly, it is not the object of the army to damage or destroy the countryside.
In fact during my time in the army I learnt to enjoy and respect it.
Secondly, not all of the areas that the MoD use are no-go areas to civilians.
The army do have to train though.
Maybe Mr Lewis would like to be allowed to walk in the country alongside the army in training?— more fool him.
Usually, only when very dangerous activities, such as live ammunition training, are taking place are the public barred from the area.
This is not done to annoy the public but to ensure their safety.
The idea of putting the army on an island is preposterous.
No two areas of the country are alike and it is vital that our troops are experienced in fighting on every kind of terrain.
One island would not suffice.
Mr Lewis seemed angry that he couldn't enjoy his freedom in the country due to the army — but he wouldn't be able to enjoy his freedom at all, if it weren't for the army.
Maybe other irate walkers would bear that in mind the next time they see the army out on an exercise.
WHAT NEXT?
I was horrified to read in your June issue that there is a plan afoot to erect concrete seats on Ben Nevis.
How on earth can people justify such a scheme?
If people need a rest on the way what's wrong with sitting on the ground?
Before long they'll be wanting to tarmac the path or build a chairlift to the top.
A PERFECT FIT
I wanted to thank you for the wonderful pair of walking boots — a prize from the February issue of Outdoor Action.
They are super and a perfect fit.
I am sure they will bring me many hours of enjoyment.
Q
I am interested in working for the Forestry Commission, for a national park or getting a job which involves caring for any aspect of the environment.
I am 28 and have no qualifications.
What qualifications would I need and how should I go about finding a job?
A
There are a number of routes you could take if you want to work in a job where you'll be looking after the countryside.
The best thing to do is to find out exactly what kinds of jobs are available in the general field and decide which ones would best suit you.
Some will require you to go on various training courses, for others practical experience is what counts.
A good place to start your research is by buying a copy of the book Careers Working Outdoors by Judith Humphries published by Kogan Page, priced £5.99.
It gives details of a host of outdoor jobs including those in forestry and conservation.
It is available in bookshops and by mail order from: Make cheques payable to Kogan Page Ltd and add £1 to the book price for postage costs.
Most employers in the field of conservation rate practical experience very highly.
It shows you are committed to environmental work.
Contact the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers  .
They will give you details of very cheap conservation holidays as well as details of local  conversation volunteer groups.
Local wildlife trusts are always looking for volunteers too.
To find out which is your local group get in touch with RSNC,.
Q
Can you please let me know if, and where, I can get a replacement part for a Super Scorpion Mark I Stove?
The one I have needs a new connector which screws onto the gas cylinder.
If it is of any help the stove came complete with an Epigas cylinder.
A
You can get hold of the part you need — the valve — from a company called Outdoor Pursuits Services.
Write to them, explaining what you need, at  or phone them on .
The valve will cost you £4.75.
Make your cheque out to Outdoor Pursuits Services.
SCOTTISH NEWS
ANGER OVER PLANS FOR ‘CUILLIN CAFE’
Rennie McOwan reports on walkers' outrage at plans to develop the beautiful shoreline at Glen Brittle in Skye
Anger is growing among hill trampers in Scotland over controversial plans to build a restaurant at the foot of the Cuillin mountain range on the island of Skye.
The MacLeod Estate proposes to build not only a 50-seat restaurant, but an exhibition centre and a shop, on the empty shoreline at Glen Brittle.
Over 100 planning objections have already come from mountaineers and walkers.
Glen Brittle already has a youth hostel and a campsite, and in the height of the season the single track road to the shore can barely cope with the number of climbers and tourist cars using it.
Yet the glen and surrounding areas manage to keep a ‘wild’ appearance.
Many feel that this wild appearance would be severely diluted if the new scheme were to go ahead.
The area is officially classed as a National Scenic Area.
The old Countryside Commission for Scotland, which became part of Scottish natural Heritage in April, has already lodged an objection to the new development.
The British Mountaineering Council has called the plan ‘a blight on the landscape’.
A public inquiry may be held.
As Outdoor Action goes to press, the details of the scheme have not all been made public.
And Highland Regional Council, which is considering the application, is still seeking further information.
It is startling to discover that many outdoor organisations are unaware of this proposal.
Action is needed straight away.
Objections so far have come from the much respected W H Murray, former president of the Scottish Mountaineering Club, who says ‘From a mountaineering viewpoint, Glen Brittle is one of the most important places in Scotland.
I'm totally against the development which would spoil its natural beauty’.
The grand old man of the Scottish mountains, author and TV star Tom Weir, said he was sad about the plan.
‘The Cuillin is the best small mountain range in the world, the hills have a unique atmosphere and Glen Brittle is part of that experience’.
Rennie McOwan has been hillwalking in Scotland for over 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors
Saving woods
Now for the good news.
Fifteen projects designed to restore areas of native woodland in the Highlands are being financed by the North West Region of Scottish natural Heritage.
Areas of native pinewood, birch and mixed woodland are being fenced off to exclude sheep and deer, and to assist regeneration.
These native woodlands support many more wild flowers and bird species than do areas of conifer forestry.
The fences will stand for 20 years and be removed when the task is done.
The cost of the projects is £250,000.
One of the most encouraging aspects of all this is that each project is undertaken because of management agreements reached between SNH, landowners, crofters, farmers or voluntary organisations involved with Sites of Special Scientific Interest.
For those who care about beauty in our hills this is all excellent news.
If you are concerned about Scottish woodlands, why not join one of the Scottish Conservation Projects working parties?
Volunteers in Knapdale, in south Argyll, have helped to remove sitka spruce and invasive rhododendrons from oak woods.
And dragonfly flight corridors have been created by providing open space on the sides of burns.
Other volunteers have cleared unwanted growth from the Black Wood of Rannoch — a remnant of the great pine forests which once covered much of the Highlands.
If you want to get involved, contact:
Freedom to roam
Those looking for straws in the wind on the right to roam issue have gained much from a statement made by Roger Carr, former chair of the Countryside Commission for Scotland.
In a speech distributed by the Ramblers Association, he said that legislation was needed on access rights for walkers.
Scotland's trespass laws are grey and de facto freedom to roam operates in appropriate countryside, provided good manners are demonstrated.
Mr Carr called on the Scottish environment minister, Sir Hector Monro, to establish a general right of access to Scotland's wild lands saying: ‘Quite apart from the value of such a right of access to all who wish to enjoy our beautiful landscapes and wildlife, I believe it would greatly assist landowners and land managers.
It would enable them to develop their policy and practice on the ground, so that management was seen to deliver real and positive benefits to the wider community.
Those enjoying right of access would understand the basis for such management.
They would appreciate how it is an integral part of good stewardship and environmentally responsible land ownership’.
A right of access should, however be subject to safeguards against damage and intrusion on privacy, he said.
Bothy to be renovated
One of the most lonely and best loved open bothies, the so-called Tarf ‘hotel’, in the Athol Forest, north of Glen Tilt, is to be managed by the Mountain Bothies Association (MBA) in co-operation with the Atholl Estates.
The bothy got its hotel nickname from an old two-star AA sign which was hung outside by hillgrangels.
This old hunting lodge began to deteriorate and when I was last there only one room was habitable.
If anyone is willing to help renovate it they should contact Jim Cosgrove  or Jim Maison , of the MBA.
Please note, the bothy will be closed during the stag stalking season  and the goodwill of the estate is essential for this welcome project.
The bothy is a marvellous base for several lonely hills and passes.
In memory
A permanent memorial is to be built to the two Glasgow University Mountaineering Club members, Brian Meers and Patrick Grey, who died on the Observatory Ridge of Ben Nevis in January.
The ‘Meers Grey Memorial Hut’ will be constructed near Ballachulish, west of Glen Coe.
The GUM club are fund-raising to meet building costs between £10,000 to £12,000.
If you want to help contact   during office hours.
OUTDOOR NEWS
NEWS IN BRIEF 
Natural pleasures
A new nature reserve on the Somerset Levels, near Glastonbury, which will eventually form part of one of the largest and most important wetlands in Europe, has been formally opened by Sir David Attenborough.
The 66 acre Greater Westhay Reserve is a pilot project for a scheme to transform 3,500 acres of exhausted peat workings into meadows, reed beds, open water and islands, to be called Avalon Marshes.
Never too old
The Scottish National Sports Centre at Glenmore Lodge in Aviemore is offering special activity breaks for the over 50s.
On the five day courses participants will have a chance to try out hillwalking, river kayaking, Canadian canoeing and rock climbing.
Cost for a course including full board and lodging is £175.
For more information contact:
Memorial fund
A memorial fund to help young people enjoy the outdoors has been set up following the death in March of one of Britain's leading climbers, Andy Fanshawe.
The aim of the fund will be to award discretionary grants to young people who lack the resources to develop their interest in the outdoors.
Donations can be sent to:
Shetland Bods
A new kind of accommodation designed to appeal to budget travellers has been launched in the Shetland Islands.
Known as Bods, the buildings offer a space for cooking, eating and sleeping.
Facilities are basic — only one has mains electricity — although all have a toilet and cold water.
For more details .
Bike guides
Off-road routes for mountain bikes on the Isle of Weight have been outlined in a new series of guides,Byways and Bridleways by Mountain Bike .
They cost 85p each or £2.99 for the set of four.
Contact  for details.
SCRAMBLE FOR EIGG HOTS UP
The Hebridean Island of Eigg is up for sale.
Its owner for the last 17 years, Keith Schellenberg, has been forced to put it on the market as part of a divorce settlement, agreed after more than ten years of legal wranglings.
Eigg, measuring just five miles by three, is treasured by walkers and naturalists alike.
It boasts a wide range of habitats supporting an impressive variety of plants, birds and butterflies.
There are three Sites of Special Scientific Interest on the island as well as 1,500 acre nature reserve managed by the Scottish Wildlife Trust.
It is offered for sale by estate agents Knight, Frank and Rutley who expect it to fetch between £1m and £2m.
So far, possible buyers have come forward from the UK, Europe and Canada.
Colin Strang Steel who is dealing with the sale told Outdoor Action ‘Some of the potential buyers want to live on the island, but I wouldn't expect it would be full time.
They want it primarily as a holiday home, for recreation.
Some want to invest in the island and get some kind of tourism going.’
Conservationists and locals fear for the future of the island and a trust has been set up to raise money to buy it for the nation.
Simon Halliwell, a member of the Eigg Residents' Association, said ‘The majority of the islanders want the trust to take possession of the island.
We want a change from the feudal tenure we've had over the years.
The sale of the island is like a lottery and what happens here will depend on the whims of however becomes the owner.’
The Scottish Wildlife Trust (SWT) is also worried about the sale of Eigg.
Director David Hughes-Hallett said: ‘The last owner Keith  Schallenberg was sympathetic to wildlife — he didn't carry out any shooting or fishing.
The new owner may not be so concerned.’
The SWT are especially worried about the future of Eigg's nature reserve.
David Hughes-Hallet explains ‘We don't actually own the reserve, we just manage it by agreement with the owner, so the sale is a very uncertain time for us.’
At least one set of potential buyers, from Holland, has been helicoptered on to Eigg to be shown around the island.
Resident Simon Halliwell says ‘This place is a gift for a person with a big ego and a big wallet and in the long term they won't be of any use to the island.’
Fancy a real thrill for free while raising money for a good cause?
Well the Multiple Sclerosis Society has made it easy to take to the air whether it be by parachute, glider or plane.
Each activity is provided free to the participant in return for raising a minimum target sum in sponsorship.
The sponsorship targets range from £100 for a bungy jump to £240 for a tandem free fall skydive.
A brochure and further information are available by calling 
READERS WIN GREAT GEAR PRIZES
Congratulations to Peter Stevens of Felinfoel in Dyfed.
You are the winner of our May competition and £630 worth of Jack Wolfskin gear will soon be on its way to you.
You win a Pocket Hotel Tent, an Ayer's Rock sleeping bag, a Stormrider jacket and an Altai 1 58 litre rucksack.
Looks like you'll have a good summer's backpacking ahead of you.
Five second prize winners each get a 30 litre Luftikus ACS rucksack worth £55.
They are 
Well done too to all ten of our third prize winners who get a Caribou daysack.
They are:
The answers to the anagrams were:
Congratulations are also due to the two winners of our mountain bike competition in the May special Bike supplement.
Diamond Back Ascents are on their way to  and .
The answers to the questions were 1.
The initials CTC stand for Cyclists' Touring Club.
2.
The first Tour de France was held in 1903. 3.
The principal governing body of cycling sport is the British Cycling Federation and 4.
Cycling makes you fitter and gives you a better life expectancy.
Don't despair if you weren't lucky enough to win this time.
Turn to page 46 for a chance to win a pair of great Line 7 boots.
FACELIFT FOR NATIONAL TRAIL
One of Britain's 12 national trails, the North Downs Way, is being given a major facelift over the next three years.
Established in 19878 the route stretches for 152 miles from Farnham in Surrey to Dover in Kent, with an alternative route passing through Canterbury.
Around £250,000 has been earmarked for the three year project by Kent County Council in conjunction with the Countryside Commission.
The money will be spent on clearing vegetation, resurfacing some areas and installing new stiles.
Preliminary work began last September following the appointment of two countryside officers who are employed full time on the project.
A new five mile circular walk, following part of the Way and running from Thurnham to Cobham Manor north of Maidstone, has already been established.
Plans to erect waymarkers and information boards along the route are also underway.
By the end of April next year it is hoped the project will have created between six and eight additional walks, in locations which have yet to be decided.
The countryside officers running the project are keen to hear from anyone who is interested in helping out.
Call  for more details.
The booklet,North Downs Way — A User's Guide (price £1) and a free leaflet are available by contacting Steve Gilbert at Kent County Council's Planning Department.
Part of the £250,000 will be spent on new stiles on the North Downs Way
News from the National Parks
Erosion in the Beacons
Degradation of the waterfalls in the Vale of Neath area of the Brecon Beacons has reached such a critical level that urgent and radical action is required, according to a new national park study.
A number of solutions have been recommended in the report to protect this fragile landscape.
These include fencing, tree planting or the creation of conditions for natural regeneration, path repair, provision of new paths and improved signing and waymarking.
The report also suggest that there will need to be a greater commitment to wardening, monitoring and maintenance in future, if the situation is not to deteriorate again after the completion of repairs.
It is hoped that the worst of the damage will be repaired over the next two to three years.
Local Treasures
The Yorkshire Dales is establishing a Local Treasures Project to maintain locally important sites and features such as mileposts, boundary stones, monuments, stocks and watertroughs.
It is felt that they will add significantly to the cultural record of the park.
Many of these are small scale features which were commonplace in the past.
however over the years neglect, development and a general under-valuing of their importance have taken their toll.
Without positive action many of the examples which still survive will also disappear.
If this happens it will be a loss not just to the National Park, but more particularly to the local areas with which they are associated.
New Bridge, Old Design
The village of Egton Bridge in the North York Moors is to have its ugly 1930s ‘temporary’ bridge replaced by a three arch structure based on the design of the original.
In the Esk Valley, the character of the village is enhanced by the river and the prominent road bridge.
The existing bridge was erected as a temporary measure to replace the original bridge which was destroyed by floods.
Last year a routine survey revealed that the bridge was in need of significant structural repair.
With reference to old photographs it was decided that the bridge could be replaced with one similar to the original pre-1930 structure.
The Park aims to contribute £35,000 to the total budget estimated at £400,000.
Upper Derwent Valley
Plans to develop a path across Ladybower Dam proposed by Severn Trent Water have been welcomed in principle by the Peak District National Park.
There is already an operational route which is not open to the public.
To make it suitable for public use improvements will need to be made including resurfacing the stone route — this will also make it suitable for wheelchairs — and installing metal railings by the path.
News supplied by the Council for National Parks
UK WOODLANDS AT RISK
In the wake of the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, a  damning report from English Nature shows that ancient woodlands have declined by nearly 50% in the past 50 years — that is faster than the felling of the rainforests in Brazil.
Based on a ten year study the report shows remaining areas of woodland and those lost since the end of the First World War.
The report states that about 45% of ancient woodlands have been destroyed or seriously damaged, compared with only 10% of the Amazon forests.
English Nature's Derek Langslow defines ancient woodlands as those which have been in existence since the 16th century or earlier.
The bulk of the destruction occurred during the 1950s and 1960s when the trees were felled to provide land for agriculture or for re-planting with conifers.
The destruction slowed down because of surpluses in farmland and an increased realisation of the woodland's conservation value.
However he argued that ancient woodlands were still under threat from new planting and new road developments — for example the proposed destruction of Oxleas Wood in south east London, to make way for a Thames crossing.
RSPB CALL TO STOP PERSECUTION OF BIRDS
Many of the UK's rarest birds of prey are under continuing threat of persecution, claim the RSPB as they launch a campaign to raise £400,000 to help eradicate the problem.
This follows close on the heels of a report published by the RSPB last year,Death by Design , which outlined just how serious the problem had become.
For example there were 367 recorded deaths of buzzards over a ten year period, although according to the RSPB the real figure is likely to be ten times that number.
Other birds particularly under threat include the red kite, white-tailed eagle, golden eagle and hen harrier.
There have already been two incidents in a wood in Wales this year, where two red kites and five ravens were found poisoned, and one buzzard and two ravens were shot.
RSPB spokesperson Mike Everett said some of the worst offenders were a minority of gamekeepers who shoot birds of prey because they believe they threaten their game birds ‘despite research which shows this is not the case.’
Money raised will be used to increase investigations of persecution offences and boost the RSPB's education programme.
This involves giving talks to farmers and gamekeepers about how they can carry out their work in a bird-friendly way.
In the longer term the RSPB will continue its campaign for stiffer penalties for those who illegally persecute birds of prey and for greater restrictions on the availability of poisons.
FAVOURITE WALKING AREAS
Writers' CHOICE
Decisions, decisions, decisions.
With so many fantastic walking areas in Britain it's sometimes hard to decide which one to explore on that well-earned summer break.
Well help is at hand.
Six of our regular writers reveal their favourite areas and that special something that continues to lure them back year after year
CORNWALL
Catherine Moore is an award winning outdoor journalist, whose first loves are walking and conservation
Anyone with a love of the sea will be impressed by Cornwall's Penwith peninsula — the tip of the country.
Along the north coast you'll see the most striking cliff scenery, with crashing blue seas vividly bringing the picture to life.
Each turn along the coast path reveals a beautiful sandy cove, or jagged rocks giving lie to the notion that this is just a pretty landscape.
I also like the area because of its prehistoric relics, abundance of wildflowers and, on a more mundane level, because in my experience it seems to get more than its fair share of decent weather.
St Ives makes a great base, especially if you're relying on public transport to get around.
The bus service is erratic out of season but can make a wide variety of walks accessible in summer.
There are plenty of self catering flats or bed and breakfasts in town, as well as campsites nearby.
The coast path is the one to head for — you can spend a week walking different sections from a single base and it's a good backpacking route.
I reckon the sections running south of St Ives are the best.
The walk from St Ives to Zennor, and up-and-down run of around six miles, left a strong impression on me.
The weather was perfect and the blue of the sea below looked like the Mediterranean, going to turquoise then white, as it hit the dramatic, spiky rocks.
Another spectacular section of the coast path runs from above Morvah — where there are great views to the Trevowhan and Trevean cliffs to the east — along to the Botallack.
You can return to Morvah across country, stopping off to see Chun Quoit, the remains of a Neolithic tomb.
You won't have the coast path from Sennen harbour to Land's End to yourself but it's worth doing for the marvellous views of the impressive rock formations on the way.
An inland walk I've enjoyed is around a five mile route starting from Bosullow Common, south of Morvah, an area rich in prehistoric remains.
The day was suitably misty, just right for a trip to the ‘healing’ stones of Men an Tol.
The Men is an over-sized bronze age stone polo mint with standing stones either side.
From here I walked on to Men Scryfa, an iron age monument and on to the Nine Maidens prehistoric stone circle.
And after a long day's walking, what better way to end it than with a glass of cider in one of St Ives' treasures — The Three Ferrets.
NORTH YORKSHIRE
Left: to Snowdon summit with Lliwedd on the left.
Below: over the Wainstones to Garrats Gap on the Cleveland Way and the Lyke Wake Walk.
Jacqui Bowen is a journalist from South Wales who likes to spend as much time as possible out on the hill
North Yorkshire offers excellent possibilities for challenging walking but it's also good to know that there's plenty to do close at hand when the weather turns moorland expeditions into exercises in masochism.
At times like that — and it must be admitted they are quite frequent in this part of the world — the coastal villages never fail to enchant me.
There's something about the way they're built and their atmosphere that prevents places like Staithes and Whitby slipping overboard from picturesque to grotesque.
A day by the seaside has a different meaning on the breezy east coast.
There is some superb coastal walking — the Cleveland Way joins the coast at Saltburn and runs down to Filey — which takes in some of the most dramatic cliffs in Britain.
And if anyone thinks this is a soft option — try a cliff-top route with a storm blowing.
The Cod and Lobster Inn at Staithes has been washed away and rebuilt three times — best get in there quickly before the next storm strikes…always a good excuse.
The Cleveland Way and the Lyke Wake Walk are, of course, the best known long distance routes and they coincide for about 12 miles.
There are over 1,000 miles of public footpaths and bridleways within the national park boundaries and with vast numbers of walkers being sucked into the Lake District and Peak District, finding a quiet spot is rarely difficult.
And that's what really makes the area so special and keeps me coming back.
SNOWDONIA
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking, camping and backpacking at home and abroad
It came as a shock to realise that nearly 20 years had passed since an enthusiastic young couple in Capel Curig told me they were going to ‘do’ Snowdonia that afternoon.
I've visited at least two or three times each year since then and I still hesitate to claim to know the area really well.
If you visit a place frequently you undergo a strange transition in feelings towards it.
The first, exploratory visits are all about the thrill of the new.
Those thrills prompt you to come back for more but they're often reinforced by a swirling hotch-potch of memories.
These memories can pop up at any time and transform even the most mundane occasion into something special.
The last time I camped at the Forestry Commission site at Beddgelert I recalled — for no good reason, but with an involuntary laugh — a visit with my rotund pal Brian.
Wearing a woollen pixie hat above his bright red beard, he loudly and uninterruptedly belched and farted his way up and down Moel Hebog with a cheery smile and complete disregard for the appalled looks which followed his thundering progress.
Each time I have a pint in the pub at Rhydd Ddu I recall a snowy Easter night spent waiting for mates who had set off earlier to tackle the Snowdon Horseshoe.
When they hadn't returned by 9.30pm I was starting to worry.
Thankfully they piled in shortly after with assorted and strangely contradictory tales of storms, abseils and heroism in the face of overwhelming odds — the only consistency being a ferocious thirst.
When in Betws y Coed, an afternoon of muscle-wrenching mountain biking comes to mind.
The afternoon in question was spent in a painful attempt (wholly unsuccessful) to keep up with a young woman who later turned out to be a champion rider with a European reputation.
I've had my picture taken alongside most of Snowdonia's summit cairns and I no longer feel prodded by guide books or pressured by time to tick off one top after another.
These days I march to a different tune.
The national park covers an astonishing 840 square miles — I've tended to concentrate on northern Snowdonia and even there have barely scraped the surface.
I wonder how much I could ‘do’ over the next 20 years?
DORSET
Henry Druce is features editor of Outdoor Action — when he's not out hillwalking, mountain biking, skiing or falling off his windsurfer
Durdle Door — a stunning natural arch at St Oswald's Bay near Lulworth.
I'm a sucker for coastal walking and am naturally attracted to Dorset as it offers some of the best in the country.
The Dorset coast path runs along a spectacular rugged cliffline from Poole Harbour to Lyme Regis, taking you to great beaches through some extraordinary landscapes.
The most famous of Dorset's natural oddities is the rock arch at Durdle Door — it looks like a jagged shark fin.
Other curious features can be seen at Lulworth Cove, home of the famous Strait Hole — a collapsed sea cave with striking rock formations and arches.
Then between Worth Matravers and Poole are Old Harry Rocks — a collection of large rocks jutting out of the sea.
Further west lies Chesil Bank — a spectacular 18 mile pebble beach which joins the Isle of Portland to the mainland.
I've never walked the whole 72-mile coast path in one go as I tend to head to Dorset at weekends and just explore different areas on day walks.
However, accommodation is readily available on the route with an ample choice of bed and breakfasts, youth hostels and campsites.
There are also many charming pubs around.
A favourite of mine is the Square and Compass in Worth Matravers where I've supped many a fine pint.
Although for me Dorset's main attraction is its coastline, I've also enjoyed exploring many of the inland areas, in particular Studland Heath.
This 400 acre nature reserve near Swanage is home to a tremendous variety of flora and fauna.
It's one of the few places in Britain where you can catch sight of the endangered sand lizard or smooth snake.
The giant Agglestone Rock is also to be found here, looking somewhat out of place on the rolling heathland.
According to legend it was thrown by the Devil from the Isle of Wight.
The Purbeck Hills in south Dorset give a good contrast to the coastal scenery.
I've explored the hills both on foot and on mountain bike, on the many tracks and bridleways which criss-cross the area.
Be warned though, the rolling hills and rugged terrain will test your mountain biking stamina to the extreme.
I've also been mountain biking around Dorchester which is somewhat gentler going though equally spectacular.
There's a great wooded area fairly close to the town — including the wonderfully named Tolpuddle Hollow and Puddletown Heath.
The many tracks through the woods make it easy to get lost — but that's never bothered me.
Another reason I like Dorset so much is for the windsurfing.
I've often taken a board and gone sailing in Poole Harbour, the second largest natural harbour in the world.
It's a great place for beginners to learn as the harbour has shallow water — only 40ft at its deepest point — with constant winds and protection from being swept out to sea.
The tremendous variety of activities in Dorset ensure that I will continue to visit time after time.
See you there!
SCOTLAND
Rennie McOwan writes Outdoor Action's Scottish news.
He's been a hillwalker for 30 years and is the author of nine books on the outdoors
The terrain of the 22 mile trek in Wester Ross is some of the wildest in Britain.
I have walked it in a day, but it can take as long as a week to complete.
The route takes you several miles from any habitation, unbridged burns and rivers have to be crossed during its length and you will find yourself surrounded by some of the most delectable mountains.
No one should undertake this hill crossing unless they are confident of covering long distances, carrying food, clothing and other gear for several days.
Knowing how to navigate is essential.
There are two open bothies on the route but contrary to what is written in some places, the farm at lonely Carnmore on the Letterewe estate is not inhabited except for part of the year.
Access shouldn't be a problem provided the walker sticks to the glen paths, but a prior check with the estates is courteous and this journey should be avoided during the peak of the deer stalking season.
There is no ban on camping in lonely corners of the Letterewe estate.
However campers should only stay for a night or two, be unobtrusive and sensitive to wildlife, and leave no litter.
However the owner of the estate prefers people to use the bothy at Carnmore.
This bothy also doubles as a stable for estate garrons (hill ponies).
The Letterewe estate is run as a wilderness area and not as a commercial estate — this is an immense boon as far as preserving the beauty of the area is concerned.
Start from the parking area close to Corrie Hallie on the A832 south-east of Loch Broom, then take a broad track southwards.
Two miles into the hills, the track to Shenavall bothy goes off to the right.
Make that a base for explorations into the fine mountains all around.
The Shenavall river, the Abhainn Strath na Sealga, has to be crossed.
However because this is a true wilderness area and there is no bridge over the river, the water levels may be too high, giving you no option but to abort the trip.
Once you've crossed the river, cross rough ground to a second river, Larachantivore, where there is (or was on my last visit, at any rate) an ancient and rickety bridge.
Be prepared to wade here, taking care that you don't go out of your depth.
After this second river a better track leads westwards through Gleann na Muice Beag.
It crosses wild hill ground giving fine views before descending to the Carnmore bothy and its old farmhouse.
Here great mountains lie all around.
Cross the causeway between Loch Dubh and long Fionn Loch, before estate tracks lead you westwards to Kernsary and eventually onto the A832 and Poolewe village.
The phrase wilderness is often overused and misplaced.
The walk outlined here comes close to being a true wilderness area, being lonely, beautiful and sometimes precarious.
The rewards gained from visiting such an area can be both magnificent and enduring.
Carnmore on the Letterewe estate in Wester Ross.
A wonderful and wild landscape to walk through
PEMBROKESHIRE
Heather Barrett is a journalist who has trekked extensively around the world.
She is currently co-writing a book on her recent Amazon expedition
Pembrokeshire heads my list of favourite UK walking areas.
It combines a wide variety of wonderful walks with an abundance of wildlife and natural history.
There is always something new to see or discover, even on a short walk.
The scenery is breathtaking, the rugged coast path meanders among tall cliffs, high above the fine beaches and pale turquoise sea.
Solitude is easy to find and there is a general air of timelessness and unblemished natural beauty wherever you go.
Ancient castles, burial chambers, ruins and churches are scattered over the area, highlighting the rich cultural heritage and providing a contrast to the golden sands, estuaries and wooded valleys.
No walker who visits Pembrokeshire can fail to be tempted by part of the 180 mile coastal path.
It's easy to walk along and the views are unparalleled.
Even on a short section you can see many of the different birds which colonise nearby Ramsey, Skikholm and Skomer islands, and perhaps some of the gannets that breed further out on Grassholm.
If you look out to sea it's fairly easy to spot seals basking in the water or if you're lucky, you might catch sight of a school of porpoise, a dolphin, or even a turtle.
One of my favourite stretches is the majestic peninsula around St Davids, Wales' most famous headland.
It's an easy walk which can be extended as far as you wish without having to retrace your steps.
In summer heather and bracken carpet the clifftops and riots of butterflies crowd the bushes and flowers.
If you've got a few days to spare, head inland to the 400 million year old Presley Hills.
There are good walks in these wild and untarnished mountains and the views from the tops are lovely.
I also like the sheltered Nevern and Gwaun valleys and the banks of the Daugleddau Estuary.
Here pockets of ancient semi-natural woodland, unafraid wildlife and a sense of history and heritage combine to offer a peaceful retreat from the coast.
It's easy to see why many people say of the place ‘Once seen never forgotten’.
WALKING IN THE LAKES
Lakeland Circuit
We asked guidebook writer Paul Buttle to devise a circular route in the Lakes for Outdoor Action readers.
In 12 days or sections of two days or more, always with high and low alternatives, we think it's the best Lakeland route ever.
Probably.
Parts 2 and 3 in August and September
My first experience of the Lake District was on a circular walking tour made over 25 years ago with two friends.
We did little planning other than booking our accommodation in a chain of well positioned youth hostels, but the holiday was memorable.
Each day we discovered something new and were constantly amazed by the intricate beauty of the area.
The aim of the circular walk I've devised is to capture as fully as possible the incredible magic of the Lakes.
The circuit aims to give walkers the best possible experience of the area in a single route.
It passes among Lakeland's most exciting summits and beautiful dales without crossing over itself or backtracking, and it avoids commercialised areas.
When I came to planning the circuit I realised there would  actually have to be two routes — a high level one, leading over the crest of the fells, and a low level alternative for unfavourable weather.
A lower level route is also a good option for days when you're not feeling up to making it across the tops.
This alternative low level route is a valid circuit in itself and not just a poor substitute.
In one respect it is superior, as by staying lower down you will be constantly amazed by the ever changing scenery — higher up the views give you a good idea of the terrain you'll be walking through the next day.
The circuit's main route works out to be over 140 miles long and involves over 38,000 feet of climbing.
It is meant to be a 12 day walk but because of its convoluted shape the circuit can easily be shortened, for instance two of the days are more or less optional.
The walk can be done all in one go or in sections — for many it might be easier to tackle two days at a time at the weekends.
Accommodation is available at the end of each day's walk, though sometimes this is very limited, ranging from a hotel to a simple youth hostel.
Taking a tent obviously gives a lot more flexibility, freeing you from the near necessity of booking accommodation in advance.
On 11 of the 12 night stopovers you can obtain a meal locally, usually bar food, so it is possible to consider camping without using any cooking equipment — this would considerably reduce the weight of your backpack.
I rather like the flexible concept of this circuit.
It allows you to alternate between a high and low route and it's easy to extend the walk or take short cuts.
In truth I have a slight horror of a route becoming ‘The (Something) Way’, as if no other way was possible.
This circuit is meant to be adapted to your specific needs, so rather than call it ‘The Lakeland Way’ or anything as horrendous as that, I would rather call it something antiquated like: ‘Notes Towards a Considered Circular Pedestrian Peregrination Amongst some of the Major Fells and Dales of the County of Cumbria’, but it is hardly a working title.
I'm willing therefore to call it ‘A Lakeland Circuit’, so long as it remains merely ‘a’ circuit and does not become ‘the’circuit.
Kentmere village typifies the incomparable beauty of the Lake District
DAY 1
STAVELEY TO HAWESWATER
The circuit begins at Staveley .
It's an uninspiring village but it has a railway station, so it's a convenient place to begin.
But more importantly it is a good starting place for exploring the lesser known eastern valleys  which are peaceful, quiet and cut off from the rest of the Lake District.
Walk Directions
From Staveley walk northwards to Kentmere (4.5 miles) but avoid walking along the road.
To the west of the river a chain of trackways and paths provide a more appealing route.
As you near the village of Kentmere the beauty of the Lake District becomes so clear.
The village doesn't have a pub or even a shop.
However, a couple of houses serve afternoon teas in the Green Quarter.
From the Green Quarter strike north another half mile along a road and then go eastwards along a bridleway to Sadgill in the slender valley of Longsleddale (2 miles).
The surfaced road ends at Sadgill from where it continues as a rough enclosed trackway, climbing up to the head of the valley.
At the head of the valley bear north-east onto a path across a shallow watershed into Mosedale (2 miles).
The next three miles of pathway northwards from Mosedale to Swindale are the least dramatic of the circuit.
However, at Swindale you are rewarded with an amphitheatre of classic  Lakeland features such as crags, waterfalls, glacial hummocks and a traditional farm.
From Swindale Head Farm follow the ‘Old Corpse Road’, actually a footpath, over the Haweswater.
Escape Routes
Gatescarth Pass, between the head of Longsleddale and Haweswater.
Shortens the route by some two miles though it  involves going slightly higher than the main route.
Low Level Route
There isn't one, although on the first day the main route is essentially at low level.
DAY 2
HAWESWATER TO PATTERDALE
Between Haweswater and the rest of the Lake District lies the longest range of hills in the Lake District above 2,000ft.
The main route is along the top of part of this range which includes the summit of High Street.
From here, provided the weather is fine, you will gain an impressive view of Lakeland's other summits.
Walk Directions
From the head of Haweswater ascend high Street, named after the Roman road that once ran along the ridge between Blea Water and Riggindale, on a well defined path.
From the summit strike northwards for two and  a half miles along an obvious path.
The range is very rounded on the top and sections of it are fairly flat, so this part of the route should be an easy saunter.
After passing over the top of Red Crag — an ill-defined top marked with a small cairn of stones to the left of the fence — bear to the left through the remains of a wooden gate towards a much lower peak intriguingly called Pikeawassa.
The path traverses round this peak and leads down to the Old Church of Martindale (2.5 miles).
Martindale is another valley which seems to have altered little for a century or more.
It is wonderfully tranquil and pastoral.
From the old church continue along a narrow country lane to the hamlet of Sandwick on the shoreline of Ullswater.
From there follow a very popular lakeshore path that follows the eastern shoreline of the lake to Patterdale (5 miles).
Low Level Route
There is no real low level alternative because the High Street range presents such a physical barrier.
But if weather conditions are really severe, or bad enough to put you off, there is a way of literally getting around this ‘obstacle’.
From Haweswater walk to Bampton village and then cross from there over Divock Moor to Pooley Bridge (9 miles).
From here catch either the CMS (Cumberland Motor Services) 108 bus to Patterdale or the Ullswater motor launch to Glenridding — this runs seasonally from Easter to October.
Hotel:(For a wider choice head a mile north to Glenridding).
Shops: This is a well-stocked village store.
Pubs and eating places: Bar meals are available here.
Public transport: bus service from Patterdale Hotel to Penrith Railway Station via Pooley Bridge (number 103).
In the summer the route also extends to Windermere station.
A SINGLE DAY ALTERNATIVE TO DAYS 1 & 2
If you wish to bypass Haweswater you can do so easily enough by continuing from Kentmere village to the head of the valley.
This leads to Nan Bield Pass, from here walk up to the top of High Street.
At the top you can continue along the route described for Day 2 — a long day's walk — or for a shorter route descend to Patterdale via Angle Tarn.
DAY 3
PATTERDALE TO DERWENTWATER
The main route crosses over the summit of Helvellyn, the third highest and one of the most popular peaks in the Lake District.
The ascent is via Striding Edge the most dramatic ridge in the area.
Public transport: bus service from Penrith railway station to Patterdale (number 108).
In summer the service connects with Windermere Station.
Walk Directions
From Patterdale take the minor road leading to the Patterdale Pack Kennels (1 mile).
Just before reaching the kennels join the start of a long diagonal path leading to the crest of Striding Edge.
Follow the crest of the ridge to the summit of Helvellyn (3 miles).
From the summit head south along the broad path which follows the summit ridge.
This soon branches in two.
Follow the right hand branch to Wythburn.
From here take the path which starts from Wythburn Church car park running parallel to the A591 and linking with a minor road running along the west side of Thirlmere Reservoir (3 miles).
Follow this road (for 0.75 of a mile) to the start of an old packhorse route leading to Harrop Tarn.
From Harrop Tarn the packhorse route leads on to Blea Tarn (1.5 miles) and then down to the small hamlet of Watendlath (2 miles), situated at the end of a narrow valley next to a small tarn.
From the hamlet follow the road to Derwentwater (2.5 miles), or use the path on the west side of Watendlath Beck to High Lodore Farm (2 miles).
Escape Routes
None, but it is possible to get a bus at Wythburn church.
CMS's 555 service takes you to Keswick.
Then catch the 79 Seatoller service from Keswick to take you to the southern end of Derwentwater.
Low Level Route
From Patterdale walk to Grisedale Tarn at the head of the Grisedale valley, along a broad trackway which becomes a bridleway (5 miles).
Apart from Ennerdale, Grisedale is the largest roadless valley in the Lakes.
it is striking and overlooked by impressive crags.
From Grisedale Tarn pass through the gap between Seat Sandal and Dollywagon Pike and descend to Dunmail Raise, the pass between Grasmere and Thirlmere.
From the very top of the pass take the path to Thirlmere (0.75 mile).
This parallels the main A591 road and links to a forestry track which you follow until you join a minor road running along the western side of the reservoir.
From here you can continue along the main route as described above.
Pubs and eating places: both hotels have public bars.
Grisedale — the largest roadless valley in the Lake District
DAY 4
DERWENTWATER TO BUTTERMERE
There is a difficult choice to make between today's main high level route and the lower alternative.
The lower level route passes through Newlands, a wonderful valley surrounded by shapely fells, while the high level choice is an excellent undulating ridge walk.
Compared to the previous day this is a short walk whether you choose the high or low route.
If you wanted to shorten the circuit you could press  on to Black Sail Hut.
See Day 5 (in the next issue).
Walk Directions
Walk round the lake to the foot of the Cat Bells ridge (3.5 miles).
Alternatively you can get to the same point by ferry.
Catch the one going clockwise from either the Ashness or the Lodore boat landings, to get to the Hawse End landings at the foot of the Cat Bells ridge.
The service runs from Easter to November and on winter weekends.
From Hawes End follow the path on to the Cat Bells ridge onto Cat Bells (1 mile) and then onto Maiden Moor (1 mile) and High Spy (1.5 mile).
From High Spy there is a short descent to Dale Head Tarn (0.75 mile south) followed by a half mile ascent to the top of Dale Head.
From Dale Head walk across the shoulder of Hindscarth and on to Robinson (2 miles, in a north-westerly direction).
From Robinson descent to Buttermere via High Snockrigg. (1.75 miles westwards).
Escape Routes
From Dale Head Tarn it is possible to cut across the top of High Scawdel to Honister Pass and then descend by road to Buttermere, partly across open fell and partly on footpath (1 mile).
Also between Hindscarth and Ronsingon, it is possible to descend from any point along this ridge to the Buttermere valley.
Low Level Route
From the Hawes End boat landings follow the nearby road to Skelgill Farm (half mile) and from there cut across the fields along a path to Littletown (1 mile).
From here continue along the road, again around the head of the valley, to a large purple house called Rigg Beck (0.75 mile).
From here follow the nearby stream uphill to a narrow pass between Ard Crags and Scar Crags (1.75 miles).
As you go over the pass the path descends the side of Sail Beck to Buttermere (2.75 miles).
Shops: none but the campsite farm has a few limited supplies.
Pubs and eating places: both the hotels in the village have public bars and serve meals.
WALKING IN IRELAND
Pilgrims' Progress
On ‘Reek Sunday’ thousands of pilgrims climb Croagh Patrick in Co Mayo.
Rennie McOwan walked with them
A psalmist in Biblical times wrote of lifting one's eyes to the hills but on the day we visited Croagh Patrick on the western seaboard of Co Mayo, Ireland thousands were doing more than just look.
I have never been on a mountain with so many other people before.
We reckoned there were at least 12,000 and the total over the weekend topped the 20,000 mark.
At 2,510ft Croagh Patrick is a big, stony mound which overlooks the many islands of Westport Bay and gives splendid views to many inland hills and into Connemara.
In pre-Christian times it was a sacred hill.
Festivities and worship-rites were held on the top which declined when the new faith arrived.
It was here that St Patrick, patron saint of Ireland, fasted and meditated and, according to legend, banished all the snakes from Ireland.
It's said to be a symbolic tale with the casting out of the snakes related to the ousting of the old beliefs.
Over the centuries a tradition arose of pilgrims going to Croagh Patrick, spending the night on top and hearing Mass at dawn.
Later the Mass switched to daytime as numbers grew.
The pilgrimage grew more popular until Reek Sunday, as local people call it, evolved into a national event.
Now people come from all over Ireland who combine climbing the peak, saying prayers en route and attending Mass on top, with ceilidhs and dances.
We had spent some days in the hills of Mayo before deciding to go to Croagh Patrick.
It was thought locally that attendance might be down because of a Gaelic football regional cup tie taking place at the same time, but many people managed to do both.
It was startling to see thousands of people of all ages toiling up and down the hill, like two gigantic snakes (if that is not somewhat inappropriate), squelching over lower, peaty sections and gingerly picking their way up large and often precarious scree.
Growing numbers of tourists joined in this ant-like procession.
We saw French, Americans, Spaniards, Italians, Catalans, Dutch and some serious looking Swedes whose leader had a walkie-talkie.
Some had national flags flying from their rucksacks so we hung out a tiny Scottish Saltire.
It was an extraordinary occasion, lively, moving, startling in its diversity and with much good humour.
There were inevitable casualties on such steep and slippery ground.
Every now and again rescue teams of young people would pick their way downhill with a bandaged pilgrim on a stretcher.
The injuries were mainly facial cuts from tripping on the stones.
Some of the pilgrims walked barefoot, a growing trend, at which we gasped.
We sometimes saw elderly people stopping to catch their breath and calling to those descending ‘Is it far?’
There was a great deal of encouragement and a helping hand for those finding it tough, mixed in with an occasional piece of mild blasphemy as yet another pilgrim went sprawling on the wet peat.
There are problems with the condition of the path and, alas, litter.
However, we were told that path repair work is planned and that groups of young people do clean-ups.
In recent times the Irish Government faced a dilemma over the future of Croagh Patrick.
Gold was found there and a full scale conservation row broke out as mining exploration started.
The Government stopped it and pledged to save the mountain.
This was an enlightened decision, but it cannot have been easy given the high level of unemployment in the rural west, and the need to find more material resources.
It was probably the right decision for tourism, but more importantly there is such a thing as the life of the soul.
Croagh Patrick can enrich the hillwalker's spirit.
And all those toiling thousands had a part to play in the decision to protect the hill.
I like solitude on the mountains and avoid crowds where I can, but I can truthfully say that Reek Sunday was a unique experience.
I can still hear the laughter on the slopes and feel the wind on the summit as a quiet congregation knelt in the mist and rain.
Top: the path up Croagh Patrick is lined with pilgrims.
Left: Croagh Patrick is a beautiful mountain, capable of lifting walkers' spirits
BONINGTON INTERVIEW
Chris Bonington
The high life
Chris Bonington's passion for climbing and adventure has taken him on expeditions all over the world.
Henry Druce meets the man behind the image
Chris Bonington is Britain's best known climber and adventurer.
His climbing achievements are many, but it is his attempts on Everest which have lodged him firmly in the public consciousness.
He finally reached this elusive peak in 1985, and since then he has captured the public's imagination on other expeditions.
The most obvious example was the attempt to find a yeti on an expedition Bonington led to climb Menlungtse in the Himalaya.
One of his most recent expeditions was climbing in an unexplored area of Greenland, having sailed there in a yacht.
During over 30 years of adventures Bonington has faced great danger — he admits he is lucky to be alive — and lost many friends.
But when you speak to him it quickly becomes clear that his passion for climbing and adventure remains as strong as ever.
I met him at his son's flat in north London — a somewhat incongruous setting for a man who's spent so much of his time in some of the wildest places in the world.
And in the flesh he lives up to his image — at 58 he's lean and fit, and with his tanned face and hallmark beard, he looks every bit the outdoor adventurer.
What was your most successful expedition?
On one level I suppose climbing the south-west face of Everest was the biggest and most complete expedition, but in spite of our being successful, one member of the team died on the second summit attempt.
As far as pure simple enjoyment goes, I'd say it was an expedition to a mountain called Shivling which Jim Fotheringham and I climbed in 1983.
It was a new route up a beautiful unclimbed peak, the west summit of Shivling.
We climbed pure alpine style, which is very fast and light, and got up and down in one piece.
In some ways it was one of the most satisfying climbs I've done.
Above: Chris Bonington — Britain's best known climber and adventurer in action
What's the closest you've come to death?
There have been so many narrow escapes that it's very  difficult to say which one was the closest.
Usually they're silly things were you haven't quite clipped in correctly to the rope and suddenly, zap, you realise you've missed death by only a hair's breadth.
I think any serious climber has got to admit that he's lucky to be alive, not that he's skilful to be alive.
Considering the risks, what continues to motivate you to climb?
I just love it.
I love the sensation of climbing, I love being in the hills.
I get a real kick out of it and thoroughly enjoy doing it.
Have you ever tried to reach a summit when in retrospect you've realised that the conditions were too dangerous?
The motivation to go on or turn back depends on an awful lot of factors.
There are times when I've pushed on when all the signals were saying turn back.
There are other times when I've turned back and felt ‘gosh no, this is wrong’ and afterwards thought why did I turn back, maybe I should have carried on.
I think the key thing is to listen to that instinct as it's most probably the thing that has the highest chance of being right.
If you ignore your instinct, that's when you get into trouble.
Where does this instinct come from?
I think it is going into your subconscious and picking up a whole series of signals.
It's picking up signals of what your mental and physical state is and referring back to a lot of experience — all of these things make a kind of gut instinct.
Primarily though it's how you are in yourself at the time which determines whether you are going to get up the mountain and get back down.
What did it feel like when you finally made it to the summit of Everest?
At the time it was a traumatic experience.
While climbing the last little bit I couldn't help thinking of all the mates who had been killed.
In fact I cried when I got to the top, but I think that that was just a release of emotion.
Subsequently when I got back down and realised we'd done it, and everyone had got off the mountain and no-one had been injured, I had an immense feeling of satisfaction, just of having stood there.
And a great feeling of release.
It left me free to do all kinds of other things that I wanted to do.
I's had quite a hang up about getting to the top of it.
Is climbing primarily a mental or physical challenge?
It's a combination of the two.
Climbing, even rock climbing, is a matter of having the physical ability to scale a section of rock, but you've also got to have it in your mind to work out how you're going to do it, and have the motivation to push yourself.
You once organised an expedition to find the yeti.
Did you ever feel you had a chance of finding it?
I was pretty open about that — it certainly enabled us to climb Menlungtse in the Himalaya.
Our prime aim was to climb the mountain but the BBC camera team and the Mail on Sunday journalist were primarily interested in hunting the yeti.
If they wanted to do that while we climbed our mountain, that was fine by me.
Did they ever come close?
God alone knows.
I think the yeti is wonderfully unproven in either direction.
I mean we did see some strange tracks and we did find this sheep which had been completely gutted, but apparently that could have been done by a snow leopard.
And in fact at the end of the expedition ski poles which had been left at the bottom of the climb had vanished.
It seems unlikely that a Tibetan would have got up there to take them, but then it could be argued that it's equally unlikely that a yeti was the culprit.
There were ambiguous unanswered questions.
What do you think about the environmental damage caused by the huge number of trekkers and climbers who visit Nepal?
It's a serious problem which has to be looked at on two levels.
The first level is something that the climbers can do something about, and that is removing their rubbish.
There are huge amounts of rubbish scattered everywhere and that is appalling.
One of the main problems, particularly at the Everest base camp, is this business of allowing eight expeditions to climb Everest at the same time.
This makes it very easy for climbers not to take responsibility for the rubbish they create.
Secondly, with the weight of tourist traffic going into Nepal, I think the government has got to accept a share of the responsibility.
There should be some kind of rubbish disposal facility and you need proper campsites for the trekkers, with camp wardens.
I also think there is probably a strong argument for controlling the numbers that go into some of these areas, like they do in American national parks.
The key problem though is not so much the rubbish, which is cosmetic, but deforestation.
The number of trekkers going into the area is only partially to blame.
The main reason is population  growth which is causing the people to clear more woodland so they can cultivate the land.
They desperately need to start controlling their population and find alternative forms of fuel.
In the long term these things need to be addressed if the mountain areas aren't going to receive very very serious damage.
You recently went on an expedition sailing to Greenland to climb a previously unexplored mountain.
How did it go?
It was a fascinating experience but from the climbing point of view the ratios weren't terribly good.
It was something like six weeks at sea and 14 days on land.
And most of that 14 days was spent travelling at the foot of the mountains.
So we actually ended up with two days' climbing.
But having said that, it was wonderful and I wouldn't have missed that trip for anything.
Was it ever frightening sailing through the icebergs?
The only dangerous time we had was on the way back when we were trying to get away from the coast of Iceland and a whole series of fronts were driving us back into the coast.
We were heading for the Westerman Islands on the far south-east corner of Iceland and a front came in faster than Robin Knox-Johnston, the skipper, had anticipated.
This meant we had to turn round but we were now being driven into a shore.
We only cleared the vital point by 100 yards.
We cleared it at night but you could see the spray smashing up against the cliffs — it was a pretty narrow escape.
I was on watch at the time getting colder and colder and wetter and wetter.
I think I was actually too cold and too wet to be too worried about the outcome.
And I had total confidence in Robin as, very touchingly, he had in me when we climbed on the mountain.
What was it like climbing somewhere no-one had ever explored before?
It was wonderful.
Greenland is fantastic and I loved the travel.
We were going on cross-country skis pulling pulks (little sledges).
That was brilliant and the mountain itself was a fine mountain.
Here there was confusion because we wanted to climb the highest point in the Lemon Mountains.
But when we got there we found that the mountain we had perceived from the map to be the Cathedral, and which everyone else had perceived to be the Cathedral, was in fact another mountain altogether.
We had to change where we were going and when we tried to climb it, it was much harder than I'd anticipated.
It wasn't the type of climb on which you wanted to be with a total beginner — Robin.
On the first attempt we didn't get to the top.
We got to the top of a very high pinnacle on a ridge and then turned back.
On the second attempt it was just Jim Lowther and myself, but once again we'd underestimated just how hard the upper part of the Cathedral was.
We got onto the summit crest but were forced to turn back.
Although we didn't quite make the top, it was a good day's climbing.
How much time do you spend on expeditions a year?
In an average year it's about six to eight weeks actually expeditioning.
I usually have one expedition a year.
How much time do you spend planning?
It depends on the size of the expedition.
The beauty of small lightweight expeditions is that they don't take that long.
We've been working on the Panch  Chule expedition for a year, but it's just the odd day basically.
Obviously as you get a little bit closer to it it gets rather more fraught.
How much training do you do before an expedition?
Just moderate, no more.
I climb through the year and run a certain amount, but it's gentle jogging.
I have a moderate level of fitness throughout and I think that's what you really want for an expedition.
How have your family coped with you heading off on these sometimes very dangerous expeditions?
Well we've managed to remain married and in love for 30 years, so that's not bad.
And we have a super relationship with our two boys.
How do you spend the rest of your time when you're not on or planning an expedition?
I earn a living by writing.
I've nearly finished a book about Greenland to be called Sea, Ice and Rock , which is a joint book with Robin.
I give lectures in the autumn, I do quite a lot of management seminars and inspirational speaking at sales conferences.
I do TV work and a certain amount of broadcasting.
I do a fair amount of charitable work — I was president of the BMC which I really enjoyed doing and I'm president designate of the Council for National Parks which will come up in October.
This will involve a lot of work but it's something I'm looking forward to.
I've got to assimilate a much broader kind of spectrum outside the interests of climbers in national parks.
I'll find that challenging, interesting, and probably quite difficult.
You've just done a TV series and book about the history of climbing.
Which feats have impressed you the most?
I think the climber Messner is the greatest mountaineer of perhaps all time.
You just have to list his track record, the number of firsts and very innovative things that he did down the line.
Being the first to do it isn't just an ego thing, it's also breaking new ground.
What impresses me in Messner is the combination he has of immense boldness and analytical power.
He knows when to turn back and he has turned back frequently when things aren't right.
And he knows when to go on.
It's immensely impressive.
What are the common traits of climbers through the generations?
You can recognise the modern climber in a lot of the old climbers.
The motivation hasn't changed — the equipment has changed, some of the pressures have changed, the emphases have changed, but the actual essential personalities have hardly changed at all.
Through the whole history of climbing there's the struggle for risk and the unknown on one side, while on the other you've got the desire for safety and to have a safety net.
And you've also got man's desire to be sure of achieving success.
In a way, these two things have been in conflict right the way through the history of climbing.
And when it comes down to it, most of the ethical arguments are about these two differences of approach.
What plans have you for future expeditions?
I'm taking my sons and my brother to Kilimanjaro in August.
I'm just about to go to Panch Chule which is a mountain in the Indian Himalaya.
It's an Indian/British expedition with a good strong team.
I've been invited to go to Bhutan so I might go there.
And I want to get back into Tibet and I also want to go to Russia.
I like mountains around about the 6000, lower 7000m range.
They're the unclimbed peaks, the unexplored peaks — and they're a bit kinder to you as you get into your late fifties.
The problem is finding the time to do everything I'd like to do.
On top of the world.
The summit of Everest in 1985
A six part series about the history of climbing presented by Chris Bonington starts on Thursday August 13 on BBC 2 at 8.30pm.
Chris Bonington's book The Climbers to accompany the series will be published by Hodders and Stoughton on August 4 1992 price £16.95.
GEAR TEST
LIGHTWEIGHT TROUSERS
A decent pair of walking trousers is an essential buy.
To help you choose the best we asked Paul Traynor to put six pairs to the test
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist with 25 years' experience of walking and backpacking at home and abroad.
Left to right: Rohan Bags — old favourites; Karrimor Tinamou — simple and comfy; Berghaus Windpants — very light and quick drying; Abris Jura — a sound choice; Regatta Action — good for the price; Jack Wolfskin Looping — versatile design and light weight
Lightweight, quick-drying trousers are a real boon for the fast-moving traveller — whether you're getting around on foot, by car or by plane.
But you don't have to be on the move to appreciate the advantages promised by the current designs on the market.
Comfort, practicality and ease of care are attractive to office workers and hill walkers alike and the flexibility of lightweight trousers means that most of us will end up owning a pair or two, regardless of our outdoor interest.
You'll soon notice the advantages of trousers with good levels of wind resistance and with a degree of resistance to rain.
When wet these trousers dry quickly in a warm room — quicker still if you're walking in a warm breeze.
All the trousers tested here were worn in a wide range of conditions and temperatures from late winter to spring.
I'm a warm walker however, and prefer to wear light clothing whenever possible.
Others will, of course, prefer to wear something more substantial during colder weather.
All weights given refer to the extra-large size or equivalent.
Read on to see how well each pair measures up to makers' claims.
ROHAN BAGS
Designated use:general outdoor and travel wear.
Fabric:Airlight — a 50/50 polyester/cotton supposed to be ‘light and quick drying’
Pockets:two open side pockets, two zipped side pockets with bellows adjustment poppers, two zipped back pockets.
Other features:belt loops.
Zipped fly.
Strengthened key ring attachment.
Double thickness on seat and knees.
Water resistance:little resistance to persistent rain but the fabric dries out so quickly after shows that it's often not worth the bother of getting out your overtrousers.
Wind resistance:good.
I stayed comfortable even on very breezy, chilly days.
Drying time:fast — wearable within three hours in a warm room, albeit with dampish waistband, pockets etc.
Paul's verdict:Bags have been around a long time now and Rohan can justifiably claim to have prompted other companies to come up with versions of their original.
I found them comfortable and versatile — in warm weather I washed and wore them immediately and they dried out almost completely within 20  minutes.
Am I alone, though, in questioning the value of the poppers on the bellows side pockets?
When lounging around I find these tend to dig in at the hips.
JACK WOLFSKIN LOOPING
Designated use:multi-use windproof trousers — can be used all year if worn over fleece trousers or climbing tights.
Fabric:H2Off polyester microfibre, which claims to be ‘superlight, water repellent and quick-drying.’
Pockets:two zipped side pockets, one back pocket with a flap secured by Velcro, twin compartment leg pocket with a flap secured by Velcro.
Other features:elasticated waist with belt loops (belt supplied).
No fly.
Adjustable at ankle by Velcro fastener.
Double thickness knee panels.
Water resistance:coped well with showers and persistent light rain, though some water penetrated in downpours.
Wind resistance:I had no complaints even on blustery days with snow underfoot.
Drying time:most of the trouser fabric dried very quickly — within two hours in a warm room — although the elasticated waistband took a while longer.
Paul's verdict:I was impressed by both the performance and flexibility of these trousers.
They coped well with steady rain making me question the need for overtrousers in milder seasons.
They felt comfortable worn next to the skin.
The elasticated waist and ankle adjusters mean they can be worn either track-suit-style or as ‘proper’ trousers when a smarter look is needed.
Their versatility and light weight makes them attractive for backpacking — albeit at a price.
KARRIMOR TINAMOU
Designated use:travel and active leisure wear.
Fabric:65% polyester/35% cotton, which claims to be ‘ultra lightweight, wind and shower resistant’.
Pockets:two open side pockets, zipped back pocket; leg pocket secured by popper — OS map size.
Other features:semi-elasticated waistband with belt loops.
Zipped fly.
Water resistance:they stayed comfortable in a light drizzle, but wind-driven showers quickly penetrated the fabric.
Drying time:most of the fabric was dry enough to wear within three hours in a warm room, but the elasticated waistband and cotton pockets took considerably longer.
Paul's verdict:I liked the simplicity and comfort of the Tinamou trousers.
They're styled more like popular ‘canvas’ trekking jeans than multi-zipped activity legwear, but have the advantages of lightness and quick-drying which makes them particularly suited for travel wear.
ABRIS JURA
Designated use:lightweight walking trousers for general and outdoor use.
Fabric:made from 50/50 polyester/cotton, which claims to ‘pack small and dry quickly’.
Pockets:two open side pockets, two zipped side pockets, two zipped back pockets; one zipped leg pocket — just OS map size.
Other features:belted waist (trousers are supplied with quick-release buckle belt).
Zipped fly.
Double thickness seat and knee panels.
Water resistance:steady rain will penetrate but the fabric holds its own against light drizzle and dries out quickly after showers.
Wind resistance:no complaints, even in the breeziest conditions.
Drying time:wearable after drying for three hours in a warm room.
The pockets and waistband take slightly longer to dry out completely.
Paul's verdict:These trousers were comfortable to wear and did the required job effectively.
Some nice points of detail — like contrasting expansion panels on pockets — catch the eye.
A sound choice.
BERGHAUS WINDPANTS
Designated use:lightweight windproof pants for a variety of activities.
Fabric:Airfoil, a 100% polyester microfibre which claims to be ‘breathable, windproof and quick-drying giving some protection from drizzle and rain.’
Pockets:two zipped side pockets, one zipped back pocket.
Other features:elasticated drawstring at waist, elasticated ankle.
No belt loops.
No fly.
Water resistance:held off light showers well, though steady rain will penetrate.
Drying time:wearable within the hour after drying in a warm room — if you don't mind a few minutes of clamminess at the obvious places where the material is thicker such as the pockets and waistband.
Paul's verdict:I found myself opting to wear or carry these simple track-suit-style pants more and more often.
They are very lightweight and proved ideal to use as a back up when walking or cycling in shorts.
They were also useful to pull on over fleece bottoms in colder weather.
They performed well despite the fact that you scarcely know you're wearing them.
They also pack away neatly into their own back pocket, with a small belt loop attached — a nice touch.
REGATTA ACTION
Designated use:all outdoor activities and general use.
Fabric:65% polyester/35% cotton which the manufacturers say is ‘easily laundered and quick drying.’
Pockets:two open side pockets, four zipped side pockets, two zipped back pockets, one zipped leg pocket.
Other features:belt loops.
Zipped fly.
Double thickness seat and knee panels.
Water resistance:water penetrates readily, but the trousers coped well with light drizzle.
Wind resistance:no complaints, even in bitterly cold conditions.
Drying time:wearable within five hours after drying in a warm room — however the waistband took a little longer to dry.
Paul's verdict:considering the very low price the Action trousers performed pretty well.
They're relatively heavy, take longer to dry and some pocket seams were not properly finished — but they remain a much better bet for walking than non-specialist alternatives.
I found them comfortable to use and easy to care for.
If more attention was paid to the basics and less to incorporating an impressive number of zips, these trousers would be even better value-for-money.
MARKET ROUND UP
BACKPACKING MEALS
Quick to cook, lightweight and nutritious, specialist backpacking meals make outdoor food preparation simple.
We take a look at what's in the shops
Raven Outdoor Cuisine
Design:a range of freeze-dried dehydrated food made with natural ingredients.
Varieties:the range includes breakfasts, lunches, dinners, side dishes and desserts.
Menus include quick porridge and hot bran muesli, Shepherd's pie and beef  bourguignon and apple and strawberry dessert.
Cooking procedures:most of the meals do not need cooking, just add hot water and leave them to stand for a few minutes.
The foil packs have a flat bottom so that they can stay upright when water is being added up to the measuring mark on the pack.
The meals can then be eaten straight out of the pack.
Other features:the meals have a long shelf life and are light and compact to carry.
Peak Performance Meals
Design:a range of freeze dried vegetarian meals.
Cholesterol free.
Varieties:include beans n' toast, bubble and squeak, vegetable stroganoff and Lancashire hot pot.
Cooking procedures:add boiling water and leave for several minutes to rehydrate.
The re-hydration process can be speeded up by heating.
Other features:lightweight and nutritious.
Wynnster Outdoor Cuisine
Design:a range of nine main meals.
Varieties:pasta, chicken and mushroom, beef and cream sauce, marinated beef and vegetables, cod and parsley sauce, spaghetti bolognese, vegetarian goulash, beef  bourguignon , vegetable stew and vegetarian stroganoff.
Cooking procedure:depending on the particular recipe, add cold or boiling water.
Then either leave to rehydrate, then eat or alternatively cook for a few minutes before eating.
Left: the Raven range includes breakfasts, lunches and diners.
Below: Peak Performance's meals are all vegetarian.
Bottom: some of Wynnster's nine main meals
NATURE WATCH
July
Richard Marpole highlights what you can see country-wide and outlines a fascinating walk in the Norfolk Broads
PEACOCK BUTTERFLY
The ‘eyes’ on the wings of the peacock butterfly are a means of defence.
When threatened by a predator, the butterfly opens and closes its wings rapidly, flashing the eye spots, in order to frighten the predator away.
It lays its eggs on nettle leaves and the caterpillars feed off the nettles until they form chrysalises.
There is only one generation a year, flying from July through to the autumn.
Those seen in the spring will have hibernated over the winter in garden sheds or hollow trees.
If disturbed during hibernation, the peacock butterfly can make a hissing noise by rubbing its wings together.
EARLY MARSH ORCHID
Early marsh orchid dactylorhiza incarnata flowers from May through to July.
It has erect leaves, usually unspotted, which form a hood at the tip and are keeled — that is they have a hard ridge running along the centre of the underside.
There are five subspecies distributed widely throughout the British Isles.
Although they vary, the most common colour is a pinkish purple.
KESTREL
The kestrel is our most common falcon, but what a delight it is to see it hunting in a natural habitat rather than at the edge of a motorway.
When looking for prey they will hover up to 300ft above the ground, using their tail and wings to stay in position.
Then they will suddenly swoop down to catch mammals or sometimes insects or worms.
They also prey on small birds.
Kestrels nest in a variety of places such as cliffs or crevices in buildings, or holes in trees.
They also use old crows' or pigeons' nests.
Sometimes they nest on the ground.
Four or five eggs are laid and incubated for about four weeks.
The young are fed by both parents and fledge around four weeks after hatching.
YELLOW FLAG
Yellow flag iris pseudacorus is commonly found at the sides of ponds and in wet meadows.
It grows up to four feet tall, with large yellow flowers and leaves which are sharp enough to cut the unwary.
The name ‘flag’ may originate from the plant having first been used as a heraldic device by Clovis, king of the Franks in the 5th century.
However, the name may also be due to the appearance of the flowers, which go limp and hang from the stems as they get old.
WILD ANGELICA
Wild angelica angelica sylvestris is common in fens and damp woods.
It is a tall plant — up to five feet high — with purple stems and pink or white flowers at the end of thin stalks.
The flowers radiate like the spokes of an umbrella — hence the name of the group to which this plant belongs — the umbellifers.
Wild angelica's close relative angelica archangelica is made into candy by crystallising the stalks.
In London during the Great Plague people chewed on the root, believing that it would protect them from the disease.
COOT
The coot is one of the most common water birds with its white beak and face shield.
During the breeding season from mid May to August, it is strongly territorial and fiercely defensive to interlopers.
Its aggressive display, with its head pushed forward to emphasise the white face shield, is accompanied by a ringing call, similar to metal striking metal.
JULY IN THE NORFOLK BROADS
The origins of the Norfolk Broads have only become known in recent years.
In medieval times, peat digging for fuel was an important industry in the area.
In some places the peat was only a few feet deep whereas in others it went down several yards.
As the peat was removed, depressions were made in large areas of ground and the peat reserves were soon exhausted.
The clay exposed by the peat digging was also excavated and used in the manufacture of bricks and pottery.
In the middle ages, the sea level rose and the hollowed out ground filled with water — the resulting water-filled depressions became what are now known today as the broads.
Today, many of the broads are just a fraction of their former size.
The changing vegetation at the water's edge has turned what was open water into, firstly, a wetland habitat dominated by alder and sallow trees, and then, as the ground has dried out, into mixed woodland.
Unfortunately silting has reduced the depth of some broads, and this, coupled with increased nutrient levels from sewerage outfall, together with run-off of fertilisers from surrounding farmland, has reduced the aquatic life.
Algal bloom, which smothers and kills aquatic wildlife, has become a familiar problem on many inland waters, but especially here in the Norfolk Broads.
Water that was clear and alive with wildlife as recently as the late 1940s is now murky and almost lifeless.
Much of the marshland surrounding the broads and rivers has been drained to make the land available for agricultural use.
Originally this was done using windpumps.
Sadly, the majority of these magnificent structures are derelict, having been replaced by more modern (but less energy efficient) diesel or electric pumps.
The more powerful modern pumps mean that the marshes no longer become flooded during the winter months, and as a consequence the water table has been lowered.
The drying out of the soils causes shrinkage, which ultimately leads to a lowering of the land levels.
Today, much of the land alongside the rivers is below sea level.
The Norfolk Naturalists Trust, the oldest country wildlife trust in the country, is working hard to correct some of the damage done to the environment.
In collaboration with the Broads Authority, English Nature and the National Rivers Authority, they have isolated Cockshoot Broad from the main river network and pumped out polluted sewage.
Within a few months, seeds — which had  lain dormant for many years — germinated.
In 1989 the Broads were given National Park status.
The Broads Authority has to balance the needs of the local wildlife against the needs of the local people, local industry and tourism.
JULY WALK ON THE NORFOLK BROADS
This walk is suitable for both car and boat borne visitors, and can be started from several points other than Upton Dyke.
It is not a strenuous walk, nor is it a walk to be hurried as there is so much to see.
Bear in mind that the path, especially along the riverbanks, can be very muddy.
From the car park at Upon Dyke, follow the footpath which runs down the left side of the dyke.
Immediately you  will see a boatyard on the left.
Just after the boatyard, again on the left, is the Palmers Post Mill which has been restored.
When, after half a mile, Upton Dyke reaches the River Bure, turn left along the river bank.
Continue following the  Bure for two and a half miles until Thurne Mouth, the junction with the River Thurne.
There are several old windmills along the way.
Firstly, on the opposite bank, is Oby Mill, built in the mid 18th century.
Next is Upton Mill, which has been converted for residential use.
The grazing marshes adjacent to the river are an important wildlife habitat.
Look out for birds such as redshank and lapwing.
The drainage dykes are the breeding area for many species of dragonfly and they also contain a wide variety of wild plants.
Thurne Mouth is a good place to stop for a while and there is a seat to take your weight.
This is a busy junction, and the restored windmills in the distance make a picturesque backdrop to the many boats, especially the yachts, which gracefully cruise by.
Don't just watch the river though because the reed beds behind this point are the haunt of reed bunting and sedge warbler.
Other birds you could see along this stretch include oystercatchers with their black and white plumage, bright orange bills and piping call, black headed gulls, kestrels and of course mute swans.
Butterflies are numerous on a warm day — including peacock, small tortoiseshell and brimstone.
The path follows the course of the River Bure to the ruins of St Benets Abbey on the far bank.
The remains are all that is left of a monastery which was founded early in the 11th century.
The path now follows Fleet Dyke until a corner where new edging work has been carried out on the sides of the bank.
From here the path is separated from the river by a narrow strip of trees — mostly willow and alder.
After a further 400yds the path regains the river, for a short time, by some moorings near the entrance to South Walsham Broad.
Follow the path which heads away from the water beside a laurel hedge, and onto a gravelled road.
There are toilets on the left, and just after these, on the right, a shop selling ice creams.
Continue along the road, and 20 yds after the sharp left turn by the car park, look for a footpath sign on the left.
Follow the path across the field until it reaches a metal gate with an awkward stile beside it.
Cross the stile and turn left onto the lane, past a red-tiled cottage, until you reach a junction of tracks.
Turn right here leading onto a grassy track.
Follow this for a half a mile, past a huge thatched barn on the right, then Marsh Lodge on the left.
Continue until you come to the car park and the entrance to Upton Fen Nature Reserve, owned by the Norfolk Naturalists Trust.
There is a one and a half mile circular nature trail around the reserve, which is definitely worth doing.
Dogs are not allowed on the reserve.
Upton Fen is spring-fed and isolated from the polluted waters of the river system — it is therefore an extremely valuable wildlife site.
Many insects can be found here including two rare species — the swallowtail butterfly and the Norfolk aeshna dragonfly.
Plants of interest are milk parsley peucedanum palustre the foodplant of the swallowtail, hop humulus lupulus , yellow flag iris pseudacorus , angelica angelica sylvestris , marsh helleborine epipactis palustris and southern marsh orchid dactylorhiza incarnata .
There are also some fine examples of tussock sedge cavex appropinquata .
Reaching the reserve car park once more, turn left onto the track again.
After 200yds, at a cross roads, the route turns left onto the farm road through Holly Farm.
When the farm road turns right, by some chicken sheds, the path goes left towards a metal gate.
Just before the gate the path turns right, between woodland on the left and a hedge on the right.
The path here can be very wet, but planks have been laid down over the worst parts.
This is yet another area rich in wild flowers.
After half a mile the path emerges onto a road.
Turn left along this road for three quarters of a mile until the road turns sharp right to become Marsh Road.
Go straight on here, down Back Lane, reaching the Upton Dyke car park in half a mile.
Oby Mill, built in the mid 18th century
BUYERS' GUIDE
SPRAYWAY OSPREY OVERTROUSERS
I think you should give as much thought to choosing waterproof trousers as you do to choosing a waterproof top.
Nothing is worse than walking in wet trousers for long periods of time, so the overtrousers you select should give as good a service as your jacket.
On one day during the test, I set off in a whiteout and finished, 12 hours later, in a torrential downpour.
When I finally took off the overtrousers, the fleece trousers I was wearing underneath were completely dry, which is what I would have expected from their three-layer Gore-Tex construction.
Other features include: an elasticated waist with an adjustable drawcord and zips running from the hem of the trousers up to knee height.
When unzipped the generous fabric panels flare open making it easy to put the trousers on even over large boots — an important consideration.
The trousers also have a handy-to-get-at front pocket with a Velcro-fastening storm flap.
I tested the Osprey overtrousers for four months during the winter and was very impressed with their performance.
They are easy to wear, comfortable and give good leg room.
NIKON SPORTING II 8 × 40 BINOCULARS
Design:a new sporting range of binoculars .
All models are coated with hard wearing rubber for greater shock resistance.
THE VANGO EXODUS TRAVELLER
Design:a convertible rucksack/suitcase with a Quick Adjustment back system and padded hip belt.
The pack is divided into two parts — the main section opens like a suitcase with a bottom partition for sleeping bags, dirty washing etc.
A 20 litre daysack zips onto the front of the sack.
The pack features brass padlocks for the two main zips, an adjustable shoulder carrying strap and sturdy handle.
ROHAN SHEARWATER JACKET
Design:new to this year's Rohan range, the Shearwater Gore-Tex jacket is suitable for activities such as backpacking and skiing, along with everyday use.
The Shearwater is a unisex design and lightweight, weighing in at 607g.
Features:a two-way front zip fastens to above chin level — there is even a fleece-lined chinguard.
The main zip is protected by a double front storm flap which has a rain gutter.
Rain and draughts are also kept at bay by the incorporation of a peaked hood (which rolls away), adjustable Velcro cuffs and an elasticated waist and hem cords.
The jacket also features two zipped fleece-lined pockets and an interactive zip system allowing you to zip in a fleece jacket for an extra warm lining in cold conditions.
Material:made from Gore-Tex and Tactel, the jacket is waterproof, windproof and breathable.
STOP PRESS The Shearwater jacket was part of the first prize in our Rohan competition in the June issue, but unfortunately the colours reproduced badly.
These are the correct colours, and if you'd still like to enter the competition to win over £1,000 of Rohan gear, contact    Closing date is June 30, 1992.
THERMOS EXPLORER FLASKS
Design:three sizes of tough stainless steel drinks flasks designed for outdoor use.
Larger sizes come with a foldable carrying handle and shoulder strap.
WYNNSTER PADDED TRAVEL POUCH
Design:travel pouch with one main padded compartment and numerous smaller zipped pockets in the lid and on the front of the pouch.
The pouch has an adjustable shoulder strap which unclips to double as a waistbelt.
GEAR GUIDE
BOOTS
Buying the right boots or shoes which give you the most comfortable fit is an absolute must.
Our comprehensive gear guide tells you all you need to know to make the right choice
Good footwear is the most important item of kit for any walker.
However, these days the choice of styles available is so wide that it is easy to become confused when making a purchase.
Your best bet is to seek out specialist footwear which will prove safe and comfortable in use, although not overspecified for the walking you have in mind — in other words, don't buy a pair of heavy duty mountain boots if you only intend going for walks on country lanes!
Comfortable boots or shoes, for whatever purpose, are a must.
If your footwear is uncomfortable you will not only end up with sore feet or blisters but you could become a danger to yourself or, worse, still, to others who might have to come and rescue you.
CHOOSING
Before you even set out to buy a pair of boots, study the manufacturers' catalogues.
Most manufacturers will be happy to send you their catalogues and give you the name of your nearest stockist.
If you plan to walk primarily on lowland ground in the summer, then lightweight boots or, in many cases, shoes will be all you need.
If you are planning to use the footwear for hillwalking as well, then a ‘general’ walking boot, giving your ankles good support, will serve you well.
Steer clear of thick heavy mountain boots, as your feet will tire easily, unless you're planning some serious winter walking where you might need to use crampons.
Most boots are made from leather or suede, and are available in different weights and with different soles to suit many purposes.
If you prefer very light footwear, fabric boots might serve you well; but remember that they are not waterproof unless a waterproof membrane is used in their construction.
FITTING
Whatever footwear you choose, it needs to be comfortable and give your feet proper support.
When you go to buy your boots or shoes, take along the socks you intend to wear for walking.
Most people will be happy with one pair of good loop-stitched socks inside their boots, but if you are used to wearing two pairs of socks, then take them with you.
Never rush and buy boots at the last minute.
Take your time and try on several pairs until you are certain they will be comfortable.
If you are not sure about their comfort, then don't buy until you have had a chance to try other boots elsewhere.
Some of the better quality boots will be available in a choice of width fittings, and if you have particularly broad or narrow feet make sure you tell the shop assistant.
Don't be tempted to get a boot several sizes larger than you normally need to get the correct width fitting; a boot that is too long will not be comfortable, and after some  use you will find that the leather will stretch and your foot will not be properly supported.
When you try on a pair of boots, push your foot forward into the boot until it can go no further, then slide your index finger down the back behind your heel.
There should just be room for your finger, and your toes should not feel cramped.
When the boot is laced up, your heel should be held firmly and you should not be able to move it about.
Make sure that the ankle cuff is comfortable and does not catch your ankle bone in the wrong place.
If the cuff catches, the style is wrong for your shape of foot.
Walk around the shop and make sure your feet feel comfortable.
A good way of checking that there is no unnecessary movement is to kick the toe of the boot against a carpeted stair riser.
If you can't do this in the shop ask the shopkeeper whether you can try them out at home.
Most shops are prepared for your to do this with expensive boots, but don't expect them to be exchanged if they've been marked in any way or worn outside!
Buying boots by mail order is a risky business.
If you have no alternative, because you live miles away from a good boot retailer, then choose a reliable company prepared to exchange the boots if they do not fit properly.
Here again, don't expect them to take the boots back if they've been marked or worn outside.
BREAKING IN.
With the advent of softer leathers and fabric boots breaking in your boots is not the problem it used to be.
However, you will still need to get used to wearing them before embarking on a long trek.
Go for short walks near your home, making the walks progressively longer until you are well used to the boots.
You might even try walking to work in them.
If you feel a ‘hot spot’— a sure sign of a blister beginning to form, change into your normal footwear and let your feet recover before having another go.
You should not get blisters if you have taken the trouble to fit your boots as we have suggested.
However if you are prone to sore feet, treat them in the old-fashioned way by rubbing the soles and heels with surgical spirit to harden the skin.
Then powder them afterwards when the skin is dry, with a good quality talcum powder.
There are also special protective plasters which can be used to cushion vulnerable spots.
CONSTRUCTION
Boots and shoes normally consist of three basic component parts — an upper, a midsole and a sole unit, although there are variations on the theme.
Normally the upper part of the boot is attached to the midsole, either by sewing or cementing, and this whole unit is then attached to the sole.
Traditionally this is done by sewing the  two together with welt stitches.
This is where the rim of the leather upper is turned outwards at the bottom and stitched through the midsoles to the sole.
The other traditional method is to turn the edges of the upper inwards and sew it to the midsole with Blake stitches.
However it is more common nowadays for adhesives to be used to bond the sole to the upper.
Many boots have a protective rubber or composition rand around the welt to prevent water getting in.
Good bonding with reliable adhesives also makes for a good leak-free join.
UPPERS
Leather is traditionally used for boots and shoes.
It's a natural material so it breathes, allowing the feet to breathe as well.
Calf leather is extensively used for walking boots as it is relatively soft and easy to break in, while hide will be used for heavy-duty mountaineering boots.
Traditionally tanned leathers will need to be treated with a good wax proofing agent to make them water resistant, although some leathers are now treated at the tanneries with special waterproof finishes.
Less expensive boots are made from split leather or suede, and some have a polyurethane coating to make them waterproof but this does make the boot less breathable.
Fabric boots are light and comfortable, and are ideal for use in hot weather.
If they don't contain a waterproof membrane such as Gore-Tex or Sympatex, you can obtain spray-on products to give them a  water-repellent finish.
Rubber and plastic boots are intended for use in very wet places but will not allow the feet to breathe.
ANKLE CUFF
This is the padded collar of the boot which protects and supports the ankle.
The height, shape and flexibility varies according to the make and model of the boot, and what suits one person will not suit another.
Higher cuffs generally give more support in rough terrain, but the more experienced user may prefer the greater mobility offered by lower cuff designs.
It's all a matter of personal preference and comfort.
TONGUE
Boots and shoes have a tongue which may also be padded to protect the foot from the pressure of tight lacing.
Unless the tongue is of the bellows type,(ie: gusseted and stitched to both sides of the opening) water will find its way in.
Sometimes a compromise is made in cheaper boots and the tongues are stitched half way.
LACING
Most boots will have a mixture of D-rings and hooks to keep the laces in place and to speed up the lacing process.
Some boots have ordinary eyelets, but these can be a nuisance when you need to thread up muddy laces.
Some cheaper boots have plastic hooks which are vulnerable to breakage.
SOLES
The sole of the boot is your contact with the ground.
Look on it in the same way as the treads on your bike or car tyres.
A good tread will generally give a good grip, but as with a car, watch out on wet ground!
Both Vibram and Skywalk soles, and other similar types, will give problems on wet ground unless you take care.
It is necessary to keep your balance by not over-extending your stride, especially when coming down steep slopes.
Lose your concentration and you could lose your footing.
Vibram and similar soles are not all heavy — they are available in a variety of weights, including lightweight units which are designed for walking shoes.
Deep tread patterns can damage the ground, and more environmentally-friendly patterns are now available.
Boots with a cut-away heel tend to do less damage than traditionally-patterned ones, but walkers need to develop a new style of walking when using them, particularly on steep ground.
MIDSOLE
The layer between the sole unit and the insole of the boot is known as the midsole.
This is specially constructed to give the correct amount of flexibility depending on the activity the boot is designed for.
At one time the midsoles of all mountain boots incorporated a steel or wooden shank in their construction, but modern techniques mean that now manufacturers almost always use injection-moulded plastics to give the right degree of flex and/or stiffening.
A shock-absorbing layer may be incorporated into the midsole, or a wedge of similar material used to cushion the base of the heel against the impact of hard ground.
INSOLE
Most modern walking boots come with removable footbeds or insoles, allowing greater flexibility of fit.
They are very comfortable to wear and give excellent support to the arch of the foot, as well as allowing a better fit around the heel.
LINING
Most good walking boots are fully lined.
The most common lining is leather or Cambrelle, a moisture absorbing synthetic fabric, although other fabrics may be used.
Some boots may be insulated with Thinsulate or a fibrepile lining and others may incorporate breathable, waterproof membranes.
CARE OF BOOTS
Always wash dirty leather boots with clean water, using a brush to remove any mud.
Dry them gently, with newspaper inside to take up excess moisture, and never subject them to direct heat.
Do not try to force-dry them in front of a fire or on a radiator.
When the boots are dry, treat them with a proprietary wax, such as Nikwax or Granger's G-Wax — both of these are recommended by the major boot manufacturers.
Boots which have been factory-treated and given a waterproof finish should not normally be given a wax treatment when new, but should be treated with ordinary shoe polish.
Always follow the manufacturers' instructions.
The stitching around the tongue and other points which are vulnerable to water entry should, however, have wax applied and worked into the stitching.
Most of these treatments will eventually wear off with use, and boots should then be treated with a proprietary wax dressing.
Untreated leather will dry out and crack, making it stiff and hard, and no longer waterproof.
Fabric boots should be scrubbed with clean water to remove the dirt and allowed to dry naturally.
When dry, a propriety spray treatment, such as Grangers' G-Sport or Texnik from Nikwax may be used on them.
SERVICING
Boots and shoes need to be kept in good repair, otherwise they are a potential hazard to the wearer.
Repairs can be undertaken by a good skilled boot repairer, but if you have difficulty finding someone locally you can send your boots or shoes to Shoecare at Preston.
They are the official repairers for most of the leading makes and can also provide original replacements for soles and midsoles.
Contact:
GAITERS
In adverse conditions gaiters help to keep stones, mud and water out of your boots, and are particularly effective when walking through heather.
Most are attached to the sole of the boot by means of a strap under the instep and a hook secured to the front lacing.
Gaiters are normally fastened by a zip at the back, but there are some with a front zip.
Yeti gaiters are made by Berghaus to fit their boots.
These gaiters cover the whole boot and have a rubber rand which gives a watertight seal.
CRAMPONS
These metal frames with spikes on them can be attached to certain types of boot to give good grip in snow and ice.
If you are likely to be out in such conditions, seek the advice of your retailer when buying your boots.
You'll definitely need heavier and stiffer boots for such conditions, and only certain boots are suitable for use with crampons.
GLOSSARY
Anfibio Leather: a specially treated hide leather which is durable, supple and water-resistant.
Ankle cuff: the padded collar which supports the ankle.
Bellows tongue: a  gusseted tongue which is fully stitched on either side of the boot opening preventing water from getting inside.
Calf: very soft leather which, as its name implies, comes from calves.
Various grades are available, and the best is generally used for top-quality mountain and walking boots.
Cambrelle: a special lining, developed by ICI, which is very hard wearing and will not distort, fray or rot.
It is air and moisture permeable, therefore cool in summer and warm in winter.
Chrome leather: leather which is tanned solely with chromium salts.
Heat and perspiration resistant.
Dual-density: double thickness sole of a boot, made from two different types of rubber and designed to absorb shock and reduce fatigue.
The outer, harder sole is moulded first and the second, shock-absorbing layer is added to it.
The whole boot is then mounted on that unit.
EVA: a lightweight shock-absorbing rubber-like material used as a mid-sole or wedge insert, which protects the foot from impact on hard ground.
Full-grain: leather that has the grain layer substantially intact and which is finished on the grain side.
Galusser: high quality leather from the Swiss tannery of the same name.
It has a thickness of about 3mm and is used for heavy mountain boots.
Hide: the skin of a full grown animal from which a leather is produced that is heavier and tougher than calf.
Injection-moulding: a method of making a sole unit, for example using PVC or other thermoplastic material, by melting the material and injecting it under pressure into the mould cavity
Last: a solid form of wood, plastic or metal on which a boot or shoe is built, and which gives its shape to the boot or shoe.
Lining: the part of the boot which lies directly against your feet.
It may be made from leather or fabric, and my incorporate a breathable membrane, such as Gore-Tex or Sympatex.
Mid-sole: the layer between the sole and insole of the boot, which is anatomically shaped and designed to give the correct amount of flex and support for the activity for which the boot is designed.
Often a shock-absorbing layer or wedge is incorporated.
The thickness and flex are graded according to use.
Nubuck: cattle hide leather buffed on the grain side to give a very fine velvety surface.
White or coloured, it is often used in women's boots and fashionable outdoor footwear.
PU-coated leather: a cheaper, lightweight leather which is given a polyurethane coating to make it more waterproof.
Rand: a protective strip of rubber covering the join between the upper and the sole.
Skywalk: a brand name for a sole with a good tread pattern and grip.
Sole: that part of the boot which is in contact with the ground.
It may incorporate a shock-absorbing layer, avoiding the necessity of a mid-sole.
Sorbothane: the trade mark of the Leyland and Birmingham Rubber Co. for their composite material which absorbs shock, and is used for footbeds and shock-absorbent insoles.
Suede: the reverse side of a skin, having a soft fabric-like texture.
Easy to dye, it is used with other fabrics such as Cordura for lightweight and fashion boots.
Fashionable dyes can easily be used.
Thermoplastic: a synthetic rubber related to resin-rubber but which can be fused by heat and therefore processed into soles by injection moulding.
Thinsulate: an insulation material made from microfibres by ICI.
A special type is made for interlining boots going between the inner and the outer which is very thin but strong and has high warmth value.
Tongue: the piece of fabric or leather which is attached to the inside of the boot under the opening.
Triple Density: a dual density sole unit with an additional piece of EVA foam on top.
This construction is normally used for stiffer mountain boots, and the middle layer is normally the hardest.
Upper: the upper part of the boot which encases the foot and which is sewn or glued to the sole unit.
Vibram: a brand name for a traditional tough and heavy-duty patterned sole which wears well.
Welt: the rim sewn to a shoe or boot upper, to which the sole is attached.
COMPETITION
12 PAIRS OF BOOTS TO WIN
PRIZES
Twelve lucky winners will soon be the proud owners of a top quality pair of fabric boots from Line 7.
The first six male entries drawn from the hat will receive a pair of GT 35s while the first six female entries will win a pair of Lady GTs — these are specially designed for women who tend not to want high ankle support.
Both styles come with an impressive array of features including Gore-Tex lining, Cordura upper and Vibram sole.
In the shops these stylish, high performance boots would cost you £89.99 (GT 35, shown left) and £84.99 (Lady GT, shown top left).
HOW TO ENTER
To have a chance of winning one of these fabulous pairs of boots all you have to do is find the following eight words in the word square: LINE 7, GORETEX, GT RIFT, RAIDER, PANDA, RANGER, ROVER and LADY GT.
In order to make it just a little bit trickier the words can read forwards, backwards, up, down and diagonally.
Once you've found the words ring them with a pen, cut out the wordsquare or photocopy it if you don't want to damage your magazine, and send it to us here at: Make sure you also enclose your address and boot size.
All entries must arrive no later than last post on Friday July 31.
OUT & ABOUT
Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country.
Walks compiled by Catherine Moore
COIRE  LAGGAN FROM GLEN BRITTLE
Coire Lagan is a wild, rocky corrie in the heart of Skye's Cuillin mountains.
It's thought by many to be the most beautiful of the Cuillin corries and takes the hillwalker in among the most impressive peaks.
The route starts at the Glen Brittle campsite, next to the beach.
You pick up the path after you've climbed the fence behind the campsite toilet.
Follow the path upwards, over the moorland.
The path goes to the right to reach a stream at a small gorge and then goes slightly to the left to pass Loch an Fhir-bhallaich.
You then go around the south-west shoulder of Sgurr Dearg to reach the corrie.
The last bit of ascent into the upper coire is stony, but it doesn't take too long to cross the ice-worn boiler plates to reach the lovely little lochan nestling there.
Above, to the north is the west ridge of Sgurr Dearg.
At the back of the corrie is the Inaccessible Pinnacle of Sgurr Dearg and Sgurr Mhic Choinnich.
And towering above is Sgurr Alasdair which at 3,251 feet is the highest peak in the Cuillin.
Below, the islands of Rum and Canna can be seen and on the horizon to the west you can look over from the hills of South Uist to Barra Head.
To get back to base retrace your steps out of Coire Lagan, but head around the north side of Loch an Fhir-bhallaich.
Cross the moor heading north-west to arrive at the Glen Brittle Hut.
Follow the road back round to the Glen Brittle campsite.
Recommended by the Skye Mountain Rescue Team.
GLENMORE RIDGE TREK
The Glenmore Forest Park lies around the shores of the lovely Loch Morlich in the Cairngorms.
There are plenty of activities on offer there including a permanent orienteering course — a special Wayfaring pack designed to accompany the course is available from the Forest Park Visitor Centre.
In addition there are two low-level ski slopes and tows and the Forestry Commission has created two interesting cross country ski trails.
There are plenty of great walks to try out in the forest itself and some of the surrounding peaks — the forest boundaries include some of the lower Cairngorm summits.
Some of the walks are waymarked with different coloured trail markers showing some of the best routes.
One of the most challenging walks is the Ridge Trek, a strenuous hike leading up to and along the ridge of the Kincardine Hills on the northern edge of the forest park.
You'll find your way along the route by following the orange waymarkers.
Look out for the forest wildlife on the way, red and roe deer live here as do pine martens and red squirrels, badgers, wildcats and mountain hares.
Birdwatchers should keep an eye out for a variety of birds including capercaillies, crested tits and crossbills.
From the Glenmore car park the trail follows the forestry road to Badgaduish in the heart of the forest.
The road continues past the buildings and after ¾ mile the trail runs off through the trees to the forest perimeter.
From here the route climbs steeply to the summit of Craiggowrie at 2,240ft and follows the undulating ridge south east to Creagan Gorm at 2,403ft.
There's one last peak on the route, Meall a Bhuchaille — the Shepherd's Hill — at 2,200ft.
The path then descends to the Pass of Ryvoan and from here back to the Glenmore car park.
Recommended by the Forestry Commission
BLOODY BUSH AND GREY LADS
Park your car 4 miles north of Newcastleton at the sign ‘Lewisburn via Bloody Bush’, past Dinlabyre Farm.
Go through the small gate on the west side of the road and follow the track.
A short path through the wood on the left leads you to the Dinlabyre Ayle.
Continuing along the track you pass Mountain View Cottage.
The track then goes up through the forest to the crest of the hill.
The path continues for around a mile to the Bloody Bush pillar — named after a dispute over where exactly the border ran.
From the Bloody Bush pillar retrace your steps, going back into Scotland until just before the summit of the hill you see a small cairn on the right.
Leave the path and walk along the hillside until you come to three prominent cairns — the Grey Lads.
From here descend into Liddesdale, aiming towards a group of large green farm sheds across the valley.
Pass a small shed on your left and go through a gate until you reach the Larriston Burn.
Follow the track which leads downstream and when it divides, turn right into a field.
The track continues until you come to a ford.
Once across the ford leave the track and walk through the fields by the burn side.
Your way will eventually be blocked by a stone dyke, but if you stay near the burn you'll find a gap.
Climb over the fence, ford the burn again to reach the main road.
Turn left, and after about a mile you'll reach your starting point.
Recommended by the Scottish Borders Tourist Board.
THE LANGBAURGH LOOP
The Langbaurgh Loop is an open challenge walk of 38 miles running through the county of Cleveland.
As the name suggests, it's a circular route and takes the walker over some of the most beautiful countryside in the north-east.
Some of the walk is waymarked with green/yellow arrows though as much of  it is over rarely used rights of way you'll need to keep your OS maps close at hand.
Travelling in a clockwise direction the route proceeds from Cat Nab, Saltburn along part of the Cleveland Way and along the cliff edge down to the beach at Cattersty Sands.
Continue to Skinningrove then go back on the cliffs above Hummersea Scar and over to the cottages of Upton .
Passing to the east of the buildings at Upton the route goes on to cross the A174 road to the east of Loftus.
You then go south, to meet a minor road known as South Town Lane which you follow for around 500 yards after which you must branch off to cross a plantation called the Warren.
Continue westwards to the village of Liverton following the B1366 south for ¼ mile when you branch off on a track on the right then go left to pass Lane Head Farm and Stubdale Farm.
Walk on to Robin Hoods Butts .
The route then heads west over Gerrick Moor to meet a moor road at White Cross and on through Westworth Wood into Guisborough Wood .
The next section of the loop passes west through the wood reaching Highcliff Nab and skirting Hutton Lowcross Woods to the south to reach Roseberry Topping .
From here head due north to monument on top of Eston Nab .
From Eston Nab the route goes southeast and then east past Poplar Farm and through a wooded area to Park Farm.
Beyond Park Farm the track goes into Park Wood and travels east through the wood, emerging and passing around North Cote Farm.
After following Wilton Lane to the north for around ¾ mile the route goes right to Dunsdale Farm and on to meet the B1269.
It then reaches Sandy Lane, a metalled road, right off the B1269, leading to New Marske.
The route then goes through Errington Woods to the edge of Beacon Moor .
The route returns to Cat Nab at Saltburn via the roundabout of the A1085 and A174 roads, following the A174 towards Saltburn for ½ mile.
Opposite a riding stable  follow a track leading past Windy Hill farm and to the beach.
From here the seashore is followed on to Cat Nab.
THE SILURIAN WAY
Grizedale Forest is in the middle of the southern half of the Lake District, in between Lake Windermere and Coniston Water.
The Silurian Way is a nine and a half mile route which takes you round the central area of the forest reaching its high point at Carron Crag at 1,031ft.
It's not an especially taxing route and is waymarked for its whole length with green markers.
It gets its name from the Silurian Epoch — a period around 450 million years ago when the rocks which make up the skeleton and the soil of the Grizedale Forest were formed.
The grey slates and shales of the Silurian rock are obvious as you walk.
The route begins from the visitor centre , in the middle of the forest just off the main forest road.
From here you walk north-east following forest paths and tracks for just under a mile.
The route then curves around to head south towards Grizedale Tarn.
Continue on tracks heading east around the bottom of the tarn and after around ⅓ of a mile turn right and head south.
After around ⅔ of a mile the route curves around as though it's heading towards the village of Satterthwaite only to curve round back east — keep a look out for Borck Crags, rocky outcrops you can see to your left.
The route then heads south west to Force Mills.
At Force Mills, follow the road leading up to Satterthwaite, keep on it as it crosses over Grizedale Beck.
Turn left off the road just before it reaches the next beck.
The route continues for a short way beside the beck, crossing it and turning right to head first slightly north-east and then north-west until a small beck is crossed, and then another by the Cortina Bridge — named after a Ford Cortina crashed here in one of the Lombard RAC rallies.
From here the route continues north, up through Hall Wood to reach Carron Crag, then north for ½ mile before turning south-east to arrive back at the centre.
AYSGARTH FALLS AND BOLTON CASTLE
The Aysgarth Falls are one of the loveliest sights in the Yorkshire Dales.
The walk starts from the Aysgarth Falls National Park Centre car park.
You leave by the fenced footpath at the entrance, turn right at the road and cross into Freeholders' Wood and follow the hard path towards the Lower Falls.
At the other side of the wood go through the gate into the field.
Follow the path to a signpost marked Castle Bolton.
Head to the viewing platform and then turn right through the wood and go back to the field turning right down the hard path and going back to the Castle Bolton signpost.
Follow a wooden fence to cross a stile and head to the waymarked gate downhill from the farm buildings on the left.
Follow the track through the farm, behind the farmhouse.
When you come across a faint track alongside a wire fence on the right follow it.
Then cross the stile and keep heading north east, following signs for Castle Bolton and you'll join the enclosed Thoresby Lane by a wooden stile.
Stay on this road to join the metalled road at Low Thoresby Farm, and cross the footbridge on the left.
Pass over a broken wall and turn sharp right.
Cross the stile near an electricity pole and continue to the main road.
Turn left on the road and walk for around 900 yards before turning right onto a path which leads up to the old railway and joins a road up to Castle Bolton Village.
Follow the road west and continue along the gravel road signposted to Askrigg.
Walk past three metal gates along the track and go right uphill.
Go past the small wood and past a gate, continue with the wall on your left and through another gate.
Turn sharp right downhill and uphill to go through another gate.
Bear left, cross Beldon Beck and walk to a gate signed Caperby.
Go left over a low ridge and downhill.
Keep left along the wall and down to a gully with Caperby below.
Go into Caperby, turn right at the main road and walk to the Wheatsheaf Inn.
Opposite the inn go through a gate signed to Aysgarth.
Go through a gate on the right with a wall on your left.
Cross the lane and take the Aysgarth path.
You'll eventually join the road back to the park centre.
SHINING TOR AND GOYT VALLEY
This is a classic walk through the western Peak District taking in Shining Tor and Cats Tor and returning by the reservoirs and woodlands of Goyt Valley.
The walk starts from the Cat & Fiddle pub on the A537 to the west of Buxton.
From the pub turn right to walk north-north-west along the road to meet a footpath on the right where the road bends.
Follow this path to a footpath junction then bear right to cross a stile.
Go north-north-east again to the path signed Shining Tor/Pym's Chair.
Follow the path to the summit of Shining Tor and carry on along the right hand side of the wall to eventually ascend Cats Tor.
Continue on the path and join the road at Pym's Chair.
Turn right along the road, and after 150 yards go over two stiles on the left and cross the moorland to the road.
Follow the path which runs parallel to the road on its eastern side up to Windgather Rocks.
Go along the rocks, descending the path which goes through a broken wall and joins a farm track opposite some farm buildings.
Turn right and continue east to the wall corner and then south-east to cross the stile at the edge of the woods.
Go east to meet farm road.
Walk along the road until you come to Overton Hall Farm where you bear sharp right down bend in track.
Continue on this track, cross Mill Clough and go on past Knipe Farm and aim for the corner of Fernlee Reservoir.
Follow the western sides of Fernlee and Errwood reservoirs going south.
Cross the bridge at Shooter's Clough and bear right to a wooden information post.
Go left at the post and descent the track leading to a footbridge over a stream.
Go right alongside the brook to reach the ruins of Errwood Hall.
From here follow the red markers to sign for Moor Edge and go left to cross Shooter's Clough Brook.
Continue on a clear path up the hillside to reach a stile on the ridge.
By now you should have picked up the signs directing you back to the Cat & Fiddle.
You'll need to retrace your steps on the path you originally took to get part of the way to Shining Tor leading to the A537.
Recommended by HF Holidays who use the above route on their walking holidays from their house at Dovedale.
For details contact HF on 
THE WEAVERS' WAY
The Weavers' Way runs for 56 miles through the varied scenery of north-east Norfolk, from Cromer to Great Yarmouth.
Starting from the undulating farmland and woodland of the north the route passes through the Broadland river valleys with their traditional grazing marshes.
Then to the south of the route you travel through Halvergate Marshes, land reclaimed from the sea.
The route is waymarked throughout its length and uses footpaths, sections of disused railway line and some minor roads.
It gets its name because of the one-time importance of the weaving industry in the area.
From Meadow Car Park, between Louden Road and Meadow Road in Cromer the way goes towards  Felbrigg .
Here there's the possibility of a diversion to Felbrigg Hall — a Jacobean house now run by the National Trust.
With Felbrigg left behind the route continues to Hanworth then over Thwaite Common and on to the village of Erpingham.
You reach the town of Aylsham via Calthorpe and Blickling.
Again there's the possibility of a diversion to Blickling Hall, another Jacobean property owned by the National Trust.
From Aylsham to Stalham most of the way is made up of three sections of the old Midland and Great Northern Railway line which used to run between Great Yarmouth and King's Lynn.
On the way the route passes through the town of North Walsham and follows a section of the North Walsham and Dilham Canal before cutting over the Stalham.
To the south-east of Stalham you arrive at the Hickling Broad Nature Reserve — an important site for breeding and over-wintering birds.
The way goes on to cross the B1152 and follow the River Thurne until it goes past Acle and on to Halvergate Marshes.
Halvergate Marshes are one of the most important areas of low lying marshland in the country and are an Environmentally Sensitive Area.
The Weavers' Way reaches its end at the railway station in Great Yarmouth after running around the north side of Breydon Water.
THE HANGERS WAY
To the north of Petersfield is a series of steep-sided hills called the Hampshire Hangers.
Running north from Petersfield to the town of Alton, the 17 mile Hangers Way follows the line of the Hangers and takes the walker through grasslands and woodlands through some of Hampshire's best countryside.
The route is marked with Hangers Way signs.
Starting in Petersfield, on the High Street where the railway crosses the road, the route makes its way to the village of Steep and up onto Ashford Hill via Ashford Chace.
It then goes on to the Shoulder of Mutton Hill, noted for its flower rich grassland.
At the top of  the Shoulder of Mutton Hill is the Poet Stone, dedicated to the memory of the poet Edward Thomas who died at the battle of Arras in 1917.
Small woods and hidden valleys characterise the next section of the route to the village of Hawkley and on to Hawkley Hanger.
Continue on to Noar Hill Hanger where you can still see the evidence of prehistoric field systems.
In the area too is the Noar Hill nature reserve, on land where chalk was once dug.
Approaching Selborne — the mid-point of the walk — from the south, the path follows the line of medieval strip lynches — hedgerows still growing where one field level drops to another.
To the north of Selborne the path goes past damp hollows which were once medieval fish ponds.
The path goes on to pass through Binswood, once a deer park but now a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
The route follows the B3004 for a while to East Worldham, turning right along a minor road and bearing left to head up through Monk Wood and on to Alton where it ends at the railway station.
DOONE VALLEY AND EAST LYN RIVER
This walk not only takes in the lovely moorland around the Doone Valley it also runs along the shady woodland paths on the banks of the East Lyn river.
The walk is linear so you'll need a friendly car driver to make it that little bit easier.
From the County Gate car park on the A39 to the east of Lynmouth walk south, along the path signed to Malmsmede and Oare.
Cross Oare Water, go onto the farm track and then by road to  Malmsmede .
Nearby is what is reputed to have been the Lorna Doone farm from the novel by RD Blackmore.
Turn left at the junction in the village.
After around 900 yards, where the road bends take the track on the left signed to Doone Valley.
Keeping parallel to Bagworthy Water, continue south, past the memorial to RD Blackmore to the site of the medieval village .
Take the wide path to the right signed Brandon Common and go north-west across the moor to the gate.
Carry on to Lankcombe Ford.
Continue north to the road junction east of Tippacott and walk into the village, bearing right with the road.
Leave the road at the path on the right around 900 yards past the cattle grid and carry on to Alderford and then head west to Rockford.
Cross the East Lyn River at Rockford and follow the east bank of the river to Watersmeet.
At Watersmeet itself the East Lyn meets up with Combe Park Water and here you'll find a National Trust shop, a cafe and toilets.
From Watersmeet take the path signed Hillsford Bridge and head south on the east of the river.
At Hillsford Bridge cross the bridge and take the main Lynton road uphill and as the road bends sharply take the path to the right heading north.
Where the path divides, keep right on the lower path.
This veers west, taking you to Oxen Tor from where the path zig zags into woods above Lynmouth.
Follow a wall to a gate, turn right and at the bottom head west to the road.
Recommended by HF Holidays who use the above route on walking holidays at their house at Selworthy.
For details contact HF on 
Local transport timetables are also available from the tourist board.
WORSLEY TRAIL
The Worsley Trail running from Brighstone Forest to the holiday town of Shanklin is a great way of getting to see the interior of the Isle of Wight.
The Trail starts at the south-east of Brighstone Forest  where it meets another long distance route — the Tennyson Trail.
Follow the bridleway signed Shorwell and continue east with Brighstone Forest on the left along the top of Limerstone Down.
Cross the main road  and follow the bridleway signed Chillerton towards Londen Copse.
Cross a field and take the track towards New Barn Farm before heading down the footpath on the left signed Chillerton.
Continue with the TV transmitter on the left until you meet the main road.
Turn right and follow the road for around 600 yards turning left where the road forks.
Follow the minor road to Ramsdown Farm.
At the road junction turn right to Roslin Farm and walk between the farm buildings.
Make your way to Cridmore Farm keeping it on your right.
Continue along footpaths to cross River Medina by the footbridge.
Go into the field, bearing right with the hedge on the left.
Go east, south-east and east again to reach path junction .
Head south and turn left at the point where you see a track on the right to North Appleford.
Turn left again then go right on the path to Bleakdown.
When you meet the road turn right and follow it for ½ mile and turn left through a gate.
Follow the sign for Godshill heading towards Lavender's Farm.
Go past the entrance to Lavender's Farm, turn right along the track past the farm itself.
Follow the path, crossing a river on a footbridge in the grounds of a ruined mill.
Skirt the garden of ‘Bridgecourt’.
Follow the minor road leading south from Godshill and turn left on the path signed Sainham and Wroxhall.
Sainham Farm itself should be on your left.
Continue on the track signed Gat Cliff and Stenbury Down.
Carry on, bearing south-west to reach the top of Gat Cliff where you will find the Worsley Monument.
Walk through the Freemantle Copse, take the left fork of the bridleway and cross three fields to reach the drive of  Appuldurcome House.
Turn left along  Appledurcombe Road to reach the main road, cross it and go up the steps to the disused railway track.
Turn right, joining the road at the bridge.
Turn left along Castle Road, following a path to the right signed The Downs, Shanklin and Ventnor.
Follow the path to Cook's Castle and through a wooded area.
Continue east following the signs for Shanklin to the Shanklin Old Parish Church of St Blasius.
Turn left to Shanklin Old Village.
BRECON BEACONS CIRCUIT
This route takes in all the major summits on the main ridge of the Brecon Beacons.
From the car park below the Neuadd Reservoir walk towards the reservoir to the end of the road.
Go through the reservoir gates, down left across a gully and up again to follow the path across the dam.
Get onto the moorland by a stile on the far side and aim towards the right hand edge of the forest about 100 yards away across the valley.
Walk uphill, where the forest ends cross a stream and continue uphill with a stream gully to your left.
At the top of the gully turn right and follow a path along the edge of a steep grassy slope on the right.
The path leads across several small streams down the steep slope to the right.
After ½ mile the slope becomes a cliff.
Walk beside it until you reach Bwlch Duwynt.
From here work your way up the rocks to the summit of Corn Du and go to the steep northern edge of the mountain.
From the cairn turn right along a track which leads  east-north-east to the summit.
Turn right, with a steep drop on the left where the path descends towards the Upper Neuadd reservoir.
As the gradient eases, follow the steep edge to the left.
The descent ends in a marshy col, and from here it is ¼ mile to the summit cairn of Cribyn.
Turn right and follow a broad track for ¾ mile down to the Gap.
Turn right and walk down the track.
After 1¾ miles a stream cuts a gully across the track.
Cross it and climb up the opposite side to join the road to the car park.
CAERBWDY TO SOLVA
For much of its route this circular walk uses the spectacular Pembrokeshire Coast Path with wonderful views of the cliffs, returning to the start point on country paths and minor roads.
From the car park turn right and head south.
Where the road bears left continue straight on to pick up the coast path above Caerbwdy Bay — look out for the purple sandstone around the bay.
Continue east along the coast path.
The path is famous for its wild plants — thrift, sea campion, kidney vetch, thyme and stonecrop are some you may see.
And look out for the chough — a rare member of the crow family — which feeds on the clifftop vegetation.
As you continue you will cross Morfa Common, an area of cliff-top heathland, now managed by the National Trust to encourage wildlife.
Down below is Porth-y-Rhaw Bay, once the site of a woollen mill and a lime kiln.
Further on at Aberllong bay you can see the remains of three tugs wrecked in 1986 on a journey from Liverpool.
And the cave Ogof Tobacco bears witness to the area's smuggling past.
Continue on to Solva Harbour where you can still see eight of the original 12 lime kilns built there.
From Solva the route cuts back across country to Llanunwas Farm.
The surrounding area is damp and so favoured by colourful plants such as the Marsh Marigold, Ragged Robin and Yellow Flag Iris.
Continue on to the Nine Wells valley then head south west to cross  Morfa Common again.
Then the route goes north to follow the road going to the west before heading north back to the car park.
THE MAWDDACH ESTUARY
This walk is a real treat for anyone interested in birds.
The Mawddach Estuary has a rich variety of wetland and woodland habitats attracting a wide range of different species.
An RSPB woodland trail is just near the start of the walk and towards the end you'll come across an RSPB observatory in the old signal box near Penmaenpool.
And the estuary is beautiful, with mountain ranges rising on each side.
To the south is the great bulk of Cadair Idris.
To the north are Llethyr and Diffwys.
If you look east, in the distance you'll see the peaks of Aran Benllen and Aran Fawddwy.
The walk starts in the town of Barmouth and finishes, 10 miles later in Dolgellau.
Route finding is simple — for almost all the way you simply follow the old railway line running north-east from Morfa Mawddach station.
From Barmouth head south, crossing the bridge over to Morfa Mawddach station .
Around 300 yards past the car park and toilet area you pass through a wide kissing gate to get on to the old railway track.
For a short section of the trail here, the Snowdonia National Park authority has provided facilities for disabled people — a shale surface to make access for wheelchairs easier and a handrail.
And just past Morfa Mawddach station an RSPB woodland trail leads off to the right.
You cross a series of bridges and get into the swampy meadowland known as Arthog Bog.
It's been made a Site of Special Scientific Interest because of its strength as a habitat for a wide range of grasses and rare plants.
Scrubland birds such as reed bunting and curlew breed here.
A crossroads in the trail marks the site of the old Arthog Railway station and to the right you can see the village of Arthog.
After this, the path follows the southern edge of the estuary.
For most of the time the estuary is a huge sand spit here which make an ideal feeding ground for estuary birds — look out for oystercatchers and herons.
Oak woodland covers the next stretch of hillside on the right and leads on to the Forestry Commission conifer forest.
Carry on to get views of the village of Bontddu on the opposite bank.
Continue onwards until you reach a kissing gate leading into the old Penmaenpool station yard.
From here the track crosses an important wetland area where you'll find the Penmaenpool Reedbed.
It's one of the largest areas of common reed in Wales and an important breeding area for otters and wetland birds.
The route continues across the A493, going on to follow the banks of the Afon Wnion into Dolgellau.
OUTDOOR PEOPLE
OUTDOOR SCULPTOR
Outdoor Sculptor Sally Matthews uses natural materials such as hedge clippings, roots and cow muck to make life-like models of animals in the countryside
It's probably because of Grizedale Forest in the Lake District that I manage to make a living as a sculptor.
The life-size herd of wild boar I made for it out of cement, roots, mud and loose rubbish such as broken rock and hedge clippings, launched my career five years ago.
I'd already been to the forest couple of times as a student and thought it was the most wonderful place.
Grizedale gave me a real opportunity to put my work outdoors.
The boar are now deteriorating.
I never say my work is going to last a long time — usually five to ten years, though obviously the smaller pieces which are kept inside last as long as people look after them.
With a public sculpture, I'll pop back and maybe fiddle around with it as it weathers.
The materials themselves are really quite important to my work.
I try to use ones which I think are appropriate for the shape and exterior of the animal.
But my main priority is making the animals look real with a lot of life in them, rather than the staid and stiff specimens cast in bronze, sitting on top of a television or placed in a town square.
Made from natural materials, they can be much more alive.
When you're working on a specific site, the lie of the land can really animate the sculpture.
Recently I've made three dogs out of wood and cement, chasing a deer up a slope in Grizedale.
They always encouraged varied materials where I studied at art college in Loughborough.
And when you're a student you use what is cheap and available.
That's why I started using mud and clay.
I did two rabbit sculptures for an exhibition in Yorkshire made of cow much on a metal frame.
Some of the visitors told their children they were made out of mud rather than say they were made from ‘cow muck’.
I started using cow much when I didn't have any plaster or cement.
It's easily manipulated and it dries hard.
I always think of it being quite clean because cows only eat grass.
Now I've started using coconut fibre which is a peat substitute.
I mix it with glue — it's a bit like papier maché.
Scrap metal is also quite good but I'm a bit of a cheat.
The metal I pick up usually has some shape to it.
I learned the basics of welding at college and have picked up tips from the experts while working on my scrap metal cows at Beamish Tram Shed and a pipe factory in Hebburn on Tyneside.
The cows have gone to the cycle path on the former Consett to Sunderland railway line.
The sculptures make the flat railway tracks more interesting for walkers and cyclists.
It's quite funny when you see people cycling past them.
They either wobble around on their bikes or screech to a sudden halt.
I didn't set out to be a sculptor but discovered at college it was much more of a natural thing for me.
I can draw but I'm not particularly good at painting.
I want to stick to making sculptures of animals because of a love of them.
My dad was a vet and we've always had animals about us.
They are just an endless source of inspiration and excitement.
When I need a ‘top-up’, I go back to my parents' farm near the Brecon Beacons in Wales for lambing.
As I was brought up on a farm I'm used to working with my hands and in all weathers.
At the beginning of the winter I always feel a bit reluctant about working outside until I get my long johns on.
Then I acclimatise myself and just get on with things.
My latest project is making seven goats for the riverside walk at Gateshead.
I'm making them at Bill Quay Community Farm nearby rather than in my studio.
Because it's going to be a public sculpture I think it's nice that people can come and see it being made.’
Animals are an endless source of inspiration for sculptor Sally Matthews
Subscription Offer
FREE BOOK
From the tops of the Three Peaks to the rich green valley bottoms and the rushing rivers and waterfalls, the Yorkshire Dales is one of our most cherished walking areas.
And it's much loved by Mike Harding, entertainer and well-known walker, who has made the Dales his home for the past twenty years.
And during this time he must have trodden pretty much every footpath there.
Harding pays tribute to the area in his lovely book Walking the Dales where he describes many of his favourite walks, some popular, some far away from the main routes.
The books is more than merely route descriptions though, as Harding recounts the times over the years he's walked the various paths, adding anecdotes, descriptions of the people and insights into the history of the area.
It's all enriched with the wonderful photographs taken by the author himself.
It's such a great book we decided to give away a copy to every new subscriber to Outdoor Action .
With Mike Harding's book — £11.99 in the shops but absolutely free to all new subscribers — and a year's worth of Outdoor Action , you'll be guaranteed plenty of ideas for new places to walk — and you'll get a good read each month as your issue of Outdoor Action is posted through your door.
The offer is only open while stocks last so post off the order form today.
If you don't want to cut into the magazine a photocopy will be fine.
Here's wishing you a great New Year of walking!