

WHAT'S ON
NOVEMBER
WEATHER WATCH
Standard British November weather is rainy and chilly.
Eastern Scotland and England are coolest — the influence of the colder continent to the east.
The Atlantic side of Britain is milder.
As autumn slides into winter across Europe, weather-wise walkers look further south-east and south-west.
Island addicts find warm coastlines and brisk mountain days in Crete and Cyprus, with just an occasional wet day.
West Mediterranean islands have cooled off and can have rainy days, but walking is still pleasant.
Southern Portugal, south and east Spain stay sunny, warm and dry.
Eastern Europe chills down and while it's often dry, snow starts taking over from rain.
The Alpine heartland is cold but still has more dry days than wet.
Snow is on the peaks and blocks some passes.
Highs and lows
Mid-November can suffer a few foggy days.
1948 was ridiculous with 114 continuous hours of fog shrouding coal-burning London.
Two years earlier, Britain's warmest November day had been recorded in Clwyd at 21.7°C/71°F.
South-east England had snow in November 1980.
Britain's most destructive storm swept southern England in November 1703.
It killed 8,000 people, wrecked hundreds of ships, destroyed Eddystone lighthouse, 400 windmills and 800 houses.
Wireless pioneers heard the BBC's first weather forecast in November 1922.
Early viewers studied the first TV weather-chart in November 1936.
WELCOME
November is the kind of month that we year-round walkers cherish.
The fair-weather hikers have hung up their boots and retreated indoors and the rest of us have even more of the countryside to ourselves.
Solitude adds a special quality to a walk and bad weather can do the same — though it does mean that many of us prefer to stay in the lowlands more often.
Starting on page 6 we've got lots of suggestions of great lowland areas to explore — places you may overlook in the height of summer when you're busy heading for the hills or tackling treks abroad.
Chilly weather does mean that we have to pay more attention to our walking clothes.
With this in mind we take a look at the kind of thing the cold weather walker should be wearing on page 26 and bring you the latest thermals on page 24.
Enjoy your Outdoor Action !
EVENTS
1 Opening of the new Archaeological Way, Derbyshire.
Five mile ramble led by John Merrill starting at Meden Trail car park, Pleasley. 2–5.30pm then tea and bus back to car park..
1 Woodland walks in Rossendale looking for insects and fungi with Lancashire Wildlife Trust.
1 Guided six hour walk around the foothills of the Old Man of Coniston.
4  Gentle guided walk starting at 10.30.
8  Guided 3.5 hour moorland and valley walk starting at Robbers Bridge, over Chalk and Weir Waters.
15  Help clear scrub to allow orchids to grow.
26 Glasgow launch of National Tree Week.
1,000 trees to be planted on the banks of the Clyde.
29 Conservation project at Whaley Thorns Heritage Centre, Nottinghamshire, to rescue hawthorn trees from a meadow.
Spades and instruction provided.
29 Chilterns Project walk across the Amersham Estate to look at tree and woodland conservation.
Enjoy woodland walks on November 1
LOWLAND WALKING
Ups on the Downs
Don't let Michael Fish's gloomy forecasts get you down.
Catherine Moore discovers you can get a big kick from staying low when the weather clouds the tops
The value of occasionally going AWOL can't be over-stressed.
Especially at this time of year when all too often the weather is as miserable as a dozen Mancunian pensioners waiting for the 211 to Gorton.
Getting away for the weekend, or even for a day of walking, is the ideal cure for those post-summer-oh-my-God-how-can-I-afford-Christmas blues.
And if the weather is dog rough a mountain walk can seem less than appealing.
But that's no excuse to sit on your backside cursing Michael Fish.
There are plenty of lowland walks which are less exposed to enjoy around Britain.
And even if the weather is passable, low level walks will take you to places you'd perhaps never have tried if you're one of the many walkers whose sights are normally set pretty firmly on the heights.
SOMETHING TO GET YOUR TEETH INTO
If you're looking for a challenge there are plenty of lowland long distance routes to choose from — just the thing to liven up your autumn.
The Peddars Way and Norfolk Coast Path are combined to make a National Trail, taking you through one of the best-known lowland areas of Britain.
The 93 mile route starts at Knettishall Heath near Thetford in Norfolk.
The first section is along the Peddars Way which follows the approximate line of a Roman road.
It follows paths, bridleways and some quiet roads and crosses heathlands, woods and agricultural land.
The ruins of Castle Acre's Cluniac priory area one of the highlights of this section.
The Peddars Way reaches the coast near to Holme next the Sea at the River Hun.
From here it makes its way down the coast — an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty — to the holiday resort of Cromer.
Another lowland National Trail that's worth a try at this time of year is the Wolds Way , stretching for 79 miles from Hessle Haven just west of Hull to Filey Brig in North Yorkshire.
It goes west along the river Humber before passing north around the western edge of the Yorkshire Wolds.
The route then heads north to the medieval village of Wharram Percy before cutting east towards the coast at Filey Brigg.
Just the other side of the Humber estuary another long distance path heads through the flat lands of the Lincolnshire Wolds.
From the Humber Bridge at Barton on Humber, the Viking Way goes east to cross the Wolds and follows the Bain valley to Horncastle.
Then it follows a former railway line to Woodhall Spa before crossing fenland on its way to the cathedral city of Lincoln.
From here it follows the route of the prehistoric Sewstern Lane and drops down to the Grantham Canal.
The 140 mile long route eventually finishes in Oakham, Leicestershire after passing Rutland Water.
WATERY WALKS
Canal walks are another choice for good quality lowland walks.
The Kennet and Avon Canal , running from Bristol to the Thames at Reading, provides not only a fine 87 mile walk, but there are endless possibilities for circular walks along its length.
The Cheshire Ring Canal Walk is another popular choice.
This 97 mile circular route follows the towpaths of six different canals.
The walk passes through towns as well as countryside and gives good views over to the Cheshire Plain and the Peak District.
As it's circular there's a choice of start points including the main towns on the route —.
In Scotland you can try the 29 mile walk along the Forth and Clyde Canal from Bowling to Falkirk.
WILDLIFE TREATS
Dig out your binoculars for lowland walks which can turn out to be wildlife treats because at this time of year the estuaries and low-lying areas around our coast are teeming with birdlife.
When their breeding season is over, and before the harsh winters of the far north set in, thousands upon thousands of birds fly south.
This makes Britain in autumn a very special place as a staging post for birds flying further south to the Mediterranean and Africa and as a winter home for many others.
Left: Castle Acre Priory on the Peddars Way.
Main pic: Glastonbury Tor on the Somerset Levels.
Both photos by John Cleare.
Above: the RSPB reserve at Leighton Moss.
Photo by the RSPB
Morecambe Bay has especially rich pickings.
It's a huge area expending from Lancashire into Cumbria, with around 120 square miles of mud and sand at low tide.
The size and quality of the   environment make it an internationally important site for birds.
As many as 80,000 knot spend their winters here — that's around a quarter of the total population wintering in Britain.
And oystercatcher and dunlin can number as many as 40,000.
Ringed plover and sanderling pass through in great numbers on their way further south.
And in winter lots of seaducks and diving birds use the bay.
When the tide turns, the birds are forced off the sandbanks and gather on the saltmarshes.
Take a walk out from Morecambe, and head north to Hest Bank for the best place to see the birds.
The RSPB reserve at Leighton Moss , just north of Morecambe by Silverdale, is also well worth exploring if you're in the area.
Leighton Moss has one of the largest reed beds in the country.
Autumn migrations bring garganey, marsh harrier and black tern.
Waders include greenshank, green sandpiper and spotted redshank.
Wildfowl are numerous in winter with thousands of teal as well as wigeon, pintail and shoveler.
The well-known RSPB reserve at Minsmere in Suffolk is another good venue for autumn bird walks.
There are a variety of paths around the reserve as well as local bridleways and footpaths you can link up with to make a longer walk.
The reserve takes in part of the Minsmere levels which were flooded during the Second World War to counter possible invasion.
Since then the area has become overgrown with reeds and provides an important habitat for bird life.
As well as this area, the reserve encompasses woods, heath and beach.
Many different species can be found at Minsmere.
Large numbers of waders pass through in the autumn including curlew, sandpiper and ruff.
In winter the deliberate flooding of an area of the reserve known as The Scrape encouraged hundreds of wigeon, teal and mallard.
You might also see gadwall, Brent geese and Bewick's swans.
In Northern Ireland,Lough Foyle in Derry is well known for the thousands of wintering wildfowl it attracts.
The RSPB reserve here takes in the south-east foreshore from Longfield Point, almost down to the Roe estuary.
There's also a National Nature Reserve at the mouth of the River Roe.
Access is good at Longfield Point, Faughanvale and Ballykelly.
You'll see many wigeon, mallard, teal and dunlin there among many other species.
And as many as 2,500 whopper swans feed on the farmland adjacent to the lough.
In Wales walkers can try routes around the Dyfi estuary where you'll find the Ynis-hir bird reserve west of the A487 between Machynlleth and Aberystwyth near Furnace.
A variety of birds use this as a stopover on their autumn migration routes and white-fronted geese, wigeon and a selection of waders winter here.
Winter walkers in Scotland should pay a visit to the Loch of Strathbeg , by the sea 30 miles north of Aberdeen off the A952 at Crimond.
Nearly 40,000 geese spend their winters here.
FOGGY DAYS
November often brings the odd day of mist and when the conditions are foggy, I often can't see the point in a tough hill walk when the expansive views of other months are nowhere to be seen.
And while the memory of stumbling through a huge — and previously unseen — boggy area on the North York moors in search of a mischievous mutt saves me from getting too romantic about foggy days, they aren't a write off.
I prefer to stick to lower levels and there are some walks I've enjoyed more when the mist is down and the countryside has taken on a more sinister or unreal appearance.
Spooky, spooky!
When the mist comes down many areas like the Somerset Levels take on a sinister and unreal appearance
Dartmoor takes some beating.
It's not really lowland in south of England terms, but the area can't be called mountainous.
Dartmoor's a shadow of its real self in the sunshine — to appreciate the place fully you need a healthy covering of mist.
Tors take on the appearance of ruined castles or huge animals through the hanging cloud while stunted trees add to the  other-worldly landscape.
Include a visit to Hound Tor with the fantastic rocky shapes said to be dogs converted to stone by witches.
And nearby are the remains of a deserted medieval village.
Spooky or what?
On the boring but practical side — don't get too carried away wandering through the Dartmoor mist — it's all too easy to get lost so don't try it unless you're competent with a map and compass.
The Somerset Levels is a weird and wonderful place at the best of times, a strange flat landscape with the unnatural looking mound of Glastonbury Tor rising up from nowhere.
It's brilliant under mist.
Aspirant hippies will find that Glastonbury makes a good base to take day walks from (after having stocked up on crystals).
Start an afternoon's walk from the town centre and head south to the River Brue and Kennard Moor.
Circle round to approach the town from the east and climb the Tor on your way back to base.
Non-hippies may prefer to take the cathedral town of Wells as a base.
Heading out to sea again,Pembrokeshire beaches are great places to walk when the mist is down and all the sun-worshippers are safely tucked away at home.
Pendine Sands, stretching east from the village of Pendine, is six miles long and wonderful to walk along on a misty day — part of the sands are controlled by the Ministry of Defence though and access is restricted.
And further west, using the coast path as a base, you can work out loads of circular walks taking in beaches.
One such walk takes you from the village of Bosherston, down to the sands at Broad Haven and around to St Govan's Head, where there's a tiny chapel tucked into the cliff face which you get to down some steps.
During a hot summer's day you wouldn't be able to move for frazzled tourists but when the weather is miserable it's a different story.
If you're looking for a great highlight to a misty walk, incorporate a visit to a good ruin.
Tintern Abbey in the Wye Valley makes a good halfway point on a circular walk from Chepstow.
From Chepstow you follow the Wye Valley.
Walk north to Tintern where you'll see the impressive ruins of the Cistercian Abbey, built in 1131 and destroyed by Henry VIII in 1536 during the dissolution of the monasteries.
From here you cross the river and follow the Offa's Dyke path then the road back to Chepstow.
Also good for adding interest to a walk on a misty day are the ruins of Rievaulx and Bolton Abbeys, both in Yorkshire.
To see Rievaulx on a decent route, make a circular walk based on the village of Old Byland.
You can go north then east over the River Rye and then south to the abbey.
Go west on part of The Cleveland Way before making your way back to the village.
For Bolton Abbey (open all year from dawn to dusk), start at the Abbey car park, go north to Simon's Seat then walk over to Howgill and return on the banks of the River Wharfe.
Save the abbey as a treat for the end of your walk.
FACT FILE
For further information about the areas covered contact the relevant tourist boards or national park authorities.
Many of them produce walk leaflets and give information about a wide range of accommodation in their areas.
Contact British Waterways: for more details about canal walking: and the RSPB for further information about the bird reserves featured in this article:.
GEAR TEST
40–50 litre RUCKSACKS
Paul Traynor heads for the hills with seven mid-sized rucksacks, ideal for long hostel-based routes or shorter backpacking trips.
Here's how they fared
There are times, especially in winter, when the average daysack just can't handle all you want to shove into it.
There are other times when for short trips you just don't need all the capacity and weight of a ‘serious’ backpacking sack.
The rucksacks we're looking at here — 40–50 litres — cater for this sort of cross-over demand.
If you're thinking of tackling a long distance footpath staying at youth hostels and guest houses, then this size sack is ideal as your load is mainly bulky spare clothing rather than weighty hardware.
If you plan lightweight backpacking overnight trips or weekend walks, then this size of sack can be suitable — especially if the tent, cooking gear and so on are spread between two or three people.
But for this kind of use think about the design of your pack and whether or not you want it to have a frame.
The pack's got to be comfortable when it's fully loaded.
You won't necessarily need a sophisticated carrying system with full hip belt, but you'll have to be careful to limit your load to avoid crippled neck and shoulders!
Remember that simple waist belts are there mainly to stop the sack swaying around.
However you intend to use the sack, it's worth trying on a few makes before buying.
Two rucksacks which look very similar in size and design may well feel quite different on your back.
People come in all shapes and sizes and rucksack makers often have to aim for the middle ground when deciding on specifications.
Even sacks with adjustable back lengths have their limits and people of above or below average height will have to shop around a little more carefully before finding the pack that's just right for them.
Paul Traynor is a freelance journalist who has been walking and backpacking at home and abroad for over 25 years
VANGO ODYSSEY 45
Pockets:
single compartment main sack with drawstring top; lid pocket with rear zip; side pockets (9in deep).
Carrying system:
soft padded back (with extra lumbar padding), has no frame and the shoulder harness is sewn in.
Waist belt is attached to the pack by padded wings.
Straps/attachment points:
ice axe loop and snap.
Paul's verdict:
very light on the pocket as well on the scales, the Odyssey is nevertheless well made and strongly put together.
Bearing price and weight in mind small points like the extra padding on the back and waist belt wings are noteworthy — giving extra comfort when the sack is full.
Good value for money.
LOWE WALKABOUT 45
Intended use:
daysack large enough to hold climbing gear which can also be used for lightweight weekend walking/backpacking.
Pockets:
single compartment with drawstring; deep lid pocket with rear zip; deep pocket on sack front with semi-circular zip.
Carrying system:
the sack has a soft padded back with no frame.
The carrying system is fixed length, with the padded shoulder harnesses sewn in.
The waist belt, attached to short wings at the base of the sack, is not padded.
Elasticated chest strap.
Straps/attachment points:
two ice axe loops with top straps which may be adjusted to varying heights; two compression straps at each side; d-ring positioned on each shoulder harness strap.
Fabrics:
TXN 600 texturised nylon designed to be both light and hard wearing.
Paul's verdict:
I found the sack very comfortable considering the simplicity of the back system and was pleased to find that it was long enough for me to use the waist belt properly.
The quality of components and manufacture was also high.
The compression straps allow gear to be arranged using the full height of the sack and strapped in tightly — a plus for climbers and scramblers.
I also liked the pocket at the front of the sack — it's big enough for hat and gloves, knick-knacks, food etc and easy for a companion to get at without you having to take the pack off.
RISOL SURVIVOR T9 45
Pockets:
single compartment main body with drawstring plus balance/extension; lid pocket with rear zip; side pockets (11in deep) with semi-circular zips.
Carrying system:
soft padded back with no frame; sewn-in, well-padded shoulder harness with tension adjustment straps; simple sewn in padded hip belt with lumbar pad and side tension straps.
Elasticated chest strap.
Straps/attachment points:
two lashing patches on lid; no ice axe loop.
Paul's verdict:
I was impressed by the specification of the this sack — especially considering the modest price.
Quite apart from the good design points like the valance/sack extension, there are even little refinements like tug-loops tied on to the zips.
In use I found the sack comfortable and stable to carry with the back just long enough for me to use the hip belt, which was functional, if a little basic.
One niggle was that the ends of the shoulder harness adjustment straps were unfinished — if you weren't careful the strap ran right through the buckle.
Correcting this at home takes a minute or two with needle and thread — but I didn't have a sewing kit with me on my first outing.
Otherwise no complaints about the finish of a strongly-made product.
BERGHAUS DART 45
Intended use:
simple, very hard-wearing hillwalking daysack.
Pockets:
single compartment main body with drawstring top; lid pocket with rear zip and pleated top which expands for extra capacity; 12in deep side pockets with semi-circular zips — one also has a small zipped external pouch for keys and bits and bobs; large pocket at front of sack with wrap-around zip.
Carrying system:
the padded back has an internal inverted V frame which is easily removable.
The back length of the pack is fixed with sewn in shoulder straps.
Simple, unpadded waist belt.
Straps/attachment points:
single ice axe loop and strap.
Fabrics:
Ardura 1000D nylon.
Advent fabric on back — designed to be fast drying.
Paul's verdict:
tough and well made, this sack has some nice touches allied to a basically simple design.
Features like the key pouch on the side pocket and the expanding lid are practical, not gimmicky.
I also found the cut of the shoulder harness particularly comfortable — important when there's no hip belt to take the strain.
The internal frame no doubt helped there.
A solid choice, but at a price.
VAUDE FORMULA
Intended use:
touring and trekking rucksack ideal for weekend backpacking.
Pockets:
two compartment main body with zipped dividing panel and drawstring valance top — access to lowest compartment is by semi-circular zip; large lid pocket with rear zip.
Carrying system:
the sack uses the company's Tergoflex-Light system which allows you to fine-tune the hip belt and shoulder harness position.
This sophisticated-looking arrangement actually proved very simple to adjust — you just loosen the recessed screws with a coin and move the belt and harness up or down the base plat to the position you want, then retighten the screws.
The length of the adjusted pack was enough to cater for my unusually long back and after making a small adjustment to the shoulder strap attachment plates which can be swivelled to close or widen the gap between them at the neck, I had a very good fit.
Good padding — with ventilation channels — means the plates and screws are safely recessed.
Straps/attachment points:
two compression straps on each side of the pack; ice axe loop and strap; six attachment buckles on the lid; D-ring positioned on each shoulder strap; elasticated chest strap.
Fabrics:
12oz Cordura nylon with doubled base.
‘Quick drying’ fabric on back.
Paul's verdict:
I certainly found the sack to be an extremely comfortable and stable load carrier.
The carrying system worked well for me and being broad-shouldered and thick-necked I particularly appreciated being able to properly and permanently adjust the width between the shoulder straps.
The hip belt too was impressively firm and comfortable.
The rest of the sack matched up to the quality of manufacture and finish of the back system — as it should do at the price.
One point worth mentioning is that the carrying system may be completely detached from the sack and used with other sacks in the range which are available separately without the back system.
KARRIMOR TRAIL 40
Intended use:
rambling and hillwalking sack for day/weekend use.
Pockets:
single compartment main body with drawstring; lid pocket with rear zip; 10in deep side pockets; mesh pouch on front.
Carrying system:
the pack uses the KST ‘size tolerant’ system — although shoulder straps are actually sewn in place, their low take-off point on the back of the sack allows you to adjust the fit precisely, fine tuning with the top tension straps.
I needed all the possible length to be able to wear the fixed-position hip belt correctly.
A good fit is important to get the most benefit from the parallel aluminium bars which frame the back system — these can be bent to suit individuals.
Paul's verdict:
this proved to be a pretty good compromise sack for mixed daywalking and light load carrying — the back system and simple frame helping out when needed without adding too much to the weight the rest of the time.
Stable and comfortable on the back, it's well made and functional.
RAFTING IN TURKEY
Splash down
River rafting is definitely the thing to try if you have the spirit of adventure coursing through your veins.
And it's spills and thrills all the way for Henry Druce as he runs the rapids of the River Coruh in Eastern Turkey
PICTURE IT.
Hundreds of people line the banks of the River Coruh in Eastern Turkey eagerly awaiting three huge river rafts, each with a 24 strong crew, to set off down the rapids.
It seems like it's the equivalent of the FA Cup Final in this rural regional, far beyond the usual tourist trail.
The rafters include journalists from around the world, two guides per boat, and the Turkish Minister of Tourism — a man with a mission to promote the sport and attract visitors.
Turkish camera crews, photographers and journalists are out in force to capture the moment.
The guide gives us some brief paddling instructions and then we're off, hurtling furiously downstream.
I concentrate on paddling in time with everyone else but my efforts are to no avail.
Within twenty seconds of leaving the safety of the shore, the front of the raft is sucked into the raging froth then hurled skyward, flinging us all into the river.
Seconds later the two rafts following behind hit the same spot and the Minister is taking his chances in the river along with everyone else.
Some manage to catch hold of their raft while others are swept uncontrollably downstream.
This is one hell of a river — it sucks me under then spits me out as I hurtle downstream.
I gasp for air when I can but never enough.
This is not good.
But in my panic stricken state I still remember the advice to face forwards with feet stretched out in front to fend off the rocks, kicking myself off as they come rapidly one after the other.
Eventually as the rapids calm down I'm swept to the river bank, exhausted, shaking, but mercifully only a little battered.
Without my helmet and life jacket it could have been a very different story.
Some weren't so lucky.
Three of the rafters were washed up unconscious on the river bank.
And one woman made a dramatic exit from the scene in a rickety old ambulance which sped her along winding dusty roads to the local hospital.
She spent two days recovering.
The rest of us were taken at a more sedate pace for a check-up at the hospital.
A near tragedy was clearly not a good start but this was not your run-of-the-mill  trip.
There had been pressure from the Tourist Board and Turkish TV crews to start the rafting trip from a particularly scenic and dramatic place and the guides misjudged what could be achieved with a novice crew.
We were just unlucky.
The French expedition guides were determined not to be defeated by the River Coruh, rated as one of the ten best white water rafting rivers in the world, and I was determined to stay in a raft for more than 20 seconds.
The eventual plan was to travel 150km along the middle section of the River Coruh which runs from the Mescit Mountains down to the Black Sea.
The guides were planning to do the whole stretch and include us novices on the easier sections.
My hands were shaking as I got into the raft for the second time.
It could have been nerves or the effects of the Turkish firewater raki from the night before.
However nerves and hangover were soon forgotten as we headed out into the middle of the river and the adrenaline started pumping.
Our guide Sam gave us very clear instructions — he didn't need to emphasise how important it was for us to do exactly as he said.
When we hit rapids this time the sensation was surprisingly gentle — it felt like we were riding on a huge river of jelly.
In larger waves it was more of a rollercoaster ride.
The front of the raft would rise alarmingly into the air then dip down as the stern followed over the crest of the wave.
At times we seemed to be on an unavoidable collision course with menacing sharp edged rocks, only to be swept clear by the current at the last minute.
At all times the guide was in total control.
As our skill level increased over the days, so did the challenges.
We met grade 4 and 5 rapids — grade 6 is the top grade and considered unrunnable.
Some of the rapids were as difficult as those that had been our undoing on the first day, but tackled with a bit of newly learned skill they were challenging and exhilarating rather than terrifying.
We saw many examples of the type of water flow which had flipped our rafts over like pancakes.
These so called‘holes in the water’ cause problems because fast flowing water is forced over a rock, plunges down the other side and then tumbles backwards.
We took great care to avoid these.
Sometimes when the rapids ahead looked particularly fearsome we'd stop and walk along the river bank to see if they were navigable.
When they weren't, we rafting rookies would leave the boats and watch the guides  skilfully manoeuvre their way through the thundering foam.
The scenery as we travelled down the river was spectacular.
The rugged mountains rose up straight from the river banks and were shaded in greens and browns with gashes of copper where erosion has taken its toll.
We passed under rickety wooden bridges and saw solitary castles — remnants of the Ottoman Empire — standing like giant ant hills on top of the mountains.
The river banks were frequently lined with curious onlookers who struggle to eke out an existence in this harsh environment.
We had major novelty value — it's strange enough for a foreigner to visit the area let alone pose in a raft.
When we passed by they would cheer and wave.
As we approached Artvin, close to the Georgian border, on the final leg of our journey, the scenery altered dramatically.
The river banks changed from jagged rock with little vegetation to luscious green slopes covered with olive trees.
There was a humdinger of a reception to greet us.
The whole population of the town seemed to be there, along with traditional Turkish dancers and musicians.
As I walked to the hotel one of the Turkish rafters rushed towards me with a copy of Turkey's most popular article about the first day of the trip with a picture of my good self and another British journalist, both wrapped in blankets looking forlorn.
The caption said ‘Even the best white water rafters in the world get caught out by the fierce rapids of the River Coruh.’
And of course, if it was in the paper it must be true.
Main picture: bubble, bubble, toil and trouble on the River Coruh.
Bottom left: hit a ‘hole’ in the water badly and the raft can flip.
Bottom right: melting snow from the peaks fuels the rapids.
Henry Druce went white water rafting in June as a guest of the Turkish Government.
Two rafting companies run trips there:
DRY SLOPE SKIING
SLIDE SHOW
Nervous novice or piste perfectionist?
Laura McCaffrey learns that whatever your skill level a dry ski slope is a great practice ground for the real thing
Putting your feet into a pair of ski boots for the first time can be alarming.
Get the right size, clip them on as tight as possible, stand up and you feel you can hardly walk, let along balance and control a pair of skis.
Then you're given the skis which stand as tall as you do and the butterflies can start fluttering.
You manage a clumsy robot-like walk in the heavy boots before kicking them into the bindings on the skis and gingerly sliding along.
Slowly, you begin to build up confidence, learn to sidestep up the slope and slide cautiously down keeping your skis evenly apart.
Then you start to add some flourishes — push the front tips of the skis almost together, the backs out, bend your knees in slightly and you have a snow plough.
Lo and behold you can actually stop when and where you want.
Practise sliding and stopping, relax a little and you'll actually begin to enjoy yourself.
And when you overcome the fear of falling, because it really doesn't hurt (honest), your enthusiasm slowly begins to build.
Soon you can graduate to using a rope tow to save the considerable effort of sidestepping up the slope, then ski down, stopping in a snow plough at first, then adding simple turns.
At last you have the feeling you are actually in control, or at least very nearly.
Getting to this stage can take some time.
And at £350–500 a week in a ski resort it's an expensive learning curve, not to mention frustrating as a chunk of the week has been eaten up before you've even got going.
Graduate to this stage on a dry ski slope for around a fiver per hour before you go on your ski holiday and your money is better spent.
There are around 100 dry ski slopes throughout the country, some very short with a gentle gradient, some hundreds of metres long with moguls — the bumps you meet on the more difficult snow runs — and slalom courses.
They're not just for the beginner but also for people who want to brush up on their skills with or without an instructor.
The vast majority hire boots and skis so you don't have to spend a lot of money on gear before you find out if skiing is for you.
It's worth mentioning that you're not automatically insured on dry ski slopes so it's worth arranging some personal cover — accidents aren't especially common but you never know.
Above: the art of parallel turns and, below, a good long outdoor ski run
The slopes themselves are made up of tough diamond  shapes of bristles not unlike giant toothbrushes.
The bristles work by laying down flat in the direction of travel, so reducing friction between your skis and the surface and allowing the skis to slide.
Waxing the skis helps them to slide better and some slopes have a lubrication system which further reduces friction.
Most slopes are outside but I went to the 30 metre slope at Calshot Activities Centre at Calshot Spit in the Solent.
My downhill skiing was a little rusty to say the least, but a few too many moons ago I'd just about cracked parallel turns, and I felt in need of a brush up.
It's important to get good instruction on dry slopes so that you don't get into bad habits before you start on the real stuff.
Instructors should be qualified as English Ski Council Artificial Slope Ski Instructors or have qualifications from BASI (the British Association of Ski Instructors).
For me the most important skill for the instructor is the ability to demonstrate exactly what you should be doing.
My instructor Rhys Henderson, also the Land Sports Head of Department at Calshot, was excellent at this.
He took me through the stages a beginner would complete in preparation for a skiing holiday.
Before you even begin it's important to get the bindings on your skis — the attachment which secure your boot firmly when skiing but release it easily if you fall — adjusted to suit your height and weight.
Too tight and the skis won't detach from the boot if you fall and you could really hurt yourself, too loose and they'll fall off.
Once your kit is sorted out the first hour is generally spent getting used to the skis, sidestepping up the slope and sliding straight down.
At this stage it's good to get your balance on the skis by jumping up on both skis together and ‘stepping’— lifting first one ski and then the other.
After ten minutes we were hot and had to take off a few layers.
It's advisable not to have bare arms or legs though, because the matting can burn your skin if you fall.
And hard-wearing mittens are essential.
We moved quickly on to what is normally the second lesson, snow plough turns, and then the third when thankfully you can use the rope tow.
There's an art to getting on and off the thing — most people fall the first few times.
Suffice to say keep your skis parallel or you're a goner.
Using the tow you can obviously go higher which gives you much more time skiing downhill to put the theory of turning into practice.
And in fact by the end of the one hour lesson I was almost up to something approaching parallel turns.
Val d'Isère here I come.
EXERCISES
Skiing uses muscles other sports do not reach so it's very important to get them into shape before you go.
Walking exercises your legs and buttock muscles and builds up stamina, but a few add-on exercises will really pay dividends — though you might still have trouble standing after the first day on your skis.
Thigh stretch
Stand on one leg and bring your other knee up to your chest and hold it there for ten seconds.
Repeat with the other leg.
Full body stretch
This can be a killer but it really is good for you.
Sit on the floor with one leg outstretched and the other bent at the knee and tucked in close to your thigh.
Slowly lean over with both arms to try to touch the toe of your outstretched foot.
Don't force it but with repetition it will get easier.
Repeat on the other side.
Upper body stretch
Nothing new about this one, but it works.
Stand up straight and circle both arms as widely as possible first forwards and then backwards.
Then place your hands on your hips and stretch over to one side and then the other.
Knees and stamina
Put both feet almost together and jump from side to side.
A variation on this is to jump up and try to tuck your legs into your chest, touching your knees with your hands.
Laura McCaffrey went dry slope skiing at Calshot Activities Centre,.
A list of dry ski slopes in Britain is available if you send an SAE to the Ski Club of Gt Britain 
WALKING IN NORWAY
Fjord Transit
Beryl Pyecroft braves the North Sea to spend a fantastic walking holiday travelling around the mighty Norwegian fjords
Being a total landlubber I was filled with trepidation as I set foot on the deck of the Norway Line's good ship Jupiter .
The thought of more than 21 hours on the North Sea wasn't exactly appealing.
But the crossing from Newcastle turned out to be a mini holiday in itself and very soon we were nosing our way through the islands and reefs which guard the entrance to Bergen's Hanseatic harbour.
From Bergen we continued northwards via single track railway to Voss where we boarded a bus for the final leg of our journey.
The narrow road, complete with alarming hairpin bends, wound its way over the mountains giving breathtaking views of lakes, fjords and waterfalls before descending into the fruit-growing region of the Hardanger Fjord.
Virtually unexplored and uncharted until the mid-nineteenth century, this area was the inspiration of artists, musicians and writers — composer Edvard Grieg spent his summers here and playwright Henrik Ibsen was inspired to write Peer Gynt by the legends and folklore of this part of Norway.
The Hardanger Fjord, flanked by lofty mountains, penetrates inland some 80 miles from the sea.
A small finger of water stretching north creates the Ulvik Fjord, with the village of Ulvik along its shore.
A green, hilly peninsula separates Ulvik Fjord from its companion Osa Fjord.
The fjords are enclosed by bare rocky peaks which are totally impassable in the winter and still touched by snow, ice and glaciers in high summer.
It used to be possible to skate over the frozen water from Ulvik right out to the Hardanger Fjord, but now the hydro-electric station discharges gallons of hot water into the fjord, and it no longer freezes in winter.
Ulvik is an ideal centre for exploring this area.
There are many options open to the tourist — from car hire, coach tours and steamer trips to flights over the glaciers in a seaplane.
But walking is undoubtedly the best way to get the ‘feel’ of the land.
Our first day's walk took us along stony tracks, through forests of birch and pine and into a narrow valley.
The steep sided mountains with a dense covering of trees rose majestically from the valley floor.
Misty cloud hung suspended not far above our heads while all we could hear was the trickle of water.
An unexpected gap in the mountains beckoned us to a silent lake fed by waterfalls and surrounded by woods with banks of moss, lichens and fungi alive with lemmings scurrying among holes and tree roots.
A steep climb through bracken and bilberries brought us to a wide rocky plateau.
The roar of water grew louder as the path continued through a wood.
Suddenly we were stopped in our tracks by the sight of a mighty torrent, swelled by heavy rain, thundering down the mountainside and into the foaming river below.
Defeated by river and rain, we retreated to our hotel for a typical ‘cold table’ of meats, fish, cheeses, salads and sweets.
On another day we chose a forest track starting from sea level at Ulvik which climbs steeply onto the mountainside.
Larch and spruce shelter nature's own rock garden with the forest floor carpeted with many species of wild flowers.
Finches, grey wagtails, woodpeckers and numerous other birds filled the air with song while the friendly lemmings scampered around showing little fear of humans.
Once we reached the banks of the reedy Frystetjorn Lake, over 1,700ft above sea level, we rested our weary bodies.
The air here was strangely still and silent after the noise of the forest.
A few unoccupied wooden cabins and a skeletal rowing boat, still chained to its mooring, were the only signs of human intrusion.
The view from Frystetjorn was unforgettable — brightly painted houses set on a patchwork hillside, orchards heavy with bright red apples and the village of Ulvik, its white church being caressed by the sunshine.
Next was a gentle walk around the wooded peninsula to take a closer look at Osa Fjord.
The two fjords, so close together, couldn't be more different.
At Ulvik Fjord there is a quayside, bobbing boats, and the village stretching along its bank, at Osa the mountains drop dramatically straight into the water.
Our final walk was a tough ascent to the 2,000ft high Jonstolen plateau.
We slowly sweated our way up the steep mountainside on wet, slippery grass which gave way to wetter, slippier rocks looming vertically out of the swirling mist.
We had reached an idyllic Norwegian scene.
There was a rock-strewn plateau where cows with bells and a few sheep were grazing peacefully.
A small lake reflected the cliff face of the towering mountain range above.d There was also a cluster of wooden huts on the plateau — summer retreats where the townsfolk recharge their batteries before winter sets in once more.
Time moves on for all of us and the next day we were homeward bound, hoping, like Peer Gynt, to return some day.
Main picture: Ulvik Fjord — real chocolate box views.
Left: Ulvik village.
MARKET ROUND UP
BASELAYER
Calvin Klein eat your heart out.
Sexy underwear's got nothing on thermal britches and vests when it comes to keeping you cosy in the depths of winter.
We take a look at nine of the hottest designs around that'll send you panting off to the outdoor shops
KARRIMOR
Action Base Layer roll neck long sleeve top and long johns.
Design:
ABL top has a high neck which can be rolled over, and a long zip for ventilation.
Loose fitting long johns have elasticated waist and gusset with fly.
SURVIVAL
Pure silk vest and long johns.
Design:
round neck, long sleeve top and long johns, women's and men's designs available.
DUOFOLD
Zip neck top and performance tights.
Design:
zip neck, long sleeve top with lightly padded stand up collar.
Tights are close fitting with elastic waist band.
ROHAN
Muztag top and leggings.
HELLY HANSEN
Lifa Super Shirt and Trousers.
Design:
crew neck, long sleeve top with  stripy inserts down sleeves.
Trousers (long johns) are available with or without fly.
SUB ZERO
Factor one round neck top and long johns
Design:
long sleeve top available for men and women.
Also men's long johns and women's sports tights.
NORTH CAPE
Zip turtle neck top and long johns.
Design:
zip front top with lightly padded stand up neck plus long johns.
BERGHAUS
Zip neck shirt.
Men's pants.
Design:
zipped high neck top (skiing style) with long sleeves.
Men's pants with gusset and side slit.
WINTER CLOTHING
DRESSING UP
LAYERING
Layering isn't just about keeping warm.
It means keeping cool, too.
In fact, what it boils down to is the most efficient system for regulating your body's own little micro-climate, without burdening your rucksack with all manner of garments designed for one specific set of conditions — a waterproof duvet jacket for example.
And that has to be good news for backpackers keen to shave pounds off the weight in their rucksacks.
From the insulation point of view, several thin layers work better than one thick one, and it provides the all-important flexibility for intermediate control which your waterproof duvet jacket couldn't even approach.
Apart from the possibilities of weather changing during a walk, layering also provides a flexible response to your own levels of exertion.
When you're slogging your way uphill, chances are you'll need a layer less than when you're cruising along the straight and level.
The idea has been around for ages, of course— people using two thin woollen sweaters rather than one thick.
But with the introduction of all manner of high-tech fabrics from super-wicking next-to-the-skin materials through to lightweight breathable waterproofs, the integrated approach to clothing has become a whole lot more attractive.
But it's important to make sure all the fabrics in the different layers work in harmony together.
For example a non-breathable waterproof layer will make ineffective the performance of good base and mid-layers.
CLOSE FOR COMFORT
Thermal underwear?
‘Thermal’ is a word gradually slipping into the past.
Not that there's any shortage of warm underwear for winter use.
In fact, the priority of base layers, as most manufacturers prefer to call them these days, is to keep you dry rather than warm.
But warmth tends to come as a matter of course simply because the base layer eliminates the clamminess which makes you feel cold.
This works by the fabric's wicking features which allow sweat to pass through it.
And there are now fabrics treated with special antibacterial finishes, designed to keep the pongs at bay.
WARMING UP
Mid-layers perhaps provide the most versatility in the layering set-up, and these days the buzz-word is fleece, that warm and cuddly fabric which took over where fibre-pile left off.
Fleece garments vary in weight and thickness — the lighter versions are usually better suited to more active roles, while the heavier ones come into their own during very cold conditions, or as evening wear around camp.
Technical advances in fleece continue apace such as with the stretch version which gives improved insulation and greater mobility through a closer fit.
There are also now specialist fleece tops using windproof  linings such as Gore's Windstopper and Malden's Polartec Series 1000 Windproof.
However if you want to stay true to the layering principle and have the greatest possible versatility, it's better to have separate fleece and windproof layers.
WINTER WARMER
A windproof layer can be used over the base layer in warm conditions, and when it gets chillier, over your fleece.
The modern microfibre fabrics which work so well in windproof garments are also quite often pretty goo din the wet.
They're not totally waterproof, but they'll see off pretty stiff showers.
They also scrunch down to virtually nothing in your pack.
WEATHER SHIELD
The outer layer is the totally waterproof one, and if you're going to follow the performance fabric ideology through to its logical conclusion, then a breathable waterproof is essential.
Many manufacturers have their own breathable fabrics these days, others use Sympatex or the best known top-of-the-range breathable, Gore-Tex, which is available in a variety of configurations.
Three-layer Gore-Tex is without doubt the most robust, but the two-layer versions with separate linings win hands down on versatility and packability.
The Karrimor Baltoro Snow Jacket pictured here uses Ferrara Gore-Tex, based on a super-lightweight abrasion and tear resistant facing fabric.
Keeping your bottom half dry is just as important.
Waterproof trousers with leg zips are the best bet for walkers, while winter walkers and mountaineers will find salopettes with full length side zips a better deal when wearing crampons.
TOTAL COVER-UP
The entire outfit will protect you when you're walking in the most dastardly of British winter conditions.
And, peeled off a layer at a time, it'll take you through a wide spectrum of weather conditions and levels of exertion.
Round it all off with a pair of boots to suit your level of walking, some gaiters to protect your lower leg and stop debris getting into your boots, and you're ready for anything!
Don't forget protection for your head.
You have more sweat glands and blood vessels per square inch in your scalp than any other part of your body.
And to an extent, a hat can regulate the way the rest of you feels.
If your hands are cold, try putting a hat on!
But there comes a point when even a hat isn't enough to keep your hands warm, so don't forget a pair of gloves.
And if you're heading anywhere where you could encounter snow and ice, make sure your equipment includes ice axe and crampons, and the knowledge to use them properly.
NATURE WATCH
NOVEMBER
LADY FERN
With most of the ground cover vegetation gone, now is the time to look at ferns.
At a distance many species look similar and only closer examination reveals the difference.
Lady fern, pictured here, has an elegant appearance with graceful fronds up to three feet in length.
Turn the frond over and look at the underside.
Here you'll find the ‘sori’, the structures which contain the spores.
The form of these is important for species identification.
Bracken is probably the best known of the ferns.
Recent research has shown that the spores of bracken are carcinogenic, so it's a good idea to avoid walking through large stands of bracken when the spores are ripe from July to August.
CALOCERA FUNGI
At the other end of the scale are the tiny calocera fungi, highly noticeable in spite of their small size because of their bright yellow colour.
There are three species,calocera glossoides , found mostly on dead oaks,calocera viscosa , found almost exclusively on dead conifers, and the one pictured calocera cornea which is found on a wide range of dead deciduous trees.
It's inedible, but who would want to bother anyway, since they are at most two inches high!
Species similar in appearance, but growing on the ground, will probably belong to the clavulinopsis genera or families, but it's easy to be fooled by fungi seemingly growing in the wrong habitat.
Sometimes the fungi isn't growing in the soil proper but just under the ground on the decaying foot or stump of a tree, so a little investigation is necessary in these cases.
ROOK
With the wet end to the summer, there may be fields where the crop has been left unharvested.
Look out for flocks of birds tucking into it — among them will be rooks.
Confusion can arise over the identification of the rook and the crow.
The first difference is that crows are usually solitary or in pairs, while rooks are gregarious.
So if you see a flock of crows they are rooks, or if you see a solitary rook, it's probably a crow!
The adult rook also has a white patch at the base of the bill, where the crow's bill and face are all black.
In flight the wedge-shaped tail of the rook is supposed to help identification, but it's hard to spot as the bird is constantly moving its tail.
In winter, rooks roost communally with jackdaws.
SHAGGY PARASOL
The wet start to autumn has meant a bumper crop of fungi.
Two notable species are the shaggy ink cap Coprinus conatus and shaggy parasol Lepiota rhacodes .
Both species are tall with large caps.
The shaggy ink cap is also called the ‘lawyers wig’ because of the white woolly cap.
As the fungus ripens, the cap turns black at the edge and liquefies.
The black liquid contains the spores and was once used as a cheap substitute for Indian ink.
The habitat of the ink cap is in grass, rubbish heaps and on disturbed soil.
In contrast, the shaggy parasol is found in woodland, especially among conifers.
When mature the cap forms a pale pink flat disc up to six inches across.
MISTY LANDSCAPES
The changeable weather that November brings can lead to misty conditions, especially in the valleys.
Walking uphill can suddenly bring you out of the mist and into the sunshine, with beautiful panoramas.
Photographing this type of landscape can be difficult because the large amounts of white in the view will cause the exposure meter to underexpose the scene.
Take a meter reading off an area of grassland and lock in.
It's also a good idea to ‘bracket’ the exposure by a stop either side of the indicated reading — and a polarising filter will improve the results dramatically.
With an SLR camera rotate the filter while looking through the viewfinder until you get the best effect, then take the meter reading.
With non-reflex cameras, hold the filter in front of the eye and rotate.
When the required effect is seen, note the position of the filter and put it on the lens.
If the filter covers the exposure meter, take a reading with it in place, if not, note the amount of compensation recommended on the filter and use that to alter the reading.
THE LAKE DISTRICT IN NOVEMBER
The Lake District needs no introduction and the secret is to find the area usually ignored by those planning walks.
Arnside, nestled into the north-east corner of Morecambe Bay, offers an alternative to the overcrowded hills further north, and when the weather is too bad for the tops, there is still plenty of interest here.
Arnside Knott is a large limestone outcrop and offers a considerable diversity of wildlife with its varying habitats of woodland, pasture, and scrub.
Looking over to Grange over Sands from Arnside
NATURE WALK AROUND ARNSIDE
This walk of about six miles takes in a variety of habitats including sea shore and mixed woodland.
There is much wildlife to see, so don't forget the binoculars and give yourself plenty of time, it's not a route to be hurried!
In places the path can be wet and slippery, so obviously wear your boots.
Take the track which is a continuation of the access road to the Arnside Knott car park.
After a short distance you reach a gate with a gap at the side.
Go through this and continue on the good track into the woodland, passing a ‘crossroads’ with a wall and gate on the right.
Go straight ahead on the route signed Silverdale and Arnside Tower.
The track eventually drops down to a road.
On this stretch, watch out for the trees on both sides of the track.
Many have multiple thin trunks growing up from the ground — they've obviously been coppiced in the past.
On the left, where the limestone is exposed, you can see how the tree roots travel over the surface and form abstract sculptures.
Cross the road and take the obvious lane on the other side which leads to a farm and the prominent Arnside Tower dating from the 14th century on the hillside above.
Follow the lane as it bears right and across the farmyard, passing through a metal gate to the right of a white farm cottage.
Turn left up to the tower, passing it on your left.
Ahead there's a stile over a wall, but before that to the right is a metal gate with a squeeze stile and go down the track between a hedge on the right and a fence on the left.
After a short while you come to two iron gates side by side.
Take the green gate on the left and continue to a tarmac road.
Go along this for about 50 yards, then turn off right and drop down towards the wall and then towards a big double metal gate ahead.
Don't pass through, but turn left and follow the fence which is on your right until you reach a narrow green gate which lets you into the meadow.
Cross the meadow to a new wooden  kissing gate on the far side.
Pass through this and follow the wall on your left which leads to another kissing gate.
As is so often the case, these gates have been made by someone who has obviously no experience of walking, because they are impossible to negotiate with a rucksack on, unless you climb onto the bottom bars of the fence around the gate to lift the sack above the top rail.
The second gate leads to a road, which you cross to another road opposite leading to Far Arnside Caravan Park.
Continue on the road through the caravan park.
Eventually it splits, with the left fork going to Shore Creek.
Take the right fork signed White Creek.
Note here the sessile oak trees, their acorns without stalks, and also the hawthorns, which have had a magnificent crop of berries —‘haws’— this year.
Where the road starts to bear to the right, a surfaced road, with ‘No Entry’ signs, turns off to the left.
Follow this and enjoy the view across the sands towards Heysham in the distance.
When the road turns sharply left in a hairpin bend, take the footpath ahead into the woodland.
Note the trees here, sessile oak, beech and ash.
When the track splits at a sign warning of incoming tides, take the left fork towards the shore.
The track doesn't go onto the shore, but goes along the top of some low cliffs above the beach.
Where the underlying rock has been exposed, the path could be slippery in wet conditions.
You'll be grateful for your boots around here but take care.
Eventually you emerge from the trees and the panorama opens up across Morecambe Bay.
This is an important area for wildfowl during the winter months, and if the tide is coming in it's worth finding a comfy place to sit and watch the geese, ducks and waders feeding at the water's edge, gradually being pushed closer by the tide.
There are several wood ants nests along the stretch, so before sitting down just check that the area's clear!
In places the path becomes narrow and rocky and needs care.
The trees along here include silver birch, yew and holly.
It's odd to see how much smaller the trees clinging to the cliff face which are exposed to the salty winds off the sea are compared to those growing in the more sheltered woodland later in the walk.
When you reach a signpost saying White Creek and Arnside, cross the broken wall, turn left and soon you emerge onto a grassy clearing giving a first class view onto the sands — and no wood ants!
The town you can see on the other side of the bay is Grange over Sands.
Continuing on, the path re-enters the woodland to a caravan park.
Follow the cinder path through the caravan park until you reach a surfaced road.
Turn left on this, and at the next junction turn right.
After a few yards the sea appears once more on your left, and in the distance, a railway viaduct crossing the bay.
Follow the metalled road for about 200 yards until you reach an iron kissing gate on the right with a footpath sign to Arnside Knott & Silverdale.
Pass through this and cross the meadow to reach a metal gate with a stone stile at the side of it.
This leads to a wide track through woodland.
The track climbs steadily through the woodland where the yew trees are of special interest.
The fruit of the yew is important in the autumn and winter for mistle thrushes, redwings and fieldfares, which feed on the soft flesh, while greenfinches and bullfinches feed on the hard kernel.
The tiny goldcrest, our smallest bird, can also be seen here.
After about a quarter of a mile the track emerges onto more open land dotted with trees, and you can find some lovely juniper bushes here.
Note also the Scots pine.
This is an area for green woodpeckers, which surprisingly are more likely to be seen searching for food on the ground than in the trees.
Other animals you might spot in the woodlands are red squirrels and roe deer.
The track continues, re-entering dense mixed woodland, climbing still.
Turn left at a high drystone wall, collapsed in places, and continue until you emerge onto another track.
Turn left and follow the track back to the car park.
At one place on the walk, there's clear evidence of a badger track crossing the route — there's flattened vegetation and the observant may spot badger hairs.
For obvious reasons I'm not telling exactly where, but anyone seeing this can award themselves ten Brownie points!
Arnside Tower, a prominent hillside landmark dating from the 14th Century
NATURE WALK FACT FILE
Youth Hostel
Check opening times with hostels over the winter period.
Camping
Telephone in advance during winter months.
Closed from end of October to beginning of March.
£1000 WORTH OF KARRIMOR WINDSTOPPER AND FLEECE JACKETS TO BE WON
PERFORMANCE WITH STYLE
Win the latest designs in Karrimor Windstopper and Fleece Jackets.
Ten lucky readers will be the proud owners of the latest Karrimor performance jackets.
The first three prizes will win the Baltoro Reversible Windstopper Jacket.
This garment combines the warmth of Maiden's Polartec 200 fleece with the latest 100% windproof material from W L Gore.
Designed to be worn either way out this is truly two garments in one, equally at home on the ski slopes, hills and the bar.
Seven runners-up prizes of Karrimor's Zulu Jacket are available.
Using Polartec 200 material these jackets are high on warmth and style.
HOW TO WIN
Using the words associated with Karrimor products listed here, start with the central B and trace a continuous line through the letters forming the words.
You may move up, down or horizontally to find the next letter but not diagonally.
Each letter is used only once and there are no spare letters.
Cut out the coupon, a photocopy will do, fill in your name, address and size details and post to:
OUTDOOR NEWS
FOOTPATHS
TOWPATH UPGRADE
Walkers and cyclists will soon find it easier to travel between Bristol and Bath following the resurfacing of a section of the River Avon towpath.
Avon County Council provided £80,000 to resurface a stretch of the path, just over a mile long, between Brasmill Lane and Nelson Villas in Bath.
Previously this section was overgrown and full of potholes.
The money will also be used to provide better signposting for existing access points to the towpath.
Peter Atkinson from Bath City Council said ‘It is hoped that there will be additional improvements in the future such as a sculpture and interpretative trail.’
TRUST SET UP
A trust  has been set up in the wake of the tragic Pakistan International Airlines crash in the Himalaya in memory of outdoor pursuits lecturer Brian Rollins (aged 40), who was on board.
The crash happened when the PIA Airbus A300 crashed into the mountainside on its approach to Kathmandu Airport on Monday September 28.
All 167 passengers were killed.
One of 35 Britons on the plane, Brian was part of a six person group who'd planned a trek to Tharpu Chuli.
The aim was to help climbers Dave Harries and Mick Hardwick acclimatise before they attempted the first British ascent of the Polish Route on Annapurna I.
Apart from lecturing on the outdoors at South Manchester College, Brian was a founder member of the Challenge Club — aimed at letting people realise their full potential through outdoor activities.
He also organised fund raising exercises such as the Big Push from Wembley to Manchester to raise money to take 100 people, mostly disabled, on an adventure holiday in Austria.
The aim of the new trust is to continue Brian's work.
Money raised will go towards building a mountain hut, with disabled access, in the Lake District National Park.
If you'd like to contribute send a cheque or postal order to:
COMPETITION WINNERS
Well done Stephen McCann of Leyland in Lancashire and Helen Balcombe of London.
You're the winners of Outdoor Action 's September Adidas competition and you'll shortly be receiving Adidas Adventure Equipment waterproof jackets and pants and Adventure High walking boots.
And congratulations to our two second prize winners — N Dunbar of Eastbourne and S Sutton of Workington in Cumbria, who'll each receive an Adidas Equipment Adventure Polar Fleece.
Third prizes of Adidas Equipment Adventure T shirts go to Tim Holland of Scunthorpe and W I Jones of Gwynedd.
The answers were:
Unlucky this time?
Well turn to page 35 for your chance to win one of ten great outdoor jackets from Karrimor.
News from the National Parks
Peak District protected against road development
A proposal to make the A628, which passes through the heart of the Peak District National Park, into a dual carriageway has been scrapped by the Department of Transport (DoT).
Their position was made clear following the publication of a study they commissioned into improving road links across the Pennines between Manchester and Sheffield.
Upgrading the A628 — one of the most direct routes between the two cities — was one of the suggestions, but the DoT stated that it remained committed to its policy that ‘No major development should take place in national parks except in exceptional circumstances.’
Coincidentally the results of another recently released study, commissioned by several local authorities, Passenger Transport Executives and the National Park Authority, shows that 65% of journeys between Sheffield and Manchester are made by rail rather than road.
This suggests that improving public transport between the two cities should also be considered.
Further road plans
Both Snowdonia and the Pembrokeshire Coast National Parks are under threat from road schemes announced as part of the Trans-European Road Network (TERN).
Under the proposals from Brussels the M4 would be upgraded for maximum heavy goods use, extending it all the way along the Pembrokeshire Coast to Fishguard.
The A5 meanwhile would be converted into a motorway through Snowdonia.
Minister of State for Wales Sir Wyn Roberts said the Brussels proposals were ‘just not on’.
New cycle trails on the North York moors
The Forestry Commission have opened some 32 miles of new mountain bike trails in the Langdale Forest, north-west of Scarborough.
The three new paths are five, 12 and 15 miles long and their waymarking is colour coded to indicate their level of difficulty.
The Forestry Commission believe that as well as catering for a growth sport, building these new routes helps separate bikers from walkers, so helping both to enjoy the forest in peace and safety.
Payment for climbing?
Some landowners on Dartmoor are trying to enforce a booking system and even payment for the use of facilities on their land such as rock outcrops for climbing.
Organisations such as the British Mountaineering Council see this as the thin end of the wedge where payment will be demanded for access to land which has previously been open to the public.
News supplied by the Council for National Parks
CONSERVATION
DELAY THREATENS BIRDS
Thousands of birds are under threat because of a delay in designating a proposed site in the Peak District as an Environmentally Sensitive Area (ESA).
The moorland in the South West Peak was proposed for ESA status in 1991 and the designation failed to come into force this summer as planned.
Because the area is now supposed to be designated, farmers have been ineligible for grants from the many government conservation schemes.
This has led to farmers overstocking animals on the land which has had a devastating effect on birdlife.
An RSPB survey shows the populations of lapwing and snipe have declined by over half, curlew by a third while ouzel numbers have crashed by 70% to just 18 pairs.
RSPB spokesperson Frank Lucas says ‘It's especially worrying that we have discovered a serious decline in bird numbers in what should be one of the best protected areas in the UK.
‘The Government cannot afford to continue to neglect its responsibilities for wildlife, and here that means helping farmers with grants for conservation in place of grants for over-grazing.’
KIDS CLEAN UP
Youth club groups around the country have a chance to win a share of £5,000 worth of prizes while helping to enhance the environment in the Youth Action For The Earth competition.
The 7,500 clubs around the UK are invited to enter a team of five people to carry out a local environmental project.
This can be anything from cleaning an old pond to tree planting or landscaping a piece of waste ground.
It's up to the club to choose, although it must benefit the local community in the village, town or city where the club is based.
Outdoor clothing manufacturers Craghoppers will be supplying top of the range outdoor clothing as prizes.
Judging will take place in June next year.
COUNTRYSIDE
CALL FOR MORE ACCESS TO WOODLANDS
Greater access for walkers to forest areas is beneficial not detrimental claimed the Forestry Commission (FC) at the launch of a booklet intended to persuade owners and managers to open up their woodland areas to the public.
Raymond Johnstone of the FC said the greater numbers visiting woodland areas would increase people's understanding and appreciation of what foresters are trying to achieve.
And regular visitors, he argued, start to assume some of the responsibilities of wardens, such as the reporting of forest fires.
‘In many cases, access to woodlands could be the solution rather than the problem,’ he argued.
BONINGTON SPEAKS OUT
Following his election as President of the Council for National Parks, Chris Bonington called for all the national parks to be set up as separate authorities as soon as possible, in line with the Government's manifesto promise.
Bonington said he also hoped to see closer co-operation and understanding between the national park authorities and the farmers, tourist operators and everyone else who lives and works in the parks.
‘As leaders in environmentally friendly practices, the parks have a vital role to play in showing the way in which fostering the well being of communities and conservation of our natural heritage can go hand in hand.’
HARD TO PLEASE
The Ministry of Defence (MoD) must feel they are in a no-win situation.
They have just announced that they plan to stop training on common land at Holcombe Moor near Manchester.
They no doubt that conservation groups would welcome the move.
However the Open Spaces Society, though happy with the decision, have launched a major offensive on the MoD.
They argue that the move shows that they can't be trusted.
The MoD had claimed at a public inquiry in 1988 that they needed the land for training and in 1991 asked to extend the area further.
General secretary of the Society Kate Ashbrook argues that the change of mind shows that ‘The predictions, promises and guarantees given at the inquiry have been proved wrong.
It underlines yet again the need for an independent investigation of the MoD's alleged requirement for all its landholdings in the UK.’
HELP FOR UPLANDS
Financial support to help restore damaged upland areas has been agreed in principle by the Camping and Outdoor Leisure Association (COLA), the umbrella body representing outdoor gear manufacturers and retailers.
Working in conjunction with the British Mountaineering Council and the Ramblers' Association, COLA plans to set up the British Uplands Footpath Trust.
No firm date has yet been set for the launch of the Trust and it has yet to be decided exactly how it will operate.
But the broad aim will be to perfect a scheme where money is raised on a continuous basis to fund upland restoration work.
COLA Director Gerry Thompson said they are waiting for ideas to formulate.
‘We think the concept is right but haven't exactly worked out how yet.’
One of the ideas mooted which has won some support is the introduction of leaflets at outdoor gear retail outlets.
The leaflets would explain the work of the Trust and invite people to make a donation.
Funds raised will help the battle against erosion in upland areas
Outdoor Action writer Paul Traynor is tackling a long backpacking trip along Italy's northern  Apennines — the country's spinal mountain chain.
His walk began at Passo Della Cisa, north of La Spezia, and he expects to be walking for six weeks or more.
‘The area is far more rugged and wild than I expected and some of the ridge walking has been spectacular’ Paul told us from Italy.
‘So far I've seen eagles and many other birds of prey and I'm keeping a close eye out for wild boar.’
Look out for a full account of Paul's journey in a future issue of Outdoor Action.
MULTI-ACTIVITY
SETTING SAIL
The Royal Yachting Association (RYA) is designating 1993 as Year of Youth Sailing in order to attract more young people to take up dinghy sailing and windsurfing.
To boost interest they're encouraging their 1,500 clubs, along with RYA recognised sailing schools, to hold free open day taster sessions.
The RYA also plans to restructure their training courses to make it easier for pupils to advance from beginner levels to racing proficiency.
The initiative will be launched at the London International Boat Show at Earls Court in January.
For details of events contact the RYA on .
CAVE CANCER SCARE
Cavers shouldn't be put off by the recent radiation scare, according to the National Caving Association.
The scare was caused by a report which showed that cavers were sometimes being exposed to levels of radiation, in the form of radon, up to 800 times the official safety limit in homes.
Dave Edwards, Chair of the National Caving Association's working party on radon, says that it's important to put the risk of catching cancer in this way into context.
‘It's similar to the chance you take when you spend time in a smoky pub.
And in fact by far the most dangerous thing that cavers do is drive.’
BUYERS' GUIDE
OUTBOUND THEBE TUNNEL TENT
The Thebe is easy to erect.
The inner goes up first and is supported by two hooped shockcorded fibreglass poles — one at the front and one at the rear.
The pole ends slot into small securing posts at ground level.
It comes with a spare pole section which is a good idea.
I liked the way the flysheet securely fixes to the inner with a clip at the base of each of the pole ends.
There are eight other pegging out points.
In strong winds, however, the sides of the tent had a tendency to cave in and flap about.
A guyline at the centre of each side would prevent this.
A third pole is inserted into the front of the flysheet to extend the bell end.
This gives ample room for cooking and storage.
A small porch at the rear can be used for other small items, although access is only from inside.
The entrance has a central panel with twin one way zips so it rolls up and fastens at the top to give easy access.
Ventilation is good with mesh netting at both ends on the flysheet allowing air to pass through easily and both vents on the outside have stiffened weather flaps.
Condensation was also not a problem — even on the wettest of days there were only a few tell tale signs on the flysheet.
Dave's verdict:this is a good general purpose tent which is nice and roomy for two and offers excellent value for money.
MOUNTAIN RANGE HARTSIDE WATERPROOF JACKET
Design:light/mid-weight wind and waterproof jacket.
Features two waterproof pockets with stud flaps, two way zip, inner zip map pocket, double studded storm flap, detachable storm hood.
Fully taped seams on the Gore-Tex lining.
Materials:outer fabric — sanded microfibre; drop lining — Winter Lite Fore-Tex (combination of fleece and Gore-Tex membrane).
Comes with 3 year guarantee.
KOHLA WANDERSTOCK WALKING STICK
Design:adapted ski pole — a modern version of the traditional walking stick.
Features include telescopic design to adjust height and ergonomic handle.
Available in two models: two part pole adjusts from 30in–41in, three part pole from 21in–42in.
Three part version is available with a summer or winter snow basket as an optional extra.
Optional rubber tip to cover metal tip for road use available for both models.
WENGER WATCH
Design:classic styled outdoor watch, water resistant to 330ft, stainless steel screw back, all weather rubber/leather strap, Tritium hands and numbers for night use.
BRIDGEDALE OUTDOOR ACTION EXPLORER SOCK
Design:knee length walking sock with elasticated toe and high density protection pads.
FLITTERMAN RIGA FLEECE
Design:designed for general outdoor use with large cotton flapped pocket, two side entry pockets, elasticated cuffs.
MOUNTAIN EQUIPMENT NIMBUS JACKET
Weighing in at only a few ounces, you hardly notice that you're wearing this jacket.
But don't let the lightweight feel fool you — the first time I wore it was during a 70mph mountain winds and driving rain and it kept me both warm and dry.
The jacket also breathes well.
When I used it with a 50lb rucksack there were no sweaty damp patches.
The materials which give this high quality technical performance are the outer sanded microfibre material with microporous coating combined with a smooth Pertex lining.
As part of Mountain Equipment's Compak range of garments, the jacket packs down small into a mini bag.
The jacket is refreshingly plain in design with a single front zip and Velcro storm flap.
There are two slanting zip pockets with weather flaps and an inside pocket which is not quite large enough to take a full size OS map.
The small detachable hood is fixed onto a high neck collar with press studs and the drawcord pulls in tight.
On the bottom hem of the coat there is also an adjustable drawcord.
The generous cut under the sleeves allows good freedom of movement and the cuffs come with small Velcro adjusters.
Dave's verdict:the jacket can handle at least three season wet weather use and is well suited for lightweight backpackers and overseas travellers.
SCOTTISH NEWS
THE THINGS THEY SAW
Recently overheard: a tourist getting off the Cairngorm ski lift saying to a friend ‘Lovely view’.
The friend replied: ‘Yes, but there's not much else!’.
Another remarked that once one had seen the ostriches (he meant the ospreys at Loch Garten), the Aviemore Centre, and been up in the chair lift to Cairn Gorm there ‘wasn't anything else to do’.
Ugh!
LETHAL POLLUTION AT LOCH AWE
What dreadful news it is that a lethal, new form of algae pollution has been found in one of Scotland's best known lochs, lovely Loch Awe in Argyll.
Driving through Kilmartin, south of Oban, I saw two notices calling public meetings to discuss pollution — the first I and many others had heard about this problem.
It follows on the much-publicised situation at bird reserve and fishing Mecca, Loch Leven in Kinross, where years of industrial and farming pollution bear part of the blame for green algae.
Researchers at Dundee University have identified a poisonous blue-green algae bloom at Loch Awe, not previously recorded in British upland freshwater lochs.
Two dogs died after eating some.
The algae is a benthic (bottom-dwelling) variety, unlike the planktonic, floating blooms which regularly damage the freshwater environment of Loch Leven.
Biologists believe the same benthic algae may have been responsible for animal deaths on Loch Lubnaig, near Callander, not far from my Stirling home, and at Loch Insh on Speyside in the past two years.
Argyll and Bute district council did post warning notices at Loch Awe advising people to keep children and pets off the shore, but these were recently removed after the hot weather which had made the problem worse was over.
Recognising the problem, The Scottish Office is funding a research programme at Dundee University to provide ‘a better understanding of the potential health hazards…in waters used for recreational and drinking purposes.’
LAIRDS OF ALL THEY SURVEY
Medieval Scottish castles were once the homes of kings, queens and local lairds, but a three year ecological survey, commissioned by the Government agency Historic Scotland and undertaken by Northern Ecological Services, is finding new castle inhabitants.
MAR LODGE WATCH
It's good to see some sound sense being talked about the Mar Lodge estate controversy by the John Muir Trust, fast becoming one of the foremost environment bodies in Scotland.
Together with the World Wide Fund for Nature and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, they were one of the three main partners in the conservation consortium who tried unsuccessfully to buy the estate.
The Trust regrets that after a year of negotiation it wasn't possible to assemble a complete package which would have allowed for purchase price, future management and costs for the extended period necessary.
‘This property still remains an exceptionally important part of our natural heritage, but its future is unresolved’ says the Trust.
The three partners are to remain in contact to maintain a watching brief and to prepare a document outlining ideas for future management of the property.
They would hope to discuss this with any new owner and with Scottish Natural Heritage.
The Trust adds: ‘The immense work done by the three principal participants, Simon Pepper (WWF), John Hunt (RSPB) and Nigel Hawkins (JMMT) and the crucial role played by Chris Brasher has to be acknowledged and we can only regret that their efforts were not rewarded with a more positive outcome.’
MISSING MUNRO
I know this is a long way after the event, but were you on Beinn Sgulaird, Argyll, on June 21 as part of the Boots Across Scotland (BAS) Fundraising Day?
The charity planned to have sponsored groups climbing all 277 Munros — but organisers believe Beinn Sgulaird was missed out.
If you know different contact: who would like to get this year's books completed.
FILM RIGHTS
I'm glad to report that Captain Alwyne Farquharson of Invercauld who has estates on Royal Deeside and on the island of Mull, has finally abandoned his opposition to a film crew building a temporary track on the island.
Associate producer and star Denis Lawson — best known for Local Hero — said that filming of The Dead of Winter had been postponed and might even be switched from Mull to Denmark, even though the story is set on Mull.
Film locations have a significant part to play in boosting tourism and the making of the film will pump an immediate £250,000 into the local economy.
Captain Farquharson has now said that provided planning permission was given and the track area restored, then the film crew could go ahead.
COUNTING ADDERS
Seen any adders in recent times?
It's the only snake native to Scotland and the only poisonous one in Britain.
It's rare for a human to die from an adder bite, but it has happened.
And there are generally one or two people who get ill each year after a bite.
Yet the adder is a quiet and retiring beast.
Bites generally occur when someone has sat down in woodland, bracken or heather, unaware that they are close to or on an adder.
Under a recent amendment to the Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) it became an offence to kill or injure adders — this is in addition to previous legislation prohibiting the sale of adders.
And now Scottish Natural Heritage has asked the Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Banchory, in liaison with the Scottish Agricultural Statistics Service and Biosphere Consultancies, to do a study to determine the current status of adders in Scotland.
The public are being enlisted to help by filling in a short questionnaire which will provide information on the distribution of adders.
I've already completed mine: my son and I disturbed one on the main path leading up to The Merrick, in Galloway, and ranger Fred Gordon and I saw a very angry one on the path in Glen Cairn in the Cairngorms.
I saw another on the West Highland Way, near Conic Hill, and friend Ronnie Leask found a dead one when a group of us went to the Jura.
Questionnaires from:
LETTERS & QUERIES
COUNTRYSIDE IS FOR ALL
This month's winning letter comes from Phil Thompson of Hampshire who wins a spanking new Lowe daysack.
I write with regard to Nick Rawlins' letter about screaming 16–18 year olds in the countryside.
I teach just such a group of boys, only they come under the title ‘Emotionally and Behaviourally Disturbed’.
When you take them out of their high rise environment they are highly stressed and lack confidence and self esteem.
Teamwork is out and behaviour such as your reader witnessed is common.
As for discipline, I have to work within the Children's Act.
I regularly take such groups of boys walking, and sometimes spend a lot of time apologising to other walkers.
Generally, by the end of the school year we culminate in a week on Dartmoor and by this time the boys have confidence in their ability and have learned the skills necessary to enjoy the freedom of the outdoors, keeping within the Country Code.
Please be patient, I work long and hard making sure these boys get there in the end.
There is a tendency to get annoyed when you meet over-noisy kids in the countryside but hopefully after reading your letter people will think twice before condemning their behaviour.
CANOEING CONVERT
I am the delighted winner of the Outdoor Action Splash competition and I'd just like to say that Andy Middleton and his colleagues gave us a great time on our week's holiday at the Twr-y-Felin outdoor centre.
I went canoeing, rock climbing and abseiling.
My friend and I were made very welcome at the centre — the staff, atmosphere and facilities were excellent, as was the food.
The holiday was one I have always dreamed about and I would highly recommend the centre to any outdoor enthusiast.
I was also very pleased with my Prijon T Slalom kayak and Schlegel Allround X-treme paddle.
Canoeing is new to me, so I am having canoe handling lessons at a local swimming pool and the local Bridgend Venture Scouts have very kindly offered to lend me a buoyancy aid, spray-deck and helmet until I can afford my own.
Glad to hear you had such a good time.
Remember us when you win the slalom Olympic gold.
BUY BRITISH
The economic and unemployment misery daily portrayed through the British media should make us all more aware that we must begin to look after our own.
I went to a well-known outdoor equipment and clothing firm in London yesterday to buy a daysack.
As I was looking through the products of many well-known ‘British’ firms, I was disgusted to find all were made in countries like China, South Korea and Taiwan — anywhere but Britain!
The argument that cheaper labour costs force manufacture abroad should not be acceptable to us as prospective purchasers.
I refused to buy any of these products, telling the vendor why.
I hope that others, who likewise enjoy the beauty of walking and other self-propelled activities around our lovely countryside, will take a similar stand and buy more British products.
Q
I intend — for the first time — to continue my regular backpacking weekends right through the winter.
I wonder therefore if you could tell me which kind of camping stove would perform best in winter conditions?
A
Look for a low slung stove with a wide base to give extra stability in windy conditions and on rough ground.
And use a windshield for more efficient burning.
Some stoves come with these ready fitted.
And if you're going to use your stove in chilly conditions, you'll need to pick a model which uses a fuel capable of coping with the cold.
Avoid stoves which use butane, which won't burn at temperatures below around 4°C.
If you want a gas stove — and they are very easy to operate — choose one which runs on a mix of butane and propane.
Meths stoves, like the popular Trangia, tend to work better in wind and can cope with cold, but you might find the meths a little difficult to light in extreme cold.
Petrol stoves burn hot and are generally fine in cold weather, though it may be necessary to pre-heat the burner on some models.
Fumes can be smelly and some people don't like the stoves sometimes flaring badly during lighting.
Enjoy your winter backpacking!
Q
I would like to have a go at some serious birdwatching, but I don't know where to start.
I can tell the difference between a sparrow and a swan and that's about it.
And where should I go to see something a bit more interesting than garden birds?
A
You need to do three things.
Buy both a good, clear pair of binoculars, a clearly illustrated field guide to British birds and join the RSPB.
The binoculars should be powerful enough for you to see what you want but not so bulky that you find them too heavy and awkward to hold for any length of time.
Choose a pair with a magnification of between 7 and 10 times and an objective diameter (which affects the brightness of the image) of between 30mm and 50mm.
In order to distinguish one small brown fluttering thing from another, you'll need to buy a decent field guide.
A particularly good one is The Complete Birdwatcher's Guide by John Gooders .
It's too big to take out with you but the drawings and descriptions of over 300 common British birds are great for teaching beginners what to look out for when trying to identify a new bird.
It also lists most of the significant UK birdwatching sites where you can see a host of species including seabirds, birds of prey and waterfowl.
When choosing one of the many pocket field guides around, make sure any illustrations actually look to you like the birds they're supposed to depict.
It sounds obvious but some drawings of birds are so odd you'd have difficulty identifying even a bluetit from them.
Listening to tapes of bird calls will help you identify unseen birds too and help direct you to the best place to stand and look for them.
Joining the RSPB is a must.
Not only are they one of the best campaigning organisations around, keeping the welfare of British birds well up on the conservation agenda, their quarterly magazine is full of interesting information on different species as well as tips on the best places to go.
And you'll get information on the RSPB reserves around the country — especially good places to start birdwatching.
Adult membership costs £18 per year.
GEAR GUIDE
TENTS
A decent tent can mean the difference between a good night's rest and a total washout so it's important to get the right one first time around.
Our comprehensive guide will help you choose
FLYSHEET
This is the outer layer of the tent designed to protect you from the elements, usually wind and rain, but it could also be from heat.
These shells were traditionally made of cotton, a durable and weatherproof fabric, but heavy by today's standards.
Cotton threads expand in the wet which means that the fly, although heavier, becomes more taut and more weatherproof.
Cotton also fights the deterioration caused by the sun better than modern alternatives.
Today's flysheets, especially on lightweight tents, tend to be most commonly nylon or polyester.
These will have a waterproof coating on one or both sides.
Both are lighter than cotton but neither are as durable, nor as watertight.
To improve the water resistant performance the flysheet seams can be sealed.
In quality tents the seams often come ready-taped, in budget models we recommend that you buy some seam sealant and do the job yourself.
Nylon does have an exasperating trait of expanding in the wet and cold, causing the fly to sag.
This means that you'll have to reposition your anchor points — cords attached to various parts of the fly to add stability in high winds — when the rain sets in, and especially if the wind comes up too.
Expedition models can have a snow valance on the fly — an extra skirt around the bottom which can be laid on the ground and anchored down by snow or rocks.
INNERS
These are usually made of cotton, polycotton or nylon.
Cotton is warmer and more durable but heavier.
Nylon inners are coated to repel any drips from the fly.
The shape of the inner depends on the design of the tent, but to all but lightweight buffs it can be the deciding factor of your purchase.
Sit inside the tent before buying to get a true idea of the available space.
GROUNDSHEETS
These are usually sewn into the tent and cover the bottom plus two or three inches up the sides of the tent.
Most groundsheets are made of nylon and are coated with either pvc or pu.
The strength, durability and weight of them depends on the weight of fabric used and how much coating has been applied.
Budget tents often have a woven polythene groundsheet.
This is very strong but is noisy, heavy and bulky.
PITCHING
Pitching can be fly first, inner first or, increasingly, inner and fly together.
Both fly first and inner first designs have advantages.
Tents with a self-supporting inner can be used in hot weather without the fly.
Wetter climates favour tents that go up fly first so that the inner and your gear can be protected as quickly as possible.
Pitching inner and fly together can be a time saver, but obviously the inner must be detached from the fly if you need to split the weight for backpacking.
One advantage of the fly and inner going up together is that the inner is kept at a set distance from the fly, preventing the two from touching and allowing moisture to leak through to the inside.
PORCHES
A covered area under the fly but not part of the inner — pretty essential in wet weather for storing gear and for use as a cooking area.
But take great care lighting stoves — tents are highly flammable.
Never cook inside the inner.
Porches, also known as bellends, can be found anywhere on the tent, depending on the design.
Larger tents often have two, one for storage/cooking and one for access.
All entrances close using zips — look for the better quality self-repairing coil zips.
To make the zips last longer make sure there's no strain on the bottom by pegging the anchor points of the flysheet at the bottom of the zip diagonally across each other— some tents have hooks or Velcro to secure them.
Four season tents and mountain tents should have two way zips so that you can still get out when the bottom of the fly is covered in snow, and they may have storm flaps to help keep the weather out.
POLES
Basically there's a choice of two materials — aluminium alloy or fibreglass.
Alloy is lighter, stronger and more expensive than fibreglass, which tends to be used in budget tents.
Most poles are flexible with several short sections shock-corded together for quick assembly.
On cheaper tents they may not be shock-corded.
Some ridge tent poles are springs to ‘snap’ pole sections together.
Repair kits, if not supplied with the tent, are cheap and a wise investment.
If a pole is beyond repair most manufacturers can supply replacement poles or lengths of pole you cut to fit.
MOSQUITO NETTING
Check the fineness of the mesh depending on where you're going — British mossies are small.
Mesh also allows for good ventilation, keeping condensation problems down.
Some models have mesh at both ends for just this purpose.
For doors with both full nylon and full mesh panels, make sure the mesh is on the outside so that you can open the weatherproof door without letting any of the baddies in.
PEGS
Most tents come with a combination of straight pegs for hard ground and angled or V-shaped pegs for softer soil.
The majority are made of aluminium alloy which is lightweight but can bend.
GEODESIC OR DOME TENTS
A true geodesic has a criss-cross of poles which gives greater stability in high winds
Internal shape is high and wide, ideal for long spells inside the tent
Pole arrangement allows for a wider variety of different and interesting shapes
Tent is free standing, good for selecting the ideal pitch once erected
Smaller versions are ideal mountain tents
Design easily accommodates more than one entrance, especially important in larger tents
Alternatives Basic dome — the three pole dome has three poles that cross at a central point.
This allows good use of space, but high winds compress the sides.
Smaller versions are more robust.
The two pole dome originated on the continent but is best used in protected valley pitches.
You can also buy really tough but  heavy steel pegs which you can hammer into very hard ground with a rock.
Always carry spare pegs.
TROUBLE SHOOTING
Condensation Sorry, but no matter what, nylon tents will develop condensation.
You can ease the problem though — ensure that the fly and inner are not touching anywhere, then try repositioning the fly so that there is space for good air flow between the bottom of the fly and the ground.
Increase ventilation by lowering two way zips from the top.
Leave the inner tent door open a fraction, even if you don't have mesh.
And pitch in a well ventilated spot.
General care
Pitch away from trees — sap ruins flysheets.
Don't leave your tent pitched all day for a prolonged period — this will degrade the flysheet.
Keep the tent clean and always pack it away totally dry, storing it in a well aired place.
If stored damp mildew will form.
Mildew is destructive to cotton whereas nylon looks stained and smells a bit but the fabric remains intact.
To get rid of mildew wash your tent in warm water and dry it thoroughly using a proofer with a mildew inhibiter.
This treats the tent and prevents mould growing back.
Nylon is made waterproof during the weaving process using a high temperature/oven baking method which cannot be repeated on a made up tent.
A coating is often then placed on the outside for additional protection.
When the main waterproofing coating starts to wear away — very quickly or after many years depending on use and care, you can try to reproof it.
This can be done in the bath or the garden, but it's often better to send your tent to the experts.
This is not expensive — around £20 for a two person lightweight model — and manufacturers should be able to put you in touch with repairers in your area.
Reproofing is only a temporary measure.
If the nylon itself breaks down the tent is irreparable.
Actinic Degradation This is the breakdown of (mostly synthetic) flysheets through prolonged exposure to the sun, but no-one really knows why it affects some tents and not others of the same make and model.
The result is a fragile, almost paper-like fabric.
Reduce the risk with the following precautions:
Take the tent down during the day to minimise ultra-violet exposure from the sun.
Pitch in a well ventilated area.
Do not pitch close to objects that will reflect the sun's rays onto the tent, such as white caravans.
Beware of prolonged high altitude camping.
Running repairs Carry a repair kit including a groundsheet and flysheet fabric, self-adhesive tape, glue, a spare pole section, spare apex, pegs etc.
TUNNEL AND HOOP TENTS
Wind will compress the sides if pitched badly or wind direction changes
Excellent use of internal space
Pitched tail into the wind they offer good stability as long as the side walls are not too high
Not all poles are equal length
Certain shapes are more  aerodynamic than others and the small versions make good mountain tents
All tunnels need good use of guylines to improve stability unless they have an internal bracing system
Alternatives Variations have four, three, two or single hoops.
Single hoop tents need to be pitched with the pole pointing into the wind and have the flexibility for more than one entrance and porch
More and more tents are coming onto the market which do not necessarily conform to these definitions but they will rely predominantly on one system for their stability.
Ask the sales assistant to outline the features of any tent before you buy.
RIDGE TENTS Ridge pole for added strength (optional).
Lightweight buffs usually do without
Extension of fly for larger porch area
Ideal water and snow shedding shape, sturdy design
Inner space limited by angle of the sides.
A transverse ridge counters this by having the length of the ridge run across the sleeping area.
Poles — originally upright poles which restricted access, not A shaped for ease of entry.
Budget models may have upright only.
Pitch tail end into the wind, keeping entrance protected from the weather.
Design will stand wind direction changes well
Majority tend to be budget models
Alternatives Transverse ridge — greater inner space.
Sloping ridge — usually lightweight variation of the standard.
Lower tail end eliminates space at feet, pitches into the wind to improve stability
OUT & ABOUT
Every month we feature a fascinating walk in fourteen areas of the country.
Walks compiled by Catherine Moore
1
A long walk through the remote area of Assynt
2
Through the Inverliever Forest to Loch Avich
3
Climbing Arran's highest mountain Goatfell
4
Stroan Bridge Walk near Loch Trool
5
Around the common land of Cockfield Fell
6
The Maguire Trail through Northern Ireland's lakeland
7
The Sandstone Trail along the central Cheshire ridge
8
A walk into railway history on the Marriot's Way
9
Exploring the Aylesbury Arm of the Grand Union Canal
10
Tor y Foel and the reservoir in the Talybont Valley
11
The Greensand Way long distance trail
12
A journey through the moors around Langport
13
Dunkery Beacon: the highest point on Exmoor
14
The coast past from Swanage to St Adhelm's Head
ASSYNT WALK
Assynt is one of the loveliest and loneliest parts of the Scottish Highlands and this walk takes you through its heart.
From Elphin, go towards Ledmore Junction on the A835.
About halfway, just east of the bridge over the Na Luirgean, a track goes north-west to Cam Loch.
Follow it for around two miles on the loch shore then turn right to gain a ridge.
Make your way to the north-west end of Lochan Fada where the track to Lochinver — the first overnight stop — become more obvious.
Continue on, passing along the shore of Lochan na Gainmh.
From Lochinver, go on to Little Assynt.
There are several possible routes to choose — try retracing your steps as far as Suileag.
Take the left fork there and go north by Loch Crom and Loch an Leothaid to the bridge over Assynt Water to Little Assynt.
Make your way to the southern side of Loch Assynt and follow the shore as long as you can and then take the easiest line of travel staying parallel to the loch.
At An Coimhleun Forest, the way is blocked by cliffs.
Follow a wide gully south to the River Loanon.
Follow the south shore, crossing the river where it is shallow enough.
Make your way to the Inchnadamph Hotel on the A837.
From Inchnadamph you take the A837 for 6.5 miles to Tunmore (a single house).
Go over a fence to the left of the house to a burn at the back.
Cross it to the track going north-east up Creag na h-lolaire to a pass.
Go north-west down the Gleann Leireag.
Go by Loch an Leothaid and along the north shore of Loch Uidh na h-larna.
Walk to the B869 and Drumbeg.
LOCH AVICH
The Inverliever Forest runs along the northern shore of Loch Awe, just south of Oban.
Wildlife is varied here — species include red, roe and sika deer as well as foxes, badgers, otters and wildcats.
There are lots of different walking and cycling routes to choose from.
This one starts from the Barnaline Car Park which is on the road running through the forest, just north of Dalavich.
It's a walk that's notorious for being wet.
From the car park, follow the forest road south-west towards the Dalavich Oakwood, which has been designated a Forest Nature Reserve because of its varied plant community.
This walk doesn't actually explore the reserve, but there are trails around it if you want to make a detour.
Past the reserve look out for a viewpoint over Loch Avich.
Half a mile past this the path branches off to the right, and goes through plantations to a large open glade known as the dry loch.
Eventually you will reach an area where you can see abandoned ruins of crofters' huts.
The path eventually emerges at an old fishing hut on the shore of Loch Avich.
From here it turns right to follow the shore until it reaches the mouth of the River Avich.
From here the path follows the river bank downstream and then heads back into the forest and away from the river before crossing a burn.
An old track lead back through the woodlands to the forest road and your starting point at the car park.
Make the time to walk by the lovely nearby Avich Falls if you can.
GOATFELL MOUNTAIN
Arran is just 19 miles long and ten miles wide, but within its boundaries there's some fantastic walking.
Goatfell is the best-known peak on the island.
It's also the highest, at 2,866ft, making it a Corbett — one of the list of Scottish Mountains rising to over 2,500ft.
There are many paths leading to the summit of Goatfell.
This one starts from the car park near the Clacach sawmill, near Brodick Castle.
The trail is easy to follow, though it is a typical Scottish mountain walk and as such should be treated with respect — proper footwear and clothing are essential.
The first part of the trail goes through the Brodick Castle Country Park.
It then rises steadily through a mixture of woodland and open ground before emerging on the flanks of the mountain itself.
For a longer, wilder and more challenging route you can explore the beautiful ridges around Goatfell leading to peaks like Cioch na h-Oighe, Cir Mhor and A'Chir.
The ridge walks are said to be second only to those of the Cuillin in Skye in terms of drama and scenery.
Some exposed scrambling is involved in these routes.
STROAN BRIDGE WALK
The Galloway Forest Park covers around 76,000 hectares of forest moorland and lochs.
With all this, as you'd imagine there are endless walking possibilities.
Good starting points are the many waymarked trails laid out by the Forestry Commission.
Of course these can be adapted to suit the individual.
This walk starts from Stroan Bridge — where the road from Glentrool Village to Loch Trool crosses the Water of Minnoch.
It's marked with white waymarks.
From the car park it goes east for around a mile and a half before going south-west to the Water of Trool.
It carries on south-west by the water to cross by a bridge over toward Minniwick Moss.
It then works its way around Minniwick Moss, back to base.
It's easy to extend the walk by, instead of cutting down to go south-west  of the Water of Trool, heading east to the western end of Loch Trool.
You can then follow the Southern Upland Way back along the south bank of the Water of Trool and walk on to Minniwick Moss.
COCKFIELD FELL
Cockfield Fell managed to escape the 18th Century Enclosure Acts and remains a valuable area of common land.
From St Mary's church in Cockfield, head for Fell Houses.
Beyond Fell Houses follow the old tramway.
Half a mile along the line, where the power cables cross the track, turn sharp right onto a tramway towards the river.
Once there, turn left to the sewage works.
Keep following the track past the Slack and Haggerleases Station.
Beyond the track, head uphill on the track to Cockfield.
After around a quarter of a mile, look back to see the outline of a Romano-British settlement.
Then follow the line of telegraph poles to the remains of an old railway bridge.
Turn right in Cockfield for part two of this figure of eight walk.
Go west, crossing the site of Holy Moor and Wigglesworth Collieries to reach Peathrow Farm.
Go over the bridge to Shotton Moor.
Follow the road for a third of a mile to the first stile on the left.
The path is waymarked and joins the road to Cockfield around Hollymoor Farm.
Turn left into Bleak Terrace and go back onto the Fell through the wicket gate to the village boundary wall.
Keep to the path with the wall on the right to return to St Mary's church.
THE MAGUIRE TRAIL
This walk passes through the lovely lakelands of Fermanagh and forms part of the 560-mile waymarked Ulster Way.
It's named after the Maguires, a powerful clan who rules in Fermanagh from the 12th to the 17th century.
From the village of Derrylin — about twelve miles from Eniskellen on the Belturbet Road — you follow the Ulster Way eastwards.
After about one and a quarter miles you detour east to Dresternan Castle, a small Georgian country house.
As the trail approaches the shore of Lough Erne on the main road it crosses the narrow channel of water between Trasna Island and the mainland and travels along the north shore of the island.
You cross over to the mainland again on the Lady Craigavon Bridge and follow the lough shore to Corradillar quay.
You join the main road at Shanaghy.
The trail goes onto the Derryadd Road and follows a quiet country road for around four miles with lakes on the right.
From Drumlone Cross, the trail goes on to join the main Lisnaskea-Newtonbutler Road.
Crossing the road it follows a path across country to a small road leading to Ballagh Cross and goes on to  Armagh Manor.
From here the trail enters forest land taking paths leading to many lovely reed-fringed lakes — Lough Corry, Lough Esheleagh and Carnmore Lough.
The trail continues to another section of forest at Mullaghfad, leading out of the forest onto a road and ends nearby at the Glenoo Bridge over the Colebrooke River on the boundary between Co Fermanagh and Co Tyrone.
THE SANDSTONE TRAIL
The central Cheshire ridge is a range of sandstone hills running the length of the county.
This walk follows these hills for 30 miles from north to south.
Look out for the waymarks — a black footprint with an S on it.
The trail starts at Beacon Hill in Frodsham from where it makes its way south to Dunsdale Hollow and follows a cliff edge and wooded slopes to reach Woodhouse Hill Fort — an iron age encampment.
The trail goes on along the side of Snidley Moor, on around the base of Alvanley Cliff and by Simmonds Hill, Manley.
You pass on to Manley Common and travel through the Delamere Forest to reach Nettleford Wood.
The route continues south, passing by one of the trail car parks at Gresty's Waste and goes through Primrose Hill wood and past Willington Wood to reach Wood Lane.
Continuing south you reach Oxpasture Wood, Fishers Green and the River Gowy.
From the river the trail goes to Beeston Crag, to the west of Peckforton Castle and eventually joins the road above Higher Burwardsley.
You walk on to climb the slopes of Bulkeley Hill from where you head for the village of Bickerton and on the heathland of Bickerton Hill.
The trail continues on to Larkton Hill and Larkton Hall and to the hamlet of Hampton Green.
The last section of the trail takes you from Bickleywood, on past Barhill Farm and across country to reach the Shropshire Union Canal.
You follow the towpath to the trail end at Grindley Brook locks.
MARRIOT'S WAY
Marriot's Way originally consisted of two lengths of railway.
One ran from Themelthorpe to  Aylesham , the other from Themelthorpe to Norwich.
The railway now gone, the trail is open to walkers as well as horse riders and cyclists.
The path starts at Hellesdon north-west of Norwich and makes its way towards Drayton, Attlebridge, Lenwade and Blackwater to arrive at Thelmthorpe.
From here it goes east to pass to the north of Cawston before arriving in Aylesham.
At Aylesham the Way links up with the Bure Valley Walk which runs for nine miles to Hoveton.
(At Hellesdon the Way carries on from the five-mile Norwich Riverside Walk).
The Way is named after William Marriot, chief railway engineer with the Midland and Great Northern Railway Company which once operated one of the now defunct lines.
Through its length the route is waymarked in the brown and cream livery colours of the Midland and Great Northern Railway Company.
There is a short diversion from the main route between Attlebridge and Lenwade at present.
The Thelmthorpe Link Path enables walkers to shorten the walk.
GRAND UNION CANAL: AYLESBURY
This walk follows the line of the Aylesbury Arm of the Grand Union Canal.
The walk starts from the canal basin in Aylesbury — easily accessible, it's just a short walk from the railway station, the bus station and several car parks.
You reach it via Walton Street.
The walk is easy enough to follow — it simply goes along the canal towpath on the south side of the canal until it reaches Marsworth.
The canal rises a total of 94ft 8ins along this section and you will  pass 16 locks as you walk.
You can see many different bird species on the canal.
Keep an eye out for large swans, herons and ducks, moorhens and kingfishers.
Reed buntings and sedge warblers nest in the reed beds at the water's edge, while the yellowhammer is a common sight in the hedgerows.
And redwings and fieldfares migrate to the area to avoid the harsh winters in Russia and Scandinavia.
For variety and to make a longer walk you can try the three circular walks which leave the towpath at various points.
At bridge 14 you can join the Bierton Circular Walk which goes around the village of Bierton.
Alternatively you can leave the canal, crossing bridge 13 and follow a bridleway on old drove roads to rejoin the canal at bridge 8.
Just before Marsworth a four mile circular walk leaves the canal at Watery Lane, follows a short section of the Grand Union Canal proper going north before returning across the fields to the car park at Startop's End Reservoir.
TOR Y FOEL
This walk takes you through the Talybont Valley to the summit of Tor y Foel.
It starts from the dam at the northern end of the Talybont reservoir.
To get there park at the Glyn Collwn car park, just south of Aber Village (south of the B4558 near Talybont-on-Usk).
Go down the gated drive between the car park and the road — walkers are allowed to — down to the Vilter House.
In front of it, follow the waymark arrows across a footbridge and go left.
Follow a track and turn right up another drive to the eastern side of the dam.
Follow the tarred road, then the track, along the eastern side o f the reservoir.
Continue until the path emerges from the forest at a wooden gate and reaches a horizontal track — the line of the tramroad.
Continue across this up the track to the surfaced road at Pen Rhiw-calch.
Turn sharply left along the road (with the Caerfanell valley on your left).
At the farm entrance gate marked Bwlch-y-waun follow the path leading off up the open hill to the summit of Tor y Foel (1,806ft).
From here, head for the end of the plantation and when you reach the road, go through the gate opposite.
Follow the path down to the tramroad at the two gates.
Cross over the stile on the left and follow the path down, over the stream and down a slope.
Bear right towards a gate.
This leads onto the railway line.
Bear left to return to the dam.
THE GREENSAND WAY
The Greensand Way stretches for around 100 miles through Kent and Surrey.
Here we concentrate on the 55 miles which pass through Kent.
Limpsfeld Chart , though in Surrey, is a good place to start the Kent walk.
The Way goes over Crockhamhill Common and to Toys Hill — at 804ft the highest point of the Kent section of the Way.
The Way continues to Ide Hill village.
The next section takes you from Brockhoult Mount to Cinderfield Wood.
You then pass through Shipbourne and south of Dunk's Green to reach West Peckham.
After going on to Nettlestead Green you cross the River Medway and River Beult to arrive in Yalding.
From here you continue to Linton and then Sutton Valence.
The villagers of Egerton, Pluckley and Little Chart mark the next section of the route.
Soon you pass through Hothfield Common, a National Nature Reserve.
You skirt Godinton Park to go on to Great Chart.
You reach your final destination of Hamstreet via Chilmington Quarry and the village of Kingsnorth.
The Way is waymarked, though a booklet giving a detailed route description is available from:
THE MOORS AROUND LANGPORT
This walk takes you through the water meadows and along the towpaths of the Somerset moors.
From the Cocklemoor River car park in Langport cross the footbridge and walk left along the north side of the River Parrett to Huish Bridge.
Turn right over the bridge and where you see a sign on the left for Muchelney and Drayton go through the gate.
Bear diagonally right across the field to the metal gate.
Enter an enclosed lane, turn left and go through the gate, turning immediately right to the metal gate/rails.
Walk up the field crossing the rhyne (ditch).
Aim for the old railway line and cross it.
Go through a white gate, go left and walk diagonally across the field, through a gate in the hedge opposite into a large field.
Bear left and go diagonally across the field to the far corner.
Cross the rails and go diagonally right to the gate.
Walk to the stile on the right.
Bear left, across the field to a gate in the opposite left hand corner by a copse.
Go through a gate into an enclosed section.
Go out onto the road.
Turn right and go through the village of Drayton.
Turn left after the Crown pub onto this straight road of around half a mile which then turns into a no through road to Midelney and Midelney Manor.
After a mile, at the bridge over the River Isle, cross the stile next to the gate on the left and follow the track by the river to the old Midelney Locks.
Here the River Isle joins the River Parrett.
Keep to the west bank of the Parrett and follow the towpath to Westover Bridge.
Cross the bridge and go through the gate on the right.
Follow the western tow path to Huish Bridge and retrace your steps to the car park.
DUNKERY BEACON
A walk to Dunkery Beacon, the highest point on Exmoor at 1,704ft.
Start from the Estate Lodge at Selworthy .
Walk ahead on road, past first road junction on left, to chapel crossroads.
Turn right on road to gate on the left 50 yards ahead.
Go through it to a track on the edge of the wood which then forks left up away from the edge of the wood to a clearing and then on to a second gate.
Walk west to woods.
At first junction go ahead towards the edge of the wood.
At the next junction take the left path signed Webbers Post.
Continue on rising path to road junction at Webbers Post.
Take the right fork to a clearing on the right of the road and take track on the left.
Before reaching the top of the road, take the track right through woods to a track crossroads .
Go left, then at path junction turn right towards the summit of Dunkery Beacon.
Take a path south for the last 100yds to the summit cairn.
Take the ridge path west to Great Row Barrow.
Turn right to Langcombe Head.
Cross the road and take path going north-north-east which then bears left to Stoke Ridge and goes down to the bend in the road at Stoke Pero .
Follow road north to a bridge at the stream.
Turn right beside the stream to junction with main river.
Turn right to Horner village.
Carry on north for 700yds to a gate in the hedge on the right.
Go through gate and cross field, bearing right to a stile.
Carry on through a strip of woodland and over a second stile.
Go east along field edge and down to stile.
Cross two fields to road, cross and follow sign ‘Holincote’.
Cross field going north-east then bear left around the edge of the next field and make your way back to Selworthy.
COAST PATH TO ST ADHELM'S HEAD
You get the best of both worlds on this walk — the lovely Dorset coast path and a cross country route.
Start by picking up the coast path by the sea in Swanage.
Head west on it to Dancing Ledge — a disused cliff quarry.
Carry on to Seacombe Cliff and turn up Seacombe Bottom until you see a stone marker on the left .
Go up the steps to the cliff top, turn left and continue on coast path to Winspit and St Adhelm's Head.
Visit the 12th century Norman chapel here.
From the chapel follow the rough road east, then north.
After about a mile turn east and then north to Weston Farm .
Turn right at the road and go into Worth Maltravers.
Leave the village along the road going north.
Take the right fork at the Square and Compass and after the stone houses cross the stile on the right.
Continue on to Eastington Farm and follow the Priest's Way east to South Barn and go just past farm buildings .
Turn left and double back behind buildings going north to the path junction .
Turn right to Belle View Farm.
Go through the gate, turn left past the stone houses and go through the iron gate.
Make your way through Swanage back to your starting point.
OUTDOOR PEOPLE
MOUNTAIN BIKE access director
As Access Director of the British Mountain Bike Federation, Colin Palmer is fighting for a fair deal for off-road cyclists
‘I first got interested in the issue of access for off-road cyclists after two years' National Series racing.
I was appalled by the race organisers' lack of knowledge about land use and saw a real need to get involved.
Most of my work involves liaising with local access officers, but I also have frequent meetings with countryside organisations like the Forest Enterprise, National Trust, Country Landowners Association, National Farmers' Union, Council for National Parks and local authorities.
I am regularly impressed by the co-operation of landowners who are generally aware of their responsibilities and don't behave aggressively.
As well as recognising the fact that we need to get on with landowners, we realise that a strong relationship with local authorities is critical.
Without their goodwill you're on a hiding to nothing.
It's important for myself and other access officers to meet regularly with council officers to ensure cycling isn't forgotten.
Some officers seem to be unaware that in terms of the number of people who do it, cycling's second only to walking.
It's obviously disappointing that the rights of way network is in such a state.
Funding is crucial but there is an organisational problem — despite the fact that there's a huge amount of latent goodwill in the community, few councils have mobilised this in a co-ordinated way so that the rights of way network  can be brought into line.
I also liaise with land users organisations such as the Ramblers' Association, British Horse Society and Cyclists' Touring Club.
As a result of these liaisons the rest of my job involves problem solving and development of initiatives.
I encourage cyclists to respect the fact that on all legal access routes there's a need to give way to walkers — but I'll be the first to admit that this doesn't happen all the time.
More and more people from urban areas are using off-road cycles out of towns so a tolerance towards them is also necessary.
There needs to be a long term education of cyclists and I sincerely apologise to those walkers who have had any bad experiences.
At the moment I am involved in setting up a mountain bike orienteering scheme or ‘Trail Quest’.
The name Trail Quest is supposed to make it clear to cyclists that they shouldn't stray away from legal routes.
I'm looking to develop a National Series for Trail Quest competitions by 1993.
It'll be a very useful tool in teaching mountain bikers where they can and can't go.
In some regions the concept of zoning — designating areas exclusively to one type of user — has been tried to solve problems about who can go where.
But it has only been half successful because everyone wants to be able to go everywhere.
There are no reasons why all groups can't mix, except where the sheer numbers of users are dangerous.
This was the case in Snowdonia where the Llanberis Path descent from the top of Snowdon is very quick.
We suggested time limits to be introduced for cycle use on the route.
Cyclists are now asked not to use the route from 10am to 5pm and the response has been excellent.
I was recently filming there with the BBC's Country File and we spoke to some local farmers who said there were often queues of cyclists waiting at the start of the route for 5pm to come.
The Pennine Bridleway from Hexham to Matlock is another very important development.
Cyclists and horse riders are keen to progress with the scheme but there has been some opposition from one particular village.
We are campaigning through magazines asking people to write to their MPs about off-road cycling facilities and one way they could show their support, or give a sign of their intent, would be to push through the Pennine Bridleway.
The Forest Enterprise are well ahead of the game as far as provision for off-road facilities is concerned.
Their policy to encourage cycling, not the macho sort but for families, is very progressive.
They are waymarking routes which are well graded and not too difficult — an increase in facilities will take people off the roads which can't be a bad thing.
My own personal favourite mountain biking route is a permissive route which I'm authorised to use but I wouldn't like to advertise it.
I enjoy mid-Wales where the riding is good, although unfortunately the rights of way network is poor.
Once a month I go out for a serious session — the last of which was a hard circuit of Radnor Forest, but I enjoyed it tremendously.’
SUBSCRIPTION OFFER
FREE BOOK
Subscribe now to get your free copy of John Cleare's Trekking — Great Walks of the World worth £14.95
Every copy signed by the author!
This book will whisk you away to some of the wildest and most beautiful trekking areas in the world: from the Annapurna Circuit in Nepal to the Mountains of the Moon in Uganda; from the Royal Road of the Incas in Peru to New Zealand's Routeburn Track; and from stormswept Patagonia to Vancouver Island.
The 13 treks outlined in Trekking — Great Walks of the World are all written by experienced travel writers who give engaging accounts of their various adventures along with a real insight to the areas they visit.
Many of the writers are also professional photographers and this certainly shows — the book is crammed full of sumptuous colour pictures.
Maps and illustrations also help to bring it alive.
Armchair travellers will be  riveted to their seats while the more adventurous will get itchy feet.
For those wanting to satisfy that itch there is an extensive factual section with each trek giving lots of useful practical information.
We are giving every new subscriber to Outdoor Action a free copy of this invaluable book, each one personally signed by the author.
So here's a way to guarantee a brilliant read both now and every month — take out a new subscription to Outdoor Action and we'll send you your free copy of this top quality book, plus the next 12 issues of Britain's Brightest Outdoor Magazine, straight to your door.
But don't delay — this offer is only open while stocks last.
If you don't want to cut your mag, a photocopy will be fine.