

The Fragments
Big Flame
According to the legend, the story of News on Sunday began in 1978 with twenty-four-year-old Ben Lowe gazing moodily out of the aircraft window on a flight back from Canada to England.
He was not looking forward to his return.
His last two years had been spent taking a master's degree in political science at Queen's University, Kingston.
Now time had run out and he was about to be plunged back into the horrible reality of his own miserable country, and particularly its miserable politics.
Sighing, he leafed through the English newspapers, the first he had really looked at for months.
The usual filth.
Biased rubbish, distortions, Tory propaganda, consumer pap, trivia, silly stories — they hadn't changed.
If anything, they'd got worse.
How could people buy this stuff?
No wonder they were getting a raw deal.
As he sipped his drink his mood grew darker.
Something should be done about it.
People should be given a chance to read a proper newspaper — one that was decent, honourable and humane.
One that reflected his belief in full-blooded socialism, a belief he was sure so many of them shared.
It was their right.
His thoughts drifted to his own future, which at that time was uncertain.
What was he going to do when he was back?
Put up with it all like everybody else, he supposed glumly.
Moan about it and do nothing like all of them.
Then, floating at 30,000 feet above the icebergs of the North Atlantic, he was struck by the Great Idea.
He, Ben Lowe, would start the newspaper of the new dawn, the paper that would restore faith in the discredited medium, the paper that would be not just a paper, but far more.
Dare he think it — the paper that would be the basis for a new political movement that would sweep the country.
The paper for the people.
If you ask Ben Lowe if this account of events is true, he smiles self-deprecatingly and says shyly: ‘Not quite.’
But then Ben Lowe is not the stuff of which legends are made.
And he is quite adamant about one thing — the paper was his idea, whatever anybody else involved with News on Sunday may claim.
Lowe had not gone to Canada for just academic reasons.
Part of his decision to study abroad had been a personal protest against the ditching of full-blooded socialism by Harold Wilson's Labour government.
Like all left-wingers, Lowe loathed Wilson, who had been elected in 1974 on the back of the wave of industrial militancy which culminated in the miners' strike of that year.
But instead of getting on with the revolution, which Lowe believed was Wilson's historic duty, Harold had immediately ‘sold out’ to the capitalists by adopting right-wing policies approved by NATO and the International Monetary Fund.
By the time Lowe settled down back in London, Wilson had bowed out and handed the mantle of Leader of the Labour Party and Guardian of British Socialism to James Callaghan, the right-wing Labour MP for Cardiff.
Lowe watched, his lip curling, as avuncular ‘Farmer Jim’ took Wilson's mastery of the new political art of the television interview to fresh heights of reassuring vacuousness.
Lowe blamed the newspapers and television for transforming the storm clouds of revolution he had sensed as an undergraduate at Sussex University into this thin drizzle of social democracy.
The media were going to enormous lengths to lure ‘the people’ away from their revolutionary destiny into the gaudy sideshows of consumerism.
But his contact with the ‘real people’ had, to be honest, been limited.
He was a baby-faced product of the concerned middle classes, born in Derby and whisked off to the Home Counties at an early age.
He was very bright, and sailed through the Royal Grammar School at High Wycombe to Sussex University, where he arrived in 1972 to read Languages.
Although interested in politics, Lowe had little in common with the industrial militants who dominated the political stage in the early 1970s.
His style was that of the laid-back, softly spoken, pro-feminist new man, a long way from the aggressive, blustering, male chauvinist approach of most trade-union militants.
Their vision rarely seemed to extend beyond the size of their pay packets or of the tits in the vile papers they read.
Lowe still believed ‘the workers’, with their  industrial muscle, were the key to the British revolution.
But he was sniffily dismayed at their delight in consumerism and sheep-like attitude to the reactionary rubbish in the papers.
He was proud that he, and others like him, had not fallen for the con-trick.
Lowe's interests extended to a wide range of issues — sexual politics, the environment, nuclear disarmament, anti-racism — all of which had emerged from the 1960s hippy and student-based protest movements.
Although his conservative clothing and mild manners didn't show it, he was becoming a ‘Right-On’, and he would support anything on the new agenda.
This gave him an endless shopping list of radical causes which had no apparent connection, but were bound together by the radical-chic lifestyle of their supporters.
His quiet rage about the papers, and the idiots who paid good money for them, grew more intense as he began to grind away in a job as a research assistant at the Financial Times .
He read the whole range of papers on most days, and was appalled by their cynical and gleeful exploitation of Callaghan's faltering stand against what was labelled ‘mindless militancy’ at Labour's grass roots.
The coverage seemed to be for the exclusive benefit of the Tory Party.
If causes dear to his heart, such as feminism, even figured at all in the mass-circulation papers, it was to serve as the butt for an endless stream of cheap jokes.
The only paper which stood out against the tide was the Communist Party's Morning Star .
But its only function seemed to be promoting the image of its Soviet paymasters and flattering its dwindling readership of old age pensioners and trade-union officials.
For once Right-On people like Lowe were in total agreement with the rest of the population — the Morning Star was a write-off, its credibility rating below zero.
Then there were the dozens of papers produced by the various Trotskyite sects, the largest of which, in circulation terms, were Socialist Worker and Socialist Challenge .
If there was a strike or industrial dispute Socialist Worker and Socialist Challenge sellers would rush to the gates to lecture workers on how they would lose their ‘struggle’ if they stopped short of Permanent World Revolution.
Their newspapers existed solely to point this out, and were designed to lead readers to the inescapable conclusion that what was needed was a new political party, free from the sell-outs of the Labour Party and the trade-union leaders.
To do this, unfortunately, meant filling the pages of their papers with the depressing and unfathomable minutiae of far-left politics.
On the other hand, some of these papers had real flair.
Socialist Worker , edited by Paul Foot, was a passable imitation of the Daily Mirror , and the International Marxist Group's Socialist Challenge was edited by the imaginative and talented former student revolutionary leader Tariq Ali, who was 100 per cent Right-On.
Their individual circulations were tiny.
But, Lowe wondered, what if they pooled their resources and produced a paper jointly?
If they abandoned factory-gate sales for proper commercial distribution through newsagents, the combined circulations might add up to something worthwhile.
Lowe, who loves playing with figures, did some research and estimated sales could reach as many as 400,000 — more than the FT where he worked, and a respectable figure at the quality end of Fleet Street.
The trouble was that there was no chance of getting the sects to co-operate.
Their hatred for each other was even greater than for the capitalist enemy, and they were constantly locked in internecine warfare in which they accused each other.of a battery of heinous crimes.
The charge sheet varied.
It could be ‘neo-Stalinism’(refusing to say Russia was a capitalist country); ‘Pabloite revisionism’(deciding to join the Labour Party secretly); ‘tailism’(waiting for trade unions to organize strikes rather than getting on with it yourself); ‘liquidationism’(dissolving the sect into a larger movement, hoping that its ideas will catch on); ‘parliamentary cretinism’(advising people to vote Labour); ‘stageism’(not demanding everything at once); or even ‘centreism’(expressing a liking for Tony Benn).
Lowe knew the sects and the papers they churned out were going nowhere.
They were stuck in the ghetto.
Now, as he started making notes to put the Great Idea into more concrete form, he proposed a paper that would be only ‘quasi-revolutionary’ and therefore have a wider appeal, and ‘non-sectarian’, so it  would not be in hock to one particular sect or group.
Lowe had the seed of a good idea, and there was some encouragement.
A new approach was being mooted in the heaving undergrowth of ultra-left literature.
People were tiring of old-style ‘workerist’ ultra-left politics and standing at factory gates being laughed at by the very workers they were supposed to be leading to the new Jerusalem.
Attention was switching to continental groups such as the Italian ‘autonomists’, who rejected the fruitless and mind-numbing discipline and line-toeing demanded by the other builders of the New Revolution.
Right-Ons like everything about Italy, where even the Fascists are nattily dressed.
The autonomists proposed networks of similarly minded Right-On people, separately involved in all manner of ‘struggles’.
They had a revolutionary theory that the combined effect of all these ‘struggles’ would be to needle and irritate the capitalist system until it finally collapsed in an exhausted heap and died.
Various papers and magazines were beginning to thrive in this new atmosphere.
Spare Rib was already well established, and was joined for a period by the Leveller , another collective magazine, and the East End News , which produced the first attempt to appeal to ‘the masses’ of East London by dressing up Right-On concerns in chirpy Chas'n'Dave-style modernized Cockney.
And the new Italian thinking was beginning to affect the sects themselves.
To any outsiders curious enough to look — and there weren't many — the Liverpool-centred party-cum-discussion group Big Flame seemed identical to any other of the tiny Trotskyite grouplets.
But although it had the standard minute membership and tatty newspaper hawked erratically round student unions, shopping precincts and Tube stations, Big Flame was different.
It had absorbed the autonomist Right-On thinking and described itself not as a political party as such, but as ‘The Revolutionary Socialist Organization’.
Big Flame was based on the Italian revolutionary group  Lutte  Continua (the struggle goes on), which sought to combine the autonomist belief in a loose network of Right-On groups with a separate political party which would guide them all.
It was a neat idea, and one which placed it half way between the rigid  discipline of the Trotskyites and the hopeless chaos of the Anarchists (or Libertarians, as they preferred to call themselves) on the ultra-left spectrum.
And Big Flame had a reputation for humanity compared with other ultra-left sects with their habit of expelling people en masse in a hail of jargon-ridden abuse, and demanding Moonie-type self-criticism from slackers who failed to meet newspaper sales quotas.
To join you had to say you believed in all the usual stuff about the Working Class leading the Revolution, but a general interest in being nice to people was all that was really required.
It was a sort of revolutionary version of the Lions Club.
The nearest equivalent at the time was Peter Hain's Young Liberals.
People who knocked  about the revolutionary left at the time still remember Big Flame fondly as a fundamentally nice organization.
It started life in Liverpool in 1971 and took its name from a television drama-documentary on the declining port's dockers, who were constantly being ‘sold out’ by the local trade-union branches.
The aim was to attract intelligent revolutionaries disgusted by the ramshackle right-wing local Labour Party and the once influential Communist Party.
As with all ultra-left groups, its members' political lives were overshadowed by the dreadful possibility of a sell-out — the biggest danger in ultra-left politics, and always on the cards.
Leon Trotsky had said that a socialist revolution in Britain was being prevented by one thing alone — the habit of the leaders of the Labour Party and trade unions to compromise with the ruling class by becoming part of the system.
The biggest example had been the General Strike of 1926 when a settlement was negotiated with Churchill.
It had happened time and time again, and the Trotskyist answer was ‘democratic centralism’, an authoritarian form of discipline by which anybody suspected of a sell-out was expelled, keeping the organization pure.
The anarchist solution was more imaginative — neatly avoiding the possibility of sell-out by having no leaders at all.
The sell-out concept was inherited by all Right-On people, and became a central part of their thinking.
But most thought the anarchist ‘no leaders’ approach was silly.
Leaders were to be tolerated as long as they were not permanent, and as long as they were held constantly ‘accountable’.
Right-On movements such as the feminists and the peace campaigners evolved complicated systems to ensure this happened.
Spokespeople or representatives had constantly to justify their activities and statements to committees, which in turn would have to report back to steering groups and working parties elected by conferences and regional groups.
No person in a position of power was ever to be trusted, especially if he or she was on your side.
It was realized that ‘accountability’ often resulted in organizational muddle and indecisiveness, and sometimes in sheer paralysis.
But this was a small price to pay for insurance against a leadership sell-out.
And the approach was said to have a huge plus-point as well.
Working on the principle that each person's experience is equally valuable, it then follows that if ten people ponder a decision, it will be ten times better.
Big Flame followed these principles and was therefore kept loosely structured.
The organization's broad philosophy and open-endedness allowed people to arrive carrying all manner of political baggage.
Henry Stewart, later to juggle many millions as News on Sunday 's financial wizard, was a Big Flame Maoist who helped start operations in the north-east of England.
Others were Big Flame Feminists, Big Flame Pacifists or Big Flame Single-issue Campaigners.
Ben Lowe found the organization the perfect place for helping develop his idea of a ‘non-sectarian’ national newspaper, so he joined as well.
Big Flame didn't have permanent leaders, but it did have superstars.
One was Alan Hayling, who was later to play a central role in the story of News on Sunday .
Hayling is a man of considerable and obvious intelligence, with dishy looks and great charm which made him a favourite with some of the women comrades.
He cut a dashing figure at the many conferences he addressed, raising his hand from time to time to stroke his dark curly locks as he poured out pure reason in soft well-modulated tones with a sincerity that was almost painful.
Hayling's left-wing politics were to a large extent the result of his background.
His Jewish mother had narrowly escaped from Romania in the 19305 when the local Iron Guard goon squad began slaughtering Jews with a barbarity which sickened even their Nazi German allies.
She had fled to England as a refugee, and married his father, who was a teacher.
The family lived in London, where Hayling was born in 1949.
When he was twelve, his father found a better post in Liverpool, and the family moved up north.
Hayling was a brilliant pupil at school and was soon marked down as Oxbridge material.
After a year spent in Uganda as a volunteer science teacher he passed the Cambridge entrance exam with ease and graduated with a double first in natural sciences in 1969.
The world was at his feet.
Between long stints in the physics labs, Hayling had dabbled in student journalism and decided to make his career in the media.
But instead of working on Varsity , the established undergraduate paper, he was already determined to be different.
He and others set up a rival ‘underground’ publication, the Shilling Paper , which, though a great success on its own terms, was useless as a credential for getting straight on to a Fleet Street paper such as the Sunday Times .
So Hayling, not interested in a normal local paper apprenticeship, tried television.
He was instantly offered traineeships by Granada in Manchester and the BBC in London.
He chose the BBC and was given a post in the Science Unit, where he was put straight on to making radio programmes.
His progress was predictably rapid, and after eighteen months he made the move to television, even though it was only as an assistant on Pets and Vets , an animal welfare show.
He quickly crossed to the peak-time Burke Report , and from there landed a plum assistant producer's job on the pop-science flagship Tomorrow's World .
Again he showed enormous potential, at once getting a feel for the audience and realizing people were interested in gimmicks and gadgets rather than dull, but more enlightening, scientific theory with pictures of boffins pottering about in laboratories.
But by now he was getting bored with the relative backwater of the Science Unit and wanted to go to News and Current Affairs, which was not only more glamorous, but offered a more direct opportunity to put his political ideals to good use.
His chance came with an offer of work on Children in Crossfire , a documentary about the psychological impact of terrorism and army occupation on the children of Northern Ireland.
But he immediately disagreed with the producer about the politics of the show, and was sent back to the Science Unit.
His transfer to current affairs was blocked — the result, he still believes, of direct political discrimination.
Increasingly frustrated, he walked out in 1974 to help found Newsreel, an independent collective making films for the Labour movement.
Although Newsreel made some startlingly good documentaries, shortage of funds was a constant problem.
But at least Hayling was free to follow the dictates of his large and sometimes cumbersome political conscience.
In 1976, just as he was planning to produce a film about the motor industry, Newsreel hit one of its frequent cash crises.
To combine research for the film with earning money, he took a job at Ford's Langley plant near Heathrow as a production-line worker in the body trim shop.
He found that he liked it.
Not the work, which was back-breaking and tedious — he specialized in bolting on bumpers and screwing down steering wheels on trucks — but the mostly Asian workforce whose respect and confidence he soon won as a shop-floor activist.
He stayed for seven years, at first steering clear of the official trade-union structure which, as a Big Flamer, he regarded as a huge sell-out.
Instead he concentrated on the unofficial Ford Workers' Combine, which bypassed the official union structure dominated by the Transport and General Workers' Union.
The Combine linked far-left activists and militants in Ford plants right across the country and, in theory, throughout the world.
In the early Liverpool days of Big Flame the comrades had been obsessed with the potential of Ford workers as leaders of the British revolution, and had put great effort into organizing and recruiting at the local Halewood plant.
And although ‘workerism’ was on the wane by the time Hayling turned up on the Langley personnel officer's doorstep, he earned many brownie points among the comrades by becoming a ‘genuine’member of the proletariat.
By day Hayling would help organize the workers at Langley, and in the evenings he would throw himself into pressure-group work.
He helped set up the Troops Out movement which campaigned for withdrawal of the British army from Northern Ireland.
He became a close friend of Sheila Rowbotham, the feminist historian who, together with feminist economist Hilary Wainwright and Big Flamer Lynne Segal, wrote a book which was of enormous importance for the far left in the early 1980s —Beyond the Fragments .
The theory behind Beyond the Fragments was simple.
The confident mood of the left in the 1960s had been part of a sudden wider upsurge in creativity concentrated on the arts, pop music, fashion, ‘lifestyle’ and sexual attitudes.
But activists on the new Right-On ‘lifestyle’ issues, such as sexual and racial equality and low-level economic development and ecology, had splintered into hundreds of fragmented pressure groups, local campaigns and tiny far-left political ‘parties’and discussion groups.
Many saw themselves as being above the grubby world of traditional politics and the professions, but often felt they could be like Richard Branson, the one-time hippy and promoter of alternative music who had joined the system and made a fortune.
The question was whether, in the harsher climate of the late 1970s and early 1980s, the fragments could be welded together to form a new force in British politics.
The various Right-On movements, especially the women's movement, had grown enormously during the years of the Wilson-Callaghan government.
The collapse of industrial militancy after the ‘Winter of Discontent’ in 1978 and the defeat of the Labour government in the election of May 1979 had  tipped the balance of power in the Right-Ons' favour.
They no longer lived in awe of their Big Brothers in the unions.
A conference inspired by Beyond the Fragments , was held in Leeds in September 1980 — the first major Right-On gathering after the election which had ushered in the then relatively unknown doctrine of Thatcherism.
As a Big Flamer Ben Lowe, like Henry Stewart from Big Flame in Newcastle, made attendance top priority.
All this activity and talk of new Rainbow Alliances chimed perfectly with Lowe's newspaper plan, which he had always seen as partly being based on, and partly bringing about, greater co-operation on the far left.
His discussion paper on the subject had now been drafted and redrafted several times.
The trouble was that the paper never seemed to get off the ground, which was typical of the Big Flame and ‘Beyond the Fragments’ approach.
The major flaw in attempting to get all the fractious fragments to work together, when nothing really united them except being Right-On, was the massive emphasis it placed on consensus.
Endless meetings were needed, and there was deep dread of taking decisions in case anybody objected and walked out, causing the whole fragile alliance to fall apart.
Meanwhile the various splinter groups, whether they subscribed to Big Flame or ‘Beyond the Fragments’ ideas or not, viewed the post-election inquest in the Labour Party with their customary vulture-like intensity.
As events unrolled they sensed that the noisy disarray presented them with new opportunities.
Labour's traditional left wing, centring on the Tribune group, plunged into its normal Machiavellian schemings aimed at taking over the party.
The outlook was good.
Thatcherism was widely viewed at the time as a mad right-wing aberration which the people would not stand for long.
It faced certain doom either at the polls or at the hands of the National Union of Mineworkers.
Thatcher's rating in the opinion polls was crashing as the dole queues lengthened.
All the left needed to do was to ensure that the next Labour government was a real alternative, and not led by another tedious old right-winger like Callaghan, who had gone back to his farm blaming the lefties.
The left's moment of revenge came at the Labour special conference at Wembley in 1980.
The conference approved a series of structural reforms giving constituency parties and the unions more power over the appointment of the leader.
The clear beneficiary was  Tony Benn, who immediately launched a six-month campaign to have himself elected as deputy leader instead of the hated Denis Healey, who was, in the opinion of many, the architect of the sell-out of socialist economic policy during the Wilson-Callaghan government.
Benn's strategy was simple and well timed.
Picking up the scent from ‘Beyond the Fragments’, he wanted to weld together the traditional Labour left and the newer Right-On movements.
He encouraged Right-Ons to pile into the dilapidated inner-city party machines and replace the ageing right-wing old guard.
The new single-issue groups, he believed, represented a potential new element in Labour's complex power brokerage which might tip the balance of power decisively in his direction.
For months Benn stomped the country addressing as many meetings attended by fringe pressure groups as he could, telling them they were good people wasting their time outside the Labour Party.
But although thousands did heed him and join, it didn't quite work.
The deputy leadership election was close.run, but in the end the party settled for the compromise of old-style left-winger Michael Foot, already in place as leader, with born-again ‘democratic socialist’ Denis Healey as deputy.
The impression of division given by Benn's lengthy and vocal campaign, however, did immense damage to the party and the shambling, duffel-coated figure of Michael Foot walked straight into the delighted arms of the Tory press, which instantly fell on him and started taking him apart.
At first the arrival of considerable numbers of Benn-recruited Right-Ons in moribund inner-city Labour Party branches went unnoticed.
But, putting to use the superior education unwittingly handed to them by the state or paid for by their parents, they soon displaced the handfuls of old faithfuls.
Shocked old-guard MPs, who had imagined they were in cushy seats for life, suddenly found Right-Ons dominating their constituency parties with a potent mixture of brow-beating and attrition.
Another, even less visible, result of the Bennite rivalism was the demise of Big Flame as a formal organization.
Most of its best organizers and natural membership joined the Labour Party.
And although Big Flame was never an ‘entryist’ party-within-a-party, like some of the Trotskyite groups, including Militant Tendency, everyone who had been part of it remained friends.
A useful network of ex-Big Flamers emerged both inside and outside the party.
Hayling and Lowe remained outside, though  Lowe worked closely with Benn and wrote a pamphlet about NATO with him.
Whether or not they were former members of Big Flame, the International Marxist Group, or any of the other sects which now dissolved themselves into the Labour Party, the Right-Ons' most effective weapon was an endless capacity to attend even the most obscure meetings.
They used the skills acquired during the social science degree courses many of them had followed in the early 1970s to scrutinize rule books and exploit every line and loophole in their favour.
Tactics which had been honed in the petty but ruthless world of student-union politics were now deployed in party meetings with devastating results.
Throughout the press the cry went up of ‘extremist take-overs’ and ‘packed meetings’.
The Right-Ons fired back the unanswerable reply that meetings belonged to those who attended them.
Cheery tombola social nights at local Labour Clubs were replaced by showings of Peter Watkins's brilliant but heart-stopping antinuclear film,The War Game , which the BBC had commissioned in the 1960s but still wimpishly refused to screen.
Similar grisly film delights, unsuitable for persons of a nervous, or even reasonably cheerful, disposition followed — some made by Hayling and his Newsreel collective.
The GLC
Nowhere was the Right-On bandwagon more apparent than in London, where it culminated in the elevation of Ken Livingstone to the leadership of the controlling Labour group on the Greater London Council the day after the local elections in March 1981.
Livingstone had formed his political views during the ‘new left’ upheavals of the late 1960s.
In 1968, the watershed year of the student riots in Paris, when most of the new generation of radicals were denouncing the Labour Party as hopelessly fuddy-duddy, he had joined up, believing it would one day become the focus for a new alliance of Right-On movements, Now, more than a decade on, his dream was starting to come true and the new radical politics were about to be released on an unsuspecting populace — with mixed results.
Local government, with its responsibility for sweeping the streets and emptying dustbins, had always essentially been a humdrum business.
But this would never do for the gilded 1960s radicals.
Many had started off working in the field as social workers, teachers, architects, planners or just plain clerks.
Now, through their domination of the London Labour Party, they were running it, and they started putting into practice schemes hatched during their long hours in drab municipal offices.
Local government was no longer boring — it was ‘where it was at’, and it became elevated to a collection of grandiose projects.
Suddenly ‘racism awareness’ training, day nurseries, and sex-equality monitoring programmes were the order of the day.
‘Chairs’ were established, and town halls sprouted signs saying how many people were unemployed locally, although nothing effective was done about it.
There was a mushroom growth of grant-aided housing associations, community advice centres, radical theatre groups and co-operative bicycle repair shops.
The headquarters of the GLC, the great pile of County Hall, changed from being a tedious and unloved administrative centre to become the Right-On rival to the House of Commons directly across the River Thames.
The building was besieged by Right-Ons, many wearing dungarees and riding shiny hi-tech bicycles bought on credit in Covent Garden.
In a parallel development, the old fruit and vegetable market was rapidly becoming the Right-On commercial centre where trendy shopkeepers cashed in with their hand-knitted sweaters, ethnic crafts and designer clothing.
There was nothing new in the preoccupations of the Right-Ons.
Socialism has always attracted its fair share of cranks; as long ago as 1937, George Orwell wrote in The Road to Wigan Pier that the very word ‘Socialism’ seemed to act like a magnet attracting ‘every fruit-juice drinker, nudist. sandal-wearer, sex maniac, Quaker, ‘Nature Cure’quack, pacifist and feminist in England’.
He surmised that Socialism would remain unpopular as long as critics were able to say: ‘I don't object to Socialism, but I do object to Socialists.’
But unlike their 1930s forebears, the 1980s Right-Ons had arrived in force.
And they were no longer held in check by the culturally conservative trade-union movement, which was experiencing a sharp decline in its prestige and power.
They swept the London Labour Party before them and established beach-heads in the other inner-cities.
Opinion about Ken Livingstone divided sharply.
No politician had ever acted like this before, and people were genuinely shocked.
The tabloid papers, which make their money from guessing the prejudices of their readers and dressing them up as informed opinion, had a field day.
But others thought: why not?
Right-Ons were citizens and ratepayers too, and it was about time that local government began to represent them.
A minority slice of the population loathed Livingstone with as much passion as the Right-Ons loved him.
And in the middle was a larger group who had not yet formed an opinion.
These people were prepared to accept Fleet Street's verdict that he was insane.
But then again, most politicians were fairly mad.
And there was great admiration for Livingstone's transparent honesty, self-effacing modesty and determination to stick to his guns.
At least people knew where they stood with him, and the darkened corridors of local government, with their forbidding and ever-present whiff of graft and back-scratching, were now lit up in a blaze of publicity.
That made a pleasant change.
The aspect which wasn't so popular was the business of giving grants to all and sundry, which was whipped up and wildly exaggerated by the Tory press.
Until Livingstone, various Right-On pet publishing and campaigning projects had been largely confined to tedious discussion documents and papers wrangled over at interminable meetings.
Now that there was a sympathetic hand at the helm, especially for the new sexual politics, they were shaped into formal applications for local  government funding.
A stream of long, earnest and often hopelessly bureaucratic ideas flowed into the system, all with the same object of getting some cash.
One of these was Ben Lowe's modest proposal to launch a new national newspaper.
Compared to the GLC's plan to make London immune to all-out thermonuclear war by placing signs on lamp posts, it was small beer.
Those Right-Ons who had written off the Labour Party for ever now began to chew humble pie, and were drawn to Livingstone's GLC as though to a magnet.
Jobs, as well as grants, were on offer, and people whom Lowe had met before started working there.
His most important contact was Hayling, who had left Ford in 1983 and now had a job monitoring multinational companies in the GLC's Industry and Employment Branch.
Hayling was also in charge of media initiatives, so Lowe naturally turned to him with the newspaper they had so often discussed as comrades in Big Flame.
The two men talked it over with Hayling's boss at the GLC, Hilary Wainwright, who was head of the Popular Planning Unit.
Wainwright was enormously enthusiastic, as she was about many things.
A leading Right-On thinker, she had co-written the Beyond The Fragments book which had started as a mere pamphlet, but had attracted so much interest that it had been upgraded and sold an extremely respectable 20,000 copies in paperback, having a major effect on its earnest readership.
Wainwright, an economist, possessed a first-class analytical brain powered by bundles of energy, and had lots of good political contacts within the Labour Party.
Although she had little time to help organize the newspaper project, as she buzzed around discussing it with friends and jotting down ideas it began to get up steam.
On paper News on Sunday was a brilliant idea.
Although to outsiders it was just a newspaper, to those in the know the concept went much further.
NoS would provide a focus to weld together the splinter groups of the left into an unstoppable force which would sweep the Labour Party before it.
The fragments would be reunited and the hated paunchy old men of the traditional Labour movement would be overthrown.
At the same time the tables would be turned so that they could actually be used to help finance the project, along with the Right-On councils which had already thrown financial caution to the winds.
The boring old unions would be pushed out by a new Rainbow Alliance of media-wise radicals, alert and campaigning on the big issues of racial and sexual discrimination, nuclear power, and protecting the environment.
The new obsessions, which were already making their mark in national politics abroad with parties such as the Greens in Germany, would take over.
The Big Flame would be rekindled.
A paper for the people
Even better for those who were thinking autonomously, the newspaper would cater for everybody who was Right-On.
Each group would be able to campaign for its particular obsession in public.
The wonderful vision arose of a publication which would be like the minutes of a gigantic nationwide meeting.
Every cause — no matter how bizarre or obscure — could be represented simply by writing a story about it.
Different causes and individuals could have their say on different pages, under an overall consensus umbrella which  embraced correct Right-On thinking on all aspects of the paper's coverage — from news to TV to sport.
And the newspaper itself could provide a stunning example with its own employment practices of how to run an organization on correct Right-On lines.
Blacks, gays, lesbians, the disabled and other disadvantaged people — all could join in demonstrating how the new thinking could be combined with commercial success.
The paper would practise what it preached.
If Hayling had any doubts about swinging the GLC behind the paper, it was because of Ben Lowe's lack of experience and drive.
But then he had a brainwave.
Hayling had come across a man called Chris Walsh who was already getting funds from the GLC for his latest, faltering, business enterprise, a Third World Development unit based in Highbury, North London.
Hayling decided that the hyperactive Walsh, who was not afraid of any challenge, would be the perfect foil for the lugubrious and cautious Lowe.
The two men would complement each other perfectly.
Hayling met Walsh for lunch and explained the newspaper project.
They hit it off at once.
Since Walsh's Third World business was going nowhere, he was enthusiastic.
He got to work at once, and an eight-page Walsh ‘strategy document’, the first of many, whizzed back to Hayling in the post.
Hayling explained further that if the GLC was going to support the venture, Walsh would have to get some newspaper professionals — or at least semi-professionals — involved, including, of course, Ben Lowe.
Shortly afterwards Walsh brought in Liz Cooper, the circulation manager of the ailing New Statesman , and Kit Sadgrove, a former advertising-agency executive now in market research.
The GLC liked to work with committees, and one was formed with the addition of Mike Power, a Daily Mail compositor, trade-union activist and chairperson of the Campaign for Press and Broadcasting Freedom.
Together they wrote a short grant application, which Hayling pushed through the committees.
The project was awarded £750 for a detailed pre-feasibility study, with Hayling, in his GLC capacity, responsible for making sure the report was properly written and the grant money not wasted.
The Guardian , the only national newspaper remotely acceptable to Right-Ons, was the logical starting-point.
By now Ben Lowe had realized that a daily paper would be too difficult and costly, so the  idea of starting a sort of Sunday Guardian seemed logical enough.
The Sunday Times , under Rupert Murdoch, was moving to the right, and Right-Ons now only had the weedy Observer , which was rapidly disappearing into the abyss of consumer journalism for the comfortable middle classes.
Since most Right-Ons would have been happy with a national version of a publication such as City Limits or Spare Rib , which specialized in redefining the world's priorities as their own, the comparison with the Guardian was daring.
Lowe was certain that if the paper was properly produced, with a GLC-funded journalistic team and regular national distribution, it could sell at least 250,000 and maybe 400,000.
He didn't think there was chance of more than that.
But his cautious frame of mind was already beginning to irritate some of the comrades.
After frustrating years in which they had covered acres of print discussing the sociological theory and implications of newspaper readership, they wanted to compete in the more popular market.
The defeat of the Labour Party for the second time in 1983 had been blamed largely on the media campaign which had glorified the Falklands, hammered Foot, and unleashed a campaign of unprecedented vitriol against Livingstone's GLC and the ‘Loony Left’.
It was time to hit back.
Livingstone himself had made a tentative start with the publication of the Londoner , a heavily subsidized but snappy tabloid free-sheet widely distributed throughout the GLC area.
The expenditure was justified by the argument that the newspaper industry existed to vilify the GLC and the rest of the left, and that the public was being denied the chance to hear the other side.
Fleet Street seemed to exist solely to praise the Tories and bolster the system.
The posh end of the market was dominated by new-wave consumer journalism which was turning into a grotesque parody of the ‘lifestyle’ politics the Right-Ons had pioneered.
At the bottom end, the masses were being fed on a diet of bingo, moronic competitions and ‘news’ reduced to a jumble of tits and bums, Tory propaganda and invented Royal Family rubbish.
The Sun was the most hated of the rabid tabloids, particularly for its ‘Page 3 girls’ and jingoistic coverage of the Falklands, which had caused widespread revulsion with headlines such as STICK IT UP YOUR JUNTA, and the infamous GOTCHA! on the sinking of the Belgrano .
For the concerned middle classes, who could barely bring  themselves to look at it, it was a horrible, violent, raucous vehicle out to destroy anything progressive or Right-On.
Its huge success grated even more, especially as it had been a Labour paper until Murdoch had bought it and turned it into a cornerstone of his international media empire.
But there was little they could do about it except wring their hands at each fresh horror in its columns, analyse its transparently partisan coverage, and point out how its competitors were dragging their standards downmarket to try to keep up with its soaraway sales.
Most puzzling was that the worse it got, the more people bought it, and — horror of horrors — it was cheerfully read in large numbers by the very people who suffered from the hackneyed prejudices and stereotypes it dispensed — notably blacks, gays and women.
For the Right-Ons, many of whom had committed the cardinal mistake of taking other people's newspapers too seriously, it was inconceivable that this diet of trash should be allowed to succeed.
It was now part of their ingrained thinking that the newspaper barons were imposing their standards on the population by rewriting the language of tabloid journalism.
The proles were being forced to put up with this stuff because there was no alternative.
Secretly (because the papers would never report it), behind the scenes a huge demand was building up for a ‘decent’ paper, one which — dare they say it — would Tell the Truth.
Another worry was now added to the complaints.
Just as linotype operators at the Sun were breaking out the champagne to celebrate the arrival of £1,000 pay packets for a three-day week, the realization was beginning to dawn that sooner or later the power of the print unions would be broken by the introduction of new technology.
In the north-west Eddie Shah was starting to emerge as a hate figure as he replaced highly skilled union labour on his string of local papers with girls fresh from secretarial colleges.
Shah was setting in motion a chain of events which would lead to the bitter Wapping strike, when Murdoch took on the print unions — previously assumed to be invincible — and won.
The issue of jobs was now added to the left agenda, as the print workers finally lost their grip on the production jugular of the industry in the first fundamental update of print technology since the late Middle Ages.
So the idea of a mass-market paper for the Masses, rather than just the Concerned and Committed, began to surface.
It didn't happen overnight.
Most Right-Ons had to move from the Fleet Street  ‘heavies’, the papers they actually read, to the unknown territory of the ‘pops’.
A mass-circulation paper was more risky, but it was much more exciting, and with the bigger sales that were on the cards, it could be very profitable.
After the ‘Sunday Guardian ’ came the next suggestion — a left-wing Mail on Sunday .
The snag in all this thinking was that most of the people involved knew little or nothing about producing mass-market newspapers.
Lowe had worked as a researcher for the Financial Times , Hayling had done his stint with the BBC, and of course they had dabbled in the Big Flame paper and other fringe publications.
Then Hayling brought in News on Sunday 's first top-drawer professional — John Pilger.
Hayling simply rang him up, in the way that he was to cold-call others, asked for his help, and got it.
Other good journalists, such as the Observer columnist Neal Ascherson and the ex- New Socialist editor and media studies lecturer James Curran, came and went, along with many lesser colleagues.
Pilger was immediately sympathetic.
He was an immensely experienced journalist, but had never found anything to match the heyday of the Daily Mirror under Hugh Cudlipp in the 1960s.
In those days the paper had sold 5.25 million copies and had been respected for its powerful, picture-led campaigning journalism, its commitment to the Labour Party, and the chord it struck with its primarily working-class readership.
Pilger was by now well into his forties and, like many other good campaigning journalists, more and more like a beached whale, increasingly irrelevant in the cynical new world of slick and sick journalism.
For journalists like him, and others who had made their names digging out scandals such as Poulson, Jeremy Thorpe, Thalidomide, and police corruption, or by trying to engage the sympathy of the nation and the government for the oppressed in society, life was becoming more and more difficult.
Editors increasingly saw only the downside of tedious and expensive court actions and official or semi-official government pressure.
They could do without it.
And Pilger, an exasperatingly prickly individualist determined to expose the ills of the world, stubbornly refused to lower his standards and fit in with the new requirements.
When Hayling invited him in, Pilger listened to the Sunday Guardian versus left-wing Mail on Sunday argument.
But he refused to compare the projected newspaper to anything on the present  market, and insisted that only he could shape it.
All he would say was that the paper would be completely new, but would hark back to the great days of the Mirror .
Lowe, a man of more modest vision, had a train-spotter's fascination for numbers which enabled him to take refuge in ‘scientific’ figures that endorsed his shyly offered judgements.
He now proposed that the fundamental gut decision of whether the paper should be tabloid or broadsheet be tested by market research, until he was finally talked out of it by another newly recruited professional — Clive Thornton, lately of Mirror Group Newspapers.
Thornton, a small, stocky, bespectacled figure with a Geordie twang from his Newcastle upbringing, was invited to join as an adviser by Lowe.
He had come to the comrades' attention when he wrote an article in the journal of the Right-On wing of the Communist Party,Marxism Today , shortly before the £750 GLC pre-feasibility study was completed in November 1984.
Thornton had just left the Mirror Group after a brief but interesting spell in newspapers.
He had been brought in by the conglomerate owners, Reed International, who were planning to float the Mirror Group off as a separate company and wanted someone to mastermind the move.
Thornton was an unusual choice: his fame sprang from his period as chief executive of the Abbey National building society, where he had swept aside years of tradition, brought in a new management style (he was very proud of having abolished fifty-one committees), and had enormous success with initiatives such as Granny Bonds.
When Thornton started at the Daily Mirror he found the usual chronic Fleet Street over-staffing, and began to swing the axe to enable the paper to stand on its own two feet and ward off the inevitable predators, such as Rupert Murdoch and Robert Maxwell.
But instead of just getting rid of jobs, as a ‘committed expansionist’, Thornton started work on plans to keep the unwanted staff, whom he described as ‘almost to a man, dedicated, hard-working folk’.
Thornton's answer was a new left-of-centre Sunday tabloid, a ‘seventh day Mirror ’, provisionally entitled the Globe .
The paper was planned in enormous secrecy to run alongside the existing Sunday Mirror , which he thought had become ‘a soft, ladies' paper’.
The Globe was designed to sell in large numbers — anything under half a  million was not worth considering.
The second venture was a new London evening paper to challenge the Standard 's monopoly.
He was just warming to his task when Reed sold him out.
Unbeknown to him, it had been negotiating with Robert Maxwell, and sold the Daily Mirror behind his back.
When he walked into the office the next day he found the new proprietor's considerable bulk squeezed into his own chair, took the point and resigned.
He eventually collected a £300, 000 pay-off.
Maxwell, rooting about in his new office high up in the Daily Mirror 's Holborn tower block, found Thornton's Sunday paper plan sitting in the in-tray and immediately rubbished it publicly as ‘evidence’ of Thornton's uselessness.
But he took the evening paper suggestion more seriously, and it eventually emerged as the London Daily News , which was changed ambitiously at the last minute into Britain's first twenty-four-hour ‘rolling newspaper’, aimed at pulling both evening and morning sales.
Despite some fine writers and good design, the paper was to fall heavily between two stools, and closed down ignominiously in July 1987 after its circulation had slumped to 90,000.
The exercise cost Maxwell £30 million.
After leaving the Mirror , Thornton returned to his Lincolnshire home to potter about with his prize heifers.
But he had been bitten by the newspaper bug, and various groups of disaffected newspaper people, including disgruntled employees and ex-employees of The Times and the Sunday Times , approached him with a number of implausible journalistic ventures.
He even ‘floated bread on the water’, as he put it, with Harold Evans, the former editor of the Sunday Times who inspires guru-scale admiration among many hacks.
But although he listened politely to these ideas, Thornton became irritated that none of the people had done any business sums.
As a man of action — as he never tired of telling people — he had stuck his multi-million-pound Granny Bond idea together on the back of an envelope in a couple of hours after the introduction of Budget changes which made it possible.
He was just beginning to get heartily sick of the whole newspaper business, when Hayling phoned to follow up Ben Lowe's letter of invitation.
Pleasantly surprised by how close News on Sunday was to his Globe plan, he agreed to meet.
There was another pleasant surprise — Hayling and Lowe had actually done some work and had something on paper.
Thornton, who prefers to follow a gut feeling, told them they had to move fast.
There was a gap in the market which wouldn't last for ever.
The Mirror Group would soon be back on its feet.
Any delay would be fatal.
They nodded and invited him to a meeting.
Thornton is remembered by Hayling, Lowe and the others involved early in the project as being ‘difficult’.
His ‘crimes’, as they saw it, started when he insisted that if there had to be meetings they must be businesslike, properly chaired and follow the agenda.
He had found the agendas clogged with ‘all sorts of odds and ends, trivia and red herrings’.
And when he tried transparent tricks to pull up vital business buried at the end of the list, he found himself making a number of enemies in the group.
Worse, although Thornton knew that Hayling saw himself as a potential chief executive, he demanded that the business side of the paper be immediately put under the direction of ‘an upfront businessman with a solid track record’.
Editorial direction should also be handed to an upfront, well-established journalist.
He didn't think having been a member of Big Flame was a qualification for either post.
Thornton's demands caused consternation.
Behind his back the group threw the Right-On book at him and, deeply paranoid as they were, came to the only possible conclusion.
Thornton was trying to hijack their project — the baby they had nursed to its first hesitant steps.
Co-operating with him might lead to a sell-out before they had even started.
They were convinced he was plotting to make himself chief executive — a charge he recalls with a wry grin and shake of the head.
Everything was wrong with him — he wouldn't always come to meetings and when he did he was ‘difficult’.
They decided that he was only in it for himself and was not the sort of person the comrades wanted to have with them, and definitely not part of the consensus.
Nevertheless, Thornton could not be ditched straight away.
They had approached a GLC body, the Greater London Enterprise Board (GLEB), for money and been told that if it was to put money in, an established business person had to be involved.
The only one interested at that time was Thornton, so he had to stay for the moment.
The original £750 grant from the GLC was one thing, but huge sums would be needed to get the real paper off the ground.
Lowe had already calculated launch costs as at least £4 million.
They  wanted to raise as much of this money as possible from the City; Thornton assured them that he could fix it if they did what he said.
This was good news, but they didn't want to rely entirely on him.
Instead they decided to get money from GLEB and the trade unions to do a proper feasibility study — one which would deliver an unanswerable case for investment.
They would then be able to go to the City on their own, and not Thornton's, terms.
Thornton hammered at them that there was a ‘window of opportunity’ which had to be grasped.
He laid out the argument: the Mirror had gone to Maxwell and dived downmarket, along with its Sunday counterpart; the Mail on Sunday was repositioning itself after its disastrous launch, but had still not recovered.
There was a gap which nobody had yet stepped into.
The Sunday market was still far larger than the daily market, though it had shrunk by 20 per cent in the 1970s.
The heavyweight Sunday Times ,Sunday Telegraph and Observer were more or less holding their own.
But the populars had been harder hit.
The market leader, the News of the World (sister paper of the Sun ), was down to 4.2 million, a loss of 2 million in a decade, by the spring of 1984.
Although it was recovering after a revamp, only it and the Mail on Sunday , boosted by massive spending on advertising, were actually gaining readers.
There were several reasons for this decline.
Church-going was being abandoned in favour of the new religion of DIY and other time-consuming pursuits, and research showed that only 3 per cent of the population still indulged in the great British institution of the Sunday lie-in, paper included.
In the ‘pops’ market, the distinction between the Sundays and the dailies was becoming fuzzy.
It was no longer necessary to wait until Sunday for a dose of smut and scandal, when the Sun was offering it six days a week.
But there was some evidence from the launch of the Mail on Sunday that the missing readers could be lured back by new papers.
And there was a hunch that ‘heavy’ newspaper readers would be attracted by a tasteful paper with plenty of news, but which could be read quickly.
A left-of-centre paper combining easy tabloid reading with heavyweight news coverage looked like a good bet.
Thornton spelled out how the new technology was rapidly opening up the newspaper scene, and offering enormous cost-cutting possibilities.
The first paper to get it would be streets ahead of its rivals.
A new left-wing paper sympathetic to, and backed by, the  trade unions could be the first to sign new staffing-level agreements and steal a march on the competition.
The comrades listened.
It was very interesting stuff.
But they explained there was still a long way to go.
A great many meetings needed to be held.
There were thousands of people to consult, movements to co-operate with, reports to be written, consultation and ‘accountability’ structures to be built, agreements to be drawn up, codes and charters to be agreed.
That could not all happen overnight.
It was time for News on Sunday to set off on the trail of the people and organizations who had theorized about the prospects for a popular left-wing newspaper for so long.
Now they were going to be given a chance to put their money where their mouths were.
And the person who was going to lead them to this golden opportunity was the new driving force who had come to the fore and already earned himself the nickname of ‘the Eddie Shah of News on Sunday ’— Chris Walsh.
Walsh was a man who had surfaced in public life before.
But the last time he had been in the headlines, people had known him by a different name — Chris Bott.
Mysteries of the orgasm
Getting things moving
‘Orgasm, organism, organisation: the coming together of life forces to overwhelm the present constraints and repressions.
Communality generalised.
The libido building its own organisation.
An organised resistance to op-pression, but the building of new social relations, the realisation of desires now, taking place within the organisation as part of the struggle for state power and a new society in the future.
An organisation embodying what its members want out of life now, the beginning of totality through total opposition, and what we do to change the world being enjoyable in itself, not a sacrifice ‘
The words of Chris Bott, anarchist or, more politely, ‘libertarian left’, as laid out in giant 36-point type and printed in lurid blue on a red background on the cover of Ink , one of the crop of underground papers that sprang up at the end of the 1960s.
Bott was given huge amounts of space on the inside pages of Ink in December 1971 and January 1972 to set out the scrambled views on life which he was culling from a variety of standard left-wing and anarchist gurus.
Prominent in his thinking at the time was Wilhelm Reich, the advocate of the practice of free love, which he believed would bring all power systems crashing to the ground.
Hence Bott's concentration on orgasm.
Ink wasn't advocating Bott as a philosopher.
The point about his thoughts, spelled out in a series of letters, was his current address — Brixton prison.
There, as prisoner number 100485, he was being held on remand, charged with maliciously conspiring to cause explosions likely to endanger life.
He was one of the Stoke Newington Eight — the Angry Brigade.
The Angry Brigade was the cause célèbre of the libertarian left  during this period, for carrying direct action beyond the usual sit-ins, street theatre and noisy disruptions and demonstrations aimed at ‘authority’ and prominent politicians.
It publicized itself with a series of military-style ‘communiqués’ to the papers, with dire threats against the ‘pigs’and slogans such as: ‘Blow it up, burn it down, kick it till it breaks.’
Moving into action, it then carried out a series of bombings, the most serious of which almost destroyed the private house of the Home Secretary, Robert Carr.
The Angry Brigade never killed anyone.
All the attacks were against property, and nobody was hurt.
And the only thing Chris Bott had murdered was the English language.
But, before the IRA and Middle Eastern terrorists made such things part of everyday life in Britain in the 1970s, the bombings caused huge outrage.
The furore was increased by the ham-fisted police hunt for those responsible.
Eventually more than ten people, including Bott, were arrested and spent over a year in jail before the end of the lengthy legal proceedings.
The Old Bailey trial lasted 111 days, a new legal record.
Four of the Stoke Newington Eight — John Barker, James Greenfield, Anna Mendelson and Hilary Creek — were convicted and given ten-year jail sentences.
Four others — Angela Weir, Catherine McLean, Stuart Christie and Bott — were acquitted.
Chris had a normal middle-class background, with the exception of the fact that he had been adopted and brought up in Sutton Coldfield by step-parents called Bott.
He went to Strathclyde University and then on to Essex in 1968.
Described in press coverage of the Angry Brigade trial as a ‘compulsive joiner of revolutionary movements throughout Europe’, he dropped out of his Latin American studies course to go to Paris during the student riots of May 1968.
The experience convinced him that Europe was on the brink of revolution, and he threw himself into revolutionary Anarchist ‘Situationism’, which rejected conventional left-wing political parties.
Drifting from Essex to Manchester and then London, Bott became a well-known figure on the briefly blossoming ‘libertarian left’ or ‘underground scene’.
In May 1970 he met Hilary Creek, another libertarian activist.
Creek had an affair with Bott, and was also involved with John Barker, who, together with James Greenfield, emerged as the backbone of the group accused of the bombings.
Barker and Greenfield were working-class lads who both arrived at Cambridge University in 1968 and were repelled by their first  ever contact with the upper classes.
Greenfield told the court he had regarded the university as a ‘playground for the wealthy’ and decided, whatever he did with his life, it would not be to help the rich get richer and more powerful.
The two men dropped out of their courses, moved to Stoke Newington in North London and stuck together as they became involved in the libertarian and squatter movements.
After the trial Bott continued to knock around his old haunts in Stoke Newington and the East End, gaining a professional qualification in urban planning which he used in community work with the homeless and unemployed.
He worked for a time with Stopover House and the Newham Alternative Project, both designed to provide temporary help for the poor and homeless of the East End.
But although he learnt such skills as writing feasibility studies, he soon tired of life in the grant-aided voluntary sector.
He wanted to get out of the old activist scene and transform himself into a modern, successful businessman.
All round his dingy housing-association flat in Stoke Newington, close to Amhurst Road, where he had been arrested at the  beginning of the 1970s, were the signs of the new affluence.
A wine bar called Fox's had opened up a short walk away in Church Street, causing such amazement that the Observer printed an article about it.
Bott wanted to be part of this new success story, along with the City people, young designers, clothes merchants, media persons and trendy local-authority and institutional workers — the Yuppies and Yeppies.
His first commercial venture was the Aardvark Transport and Trading Company, based in Wapping.
It had sprung from his activities in the housing movement, but was run on straight commercial lines, providing an ‘alternative’ removals service and producing a nice sideline in salvaged Victorian fireplaces which were sold to the new rich.
Aardvark taught him that the left was not just a movement but a market.
He cut off his shoulder length hair, put on a suit, and started dealing with bankers.
Associates were shocked by the transformation, and joked that he had become a plain-clothes policeman.
Now he believed that the people who supported left-wing causes, and shared in movements concerned with issues such as squatting, nuclear disarmament, ecology and environment, provided a cohesive group to be sold to.
And although many of them might be poor in some ways, that didn't mean they had no money to spend.
Walsh's  thinking was based on the theory known in economic jargon as ‘reverse income substitution effect’.
This postulates that, although some groups may not have much money in relative terms, they will spend more in defined sectors.
Students, because their money is not tied up in big items such as mortgages, spend a lot on goods such as jeans, beer and cheap travel, and are therefore a target group.
On the back of this approach, which is sound enough, he was to evolve complicated and hopelessly over-ambitious merchandising plans.
By the time he got involved with the newspaper project, Bott had changed his name; he was now Chris Walsh.
There was nothing sinister about this change — he had simply reverted to the name he was born under after a search to find the identity of his real parents.
Although Walsh's main aim was to become a successful businessman, he kept most of his old political views, which were different from those of the other people starting up News on Sunday .
He brought with him the ‘direct action’ theory and practice of the libertarian left.
Politics for people like him was not what you said, but what you did.
The contrast with Ben Lowe, the blushing withdrawn original founder whom he increasingly pushed to one side, could not have been more marked.
Lowe represented what had always been the basis of the project until then — the concerned, upmarket readership of Right-Ons which was the perfect setting for a talking-shop.
But Walsh got stuck into the project with typical determination.
He was quite clear about the paper he wanted.
It was to be politically left, but above all popular, and designed to appeal to a big readership.
He was contemptuous of soggy, concerned lefties and wanted the paper to be outrageous, noisy, controversial — an angry two-fingered salute to everyone in power — right, left or centre.
Extrovert, cheerful and bursting with half-baked ideas and projects, he didn't see things the way the talkers did.
What they saw as a problem, he saw as a challenge.
He was thinking big, and thinking big meant a huge readership — a paper like the Mirror , to be read in equally large numbers by ordinary people who shared his contempt for organized politics.
He wasn't interested in the heavy political stuff which bored the pants off most people.
The required approach, rather like Walsh himself, was short, rude and snappy.
Thornton had been pushing for the same sort of readership, and the two men had another thing in common— they wanted action.
Things must be got moving.
But Walsh's position was not as polarized  as Thornton's with regard to the others.
He realized that there must be meetings, and he was prepared to go to them and fire off his battery of buzz words which signified he was ‘one of us’.
He had been around the scene for long enough to know how to manipulate meetings without getting everyone's back up.
His loathing for committee-bound inactivity was not new.
In his outpourings to the readers of Ink he had compared bureaucrats to the police, the army and prison officers.
Instead of traditional forms of organization, which for the Labour movement meant committees and conferences, Walsh confusingly advocated ‘the overthrow of the present set-up, the development of self-organisation, of consciousness, of strategy, power, for this to take place, the creation of community resources, shared pleasure, the spreading of present alienation’.
But at the same time he had another libertarian trait — he was shambolically organized.
Nothing was worth doing unless it gave pleasure, he had argued in Ink .
And being organized did not give him pleasure.
For a start he was a night-bird, and would often only surface in the middle of the day.
He didn't like the tedious business of routine, and rapidly became notorious in the group for missing meetings and failing to make appointments.
The complications of the laborious paperwork and endless reports of minutes which obsessed other members of the project held no interest for him.
He often only glanced at the reports.
Like Thornton, his philosophy was to back his hunches and do it now.
The rest he saw as just bureaucracy.
Walsh thought that if it was left to the others they would go on talking for ever.
Unlike them, he had ‘a strategy’.
Outside his own environment, however, in the more sober and conservative world of conventional business, Walsh worried people.
Thornton knew of various incidents which confirmed his opinion that Walsh made a distinctly negative impression in the hunt for backers.
A typical occasion was when Thornton used his contacts to set up a meeting between the paper and the trade-union-sponsored Unity Bank to borrow £10,000 to keep things going for now, and to test the water for the millions of pounds that would be needed in the future.
The meeting was not a success.
Unity Bank's Terry Thomas, who represented another backer which it was hoped would look favourably on the project, the Labour Party-linked Co-operative Bank, turned them down flat.
Much of his decision was based on his  assessment of Walsh and Hayling, who was also present, and of their business plan.
Walsh, bedecked with new suit and executive glasses, had pitched in with his usual aggressive style.
Head tilted back, and firing out ideas like a machine-gun in his nasal North London voice, he had presented himself as a man with his finger on the modem business pulse.
His conversation was spattered with recently mugged-up marketing and business phrases.
It all led to only two possibilities: he was either a whirling business genius or a complete headbanger.
And since he was in his late thirties and apparently without a cent to show for it, the conclusion was obvious.
Hayling, who was much smoother in his appearance and approach, just seemed to Thomas to be very ignorant of business and how it worked.
After the two had left, Thomas confided to Thornton that he found it quite extraordinary that these two people, who were so naive and inexperienced, could be at the top of what was supposed to be a concrete business proposal.
What they had told him about the paper was ‘positively negative’— an endless list of what the paper was not going to do, rather than what it was going to do.
He could see no future in their hopelessly optimistic sales forecasts.
With this thumbs-down from a part of the financial world whose support was expected, Thornton was losing his ‘window of opportunity’ argument.
It didn't worry the comrades too much.
The Right-On alternative to the City was sitting under their noses in the form of the Greater London Enterprise Board.
The negotiations which followed were mainly handled by Alan Hayling.
Hayling was still not a formal member of the group starting the paper, but he was getting more and more interested, and in his official GLC capacity acted as a go-between between the paper and GLEB, smoothing over the difficulties and piloting the paper round bureaucratic pit-falls.
GLEB had been set up by the GLC in 1983 to provide venture capital to start up enterprises and provide jobs in the London area.
An endless stream of proposals had poured in for the £20 million a year it had to dispense.
Many of the earlier ones came to grief, especially workers' co-ops, where money was handed out for projects such as a vegetarian quiche restaurant in Deptford.
Some were simply misguided, others were closer to the edge of the law, but predictably many crashed.
However, GLEB made progress with more sane ideas, and was credited with creating or saving 2,000 jobs in 116 different  enterprises.
Whether this added up in terms of cost per job was another matter.
When News on Sunday made an approach, GLEB was concentrating on how to replace the rapidly disappearing jobs in the print industry, and any proposal in this area was high-priority.
Critics of the organization say it gave away money indiscriminately, whilst its supporters maintain fiercely that all projects were minutely criticized for viability.
Certainly, as News on Sunday found out, it involved a vast amount of bureaucracy and meetings before any money was handed over.
By now, in 1985, the GLC bandwagon was slowing down and the Department of the Environment had imposed swingeing cuts on GLEB's expenditure.
News on Sunday asked for money to produce a dummy newspaper, which would then be market-researched, and the results wrapped into a feasibility study.
The research would determine likely sales levels, and also settle the division between a left-wing Mail on Sunday , with projected circulation of 400,000, and a ‘Sunday Guardian ’ selling 250,000.
If the green light came on for either project, the paper would go straight to capitalization as a commercial company.
Investment would be sought from the City, councils, trade unions and rich individuals.
GLEB would be paid back with shares in the company when it was floated, and be given a say in the structure of the company.
The paper pitched for £56,000.
GLEB offered £39,000 with strict conditions.
The funding money had to be matched pound for pound by other backers; the people who believed in the paper had to put up £5,000 of their own money between them; and the paper had to have a controlling group to protect it from an outside takeover which might change the political line.
This group also had to be made up on strict equal-opportunities lines, with the requisite number of minorities and women.
Two GLEB representatives, including information director John Palmer, previously a Guardian journalist, joined the NoS executive committee.
Walsh, with Hayling fronting the show to add that important touch of Cambridge class, threw himself into raising the matching funding required by GLEB.
He was given able assistance by Mike Power, a long-standing member of the Communist Party with high-level contacts in the left-wing unions.
Thornton had good contacts as well, and proved very useful in arranging meetings.
He was friendly  with Ron Todd, the head of the giant Transport and General Workers' Union, with more than one million members.
The T and G was the paper's greatest union supporter from the beginning, and was to end up as the biggest single investor.
Thornton had also earned the respect of SOGAT, the print union, and Manchester City Council for his previous efforts to re-employ the redundant workers at the Daily Mirror plant in the city.
Although the amount NoS had to raise at this point was small compared with what was to come later, those involved say that in many ways it was harder work.
The unions posed the same problem as the City.
The proposal did not yet have concrete facts to back it up.
And the unions had also been through this scene recently.
At the beginning of the 1980s, the TUC had asked Lord McCarthy, a Fellow of Nuffield College, Oxford, to examine the feasibility of a daily newspaper sympathetic to the Labour movement.
There had been great difficulty raising the £40,000 contribution from the unions.
McCarthy's report had proposed a £6.7 million plan for a national daily along the lines of the Sun or the Mail , based in or near London, with a staff of 230.
The paper would need a minimum circulation of 300,000 to make money, and with an annual expenditure of £13.3 million would make an annual profit of £6.4 million if it reached a circulation of 500,000 But the idea never got off the ground.
The diminishing role of the unions, disillusionment among workers, and falling membership due to unemployment had put many of them in considerable financial difficulties.
Although the idea was superficially attractive, money was too tight.
Ben Lowe had studied the McCarthy report carefully and had answers for a lot of the scepticism, even though the unions' enthusiasm had been blunted.
And Walsh, zooming about, was tirelessly energetic and ruthless in his determination.
Mike Power and Clive Thornton pointed him in the right direction and sent him in like a terrier down a rabbit hole.
He and Hayling emerged with £11,000 from Manchester City Council, £7,000 from the TGWU, £6,000 from SOGAT and a total of £10,650 from six others — National Union of Public Employees (NUPE), £3,500; National Communications Union (NCU), £2,000; National Union of Journalists (NUJ), £2,000; National Association of Local Government Officers (NALGO), £2,000; Association of Cinematograph, Television and  Allied Technicians (ACTT), £650; and the tiny TGWU-dominated Bakers' Union, £500.
The people who wrote the original GLC-funded pre-feasibility study — Chris Walsh, Ben Lowe, Mike Power, Liz Cooper and Kit Sadgrove — met in a flat near Kings Cross and formed themselves, with the addition of five others, all friends, into the Founders' Trust.
The Founders put up the required £5,000. making a total of £39,650 — enough to match GLEB and trigger the promised grant.
But while Walsh and Hayling were raising the money, relations with Thornton were becoming increasingly strained.
He began thumping the table and insisting the paper  install experienced management.
The comrades were horrified.
One of the key elements of the paper had always been that it should be run on consensus lines, with broad agreement among the group, often expressed by a vote before any decision was taken.
The trouble with ‘meetings management’ is that the viewpoint adopted is that of the people who turn up.
If you miss a meeting, or a crucial decision within one, it is very difficult to have anything reversed afterwards, as it has then been approved by the consensus and therefore stands.
Decision-making and prioritizing therefore fall more and more to the kind of people whose forte is attending meetings and getting the support of those present.
It is management by attrition.
But the decision to use it was deliberate.
NoS people were not just inexperienced in business, but were opposed to its methods, and consciously trying to do things in a different way to prove the rottenness of the capitalist system.
Thornton, on the other hand, understood a lot about the caring side of capitalism, but was firmly wedded to the way it operated.
He grew more and more dismayed at this well-meaning amateurism, which he could not see working in practice.
The two sides might have parted company there and then had it not been for the GLEB's condition that someone with newspaper business experience should be on the executive.
Thornton agreed to stay, but insisted that his name be kept secret.
As he was only a member of the executive, with the same status as everybody else, they agreed, but then promptly let him down.
James Curran, the left-wing media intellectual who had been advising on market research, leaked his involvement to Tribune , the established semi-official paper of the traditional Labour left.
Thornton exploded, and successfully demanded that Curran be booted out.
RSGB
The leaked news that a figure as credible as Thornton was involved put NoS on the public stage.
Thornton then insisted that although his name was known it was not to be used for fund-raising.
He would remain on the sidelines, and do some more work if and when they were ready to launch the paper.
He also advised them again to get a high-profile chairman and a well-known editor.
Pilger had already been  suggested , but Thornton was unimpressed after coming across him in his Daily Mirror days.
He was more interested in offering the post to John Lloyd, one of the most respected journalists on the Financial Times .
With Thornton dropping into the background and the money coming in, the comrades progressed to the next stage, the dummy edition.
It was a marathon process.
The paper was first scheduled to be printed in June, but in the end didn't go on the presses until four months later in mid-October.
It was preceded by the involvement of hundreds of people in discussion groups devoted to different sections — home news, features, music, the arts, international and foreign news and sport.
At great length, and with considerable idealistic heart-searching, they worked through the various problems and anomalies of the paper in comparison with its rival newspapers.
The discussion groups were relatively open, and many people came along as friends of friends.
Some were journalists, others political activists, and many were interested in working on the paper for wages once it got going.
One of the attractions of NoS was that, in breaking away from the Fleet Street mould, it was also looking for a different sort of employee.
A major part of the paper's thinking was that it could employ people who would have been good journalists if they had pursued journalism as a conventional career.
They were therefore unrecognized, as they knew only too well, and were attracted by the idea of the possibility of a job.
Some were qualified, others wanted to learn.
Most of the group members were quite young, Right-On, middle-class, intellectual, and had their own particular obsession which they wanted to see in the paper.
There was a high attendance by women, who formed a major part of the thinking.
A count at one meeting revealed that all twenty-seven people present were Guardian readers, and it was obvious that many of them knew little about popular  papers.
This persuaded one faction, representing experienced newspaper people such as John Palmer, to try to push the paper back upmarket.
Palmer, seconded by GLEB to work with NoS , felt many people were naively attracted to the pops because they thought they were easier to do.
Fleet Street, which has been spending millions for years trying get the formula right, holds the opposite point of view.
Working on a quality paper, where journalists have more room for the finer points and a more informed audience, is considered to be much less demanding.
Although these new contributors were welcomed, the central organization of News on Sunday remained secretive and close-knit.
Instead of being directly involved, radical supporters were diverted into the groups where their thoughts could be sifted and selected at will.
Walsh, ever eager to stick his finger in someone else's pie, gravitated towards the foreign affairs discussion group.
The agonized hand-wringing about internationalism and the finer points of world politics were thrust aside.
Instead Walsh put in simplistic suggestions with blockheadedly dramatic headlines like: ‘South Africa — Is it going to blow?’
It was exactly what Palmer feared.
Ultimately, though, which way the paper was going to go was decided by market research, a new obsession and an antiseptic surrogate for contact with real tabloid readers.
‘Concept research’, followed by an omnibus quantitative survey, produced a brief for the dummy which came out in favour of the more ‘downmarket’ left-wing Mail on Sunday , rather than the ‘Sunday Guardian ’.
Walsh was pleased.
For him this was a move in the right direction, though not far enough.
The brief suggested a paper with sixty-four pages, ‘strong on photographs, highly readable and written to be taken seriously’.
But the brief also instructed that it was to be ‘a lively, humorous paper that covered all aspects of life and not just current affairs.
The paper was to be open and frank on political as well as personal issues; it was to be investigative and campaigning, internationalist, but also accessible, and radical but clearly independent of any political current or party.’
Not surprisingly, people in market-research panels up and down the country had said they would be delighted to buy a paper like that.
Now all the comrades had to do was produce it.
The job of pouring vintage Right-On journalism into mid-market ‘quality-tabloid’ bottles fell to Hayling.
He was now the member of the newly formed executive committee with special responsibility  for both structuring the company and liaising with discussion groups and with adviser John Pilger.
After a series of delays, more discussion groups and a conference in Manchester, work started on the actual dummy.
It was put together at the Camden New Technology Centre, which was loaned by the council, and administered from News on Sunday 's recently occupied headquarters in Caxton House near Waterloo station, the London offices of the print union, SOGAT.
The dummy took three weeks' work by a team of volunteers, mostly part-time and helping when they could.
The operation was overseen by Pilger, who put in an occasional appearance in person with suggestions for improvement.
Nobody knows exactly how many people were responsible for input, but by the time the dummy was finished more than two hundred had played a part one way or another.
Some of the work went smoothly, but a lot was chaotic, with much confusion and many meetings to dole out coverage in accordance with the relative worthiness of various campaigns.
Brian Whitaker, a former editor of the Sunday Times ‘Insight’ team who was responsible for much of the last-minute layout, found himself interrupted by the constant political hubbub.
At one point a furious gay activists delegation turned up.
It had heard that the paper was planning to include an item on AIDS and demanded to be consulted.
A cardinal error had obviously been made, as the paper had made huge efforts beforehand to consult pressure groups about tackling their subject in an approved fashion.
Naturally the activists got their meeting at once.
Whitaker thought this was all wonderful stuff and great fun, but at one stage when his patience was wearing thin he was heard to exclaim: ‘This is worse than working for Murdoch!’
News on Sunday , when it eventually emerged, was pronounced a fair effort by the rest of the industry.
It had its sixty-four pages, some in smudgy Today -style colour, some in glossy heat-set colour, and most in good old black and white.
The front-page story was about a waste pipe dribbling low-grade radioactive waste into the Thames, which, by Fleet Street standards, was not a great story.
Clive Thornton contributed a personal finance column.
The paper was an extraordinary jumble.
So many people had to be pleased or mollified, and it was trying to do so many things at once, that the pages were hopelessly crammed with bitty stories.
But it was particularly strong on international news, and contained a good consistent political line  which pleased most of the people involved.
The design, however, was almost universally condemned within the project.
At a glance, the paper resembled a specialist publication like Motorcycle News , with elements of Socialist Worker ,New Musical Express and the Mail on Sunday stirred in.
The new obsession with trendy design was indulged in by scattering diamond-shaped symbols around the pages.
The paper was immediately put out for market research by RSGB — Research Surveys of Great Britain Ltd, one of Britain's largest and most respected market-research companies.
The company, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of AGB Research, had been chosen by Ben Lowe partly because it had done market research for other papers, including an abortive workers' co-operative, the Scottish Daily News .
(It was later to do work for the Independent .)
It was also felt that it was a company which nobody could attack on the grounds of political bias in favour of the project — if anything, thought Walsh, the other way round, after he had seen a portrait of Margaret Thatcher prominently displayed in its Ealing headquarters.
After two weeks RSGB's thick brown-covered report thumped on to Lowe's desk.
It contained nearly a hundred pages, densely covered with rows of figures — the results of interviews with 1,072 people from Land's End to John O'Groats.
Lowe liked crunching numbers anyway, but as his figures skittered across the rubbery keys of the calculator, he began to gasp with amazement.
After a desultory fifteen minutes looking through News on Sunday , 5.6 per cent of interviewees had said they were ‘certain to buy’ a paper like Hayling's dummy.
In a national Sunday paper market of around 20 million, this amounted to 1.1 million ‘certain' sales every week.
Add in 9.8 per cent who said they were ‘very likely to buy’, and you had three million customers.
When the shock had worn off, Ben Lowe and Henry Stewart — recently drafted on to the executive committee from the Newcastle regional group — started examining the figures in detail.
Their findings were summed up in the feasibility study published in February 1986, which predicted a minimum weekly sale of 800,000 and a maximum of 1.5 million.
There were a number of warnings from RSGB which were included, and which were later to be added into the company prospectus.
‘Newspaper sale prediction is open to wide margins of error, as are any sale predictions…primarily because the quality of the product will change from week to week depending on the available content, the number of editorial pages and so on.’
There were other factors to be taken into account — the effect of the pre-launch television advertising campaign, the launch of new opposition titles, and the ‘variability of the product from the impression given by the dummy’.
Lowe and Stewart concluded that all these factors were ‘likely to increase sales’.
They thought the pre-launch promotional campaign would easily counter any moves by the opposition.
The other new launches planned were Sunday Today and Sunday Sport — neither aimed at the same sort of readers.
Most important, the real paper, as opposed to the dummy, would be ‘produced with professional staff, an extensive newsgathering network and extensive resources, and it therefore seems certain that it will be more impressive than the dummy issue’, they grandly announced.
The most extraordinary factor was RSGB's advice that they should go ahead and publish — the opposite to what the company had told the Scottish Daily News .
And the advice was on the back of the most comprehensive research ever carried out for a new paper.
Though Lowe tried to hang on to the original concept, RSGB's figures finally killed off the ‘Sunday Guardian ’ approach.
The paper had now taken a major turning.
The market gap which Lowe had guessed was there was bigger than he had expected.
Walsh was ecstatic: now the paper was looking far beyond the Right-On supporters' group and being told what he had always wanted to believe — there was a large group of solid working-class people fed up with the frivolity in the existing tabloids.
Added to the Right-On readers, they effectively expanded the core group and provided a viable number of buyers.
The readership identified by RSGB broke down equally between men and women.
Most — 65 per cent— were working-class in socioeconomic groups C2, D and E. The rest were white-collar, middle-class and upper-class from groups A, B and C1.
The readers were younger than average, with 45 per cent under thirty-five, compared with 37 per cent in the population as a whole, and the paper was confirmed as northern, with 67 per cent of its potential readers beyond the Watford Gap.
It seemed that NoS was going to be the first to tap the huge reservoir of people who had given up on the papers altogether.
An impressive 17 per cent of the potential readers were not buying a Sunday paper at the moment.
Of the ones who were, half would come across from the News of the World , Sunday Mirror and People .
More than a third of sales would be to Labour voters, another third to Alliance or Tory (12 per cent), and the rest to people who could not say which party they supported.
As an aside the research revealed that just under half of the women questioned did not support the women's liberation movement.
To this day RSGB stand behind their research.
The fact that it was proved to be an overestimate is blamed on various horrors which took place on the paper's route to market.
But at the same time, the fact has supported those who have a low opinion of market research in estimating ‘self-image’ matters such as which paper people will buy.
Now, after various newspaper disasters, it is being recognized that allegiance to a particular paper, whatever others may think of it, is not something people change lightly.
Even when the study appeared, there was a great deal of scepticism within NoS , but the attitude was that they had consulted the experts and got the evidence.
If this was the reply, they were prepared to go with it.
The next step was to turn the feasibility study into a detailed business plan which would be presented in a share prospectus aimed at attracting the target £6.5 million now estimated to be needed to launch a paper selling between 800,000 and 1.1 million copies.
The key to this was finding a Chairman.
And although Thornton seemed the obvious choice to the outside world, relationships with him had reached a new low in October 1985.
Immediately after the dummy was produced, Thornton found that money had been raised in his home city of Newcastle by using his name without permission.
He was furious.
He had already noted, with some concern, that money raised was immediately ‘dissipated’ into a range of fringe activities.
But this was too much; he picked up the phone and left his resignation on the answering machine at Caxton House.
The next morning Tom Picton, a former lecturer at the Royal College of Art who had worked as picture editor on the dummy edition, played back the tinny message.
‘This is Clive Thornton.
I resign here and now.’
Thornton was eventually smoothed down and persuaded to stay on condition that the paper find a Chairman at once— a reputable businessman whose name could be used instead of his.
Finding someone was a question of asking round in likely circles.
Matthew Evans, head of publishers Faber and Faber, was the first to get the call.
Hayling reported to the unenthusiastic executive committee that he was ‘favourably disposed’, but nothing came of it.
Sir Denis Foreman, of Granada Television, excited a little more interest.
He told Hayling that he was keen to help, but could do nothing until he retired in April, more than six months away.
The IBA rules prevent chairmen of television companies having substantial national newspaper interests.
But he would be happy to be ‘Godfather’ to the project.
Christmas came and went, and it was three months since Thornton's answering-machine ultimatum.
Since nobody else had been found, Hayling offered Thornton the Chairmanship, but the executive attached two humiliating conditions.
First he was to endorse publicly the NoS Equal Opportunities approach, and second he was to agree to allow negotiations with the unions to ‘run their course’ quietly.
As Hayling, Walsh, Lowe and the others must have known, Thornton could not accept either condition.
He was on record as saying that he regarded the agonizing over Equal Opportunities on a paper which did not even exist as — at best— a red herring.
And he felt even more strongly about the union issue.
He had told them a year ago that one of the main reasons he was interested in the paper was his conviction that the ‘new realism’ of print unions made it financially possible to seize the ‘window of opportunity’.
Thornton wasn't interested.
NoS had mucked him about for more than a year.
He had attended endless meetings which they accused him of dominating.
If he didn't turn up they moaned at him later for not being there, and they had used his name for fund-raising without permission.
All he had intended to do was bridge the gap until they got a Chairman, or ‘Chair’ as he was supposed to call it.
With Thornton's final refusal the comrades could not fudge the Chair issue any longer.
They tried Walter Runciman of the Child Poverty Action Group and Peter Hughes of Logica, the computer company.
Runciman was not interested and Hughes told them he was busy turning round his company, which had temporarily bombed — an ideal qualification in retrospect.
As they culled Who's Who there was a debate on the executive about the ‘Old Lord approach’— finding someone who had been a financial force in the past, and would prove the paper was commercially sober.
But at the same time, through being virtually geriatric as they saw it, the Lord could be expected to stay in his castle and not spoil the fun.
Lord Lovell-Davis, Lord Kearton (Labour financier  and former head of the National Enterprise Board), Lord Wedderburn (Professor at the London School of Economics) and Joel Barnett (merchant banker and former Labour Treasury Minister) were put in the frame and sounded out.
But, employing the commercial sobriety for which they were being approached, they all refused.
Then Hayling struck gold.
A call to Nicholas Horsley, the Chairman of the Hull-based food-supply giant, Northern Foods, led to a meeting at Glendor House, Clarges Street, the company's plush Mayfair duplex flat off Curzon Street.
Hayling lavished the famous charm in unprecedented quantities, making an immediate and long-lasting impression on the fifty-two-year-old Horsley.
It didn't take long to get things sorted out.
At Northern Foods Horsley's brother-in-law, Chris Haskins, was taking a bigger and bigger part in the running of the company, leaving Horsley with more time, and he was delighted to have a chance to help in a project which instantly appealed to his idealistic nature.
He accepted at once and was almost ready to start tomorrow.
He promised, as his first task, to sort out Thornton.
All that remained was to get his appointment approved by the comrades.
The NoS executive reacted to the Horsley option with characteristic lack of grace.
Ben Lowe was dispatched to comb the radical food supplier's background for things to complain about.
The verdict was that Horsley had about as clean a bill of health as it was possible for a real, live capitalist to have.
Northern Foods was even tussling with one of its customers — the 100 per cent un-Right-On McDonalds hamburger chain — over its activities in South Africa.
This was just the sort of attitude the paper wanted — in another context it would have been a good news story.
And Horsley had given money to miners' families during the 1984–5 strike.
Horsley passed the test and went off to see Thornton, who was still simmering and had nothing but dire warnings for him.
‘They're driving me mad,’ he fumed.
He had been let down several times, they had done all sorts of things without asking him, and sometimes he only found out what they'd been up to when the papers rang for comment.
‘They've no idea.
And it'll be you who'll be in the public gaze as the figurehead.
You'll get the reporters, the TV, the media all intruding into your private life asking you to explain what's going on.
It's not worth it,’ he stressed.
But to Thornton's surprise, Horsley assured him that NoS 's naïvety was its greatest asset.
The stories of his own radical youth flowed out.
‘You know, they remind me of myself thirty years ago when I was a student activist at Oxford,’ enthused Horsley.
Hayling's invitation had brought it all back.
When Horsley had left university in the mid-1950s, with a third-class degree in philosophy, politics and economics, he had planned to conquer the world as a footloose roving reporter in the mould of his great hero, the foreign correspondent James Cameron.
He set off with rucksack and typewriter on a round-the-world trip, but only got as far as New Orleans, where, ever the hopeless romantic, he fell in love with a girl he met on a park bench.
Before the first blockbuster clattered from his typewriter he was back in Hull, settled down with his new wife, and started in middle management in the family business, then called Northern Dairies.
Thornton was unimpressed.
While Horsley had been cavorting about at Oxford, he had been on the first rung of an entirely different social ladder, as a solicitor's clerk.
Horsley didn't think much of Thornton either, and later complained (as did others) that he talked mostly about himself.
But to seal the deal he offered Thornton a place on the board of the nascent company, Jeboda, which was to be News on Sunday until flotation.
Thornton accepted, agreeing to stay around and possibly play a larger role again if things looked up.
But he gave a final warning to Horsley.
He was going to find he had an enormously difficult job on his hands.
The people in NoS had to be made to realize that if they were going after big money, professional management had to come in.
And that meant them moving over.
Thornton saw no sign that they were prepared to do so.
Horsley just smiled, his large relaxed frame and confident bonhomie contrasting sharply with the abrupt style of the little self-made Geordie.
He looked down at Thornton and informed him of the new management attitude.
His hero, James Cameron, would have approved.
‘They've got a dream, Clive.
A dream.
And we've got to help them make it come true.’
Serious money
Moving up north
With Clive Thornton out of the way, the media spotlight began to warm up on Nick Horsley.
And he began to sweat.
At this stage the media hounds were sniffing News on Sunday for signs of Loony or Hard Left activity.
It was partly for a story, and partly to size the paper up as competition or business.
Files on the paper were being opened in cuttings libraries and (behind the scenes) on executive computers.
Newcomers — especially such crucial ones as the Chairman — were being inspected carefully as the jigsaw of the company began to fall into place.
But Horsley's reasons for joining the paper were entirely respectable.
He was a pacifist professing the admirable, old-fashioned virtues of his Quaker upbringing.
Horsley's CND activities went back to his days at Oxford, when the time he spent on demonstrations was one of the reasons for his third-class degree.
He remained an active supporter of CND, boasted that his daughter had been conceived on an Aldermaston march, and had once horrified Margaret Thatcher by wearing his CND badge when he met her at a gathering of northern business people.
He even had a CND sticker in the back window of his car, a Jaguar XJ4.2 — and he claimed that no other Jaguar in the country displayed one.
Campaign , the advertising industry trade paper, noted that he had happily accepted the deletion of the suffix ‘man’ from his title of Chairman of News on Sunday Publishing plc.
The article made a weak joke about his CND beret.
There was no questioning the fact that Horsley was an extremely successful businessman, even if his clothes sometimes looked more like Country Life .
His big frame, slightly unkempt, thinning blond hair and florid appearance smacked of outdoor activity and a ‘hearty’ attitude.
He had been a keen sportsman in his youth, and now  followed cricket avidly.
And he was well known in the City, where there was still respect for a solid Yorkshire businessman.
Northern Foods was one of the largest and most successful companies in the country, with a steady record of expansion which was beginning to attract foreign investment.
At the same time, the company's interests had spread all over the world, far beyond the milk-round set up by his father.
The company had been well placed to take advantage of the 1960s consumer boom, and was already prospering by the time Horsley joined the Board in 1963, at the age of twenty-nine.
He became Chairman seven years later; under his chairmanship profits rose from £1 million to £60 million, making him by far the most successful businessman in the East Riding.
A particular coup for the firm was the contract to supply the rapidly expanding Marks and Spencer chain.
But Horsley hadn't sacrificed his humanitarian principles whilst presiding over such speedy business growth.
Northern Foods had always had a good name locally, and had earned respect for its relations with its workers.
Horsley personally insisted the company practise Equal Opportunities, and have fully unionized factories where managers and employees addressed each other on Christian-name terms.
In some ways, though, Nick — as he insisted people call him — lived in the shadow of his father Alec, a renowned pacifist who had set up a Chair of Peace Studies at Bradford University on the sensible grounds that everywhere else seemed to study war.
It was through this initiative that Nick finally got to meet his great hero, James Cameron, and after the collapse of his first marriage, he married Cameron's step-daughter, Sabeita.
When she left him in 1983 he was devastated.
But after that he met up again with Olwen, a childhood friend.
The two of them had often met socially in the old days, with their respective partners, at evenings in the Green Dragon, the local pub in the village of Welton, ten miles from Hull, where Horsley lived in a magnificent stone house which, he always stressed, did not have a drive.
Olwen had had her troubles as well.
Her marriage had broken up, and she had gone to live with a man who was starting an art gallery in the Lake District.
The relationship didn't work out, and early one Sunday morning she rang Horsley pleading for help.
He told her to  drive to him immediately, and when she arrived treated her to a breakfast of kippers and Chablis.
They had stayed together ever since, and Nick referred to her as his ‘partner’.
Olwen was not at all sure about the NoS offer.
She thought it would be a big mistake for Nick to devote two or three days a week to the newspaper at the expense of the family business.
And she was worried about his health.
Horsley was being slowly crippled by a rare type of paralysis spreading from his ankle, which meant that he now had to walk with a stick, and which it was feared would eventually put him in a wheelchair.
Frequent travel made his leg swell up, and caused him a considerable amount of discomfort.
Olwen didn't know at that time that the commitment was soon to become twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
At one point she told Nick that if Hayling — whom she referred to as ‘that nice-looking young man with the curly hair’— came round again she would refuse to let him in.
But she did, and was another won over by the famous charm.
Horsley cheerfully admitted when he took up the post of Chair that he knew nothing about newspapers.
He would rely instead on his successful general business experience to pull him through.
His language was full of nautical metaphors.
The Board was the bridge; he was going to keep his hand on the wheel.
This was a perfect frame of mind for chairing Northern Foods, a great supertanker of a business forging steadily ahead through the profitable waters of supermarket supply.
But NoS was more like a racing power-boat, and Horsley soon found himself in the position of a water-skier rather than a captain.
Instead of being at the controls, he was desperately clinging on while the engines, at full throttle, thrust the boat violently from side to side as a host of faction fighters wrestled to grab the wheel — or in most cases to avoid touching it.
Shrewd observers, such as Paul Johnson of the Spectator , pointed out that there was a world of difference between running a food-supply business — however large and successful — and a newspaper.
The former was a relatively stable affair.
Newspapers, even ones unencumbered by the exceptional problems NoS was creating for itself, need quick decisions and highly interventionist managers who know the business inside out.
But Horsley was popular with the Founders on a personal level.
His politics didn't cause any problems.
He was a self-confessed old-fashioned Liberal, who believed in people being nicer to each other, and he had a warm and generous manner to which they responded.
Hayling got huge enjoyment from introducing the two sides, and he and others were beside themselves at the incongruity of the meeting.
Their attitude was part of an exaggerated respect for the English class system, and they did not seem to realize that an open-minded person like Horsley could easily have had the same sort of meeting at, for example, a CND conference.
Horsley, as a Yorkshireman, was naturally a fan of the north, and hoped that News on Sunday , as part of its political stance, would help halt the growing north-south divide.
The paper had originally intended to base itself in London, where large-scale funding from GLEB and the GLC seemed certain under the banner of creating jobs.
But now that the GLC was about to be abolished and GLEB was in trouble, the paper, with Horsley's enthusiastic support, decided to move to Manchester.
Horsley and Hayling were in disagreement about the Manchester move.
But the two men had quickly developed a peculiarly close and mutually protective relationship, and could agree to differ without falling out.
It was said that Horsley treated Hayling as the brilliant but wayward son he always wanted, but never had.
He could criticize ‘Alan’, but nobody else was allowed to.
Others said that Horsley saw in Hayling the image of what he had always wanted to be — idealistic, full of derring-do, glamorous, and free from the tedious baggage of conventional business life.
The NoS pro-Manchester lobby had a strong moral argument which appealed to both Horsley and the Founders.
The paper would be whisked out of the cynical ghetto of Fleet Street, and away from distorted, degenerate London priorities — back to basics and closer to ‘the people’.
Supporters of this argument seemed to believe that the paper could defy the laws of journalistic and financial gravity.
All the nationals except the Daily Star , which had been specifically based there by its owners to soak up the spare capacity left by their other declining title, the Daily Express , had either closed down, moved to London or drastically reduced their Manchester operations.
The Guardian left at the end of the 1950s, and even the Star was shortly to move to the Smoke.
The anti-London lobby, however, was well organized and had financial arguments to back its case.
There was the possibility of large-scale investment from Manchester and other northern councils  hoping to stem the tide and keep a vestige of the newspaper industry in the city.
EEC training grants would also be available.
To bolster the argument, Kerry Marcus, a radio journalist from Manchester, was hired on a £6,000 grant from Manchester City Council to produce a convincing financial case.
Marcus calculated that by taking into account property costs — estimated at a third of those in London — and salaries on average £2,000 lower, the paper should save £658,000 a year by being based in Manchester.
It could also get £140,000 in grants and investment from the council and the local equivalent of GLEB if it moved north.
By this time many of the London borough councils, such as Islington, Brent and Southwark, were confidently expected to invest, regardless of where the paper was based.
There was hope that locating the paper in the north would swing other, non-London councils behind it.
As much as £750,000 extra in investment from Manchester and other northern councils was estimated to be available if the paper moved.
And, to top the argument, market research indicated greater reader-loyalty amongst NoS 's target audience for a northern-based paper — indicating an extra £1 million a year in sales and advertising revenue.
Added together, the anti-London lobby said, there was around £2.5 million to be gained by moving to Manchester.
But in the end, like most decisions on NoS , the Manchester move was ‘positively negative’.
It was not so much pro-Manchester as anti-London.
As the paper was to be printed on contract presses with pages faxed across electronically, its editorial offices could in theory be based anywhere.
But the plan had another side to it — it was a vital factor in the faction fighting which was beginning to engulf the paper.
For the comrades it was a back-handed way of ensuring that the increasingly suspect and disliked Pilger would be ruled out as editor.
And it would cut his ally Hayling down to size.
Both men had fought a long and isolated battle against the move from London.
Globe-trotting Pilger regarded even London as provincial; Manchester was beyond the pale.
He described the city as ‘an interesting train ride away from all the talent and all the good stories.’
He might visit from time to time should a story miserable enough to write about crop up, but there was no way he was going to edit the paper from there.
After all, Pilger was a citizen of the world.
He virtually commuted between London and Sydney, his Australian birthplace, where he would stay for months at a time with his parents, making award-winning films, before returning to London in his safari suit, sun-bleached and fit.
He saw himself, with some justice, as towering above the rest of the NoS people.
He admired some of them as determined but ordinary folk.
Others, like Hayling, obviously had talent, but none of them had even a fraction of the experience or ability which had twice earned him the Journalist of the Year award for his coverage of Vietnam and Cambodia.
Though Pilger was a committed left-winger, he was lacking the finer points of the new feminist-influenced Right-On etiquette.
The maverick and often exasperating individualism which had served him well in battles against conservative-minded executives at the Mirror became a major liability at NoS , where the premium was on conformity to group objectives.
Like all outsiders, he was automatically a focus for suspicion, and his casual dismissal of the Manchester plan had gained him enemies.
Hayling, who was now working closely with Pilger, sensed the Manchester decision had been made in advance by the Founders, and assembled a team of journalists to explain what was wrong with it.
He wanted to use Pilger as his main gun, but the globetrotter had disappeared abroad again.
As a substitute Brian Whitaker, the second most experienced journalist continuously involved with NoS , was drafted to write a journalist's case for the paper remaining in London.
Whitaker's report explained how newspapers worked.
Just because the paper was in Manchester would not even mean that it would be easier to report on the north.
All the lines of communication were routed through London.
London had the City, the Government and all its departments, the headquarters of all the major companies and pressure groups, all the people in the know — in short, as Pilger had said, all the stories.
And the crucial support elements, such as press-cuttings and picture libraries, were in the capital.
Even the Founders recognized that a London presence could not be abandoned altogether, so by choosing a northern HQ the paper would turn itself into a two-site operation.
This would throw up a host of attendant problems.
But the Founders and their political allies weren't interested in these facts, which, with their ignorance of newspapers, did not mean much to them.
They decided that Pilger, Hayling and the journalists simply couldn't be bothered to make the move.
Hayling had let them know that the move would complicate his personal life.
He  was a pro-feminist ‘new man’, and therefore saw himself as required to do his fair share of the housework and of looking after his young daughter at home in Shepherd's Bush.
But the Founders' vote for Manchester was also supported by Walsh, who was excited by the possibilities of fund-raising from the northern councils.
The decision was not unanimous, but it was clear-cut.
Hayling recognized at the time how the project had been damaged.
It was only later that he described the mistake as ‘terminal’, but he knew originally that it was serious.
By the time the paper was launched a year later, it was clear that he was right.
The economic advantages evaporated, and large-scale investment by Greater Manchester Council's pension fund never materialized, although other northern councils did invest.
The move was a major handicap in recruiting journalists — who, after all the fuss, were mostly hired from the south, and not from the local redundant talent which was said to have been available.
The costs and confusions inflicted by the twin-site operation were huge.
News on Sunday ended up with the worst of both worlds — a paper with metropolitan Right-On concerns, produced in a city that had fallen off the edge of the Right-On world.
Hayling's authority as chief executive was severely dented by the decision, and his defeat contributed to the creating of an unmanageable company where authority was beginning to dissolve into competing committees and rival cabals.
He considered resigning, for the first and not the last time, but failed to do so.
And the argument over Manchester polarized the two ends of the company.
The Founders and the closely allied management team, recently formed from the old executive committee and resolved to work by consensus, began to close ranks against Hayling and the intruding alien business world which he came to represent.
The main voice for the growing suspicions was Liz Cooper, a member both of the management team and the Founders' Trust.
As a staunch feminist, she grew alarmed as all the positions of power were taken by men.
It seemed that the men were welshing on the Equal Opportunities policy so as to make the paper more attractive to investors.
And the feeling grew that the women had been outpersonoeuvred.
Instead of being at the top, they were being concentrated in middle management, where all the hard detailed work had to be done.
Walsh, lecturing the others on how they must junk ‘traditional left-wing fund-raising methods’, had the most important job of the moment as fund-raising co-ordinator.
He was now presenting himself as a cynical hard-nosed East End wheeler-dealer.
He had recruited John Hoyland, the recently redundant editor of the GLC freesheet Jobs for a Change , as his assistant and general factotum.
Hoyland saw his job as trying to impose some order on his boss's whirlwind operating methods, which had caused such irritation amongst the others that there had been demands for his dismissal.
Hayling, now describing himself in Trotskyite jargon as a ‘commercial rightist’, and wearing a three-piece suit to prove it, seemed determined to become a City gent.
He was disappearing regularly into the bowels of the City to meet various moneypersons, all of whom were assumed to be faintly threatening male chauvinists.
And he had formed an exclusive and close personal relationship, which went beyond mere business, with another powerful man, Nick Horsley.
Horsley, in turn, was followed around and virtually nursed, as the women saw it, by the embarrassingly doting and un-feminist Olwen, whose old-fashioned attitude towards her man sickened them.
Hayling and Horsley were obviously lining up yet another man, Pilger, to control what the paper would say with its editorial content.
Without consultation, Hayling had invited Pilger to move up from being a mere adviser to the new post of editorial director.
The Horsley-Hayling-Pilger axis, with Walsh spinning round it in an erratic orbit, symbolized the male domination of the project.
The feminists thought the whole structure was rotten, but they had taken a particular dislike to Pilger.
He embodied everything that was wrong about men.
He was arrogant, powerful, patronizing, self-assured, and would sweep into rooms and dominate space and conversation.
For Liz Cooper it was somehow summed up by his big feet, a typical male defect, which she would complain about whenever possible.
On top of this, there were plenty of people in NoS who were opposed to the idea of having an editor at all.
Supporters had been split into regional groups throughout the country, and John and Joan Bohanna's Merseyside Regional Group directly confronted Pilger, telling him that ‘ultimate NoS editorial control rests not with the editor, or the Board of Directors, but the Founders’, and the editor would have to do their bidding at all times.
There were only four  things that the editor could do without consulting the Founders.
He could work out the house-style; take legal responsibility for libel; make sure nothing went in the paper which was against the editorial Charter when the Founders were not looking; and he could put ‘scoops’ in the paper should the reporters come across some.
The traditional notion of an editor, hired to get on with it, was out.
This arrangement represented ‘the same top-down white patriarchal model of leadership that surrounds us in our daily life in capitalist society and most left-wing organizations in this country.
The success of News on Sunday in financial terms does not depend on this outmoded politically sterile model of operation .’
Not that the success of News on Sunday in financial terms was very high on the list of priorities.
‘In the first place we can never forget the main objective in establishing News on Sunday was not to make money,’ the Liverpool comrades continued, adding the muddled rider: ‘It would be lovely to ignore money, but we can't.’
There was little enthusiasm, then, as the paper moved towards the alien financial world of the City to set itself up as a public limited company.
Suspicion intensified that a sell-out of its principles was on the cards.
Raising the money
The manner of the capitalization was that the shares would not be publicly quoted and dealt in like ones on the Stock Exchange, but would be offered to investors who would have faith that the company would grow and their shares would increase with it.
A great inducement of ‘start-ups’ or ‘green-field projects’, where the original investors are in on the ground floor, is that they will make a killing if the company one day goes on to the Stock Exchange, or is gobbled up by a predator in a takeover bid.
But to attract the funds needed to capitalize,NoS would have to persuade a merchant bank to sponsor it, which would inevitably lead to confrontation over the Right-On organizational principles on which the project was based.
The first merchant bankers approached were Samuel Montagu.
They were interested, but their fees were considered to be too high.
Instead they recommended Guinness Mahon, part of the giant Guinness Peat group.
Hayling went along to meet Anthony Everett, the director who would be handling the  issue.
Everett, an extremely experienced chartered accountant, was captivated by Hayling and became personally very interested in the paper and the job opportunities it would create.
Hayling in turn was delighted to meet a man whose friends described him as a ‘non-conformist’ compared with most City types, and one who had strong views about the way City investment was dominated by political advantage.
Everett had difficulty convincing some of his colleagues, but the involvement of Horsley ‘put it all together’, and he was authorized to take the share issue on.
The share offer was to be made through the normal prospectus, summarizing the business plan for the paper and projected profits, endorsed by relevant professional advisers.
Guinness Mahon, in conjunction with solicitors Jacques and Lewis, had the responsibility of drawing up the document, a complicated matter strewn with legal pitfalls.
Such a process is always lengthy and complicated, as each line has to be verified to ensure no false promises or claims are made.
It produced some odd scenes: when NoS wanted to state that the paper was going to be ‘progressive’ and ‘accessible’, articles from the dummy had to be scrutinized to make sure they proved this was true.
There was constant pressure from Everett to make the company more attractive to investors by dumping various Right-On commitments.
Hayling relayed the pressure back to the ever more suspicious comrades.
There were two specific worries — the lack of management experience and the extraordinary Golden Share proposal, giving the Founders power over the financial control of the company.
But, like Horsley, Everett was immediately infected by the challenge of the project and the admirable enthusiasm which it represented, and he put himself out on a limb to help.
It was decided that the company should be capitalized at £6.5 million, to be sold in shares of £1 each.
Hayling, Walsh and the others gravely signed undertakings to appear in the prospectus that they would look after the shareholders' money and manage the company in a ‘responsible and profitable manner’.
There was much discussion as to who should and should not appear in the prospectus as the management team.
The original plan had been to leave all the top posts open, with a promise to find people as soon as the investors had parted with their cash.
Everett pointed out this was ridiculous, and reminded the comrades that management was everything, especially in a risk-capital venture  such as this.
Many new companies are floated on the reputation of the team alone, and although NoS did not have one which would bring investors flocking, it had at least to state that one existed.
Eventually Hayling agreed to appear in the prospectus confirmed as chief executive until the launch.
Up until then he had been acting temporarily in the post, awaiting the arrival of a more experienced businessman.
Walsh did not appear, but Cooper and Pilger went in as non-executive members of the Board.
Hayling was pressuring Gerry Taylor to appear in the prospectus.
Taylor, former managing director of the Guardian , was cagey.
He had talked to the paper and was agreeing to join, but had not yet committed himself.
Anyhow, he had other contractual commitments, so he refused to allow his name to be used.
The lack of experienced management was commented upon when the prospectus was issued, but there was an even more serious problem — the powers given to the Founders' Trust.
The Founders had to agree everything to do with the paper, including the appointment of the sponsoring merchant bank.
Everett was duly interviewed for suitability in a hall in Shepherd's Bush on a Sunday afternoon.
It was a bizarre scene, with the City merchant banker being interrogated about his views on a number of subjects.
When asked about his attitude to Equal Opportunities, Everett promptly offered a half-hour lecture on why women should be ordained as priests.
The Founders moved on to the next question.
The Founders' powers had emerged in the long wrangle with GLEB.
Essentially a self-appointed and unaccountable élite, lacking any national-newspaper or big-business experience, they were put in a position of control of both the company and the editorial side of the paper.
The objectives were laudable and in some ways romantic.
The Founders were to be the guardians of the purity of the paper, protecting it and keeping it in touch with the grass roots which they represented.
Membership of the Founders' Trust had changed frequently in the quest to find more women, working-class people and blacks, but at the time the prospectus was issued the original five Founders — Lowe, Walsh, Cooper, Sadgrove and Power — had been joined by a mixture of others.
Walsh's ex-partner Jo Robinson, ex-Big Flamer Henry Stewart from Newcastle and New Zealand journalist Kerry Brown had become Founders, along with Maxine Johnson, an industrial-relations lecturer who lived in Manchester.
The group had been completed by Steve Riley, a T and G shop steward at Fords in Dagenham and two people from Liverpool — Yussef ‘Joe’ Farrag and Joan Bohanna, shop steward at Glaxo.
Bohanna's husband, John, was the secretary to the Trust and its public spokesperson.
They were all friends, or friends of friends, of the original group and highly politicized.
Hayling had been excluded from becoming a Founder first because of his job policing the project for the GLC grant, and then because he was working for the company.
Founders were not allowed to take NoS jobs without giving up their place on the Trust, which determined from the beginning to act as a collective.
Hayling nominated Riley and Bohanna, who were cronies from his days as a ‘workerist’ Big Flame activist at Fords.
The Founders appeared in the prospectus as holders of a Golden Share which gave them six powers.
The most important was the right to prevent any single investor from owning more than 15 per cent of the shares, which effectively gave them the right to veto a takeover bid.
The object was to prevent takeover by a rival paper, or even by a consortium of people opposed to NoS and its politics which might try to build up a majority shareholding.
Because of the Golden Share, Murdoch and any others would be forced to stand on the sidelines gnashing their teeth as News on Sunday forged ahead, slicing huge swathes off the readership of their titles.
The next target was already in sight.
Founder Henry Stewart had produced costings for a daily paper financed out of the profits of News on Sunday , which would be protected by a similar fiendish arrangement.
The second most important power which came with the ownership of the Golden Share was the right of veto over the hiring and firing of the editor.
This was to ensure that he or she would not be pressurized to publish things against their judgement or be got rid of in favour of an outsider who would change the paper's political line.
With the final umbrella of the Charter, which theoretically laid down the principles of the paper and what it stood for, the last bricks were put into the edifice.
Everett argued that the Founders would have to give up some of their powers if NoS was going to attract any regular City investment.
Nobody, he said, would put money into a company controlled by an outside body like theirs, with no financial liability or incentive to make the company profitable.
In the first feasibility study for GLEB in November 1984,NoS had planned to raise £1.5 million from the  City, either in the form of venture capital or debenture stock — a hefty 29 per cent of the launch costs, then estimated at £4.45 million.
There was no chance, Everett told them, of raising that sort of money with the Founders' powers.
But they didn't care, tending to the view that the City was a viper's nest of scheming capitalists, whose sole reason for investing would be to take the paper over.
And they had decided that they could keep more control by financing the paper with capital raised from ‘the movement’.
Shares in News on Sunday Publishing plc, registered company No. 1989364, went on sale at 10am on 9 July 1986.
The offer was of 6, 500,000 shares at a cost of £1 each.
The prospectus offered investors a return of either 18 per cent, 34 per cent or 45 per cent over a three-year period, depending on the accuracy of the sales projections, based on the RSGB figures, with all the appropriate caveats cautiously attached.
Because the issue was not underwritten, if any shares remained unsold when the statutory forty-day issue period ended at 5pm on 12 August, the company would fail to capitalize.
The whole thing would be over, and all the money raised would have to be sent back.
Everett tried a quick tour of ‘neutral’ investors — the big pension funds, particularly those belonging to the nationalized industries, and the major insurance companies.
But he did not waste much time.
He knew the projected return for such a risk venture was ‘at the lower end’, and felt the companies were very wary of anything with a political content.
As he expected, he drew a blank, and found the main objection was the Founders' powers.
Everett was convinced that part of the lack of enthusiasm was due to the fact the paper would actively support Labour.
He knew it was in the interests of the City that the Tories win the next election.
But there was nothing he could do.
(There was, however, another side to this coin.
The City was beginning to wake up to the fact that the Labour movement, all told, had a great deal of money at its disposal — especially in the pension funds of Labour-controlled local authorities.
Pension-fund investments across the country amounted to billions of pounds, and by helping News on Sunday investors could score many brownie points, and find a possible way in to this exciting and under-exploited source of money.
But even that argument failed to raise any investment.)
In any case, most City people put politics to one side and looked at  the nascent company as a simple business proposition.
Merchant bankers N. M. Rothschild were completely dismissive.
Mentioning ‘optimistic’ circulation forecasts and the key problem of inexperienced management, they stated: ‘There is a very real possibility that the business will run out of cash and that investment returns will be negligible.’
They forcefully advised clients not to invest.
Phillips and Drew emphasized that there was no finance director to look after investors' money, and added that the return being offered was much too low for such a high-risk project.
‘The Founders’ rights make it difficult for NoS to be taken over,’they warned.
‘This is a disadvantage in raising the capital because the possibility of profitable acquisition appeals to investors.’
It was as Everett had feared — the Golden Share was being seen as a kind of sterilization pill which would prevent a takeover and a profitable union.
But the comrades were prepared for everything the class enemy could throw at them.
Walsh, as fund-raising co-ordinator, and Hayling, as ‘poacher turned gamekeeper’(as Everett described him), had been sounding out potential ‘movement’ investors for months.
Reluctantly realizing that major investment from the City was increasingly unlikely, they had been concentrating on the unions and council pension funds.
Now they joined in with Everett's strategy of going where the big fish were.
The Founders had always thought that they might get some pension-fund money.
But it was Hayling and John Hoyland, Chris Walsh's new assistant, who knew exactly how it could be done.
Hoyland, like Hayling, had taken an interest in the campaign being run by their GLC employers to ‘disinvest’— withdraw investment — from companies involved in South Africa.
In an effort to avoid any financial contact with South Africa, the GLC had devoted considerable attention to its pension fund and the way it was managed.
It had been pleasantly surprised to find that, after years when nobody had bothered to find out, political control over the investment decisions was more direct than anyone had realized.
The GLC introduced a new vogue for councils to take a far more active role in their investment decisions.
Now, just as the GLC had been abolished,NoS was going to step into its shoes and teach other councils how to use their pension funds to back risk ventures, within the limits which were laid down.
In many cases NoS was to be their first experiment.
The paper homed in on its discovery that councils could use 5 per cent of their pension funds on risk ventures.
In  one example — Haringey, which covers an inner-city area of North London including Tottenham — the 5 per cent limit worked out at £7 million.
Larger Labour-controlled county councils had even more money available.
Cleveland, in the north-east, had £13 million to invest.
Most important of all, much of this risk capital — adding up to hundreds of millions right across the country — was at the disposal of the NoS core group's close political allies.
All they had to do was hit a tiny fraction of the total available and they were in business.
A target of £3.5 million was set for the councils.
Hayling and Walsh had already probed the possibility of getting their hands on some of this money, but it was only when Horsley arrived in March 1986 that things began to really move.
For the next three months Walsh, Hayling, Horsley, Everett and the ever-present Olwen raced around the country in the black Jaguar.
Under Walsh's overall co-ordination Horsley and Hayling, assisted by John Hoyland and Henry Stewart, handled the councils.
Walsh, Hayling and a new assistant, Marisa Casares-Roach, looked after the unions.
Hayling had introduced Casares-Roach to Walsh after meeting her at a Ford workers' conference in Benidorm where she had been the translator.
She was a small, fiery Spanish woman who was experienced in marketing and had once worked for  Athletico Madrid football club.
Casares-Roach had moved to England in 1968, and had a multitude of contacts through her trade-union activities, especially in the T and G, where she was a member of one of the national committees.
The NoS roadshow was idiosyncratic but effective.
Olwen drove, and evolved a schedule of visiting her numerous girlfriends or looking for bargains in the shops whilst the others pitched the local council or union.
The bureaucracy of both institutions caused numerous problems, particularly with the councils, where there were endless fixed meetings to attend, return trips, official hands to be shaken and backs to be slapped.
As the programme of meetings rolled on, sometimes with many presentations on the same day, Horsley was exhilarated, amazed and excited.
Everett, similarly enthusiastic, described it as ‘being on the stump’.
The close-knit team found it exhausting, but tremendous fun — a bit like a rock tour, with half-hour presentations of the business plan instead of‘gigs’.
After years of dealing with the likes of dullard and truculent supermarket purchasing managers, Horsley was  suddenly meeting all manner of fascinating and powerful people.
And he was having the time of his life.
There was a Westminster hotel meeting with Neil Kinnock, a fellow CND supporter.
Finding that broking in political power was more fun than selling milk, Horsley self-importantly told Kinnock he'd better stick to his socialist principles after being elected Prime Minister, or there'd be trouble from NoS .
Kinnock's more realistic reply was: ‘That's fine, Nick, so long as you help me get to Downing Street first.’
Of course the paper would, Horsley assured him.
One day in April, Horsley, Walsh and Everett spent the morning in Manchester meeting the Co-op insurance company and asking them for a £750,000 investment, before rushing straight round to the Council Economic Development Committee to pitch for another £500,000.
In the afternoon they sprinted over the hills to the offices of Derbyshire County Council in Matlock.
Horsley asked for £500,000.
And Walsh piled on the pressure to get promises of advertising business.
On a typical evening, and sometimes in the small hours, it was back to the Caxton House HQ in London for strategy meetings.
Whether NoS could be classified as ‘Loony Left’ or not, the majority of its council backers were to be the big names on the Sun hit list.
The paper started by zeroing in on the inner London boroughs.
Top-priority councils for fund-raising efforts were Lewisham, Haringey and Newham.
Islington, Southwark, Camden and Hounslow were thought to be in the bag.
The operation was run on a ‘me too’ basis, so Greenwich, for example, was only to be approached after Haringey and Newham had committed themselves.
Their investment advisers might try to stop them, or limit the investment if it was being made on social grounds, but the Labour Groups could be relied upon to over-rule the objections.
In Islington the financial advisers set a maximum of £50,000, but the council decided to invest five times that.
Hounslow came up with £100,000 after being given a limit of £10,000.
On 12 July Southwark council received a report from its finance director concluding that NoS was high-risk, low-return.
He strongly recommended against investment ‘unless the aim is to support the editorial charter’.
The inadequacy of the NoS management, described as ‘enthusiastic but inexperienced’, was mentioned once again.
Nevertheless, Southwark invested £300,000.
There was another problem with some of the firm political allies such as Lambeth, Brent, Haringey and Hackney, who still tended to leave investment decisions to their advisers:NoS had to teach them what to do.
At one south London council, which had left the fund in the hands of stockbrokers and been happy to rubber-stamp their annual report, nobody could remember who was in charge.
He turned out to be an elderly ex-colonel, who was tracked down to his retirement home in Surrey.
At Haringey it needed the direct intervention of council leader Bernie Grant, later to become the first black MP for Tottenham, to change the policy of leaving all investment decisions to the advisers.
The outcome was an investment of £250,000.
In Brent, council leader Merle Amory had to organize an emergency meeting of the pension-fund investment panel.
Brent came across with another £250,000.
The campaign did well in London, but in the rest of the country the pickings were thin.
Derbyshire was a rare, and expected, northern exception, investing £300,000 after the Matlock meeting.
(When Southwark promised £300,000, matching Derbyshire's investment, the council insisted on putting in another £5,000 to stay the largest single shareholder.)
The West Midlands and Cleveland County came up with £300,000 and £250,000 respectively, and that was all for the rest of England — a paltry £885,000 compared with the £2,325,000 raised from just twelve London boroughs.
A whirlwind Walsh tour of Scotland yielded a meagre £300,000.
Walsh found many of the councils quite backward.
Strathclyde, a huge left-Labour-controlled council, had not even set up the required risk-capital fund.
Walsh and Everett began to advise them how to do it, but it was too late.
Wales only added another £150,000, but the operation was still an overall success.
The target had been £3.5 million, and the total raised from the council pension funds was £3,630,000.
‘We have a newspaper!’
Next came the unions.
An initial target of £4.7 million, later reduced to £2 million, was set for investments, which could be drawn on the unions' general funds.
The target was ambitious, but by no means impossible had the fund-raising campaign been properly organized.
It was not.
When it came to it, the unions were badly handled and the strategy badly thought out.
Seasoned pressure-group activists  advised Walsh to combine the presentations to top officials with pressure from the grass-roots.
The standard tactics were explained — alerting the membership in each union, by letter or leaflet, dispatching activists to local branches to pass resolutions supporting the paper and to make sure they got on the agenda of the union's conferences.
General Secretaries would then be obliged to satisfy the membership and could be put in a classic squeeze when they were approached at top level, even if supporting NoS was against their better judgement.
Walsh sneered at such suggestions as ‘traditional left’, old-hat and boring.
He didn't think much of the unions and their so-called democracy, preferring to rely on direct contact with the leaders.
In many cases he had left the unions to the last minute and missed the relevant conferences anyway.
Instead he was backing what he called the ‘peer group domino approach’.
The first promise of money would be hardest to get, but once it was in the bag the others, not wanting to be left out, would fall in line.
Ignorance of the union world was underlined early on by a detailed target list itemizing the amount sought from each union.
It included a target of £150,000 from the National Union of Mineworkers, even though it had emerged penniless from the strike in 1985, with its assets in the hands of the sequestrators.
Another £100.000 was put down for the National Union of Journalists, despite its clear and well-known policy of not investing in newspapers because of the inevitable conflict of interest in its role as champion of higher wages for journalists.
Another £100,000 was targeted from the National Union of Students, which as a federation of local student unions and associations is barred by law from spending or investing any of its constituent members' money.
The Transport and General Workers' Union was the first domino to fall in Walsh's strategy.
The T and G is a weathervane union closely connected to the Labour Party leadership.
Other unions would wait to see the attitude of its General Secretary, Ron Todd, before making up their minds.
Todd, supported by his executive committee, promised £550,000 — which was £50,000 above target.
This was not entirely unexpected, as he had been a firm supporter of the project, and the union had put £7,000 into the earlier feasibility study, but it was still a useful bonus, and provided the sort of result NoS needed to wave around.
The real hunt, though, was to find a union less clearly aligned  with the labour left.
The breakthrough came with the middle-of-the-road National Union of Railwaymen, which promised to come up with their target £150,000 ‘subject to a positive  response from a number of other unions’.
The NUR did deliver, and the victory was heavily emphasized in a letter to John Edmonds, leader of the General and Municipal Workers, the largest union led by Labour right-wingers.
They nevertheless declined to invest, and the whole ‘domino’ strategy was soon in tatters.
Even though the overall union target had been cut back from £4.7 million to £2 million, only four unions came in on target: NALGO with £250,000; the National Union of Seamen and Fire Brigades Union with £50,000 each; the fourth was the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers, led by the vociferously right-wing Gavin Laird.
It was something of a shock that the AUEW had invested at all, let alone met its target.
But the decision was made only hours before the share sale closed, and too late to cause a domino effect among other right-leaning unions.
The only union to exceed its target was Ron Todd's T and G.
Other unions which had either supported the earlier feasibility study, or might otherwise have been expected to be sympathetic, came up with only feeble amounts.
The print union, SOGAT, targeted for £150,000, invested only £10,000.
NUPE (target £250,000) invested only £5,000. and the nurses' union COHSE (target £250,000) was little better with £15,000.
Fourteen large unions each targeted for more than £100,000 failed to invest anything.
They included the National Communications Union, contributors to the earlier feasibility study, and left-wing unions such as TASS, UCATT and Clive Jenkins's ASTMS.
In the first week of the forty-day share sale period, the unions only invested £871,000, and two weeks before the closing date the total had only crept up to £927,500.
Despite frantic last-minute appeals, only £1,634,000 had been raised by the time the offer stopped — still well short of the new lower target of £2 million.
Between them the two major planks of the strategy had yielded £5,264,500.
The third target group was individual supporters and commercial investors.
This turned out to be an even bigger disappointment, and showed how few people were really heavily committed to the project.
The target was £1 million, which Walsh wanted to collect through the ‘thousand times a thousand’ approach which had  been mentioned in the original feasibility study.
The idea was to persuade 1,000 ‘rich radicals’ with incomes of over £12,000 per year (the Walsh criterion for being rich) to put up £1,000 each.
Everett vetoed the suggestion as unorthodox and cranky, totally scotching a Walsh proposal that an advertisement be placed in the Guardian .
He explained that if the money wasn't raised it would destroy confidence, and anyhow such an unusual move would be very close to breaking the rules about soliciting investment.
As a substitute, Walsh frantically instructed everyone to turn out their address books.
Long lost ‘friends’ suddenly received phone calls which quickly edged round to the appalling standard of the existing Sunday papers.
If the conversation didn't quickly progress to the bottom line, it was swiftly terminated.
Various individuals came up with useful sums.
Horsley's father, Alec, put in £7,000 Nick Horsley, for once, bettered him with £10,000.
Hilary Wainwright, the co-author of Beyond the Fragments who had joined the Board of the new company, bought £1,000 of shares.
Her brother Martin, a Guardian reporter and steam-train enthusiast, did likewise.
Hayling did not invest as he had no money.
Some left-wing celebrities were persuaded.
Julie Christie and guitarist John Williams each bought £1,000 worth.
Best-selling thriller writer Ken Follett, a former newspaper reporter himself, put in £10,000.
But it was touch and go all the way.
As they entered the last fortnight of the share sale there was still a shade under half the £6.5 million to be raised.
Most of the London councils had paid up by then, though some of the large sums promised by the unions were still churning their way through committees.
Then, a body blow.
Just two days before the share sale was due to close, the Greater Manchester Council superannuation fund failed to come up with the expected £250,000.
Like the GLC, it had been abolished, and its responsibilities passed to a joint organization of ten Manchester boroughs.
All had to agree to the investment, and at the last minute Stockport, the only council where Labour had lost overall control to a mixture of Tories and Liberals, vetoed the decision.
Caxton House and Guinness Mahon's City offices saw frantic activity as existing investors were begged over the phone to increase their contributions in a desperate bid to bridge the gap.
The NUR was the only one to oblige.
Others, including the London councils, were sympathetic but explained that it would take months, not hours, to get the decision through all the relevant committees.
The last nerve-wracking day was 12 August, the ‘Glorious Twelfth’ which marks the opening of the grouse-shooting season.
The red line on the thermometer on the wall of Caxton House crept up with agonizing slowness.
If the £6.5 million target was not met in full by 5pm, it would be too late.
And the target was not reached.
At the end of the day the company was still short by £719,000.
Everybody had known it would be a close thing, and the invitations sent out to the party that evening had hedged bets by inviting people to a ‘congratulations/commiserations’ party.
But the day was saved by Everett, who agreed — after pressurizing his boss, Alastair Morton — that Guinness Mahon would take up the remaining shares.
The closing rules about share issues are very strict; ironically, this is to protect investors in successful issues.
The argument goes that if an issue has been over-subscribed, people who come in late already know that it has been a success and are therefore cutting down their risk.
But in this case, Everett argued, Guinness Mahon could take up the slack as the company fully expected other investors who had been too slow to meet the deadline to come in.
One of the disadvantages of the issue's timing had been people going on holiday, exacerbating the delays caused by the bureaucratic structures involved.
But the Guinness Mahon decision, although it had saved the company, had introduced a sobering note.
Everybody knew that if Everett had not stepped in to buy all those unsold shares, the company would have been a dead duck.
But Horsley put these thoughts to the back of his mind as he headed for the party at Caxton House, determined to enter into the spirit of things.
‘We have a newspaper!’ he yelled as he crashed in, mopping the sweat from his brow.
At the NoS offices the champagne corks had been popping.
The celebrations were for having pulled it off, but it was also time for many people who had been involved in the project to leave.
For them this was the high point.
With the Charter and the political precepts of the paper firmly in place, all that was needed was to drag a few journalists out of the pubs and set them to work.
The rest would follow automatically.
Henry Stewart returned from a last-minute fund-raising pitch and changed out of his three-piece suit into his familiar jeans in the corridor.
It was the first suit he had ever owned and three sizes too  big.
As he gulped the warm champagne he swore he would never wear it again.
Three days later Everett and Horsley went north to collect on the promises that had been made.
Though the Greater Manchester pension fund investment had been blocked by Stockport council, the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive was still game, and Everett picked up a cheque for £175,000 from a suspicious representative who demanded proof that he was really the man from Guinness Mahon.
Everett told him not to be so ridiculous, grabbed the cheque and ran.
Back in the Jaguar with Olwen, they motored north up the M6, turning off close to Lancaster to make their way up a private road to a grey stone castle at the top of the hill, overlooking the beautiful valley of the River Lune.
The forbidding-looking castle, Claughton Hall, belonged to Owen Oyston, a flamboyant fifty-one-year-old self-made multi-millionaire known for his good local Labour Party connections.
Oyston had been brought up the son of a Durham miner and had moved to Blackpool with his parents when they went to open a boarding house.
He had made his millions by first cornering the estate-agency business in the gaudy resort, and then expanding throughout the north-west.
He showed Horsley and Everett politely round the castle, explaining how parts dated back to the fifteenth century, and telling the preposterous, but true, story of how the building, formerly the family home of the Fenwicks, had been shifted stone by stone from the foot of the hill in the 1930s to give it the spectacular view it now enjoyed.
Everett and Horsley were both intrigued.
They had heard of Oyston, who had originally been contacted as a cold call, but they had never met him.
He was an interesting character, with the raffish air of a nineteenth-century showman and a goatee beard and longish hair to match.
He even kept six shaggy bison in the grounds of his castle, and had a Wild West hat which he donned to complete the pioneer image.
Oyston's estate-agency fortune had been based on the sort of direct contact with the people to which NoS was aspiring.
He had moved in and taken the stuffiness out of the business, slaughtering its ‘professional’ pretensions, and bringing it on to the High Street long before the present new wave of trendy estate agents.
His slogan was  ‘NO SALE — NO FEE!’
If he did not sell a property there was no charge, and at a time when other agents charged for everything down to advertisements in the papers, this was a popular and profitable revolution, which added to the image of ‘man of the people’.
This had been further enhanced recently by his appearance in television ads for the estate agency chain, which suggested his decision to give up an earlier acting career had been a smart move.
That career had peaked with a part as a junior barrister in Granada TV's Crown Court .
Now, in the television ads, he cheerfully delivered some hammy lines before falling backwards into a swimming pool.
Other Lancashire businessmen watching his progress had come to respect him as a red-hot entrepreneur and ruthless opponent in business dealings, for whom profit was the consideration that overrode every other.
They noted with some awe the way he had risen to become one of the richest men in the county.
Oyston was now moving across into the media, using the same formula of low overheads, tight management and aggressive advertising.
He had bought up the loss-making Radio Aire in Leeds and Red Rose in Preston, and turned them round.
Both, along with Red Dragon in Cardiff, which he also picked up, were now showing a healthy profit.
Next had come the much bigger step in to cable television, which he believes will one day be a major community resource and the source of enormous profits through home-order shopping on two-way TV lines.
By the time Horsley met him he had won the franchise for Lancashire Cable, had a controlling interest in Merseyside Cable, and was looking for other cable companies.
Politically Everett and Horsley also found him intriguing.
Oyston kept close connections with local Labour parties, and helped with schemes to provide jobs and start small businesses.
He had been one of the founders of Lancashire Enterprise, started in the early 1980s by the controlling Labour Group on the county council, and financed by a 2p rate.
The organization, based in nearby Preston, put money into promising new businesses in return for a share in any future profits.
Although it had originally been derided by the other parties, it was now a local success story, backing businesses which employed a total of 2,500 people, and had gained all-party support.
The project was typical of Oyston, who is a ‘corporatist’, advocating co-operation between government locally and nationally, the  banks and private entrepreneurs such as himself.
He believes this ‘tripartite alliance’ is the reason for Japan's rise to domination in world markets, and the only way that Britain's true industrial base can be saved.
It makes him a hard man to place on the political spectrum, as he is in some respects an avowed admirer of Thatcher.
But at the same time he totally disagrees with the way she has given the banks a free hand to put resources behind new ‘non-industries’ such as the service industries, and concentrate economic wealth in the south.
Oyston sees the north being reduced to Third World status, and is alarmed that the country is being taken over by foreign investment.
The tour of the castle over, Oyston seated his NoS guests in the draughty baronial hall and explained his views as they sipped some of his own-label champagne.
Olwen found this incredibly vulgar — she had not been impressed by the mixture of genuine antiques and large hideous brass objects which gave away Oyston's boarding-house background.
Nobody had been quite sure either what to make of the stuffed animal heads on the wall, and the large crocodile sprawled across one of the floors.
She suppressed an embarrassed chortle as the men began to chat about the paper.
Oyston knew NoS was desperate for money, but Everett thought his decision to invest was quite impulsive.
After consultation with his lawyer and right-hand man, Michael Connolly, Oyston wrote out a cheque for £100,000 and made to hand it over.
But as he was passing it across he paused halfway, holding the precious piece of paper up by three fingers.
There was one condition he hadn't mentioned — he wanted a seat on the Board as a non-executive director, in line with his standard policy when putting a significant amount into a company.
Everett and Horsley consulted each other quickly, then agreed.
They waved goodbye at the door and got into the Jaguar well pleased at the chunk which had been taken out of the Guinness Mahon share mountain.
Back at the castle, Oyston had already written off the £100,000.
Down in London there was only one thing spoiling the continuing party atmosphere.
Now was the time the comrades had dreaded, when they would have to move over and allow the company to be managed by the ‘persons of experience and ability’ as they had promised in the prospectus.
But Horsley did not seem to see things like that, and he had cheered them up mightily with a little speech  congratulating them all and insisting ‘the team’ must stay together.
It had already been decided that Hayling was to remain as chief executive, and everyone who had been doing a specific job for the company was invited to carry on.
Walsh became Marketing Director on a salary of £20,000, and with a £1.5 million budget.
But the two of them had had a falling-out on the night of the capitalization party.
Walsh had accused Hayling of keeping financial information from him and the others, and Hayling had countered saying Walsh had no need or right to know.
It had been a bitter row.
Ben Lowe was the only person doing a specific job for News on Sunday who demanded a competitive interview.
He wanted the job of national regional manager — in charge of the complex network of local committees which he had himself established — and was distraught when Walsh and Hayling offered him only the assistant's job.
Brought in over him was Tony Cook, a good-natured and permanently jolly NoS regional activist and successful businessman who had invested £6,000 of his own money in the paper.
Other management jobs only went to outsiders if there were no internal candidates.
There were three such positions.
Gerry Taylor, the ex-managing director of the Guardian , came in to organize advertising sales as principal consultant to the Board.
The two other new jobs went to people who could hardly be described as outsiders, even though they had not been either Founders or members of the Executive Committee.
Vince Luck was brought in as finance director from Northern Foods.
Christine Jackson, a Manchester-based national officer of the Equal Opportunities Commission and personal friend of Horsley for thirty years, became Director of Personnel in charge of Equal Opportunities.
After some agonizing over whether they were confident enough to do their respective jobs, ex-Big Flame member Tony Hodgson became Production Manager and Liz Cooper gave up her job as Circulation Manager of the New Statesman to take up the same position on the new paper.
At the capitalization party a number of well-wishers had wandered in from the various Labour movement campaigns and organizations which shared the Caxton House office block with NoS .
One of them had been Keith Sutton, taking a break from editing the anti-Murdoch strike paper, the Wapping Post , in the office below.
Hayling had seemed unusually pleased to see him and offered him some champagne.
Sutton, who had gone teetotal, refused.
‘You've done the  easy bit, Alan,’ he joked, sipping orange juice.
‘Now all you've got to do is produce the paper.’
It was an obvious remark to make, but Sutton was surprised by the response.
‘Well,’ Hayling whispered with a twinkle in his eye, ‘that's largely going to be up to you, mate!’
Officegate
Choosing an editor
Raising the £6.5 million, ‘the largest sum ever attracted by a radical project in Britain' according to the publicity blurb, had been either a heroic achievement by selfless, dedicated humanitarians or the blag of the century.
John Pilger had no doubts.
‘I had little to do with raising the money, but I watched in considerable awe those who did: Alan Hayling, Horsley, Chris Walsh and others.
As one door would close, they would move on to another, never surrendering faith in the need for a popular paper that, in Hayling's words, ‘at the very least reflects the decent humanity in this country’,’ he wrote in the journalists' trade paper,UK Press Gazette .
Under the title ‘How we will revive the lost arts of the tabloids’, Pilger laid down the criteria: ‘dramatic, uncropped pictures which the old Express displayed with such flair; original well-written investigations which the Sunday Times ’ Insight Team pioneered (I count the old Sunday Times as a great popular paper); and the use of writer-photographer teams which Picture Post and the Mirror used with such power.’
The paper's job was to warn its readers when they were being conned by ‘governments, opposition parties, vested interests, food manufacturers, sporting authorities, the media, powerful individuals and so on’.
The paper would challenge authority, never ‘preach’ to its readers, and would not just publish political tracts of the left.
To the outside world it seemed that the man who was providing such a detailed vision of the paper would be editor.
Pilger was the only nationally known journalist mentioned in the prospectus; one muddled council had even noted: ‘The editor will be John Pilger of the Financial Times .’
But Pilger was not prepared to move to Manchester.
He wanted to ‘shape’ the paper from London, and took the job of editor in chief, with an editor to work under him.
The editor's primary responsibility would be the tedious business of bringing the paper out every week.
But it would be more than just a production job.
The editor would also have the authority to make decisions when Pilger was away on one of his frequent trips abroad, within guidelines which Pilger would lay down.
This was an unusual arrangement which might have worked in a perfect world.
But in reality it was a compromise designed to bring the long factional struggle about Pilger's role to an end.
Pilger would be allowed to be editor in chief, but to take the job he would have to resign from the Board of Directors.
Pilger and Hayling wrote a job description outlining the editor in chief's total power over the editor, which was to be shown to applicants for the editor's job so they would know the position.
Pilger, as editor in chief, would have ‘overall editorial control’, and his vision, ideas and contacts would essentially create the paper.
The editor would edit on a ‘day to day basis’ in Manchester.
There were about twenty applications for the editor's job, which were marked up under headings of ‘politics’(most got zero) and ‘experience’.
Politics, of course, was not just a matter of party or creed, but how many Right-On points were scored for being black or female.
Unfortunately no blacks applied, and only one woman.
To help sort things out, little comments such as‘sincere/wet’, ‘overzealous’, and ‘pompous’ were attached to the more promising applications.
Most were not considered worth interviewing, but a shortlist was drawn up for interview at the Northern Foods flat in Clarges Street.
The interviewing panel of Horsley, Pilger and Hayling, with Kerry Brown and Maxine Johnson representing the Founders, was supplemented by Christine Jackson, sitting in and limbering up for Equal Opportunities.
The candidates had been asked to supply a dummy paper with a lead story and some idea of content.
The best was supplied by an immensely experienced journalist with a suitably northern background.
His dummy, leading on the story of a northern factory which was allegedly poisoning its workers, had been marked down as brilliant and just the sort of hard-hitting stuff the paper wanted.
But his interview was a different matter.
He arrived forty-five minutes late and entered the room in an oddly measured fashion.
He took off his jacket with over-exaggerated deliberation, folded it with studied care, and placed it on the floor, parroting a curious sales pitch of clichéd adspeak.
‘I can produce you a great paper,’ he drawled.
‘A really great paper….’
He was white, male, middle-aged and middle-class and therefore scored zero Right-On points.
But as they started to grill him on such matters as his attitude to South Africa and Northern Ireland, it was his actions, not his befuddled replies, which riveted the panel's attention.
He appeared to be searching for some key document.
He emptied out the contents of his briefcase one object at a time before moving on to his pockets.
Each item he retrieved was examined with great care, and he took the opportunity to do some elementary housekeeping by discarding unwanted minutiae of his life.
Scraps of paper looking like old bus tickets were placed neatly on the carpet.
The panel sat mesmerized until it slowly began to dawn that the applicant appeared to be suffering from the old Fleet Street problem of being tired and emotional.
After twenty minutes Christine Jackson passed a tart note to Horsley, who looked up sharply and abruptly concluded the interview.
Until he got Jackson's note he had been convinced that the man was suffering from some sort of regular illness.
The other interviews went smoothly enough.
The female candidate, Barbara Dalzell, a New Zealand journalist from the Financial Times , made a good impression and was reluctantly rejected as lacking experience.
But what the rest of the candidates did not know was that Pilger had already earmarked someone for the job — the man who had gatecrashed the capitalization-day party — Keith Sutton of the Wapping Post .
Pilger had met Sutton whilst making a film for Australian television about the Wapping dispute.
They had a common cause against Murdoch, publisher of the filthy Sun , and Pilger was impressed that Sutton was bringing the Wapping strike paper out on a shoestring.
The two men found they agreed on many points about today's press.
Sutton, a former sub-editor on the Sunday Times colour magazine, explained how he had started the Post with only his faithful assistant Carmel Bedford, a former Sunday Times copytaker.
He had laid out the pages, subbed copy, written articles and thought of stunts and headlines.
As more people arrived to help, the Wapping Post became a focus  for the ‘refusenik’ journalists, who got their nickname from their refusal to go to Wapping.
Many, particularly from The Times and Sunday Times , had been on the papers in Gray's Inn Road and Printing House Square all their working lives, and for most of them the strike was about more than trade-union principles.
The Sunday Times had always been a special paper, particularly in the Harold Evans days, when, with stories like Thalidomide and the Insight coverage of Northern Ireland, it could lay claim to being the greatest in the world.
For the journalists, resentment at the move to Wapping and the slaughtering of 5,500 print workers' jobs was combined with bitterness at Murdoch's destruction of the papers' esprit de corps and journalistic standards.
Murdoch's motivation was simply profit, and his cynical attitude had already led to a mass exodus of high-minded journalists.
The Times had been reduced from being the ‘top people's paper’ to running a form of bingo based on stock-market prices.
Wapping had split the staff on both papers.
Many of those who moved were deeply ashamed and riddled, with guilt as they were bussed into the plant, hiding under the seats from their former colleagues on the picket at the gate.
Many of the others — broke and sickened by the attitude of their non-refusenik colleagues, who included most of the staff of the Sun and the News of the World — experienced personal traumas as they struggled with the difficulties of what was obviously becoming a futile protest.
The Post was a way to fight back using their undoubted journalistic skills.
Lew Chester, one of the paper's greatest reporters, turned up and started knocking out his usual classy feature articles.
Brian Whitaker, who had been editor of the Insight team, and had remained alone in the old Grays Inn Road Sunday Times building finishing a book on the sinking of Greenpeace's Rainbow Warrior , brought along his production skills.
Sutton's energy and commitment had bound the people on the Wapping Post together with fierce loyalty to each other and their publication.
His most notorious story was a psychoanalysis of Rupert Murdoch based on material from sources including the office cleaners.
It was incredibly rude.
A cartoon of a naked Murdoch, complete with tits and with his privates covered by a copy of the Sun , appeared under the headline MURDOCH ON THE COUCH and the subhead IT'S RUPERT THE BARE WEEK IN YOUR PEACEFULLY PICKETING POST.
Inside Sutton dredged up personal details, such as Murdoch insisting the fringes of his Indian carpets be combed into regimented lines every  morning and that there must be no marks left behind by the wheels of the Hoover.
Details of the state of his toilet had been supplied by the cleaners and ‘a Harley Street analyst’ concluded that the Australian media mogul had never overcome struggles with his mother over toilet training.
Sutton gleefully added a further strapline: THE DIRTY TRICKS IN LITTLE RUPERT'S POTTY WORLD.
The story was a riposte to a similar stunt pulled on Tony Benn by the Sun .
Delighted, Benn told a refusenik rally that if the striking miners had had a paper like the Wapping Post they would have won.
Sutton had been deeply moved by this compliment.
He had begun working on plans to turn the Wapping Post into a national strike paper when Pilger tipped him off that he was first in line for the editor's job at News on Sunday .
As a leader of a protest against a key Thatcherite hate figure, he was the obvious choice.
And his general background, a useful blend of the traditional and the unconventional, fitted well with NoS .
Born in 1945, Sutton was brought up in a Nissen hut, the son of a mechanic and a hairdresser.
He made it to grammar school in Woking, leaving at sixteen with enough O-levels to get a traineeship on the local Surrey Advertiser .
By the age of twenty-one he was on Fleet Street, married with a mortgage, and was living in suffocating respectability in Rayleigh, Essex.
His progress up the ladder of the Street was rapid, from the Daily Mail to Associate Features Editor at the Express and then Features Editor on the London Evening News .
His main rival at the Express was another young rising star, Kelvin Mackenzie, who handled news.
But whilst Mackenzie carried on and ended up editing the Sun , Sutton began to question what he was doing.
He took nine months off between jobs and dabbled in commune life, with a period at Laurieston Hall, the alternative centre on the Scottish Borders.
Then in 1975 he ‘dropped out’ altogether, moving into the alternative society full-time as a squatting activist in south London.
Sutton was one of the organizers of the famous occupation of Harry Hyams's Centre Point office block in the winter of 1975.
With another group of activists he later co-ordinated another well-publicized protest after the GLC's ‘Fare's Fair’ cheap public transport proposals had been overruled by the Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning.
As a stunt Sutton and thirty others queued at a bus stop, got on the bus, and changed into home-made ‘Lord Denning’ gowns, complete with wigs made out of carpet tiles.
The bus was made to stop on Westminster Bridge, where the ‘Lord Dennings’ filed off for the benefit of the world's press, to the accompaniment of a reading by Heathcote Williams, the alternative poet.
Throughout this period Sutton continued to work Saturday-night shifts at the Sunday Mirror as a sub-editor, and decided to catch up on his education by taking a BA in history at Goldsmiths College, part of the University of London.
After graduating he moved to the Royal Holloway College to research a Ph.D.
on nineteenth-century radical newspapers.
He became enormously interested in these papers and the effect they had at a time when many people thought Britain was on the brink of popular revolution.
And he was delighted to find that these forerunners of pop journalism had used the same skills as those on which he prided himself to stamp events into the nation's consciousness.
Most impressive of all was the reporting of the 1819 ‘Peterloo’ massacre, when the Manchester Yeomen of the Guard slaughtered destitute hand-loom weavers protesting about their version of new technology — the mass-production steam mills.
The massacre really took place on Saint Peter's Field, but a sharp writer on the radical Manchester Observer linked the outrage to the battle of Waterloo, coming up with the headline ‘Peterloo’.
The phrase caught on, and although Peterloo was only one of several similar incidents around that time, it became the one people remembered.
That, for Sutton, was what journalism was all about.
But his research ended when his grant ran out, and he took a mundane job as a sub-editor on the Sunday Times colour magazine just before the Wapping dispute began.
Sutton's political credentials helped win the approval of the Founders.
And whether he knew it or not, he could be marked down as one of Wainwright and Hayling's ‘Fragments’— a talented 1960s person who had now matured and wanted to bring his skills back into the mainstream.
Pilger, on the other hand, was more interested in Sutton's production skills and in satisfying himself that he could be entrusted with that side of the paper — not easy with a new start-up and the complexities of the new technology.
Sutton had taken great care over his written application for the editorship; even his later detractors say it was brilliant.
His dummy was excellent, but there were doubts in the question-and-answer  section of the interview, when Pilger thought he detected a certain woodenness in his replies after the initial pitch.
Sutton was called round the day after the formal interview to double-check, and was much more relaxed in sweater and jeans.
But although Maxine Johnson of the Founders still had doubts, he clinched the deal with his easy and cheerful manner.
There was a slight hiccup when he demanded a salary of £40,000.
Pilger supported the payment, on the grounds that the editor should not feel a poor relation in Fleet Street.
Hayling, however, was scandalized.
In an interview with the Guardian when his dummy had been published almost a year previously, he had specifically said the paper ‘would not pay £40,000 wages’.
But someone had to be got into the job quickly and there were no other obvious candidates.
It was only after his appointment had been confirmed that Sutton demanded a nine-month notice period, which was in such stark contravention of the paper's equality principles that Christine Jackson took his contract to the Board.
It was approved.
Two days after the interview, Sutton's appointment was ratified by the Founders, who had the right, as holders of the Golden Share, to veto his appointment if they chose.
They asked him how he proposed to work with Pilger and, to his surprise, told him that he had far more power than Pilger had led him to believe.
Walsh pointed out to Sutton that it was he, and not Pilger, who had the final say about what went in the paper.
Joan Bohanna was worried that Pilger might use the paper to say what he, rather than they, wanted.
Sutton promised to make sure this did not happen.
Maxine Johnson, who had been uneasy at his interview, was worried about whether Sutton would ‘be able to stand up to Pilger’.
But for the moment that remained to be seen, for the jet-setter was about to leave for Australia again to make a three-part film assessing his country on its bicentennial.
The film was to be broadcast in January 1988.
The formalities over, editor in chief Pilger laid out his plans to his new editor.
Colleagues he had worked with all over the world were to form a network of stringers.
An investigations unit would be set up in London, staffed by reputable heavyweight journalists he had already selected.
The three women who made up the much-admired Daily Mirror Reader Service, introduced in 1944 but cut by Maxwell (on New Year's Eve 1985, the same day as Pilger himself had been ‘purged’, as he put it), would come en masse , providing an  unmatchable advice forum for the paper's buyers.
A first-class woman columnist would come from the Liverpool Post , along with the man to fill the key job of chief sub-editor.
Leaving Sutton to chase up and entice these people, Pilger got on the plane and disappeared Down Under.
‘We want journalists’
With Pilger out of the way, Sutton began to find his way around the organization on his own.
He was getting on fine with the Founders.
He had even discovered that John Bohanna, their honorary secretary, shared his admiration for Robert Tressell's classic novel,The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists .
In contrast to Pilger, Sutton was approachable and friendly.
He was enthusiastic about the paper being located in Manchester, whereas Pilger had clashed with them over the move.
They called him ‘Keith’, whereas Pilger was pointedly called by his surname.
And now he was to have his first big test as editor at a gathering at an old Big Flame haunt, the Beechwood conference centre near Leeds, a worker's co-operative, complete with wholefood canteen.
The conference was being arranged for the Founders and regional activists to meet the newly arriving senior staff.
The agenda gave Sutton a golden opportunity to stamp his authority on the paper.
They asked him to make a speech entitled: ‘What kind of paper and how we're going to sell 1.5 million.’
Sutton pitched straight in.
He told them there was no point in producing a more expensive, national version of City Limits , the Right-On London listings magazine started by former employees of Time Out and helped into the world by the GLC.
The only game in town was mass circulation, and that was to be achieved by NoS becoming an aggressively popular tabloid.
He whipped the lo October edition of the Sun out of his pocket and brandished the front page.
The splash read: THE LIARS — WHOPPERS ASIANS TOLD AT HEATHROW.
Below was a racist article about immigration control.
It was Sutton's chance for revenge on his old foe Kelvin Mackenzie.
He changed from his normal calm self into a frenzy.
The veins standing out on his neck, he shouted at the top of his voice: ‘We're going to crucify this stuff.
It's filth!’
He began punching the paper, sending flurries of cheap newsprint showering to the ground.
‘We're going to go round to Mackenzie's house and we're going to ask his  daughter what she thinks of this and we're going to take pictures of him and we're going to run our own front page with a picture of him and a bloody great headline which says RACIST!’
The meeting was thrilled.
This was no simple production assistant.
This was a man with spirit!
The Founders and regional activists loved it.
But Hayling felt sick.
It was so vulgar.
This was not what he and Pilger wanted at all— he had better let him know what was happening.
News of Sutton's sudden elevation from humble production editor to rabble-rousing orator reached Pilger in Australia from Ben Lowe as well as Hayling.
He was slightly alarmed.
Lowe wrote claiming that Sutton was trying to undermine him and forge an alliance with the Founders.
Now, pushed to produce a dummy for potential advertisers, Sutton had started interviewing and recruiting journalists.
The editor in chief, from Australia, tried to keep in touch.
His anxiety mounted as telexes were left unanswered and calls blocked by Martin Huckerby, another Wapping refusenik whom Sutton had recruited as the paper's managing editor.
Huckerby, a worried-looking, balding man, had a responsible position which basically involved overseeing editorial expenditure and running the paper day to day, but was best known for fussing round the office collecting old coffee cups and switching off the lights last thing at night.
He infuriated Pilger, who referred to him as Sutton's ‘butler’.
Pilger was worried by the descriptions of Sutton's Beechwood performance, but was more concerned that progress should be made on his list of key editorial appointments.
Left behind in England, Sutton had found many of the people on Pilger's list unenthusiastic about leaving secure and well-paid jobs for the uncharted seas of a Pilgerite Quality Tabloid edited by Sutton.
John Merritt, a young reporter then on the Mirror , by whom Pilger set much store, was particularly difficult to pin down.
And there were further problems presented by News on Sunday 's GLC-type Equal Opportunities commitments.
The Founders were particularly keen on these, and urged more efforts to recruit blacks and women — unqualified if need be, and to be trained on the job.
They criticized Christine Jackson for not doing enough.
They minuted ‘grave reservations’ about her, and resolved to ‘bring to the attention of the board the limitation of Christine Jackson's skills’.
Jackson ploughed on regardless.
An extraordinary advertisement  simply headed ‘Journalists’— giving scant information on what jobs were on offer and what qualifications were required for them — was placed in the Guardian and black papers such as the Voice .
An equally extraordinary number of replies found their way back in a deluge to Manchester.
Nobody knows exactly how many there were, but estimates range up to 5,000.
Each received a bizarre open-ended application form, a baffling collection of leaflets, including the Charter and material about Equal Opportunities, and a list of a large number of jobs open to anyone who fancied trying one of them.
‘Ever worked on a street barrow?’ one leaflet asked.
Why not apply to be editor of the paper's glossy colour section?— the equivalent of a colour supplement and usually put together by large teams of highly skilled and experienced specialists.
A nineteen-year-old insurance agent was one who did just that.
He didn't get the job.
Pilger, in drawing up his list for Sutton, had cheerfully ignored Right-On methods of recruitment, bypassing and snubbing the Founders again.
Bending the Equal Opportunities rules, he had used the normal method of tipping off chosen journalists and assuring them their applications would go through smoothly.
But those on the list who actually applied, as opposed to expressing vague interest, had no way of knowing whether their completed application forms had been weeded out or simply thrown on to the paper mountain along with everyone else.
The whole process quickly got out of control.
Applications varied wildly in calibre and content.
Some were superbly typed or run off the ubiquitous Amstrad printer.
Others were handwritten and virtually illiterate.
Long political screeds were attached about what the paper should be like, pleading justifications of position and talent.
Hopefuls who wanted to be journalists promised bounds of enthusiasm, and optimistically said they would learn the rest.
Burnt-out old hacks explained a sudden new lease of life, promising their days in the public-relations ghetto were over.
There were lots of hopefuls who would have been journalists if they had pursued a career, or who now wanted to learn.
All, of course, were hugely talented.
Once the usual carpetbaggers, liars and opportunists had been discounted, there was a heart-lifting common thread, a real desire to work for a paper promising to lift them out of the cynicism and virtual despair of the current newspaper scene.
Older reporters  fed up with the declining standards of Fleet Street; younger ones condemned to the grind of sycophantic local newspapers owned by disinterested big groups; good freelances — all were ready to start work.
Contained in the application forms was the core of a first-class and committed newspaper staff.
Here were the people who were now convinced the paper existed and wanted to join the venture.
Motives were mixed.
A few were prepared to take big salary cuts and throw away the security of their present employment — others were just grateful for a job or the chance to work on a national.
Some were doubtful whether it would actually work, but all shared a hope of something new, and all were to be given an equal chance.
As teams of temps struggled to cope with the mounting chaos, Jackson tried to keep the Equal Opportunities flame burning.
She reported sternly to a meeting of the management team that word-of-mouth recruitment might be taking place.
Anyone doing this, she said, ‘is likely to be acting unlawfully’.
The team, as usual lacking expertise in the particular field, agreed, and laid down criteria for positive discrimination to fight back.
Each department was set a minimum target of 52 per cent women and 10 per cent ethnic minorities.
As an aside Jackson promised to investigate providing the blind with the paper on weekly cassette.
But she had already lost her balance as she impossibly tried to juggle Equal Opportunities, shortage of staff and time, and the torrent of ‘open access’ job applications.
And by now there was pressure to hire staff, with the launch date less than six months away.
If any reporters were to be poached from other papers, they would mostly need to give three months' notice.
The Founders and other people within NoS kept up the pressure to go even further down the Equal Opportunities road.
The equal opportunities committee, set up by London office administrator Zoe Picton-Howell, had gone into mothballs after getting the executive committee to co-opt Sylvia Collier as ‘editorial co-ordinator’.
Now it sprang back into life.
Picton-Howell's main mission in life was to record faithfully the minutes of the many meetings she attended.
But she had spent many years perfecting the art of the memo.
She was a shy, quiet woman in her mid-twenties with a tinkling nervous laugh.
Her father, Tom Picton, was the NoS photographer.
Picton-Howell had worked hard for the project since the early days, and had kept her old job as London office administrator on Equal Opportunities  grounds that the post should not be put out to competitive interview after capitalization.
The logic of this ‘Equal Opportunities’ argument escaped most people.
Picton-Howell, who later became an editorial researcher, now bombarded Jackson with demands about maternity leave, paternity leave, day-nursery facilities and more mundane and familiar matters such as car mileage allowance and overtime payments.
With determination in her large, watery blue eyes and a doleful expression permanently on her face, Jackson moved to quash the revolt.
A crèche was written off in favour of a child-minding allowance and the demand for equal paternity and maternity leave refused.
Taking the traditional and un-Right-On view of child-bearing, Jackson told the staff that women needed time to recover physically.
Equality did apply to some things.
The staff were informed that the company could not afford to pay overtime to anyone — regardless of sex, race, age or disability.
The car allowance, a key item in reporters' lives and in getting them out of the office — was fixed at Option B — 15p a mile.
One of the sub-editors, a former vicar with a most un-Christian vocabulary, later pointed out that this was less than the Church of England paid its clergy.
Whilst Jackson struggled not to offend black outreach workers, the system for processing the application forms buckled under the weight of numbers and its inbuilt defects.
Under the ‘open access’ policy, people applied for different jobs in as many as three separate departments.
Each form had to be copied and sent to a different department editor.
Some went to London, others were returned to Manchester.
And then there were other copies for the Founders, who were to attend interviews and vet applicants.
Soon the demands grew so heavy the photocopier could not cope, and originals began to fly about the system.
Hayling added to the confusion by taking away applications from blacks, which were put aside for positive consideration.
There were disappointingly few.
Hayling had realized that although women's interests were being looked after on the paper, there was already suspicion of NoS in the black community.
Blacks were right to be suspicious.
They had met Right-Ons before.
Soon the system was in total chaos.
There is no record to say how many applications, and for what jobs, were finally considered.
Cuttings and examples of previous newspaper or magazine work were  separated from the application forms, depriving the editors of the main thing they needed to judge them by.
Some were lost by hapless temps.
For months afterwards copies of forms turned up all over the Manchester office.
They were found at the bottom of drawers, in filing cabinets, and stuffed in amongst other papers.
One large pile of forms with attached items of a non-standard size was uncovered, apparently untouched, weeks after they had arrived.
All over the country hurt and disillusioned journalists and would-be journalists wondering why they had never received a reply could only presume that they had been rejected.
Pilger managed one brief telephone conversation with Sutton while he was in Australia.
He was very worried about the lack of progress with recruiting the people on his list.
Pilger told him they had better get together for a serious talk the minute he got off the plane.
News on Sunday 's temporary London offices in GLEB were available for the summit, but Pilger instead hired a room in the Kennedy Hotel, a modem businessman's establishment next to Euston station.
Sutton was told to get on the first train from Manchester.
The two men have different versions of the meeting which followed, and there were no witnesses except for a waiter who interrupted them in the middle of the shouting match and asked if they wanted any sandwiches.
They did not.
They agree, however, on four points: the pleasantries lasted about thirty seconds; there was a terrible row; one of them stormed out; and the word ‘cock’ was used.
According to Sutton, Pilger made him cancel interviews which had taken a long time to set up.
He had not got very far with Pilger's list.
He did not know the people on it and they did not seem as keen to join as he had expected.
And more and more the fast-approaching deadline of the next dummy edition was pressing on his mind.
He met Pilger in the foyer and they went up to the room.
Pilger had laid on a lot of beer.
Sutton got the impression Pilger was ‘going to really put me through it’.
He found him agitated and anxious and thumping the table, demanding to discuss the two men's roles in relation to each other.
Sutton says Pilger ‘went bananas’ and kept repeating: ‘Listen, cock!
Listen, cock!’
He strode round the room shouting: ‘I am number one, cock.
You are number two.
What's more, cock, I expect you to  treat your number two in exactly the same way.’
Sutton says he was astonished.
He had been in scenes like this with his teenage daughters, and he kept thinking: ‘I must stay cool.’
Pilger then got even more upset and accused him of wanting to produce the Daily Star .
Then Sutton, says he, got narked and asked Pilger why he hadn't applied for the editor's job himself.
Pilger said he couldn't because of Manchester and added: ‘I suppose there isn't even an office there for me?’
Sutton replied that there wasn't.
He'd decided that if Pilger was only going to be there one day a week he could share an office with Hayling.
Then he started winding Pilger up, saying over and over again: ‘Why aren't you editor, then?’
Pilger, furious, was eventually provoked enough to shout: ‘You've had it, cock!
I'm going to see Hayling and Horsley.’
He stormed out, paid the bill at reception and disappeared.
Sutton peeped round the door and, when he realized Pilger had gone, followed him.
The beer was abandoned.
He went round to the Observer where his girlfriend Stephanie Thompson worked and told her what had happened.
Pilger remembers it differently.
According to him, Sutton was uptight from the moment he walked in.
He set the tone by drawing out a plan of the Manchester office.
First he pointed out his own editorial cubicle, then the adjacent one which he explained was for his personal assistant, Carmel Bedford.
Pilger was certain that Sutton's accent dropped several social degrees and ended up strong south London.
Sutton looked Pilger straight in the eye, jabbed at his chest and announced: ‘There's nowhere there for you, cock.’
Pilger says he was flabbergasted.
When he got his breath back he told Sutton it was imperative they sat down that night, the next night, the night after — however long it would take to thrash out a plan for the paper.
He ploughed on, trying to outline his plans for the paper, and engage Sutton's attention.
But Sutton suddenly seemed weary.
He slumped in a chair with his head in his hands and told Pilger he was already exhausted by the workload and the pressures.
Suddenly he snapped, got up and announced sharply: ‘I'm not having any of this editor-in-chief bullshit.’
The meeting ended abruptly and both men walked out.
Pilger couldn't believe it.
He rang both Hayling and Horsley.
‘We've got a real problem,’ he told them.
Obviously only one of these recollections can be correct, but  whichever it is made little practical difference.
From this point the foundation of the editorial side of the paper, the working arrangement between the two men, collapsed.
For Pilger the drama reached almost Shakespearian proportions.
It was not quite the end of the world as we know it, but it was close.
In a letter to Horsley nine days later he wrote: ‘I believe that if the decision is made to go the way of the Sun , the tragedy will be of historic proportions.
Keith Sutton…brings us the worst of Fleet Street, the Sun , disguised as ‘radical’…you cannot be radical and look like the Sun ; it is a contradiction in terms.
The way the Sun looks is an integral part of its violent approach to almost everything: its anti-humanism.
It is laughable to suggest it represents ‘a tradition’.
I want no part of that ‘tradition’.
Nor should News on Sunday be part of it.
‘Noble failure’ was mentioned yesterday.
Worse than that would be success by means that in no way reflect the need for a radical, popular paper.’
He concluded that he shared responsibility for hiring Sutton.
‘I think, via him, the Sun ‘tradition’ will hijack News on Sunday ….
The prospect of a betrayal of everything News on Sunday has meant to so many people is there…
I believe Keith should go.’
And although Sutton had offered to continue working with Pilger, the answer was quite clear: ‘Of course I won't be able to work with him.’
The Pilger-Sutton split had an immediate effect on staff recruitment.
Both men had to approve senior editorial appointments; now they were deadlocked.
Each appointment became a battle in the war between them.
To get things moving, Sutton skirted both the Equal Opportunities and the Pilger problem by hiring people on temporary consultancy contracts.
Brian Whitaker, who had worked on the Wapping Post and the Hayling dummy, had applied for the job of editor and, although he had not been interviewed, was taken on by Sutton as his deputy.
Another key job, Features Editor — or Assistant Editor (Features) in NoS -speak — had been filled by Polly Pattullo, who had served more years than she cares to remember on the Observer colour supplement before wilting under its increasing consumer bias.
Weary of the general air of malaise in the Observer office, she had written round.
Although she was a feminist, her primary motivation for joining NoS was the challenge of working on a tabloid.
And she saw  another plus point.
Living in Manchester would allow her to escape from Yuppified Clapham.
Pattullo and Whitaker were in turn lining up staff.
Sports editor Bob Edwell, who had come from the Daily Express in London, was looking for sports writers, and above all the paper needed its back bench staffed by the all-important sub-editors, who prepare the reporters' words (the copy) for the paper, and write the headlines.
On NoS they were being treated to the miracle of new technology, bypassing the National Graphical Association compositors who, before the age of ‘direct entry’ computers, retyped the articles on Linotype hot metal machines after the subs had marked them up in pencil.
Most important of all, a chief sub was needed.
The chief sub, more than anyone else, would be responsible for the look of the paper.
Sutton, to the alarm of Pilger and Hayling, had lined up John Hetherington of the Daily Star , a scarcely less provocative choice than the Sun .
The appointment was immediately blocked (two months later, when the ban was lifted, Hetherington was no longer interested).
The fight over appointments became more and more bitter and added to the all-engulfing problems of Christine Jackson's recruiting operation, with its Equal Opportunities commitments.
As Sutton pushed each new recruit through on the grounds of urgency, he would gain a new ally.
He and Pilger were now at each other 's throats, with the showdown already on the horizon — the dummy edition of Sunday 7 December.
The dummy was needed, Hayling said, to show to potential advertisers and help start up the advertising sales process.
It was also to be used to feed the market-research obsession.
Sutton's first dummy
This was to be the first chance to see what Sutton could produce.
He had made it clear at Beechwood that he believed the paper had to be pop, pop, pop if it was going to sell a million.
And to do that it had to follow the successful formula of the present day, of which the leading exponent was the Sun .
Sutton's focus on the Sun , and on headlines like ‘GOTCHA!’, was not just rivalry with its editor, Kelvin Mackenzie.
Sutton was looking at what the public bought today.
Not for him the good old days of the 1960s, when the Mirror — social conscience and all — reigned supreme and Pilger was churning out his  hard-hitting reports.
People used to drive around in Austin A40s then.
Papers had changed as much as cars.
Nowadays this heavy investigative stuff was a liberal wank —‘concerned’ middle-class people trying to raise up the working classes.
The way to make NoS popular was to put lots of people in it They could be used to bring home the sort of things which should be exposed and campaigned about in the paper — like housing conditions, or unemployment.
And there was no reason why NoS could not be like the Sun and still talk to the left.
It just had to be upfront and radical.
The ‘Up Yours’ mentality which people liked was nothing to do with politics or being right-wing.
The sort of rude things you got in Private Eye weren't right-wing.
And his Ph.D.
studies of radical tracts had covered a period without any of today's party politics.
It was getting through to the readers on a human level that counted.
Sutton had recruited Bill Packford, who had worked with him on the Evening News in the old days, to lay out pages for the 7 December dummy edition.
Packford summed up a lot of the negative reaction to left-wing journalism.
He saw Sutton's interview dummy and was not impressed.
BLACKS UNDER THE LIQUID COSH and STRIP IN THE NAME OF THE LAW was not what he thought people wanted to read about on Sunday morning.
They didn't want to be hit over the head like that, he concluded with his characteristic weary shrug.
Packford was an active member of his local Labour Party, sympathetic to the idea of the paper, and liked Keith.
He was, however, a hack, a dyed-in-the-wool Fleet Street man.
He knew what worked in popular national Sunday newspapers and what didn't.
BLACKS UNDER THE LIQUID COSH didn't.
Like Sutton, Packford had dropped out of papers as a career.
He had moved to Penzance in Cornwall, commuting to London for work.
The two had met up again when Packford helped on the Wapping Post .
But apart from that, he offered his skills to the highest bidder and would produce any type of paper to order.
He went round his customers, the publishers of trade magazines and in-house company newspapers, like an interior decorator with a book of samples.
He would show them examples of different sorts of pages and wait until they found one they liked.
‘Make it look like that,’ they would say, pointing to one of his sample pages, and that is what it would look like.
He had won an award for his Glaxo house magazine.
News on Sunday was more difficult than Packford's normal  customers.
He had been amazed when Sutton rang to say he had become editor, especially as the British Telecom line had been so bad that he had misheard and thought Sutton had taken over at Today .
Though Packford was happy to experiment with all kinds of design, his work on the launch and re-launch of the Mail on Sunday had only confirmed the view that he and Sutton shared.
The Mail on Sunday had been launched with all sort of fancy design ideas.
It had immediately bombed and Sir David English, editor of the Daily Mail , had had to be brought in to rescue it by throwing out the new design ideas and making it look as old-fashioned as its daily counterpart.
Sales had picked up and the paper was now established.
It proved exactly what Sutton thought: whatever the intellectuals might think, the punters did not want designers mucking about with their newspapers.
Sutton and Packford both cut their teeth on the old hot-metal newspaper production process.
In those days newspapers were filthy, grubby things, often virtually illegible, with smudgy pictures and layers of black ink which got all over your hands.
New technology might have improved the print and production quality, but as far as Sutton was concerned nothing else had changed.
Designers were effete trendies from art college.
They might be all right for magazines or even upmarket newspapers, but they were useless on pops.
They charged you a fortune and left you with nothing but a hopelessly constricting grid.
The only bit they could cope with was designing a trendy logo.
But whereas Packford had adjusted to the age of new technology and the design possibilities it offered, Sutton remained wedded, at heart, to the old hot-metal approach.
Hot-metal men knew how pop papers were really composed.
Instead of being ‘designed’, the mishmash of typefaces, type sizes, screaming headlines, jumbled-up articles and unrelated snippets came from an organic process.
To the unpractised eye it might appear a hotch-potch thrown together at random.
But really it was a skilled, even magical, craft, evolved over two hundred years.
Papers looked like this because the ones that did not went bust.
Pages were put together by gathering the material up and roughing it into a layout based round the principal hooks — the headlines and pictures which were the only things that really mattered.
It was a fast, intuitive process.
The object was to pack together the secrets of  the trade — WOBs, NIBs, blobs, bullets, underscores and overscores, starbursts, barkers, screamers, gobbit-boxes, straps, rag-outs, bastard measures and cross-heads.
Anything that would grab the eye was jammed together to make the page frantically busy.
The words of stories were secondary.
Power over those was delegated to the sub-editors.
The reporters tipped in roughish copy which the subs could slash to fit the allocated spaces.
This was to be the formula for News on Sunday .
After all, it wasn't a coffee-table production for the middle classes.
It was a pop paper, not the Bayeux Tapestry.
Ten years ago you would have wrapped your chips in it.
As for the committed audience, they would have to live with it.
They were in the bag anyhow.
Sutton thought getting them was ‘a piece of piss’.
Still high on the Wapping Post , he told Packford it was worth giving News on Sunday a chance.
Sutton was later going to have to cope with marrying up this formula to the new direct-entry computer system, which was being sorted out by systems editor Eugenie Verney, a sub-editor made redundant from the Daily Express in Manchester, who had previously worked on the Guardian .
She had already fallen out with Sutton, who regarded computers with unconcealed loathing.
His lack of new-technology experience had been ignored by Pilger and the others when they chose him for his production skills.
For the moment, anyway, he was using the old methods on the 7 December dummy.
It didn't work out very well.
He and Packford had to work under appallingly difficult circumstances, with a skeleton staff and a jobbing printer who had never done anything like it before, and the actual paper was printed on cheap newsprint.
But it was still unmistakably mediocre.
Under the strapline of ‘The People's Paper’ there were thirty-two pages.
The front page, headed uninspiringly WAS THE PRIME MINISTER A SPY? was a good story, an early revelation from Peter Wright's book Spycatcher .
There was more heavyweight material with a double-page investigation into the mystery plane crash which killed President Samora Machel of Mozambique.
A black-and-white ‘Life on Sunday’ section in the middle carried an illustrated feature advising women how to feel themselves for signs of breast cancer.
A section called ‘Relax’ covered entertainment and television with features on Lenny Henry, Batman and Boy George.
There were eight sports pages and the football results.
The glossy colour section was entitled  ‘More on Sunday’ and immediately truncated to ‘Moron Sunday’by Sutton's critics.
But it was the news pages that had really gone off the rails.
They were hopelessly bitty, and the real mistake was on page 3, with a hopeless attempt at humour in a picture story headlined THE POPE'S HOROSCOPE.
There was a large picture of the Pope in tarmac-kissing mode and the story of how the paper had entered his birthdate on the British Telecom horoscope service.
For good measure the piece whined about the cost of the call.
Behind the scenes Pilger, still fuming from the Kennedy Hotel showdown, was working separately.
He did not think people wanted harmless fun on Sunday.
They were desperately keen for information.
Under his leadership, the heavyweight investigative team was to produce reports which were a cross between the old Sunday Times Insight team and the occasional ‘Shock Issues’ which are all that remains of the old Mirror .
These would hit the popular audience — the old-style Mirror readers who wrote in bemoaning the trivialization of their paper.
Pilger had kept a lot of these letters, which had moved him deeply.
His experiences in covering the miners' strike had reinforced his conviction that people were begging for his sort of paper.
Pilger was not at all convinced that the NoS sales target was viable, but it was not his job to worry about that.
He believed that if the paper made a big enough impact and was raved about by the industry, there would be a rush to save it even if it didn't sell enough to make a profit.
Some sort of re-financing package could be organized.
And even if it went down, at least it would be a heroic failure — a genuine attempt to break the mould and bring back standards of quality and decency.
And it would not just be decent in its coverage — it would look decent.
It would be a quality product and not ashamed of it.
It was the least the people whose letters he kept and treasured deserved.
So while Sutton had been frantically interviewing and trying to cope with real stories, Pilger had been to the Regent Street studio of Carrol, Dempsey and Thirkell, designers of the two-month-old Independent , described by the middle classes hoping for better papers as ‘a good deed in a naughty world’.
Working with Thirkell, Pilger had drawn up sample pages of a new design, using gobbledegook text except for the headlines.
The front-page splash was an old Pilger  chestnut — the latest of a series of articles which he periodically wrote based on the diaries of a seven-year-old Asian girl in the East End in which she faithfully recorded racist attacks on the family.
The result was quite unlike any current national paper in Britain.
The front page was a picture of the Asian girl below a long headline in lower-case type.
The typeface was clean and simple.
The inside pages used classic 1970s magazine design.
Pictures and illustrations were used big, and the wide column layout packed a lot of words on the page.
The layout was powerful and grabbed your attention.
Each page concentrated on one article.
Unlike the Sutton formula there were no hooks to send your eye skittering round the page.
You went straight in.
Overall it was crisp, tight, and committed.
You either loved it or hated it.
It was a designer newspaper — its nearest equivalents the trendy but established continental papers such as Libération in France.
There was one unfortunate mistake.
‘Siege’, in the front-page headline, had been misspelt as ‘seige’, which caused Pilger opponents to fire back the ‘Moron Sunday’ jibe with racist jokes about stupid Ozzies who couldn't even spell.
Now the two rival versions had been completed, it was time for the multiple power centres of News on Sunday to deliver their verdicts.
The chosen day was 16 December, when there were meetings at GLEB's offices to discuss Sutton's dummy.
Sutton knew it was not that good, but he wasn't prepared for what came next.
The day started with a meeting of the London staff.
They had no particular reason to like Sutton.
The ones who had worked on the previous Hayling dummy, including photographer Tom Picton and his daughter Zoe, had good reason to fear that Sutton, given a free hand, would get rid of them.
The journalists who had been hired by him were based in Manchester.
The administrators and Walsh's marketing department minions, who had been invited in to criticize as well, were suspicious of ‘outsiders’ like Sutton anyway.
But there was an emotional element as well.
They had been shocked by the dummy, which they thought far worse than the Hayling one.
But because many of them knew little about journalism, they didn't appreciate the difference.
Hayling's dummy had been a marathon performance over months, whilst Sutton had had only a short time and few people.
When the London staff, gathered round specially for the occasion, began to deliver their verdict and the litany began to roll, Sutton was staggered by their ferocity.
Some were veterans of News on Sunday 's many faction fights but now, for once, they stopped ganging up on each other and ganged up on Sutton.
The paper had no stories in it, they said.
It bore no relation to the Charter, it wasn't irreverent and anti-establishment, the pictures weren't strong enough, it did not have enough on ethnicity or women, it wasn't exciting, different, political or inspirational.
And another thing — it had no humanity.
Someone said it was the worst paper they had ever seen.
Sutton was goaded about his statements that he would bring ‘real people’ into the paper.
Instead they'd got the Pope and an article about a highly paid journalist, Simon Winchester, eating a dog for dinner.
They didn't even like the editorial, which had been written by Packford on half a bottle of Scotch.
On and on it went.
Each new speaker had a separate catalogue of complaints.
Sutton was devastated.
There he was, just off the picket line, where he knew people had loved the Wapping Post .
They had queued up for it, even if the committee people had worried about it.
A copy had been auctioned on the spot for £35.
Now he was trying to get something done in this nightmare, and this was all the thanks he got.
Becoming editor had been the greatest day of his life, and now these people were telling him that his paper was apolitical and had a lack of analysis and editorialization.
Though his critics maintain they were trying to be constructive and wanted him to stay, Sutton was convinced that the criticism had been organized in advance as a warning that if he did not go, as Pilger was demanding, they would make life hell for him.
It was like a kangaroo court, he thought.
No, he decided, it was worse — a lynching party.
Then came the coup de grâce .
Pilger raised a copy of Sutton's paper disparagingly above his head, and solemnly pronounced: ‘This is a travesty of journalism.’
He produced from his briefcase his own alternative, Thirkell-designed sample pages, beautifully printed on glistening white bromide paper.
Next it was the turn of the Founders.
Their meeting was a grade up from the mob justice represented by the staff.
The Founders at least had the semblance of a court.
But they were no more complimentary, and complained bitterly that the paper was devoid of politics.
Sutton was allowed to say his piece.
He blamed chaotic production arrangements, lack of time, people and resources.
He didn't think much of his dummy himself.
And Hayling had told him to tone down the politics to smooth away advertisers' fears that it was going to be a Commie rag.
They had seen his passion and anger at Beechwood.
It would come out later, along with the politics.
Sutton pleaded with them to have confidence in him.
Pilger had been giving him a hard time.
‘I've been living in fear, undermined over the past few weeks,’ he moaned.
Pilger was called in, and he summarized his position.
He blithely asserted that Sutton's dummy ‘said it all’.
It was a paper devoid of politics and didn't represent any of the spirit they had thought of and encapsulated in the Charter.
The last one, done by Hayling with his advice, had been far better.
They all knew what he thought should be done; the Founders were on a ‘disaster course’ if they fudged it.
The earlier staff meeting had shown that journalists would not work under Sutton.
He sympathized with one of the Founders who had said that there must be ‘no blood on the floor’, but blood was now clearly necessary.
NoS had not been hijacked — that was too strong a word.
But they had all made a serious error, himself included.
And now Sutton had formed a coterie of cronies round him and was appointing the wrong staff, which had to be stopped at once.
All applications for jobs had to be routed through Pilger.
‘I can't do any more,’ he concluded.
He wanted Sutton sacked that very day.
Hayling would take over as managing editor until somebody else could be found — he'd done well enough on last year's dummy.
Pilger himself would remain editor in chief as agreed.
There was a skirmish at this point.
The Founders had been suspicious of Pilger for wanting too much power long before Sutton was appointed.
They had offered him the position of editor in chief with, apparently, more direct control over the content of the paper, but only if he came off the Board.
Pilger had agreed but had apparently not realized how this weakened his position.
The Founders now told Pilger that the role they had given him was something less than total editorial control.
Pilger was furious.
He hated the intricacies of the NoS management system.
He replied that without total control he didn't have a job.
They'd better make their minds up quickly whether he was in charge or not.
He'd got other things to do if they didn't want him on his terms.
Pilger left the room and the Founders mulled it over.
It was quite a dilemma.
Sutton's dummy was awful.
They didn't trust either of them, but if either left there would be trouble.
If they sacked Sutton now it would be seen as a victory for Pilger and agreement to his total control over the paper.
They would be rendered powerless — there was no way they could do anything with him.
But if they backed Sutton at least they stood a chance of controlling him — even if he had turned out to be, as some thought, a bit of a duffer.
After this Sutton was spared what he had thought was going to be his third inquisition of the day, the Board meeting.
The result was a foregone conclusion.
As Pilger waited outside he was passed a note telling him Sutton was to stay.
He still went in and showed his pages.
Steve Riley, one of the Founders' representatives on the Board, asked him to stay.
If he had to go, he should go quietly and give continued moral support to the paper.
Though he got some support from Board members Hilary Wainwright and Vella Pillay of the Bank of China (who changed his mind and agreed that Sutton had to go as soon as he saw Pilger's pages), there was no real point.
Pilger was disgusted by what he saw as a load of hand-wringing, indecisive amateurs.
Their main worries seemed to be not the paper, but bad publicity and the left being seen fighting amongst itself.
Bitterly disappointed, he later complained he felt like a Spanish general without a horse.
He was the principal architect of the paper's style and the only journalist involved with the original Founders.
Three months previously he had been invested with ‘overall editorial control’.
Yet now he had no editorial powers at all.
The committees, which he saw as ‘aspiring to mediocrity’, had betrayed him.
He walked out and never came back.
Two days later the Founders, Board and management team met together to discuss the crisis.
They took the NoS way out by setting up another committee — the product development committee — to keep Sutton in line.
This was to be headed by Hayling, who became the ‘new Pilger’ in the position of editorial director, to which he was appointed in the New Year.
Hayling's place as chief executive was taken by Gerry Taylor, who had been hired as the paper's advertising consultant.
Two days before Christmas Hayling circulated a memo to the staff.
‘The trauma is now over’, he wrote.
Many of them were now much clearer about the paper, and he explained the latest changes in  management structure.
He wished them all a peaceful Christmas break.
‘We certainly deserve it’, he concluded.
A desperate last memo from the London office manager, Anne Diamond, promised that the Christmas party, which had degenerated into a drink in the wine bar opposite GLEB, would now be held in January.