

SOUTH AFRICA 1995…?
contents
Should it be South Africa 1995…?
Mick Cleary argues that claims for the 1995 RWC are not as persuasive as at first they may seem
Best…on borrowed time?
•ENGLAND — Richard Bath uncovers England coach Dick Best's short contract •Beaumont at Large 
Big Al gives it a bash!
•SCOTLAND — Bill McLaren talks to Alan Watt, lock turned tighthead prop •Scottish Notes with Bill McMurtrie
Captain Scarlet
•WALES — Steve Bale analyses Llanelli coach Gareth Jenkins
•Down the line with Phil Bennett
Hamilton goes for it!
•IRELAND — Sean Diffley meets flanker Gordon Hamilton
•Irish Report with Sean Diffley
Top Scorers
•BRITISH ISLES — Peter Jackson spotlights Saints' John Steele
Clubs of the Month
Clifton and Tynedale win the plaques
What Eddie Butler Saw
British clubs keep the RWC pot boiling
100,000 Hail Aussie Aces
Greg Campbell revels in the Sydney tickertape parade
World Cup 1991 Souvenir
The ONLY complete record — 350 pages in embossed binder
Anglophobia — fact or fiction?
•FRANCE — Chris Thau argues that it's a fact
Books of the Year
Stephen Jones reviews a bumper crop for this Christmas
Missing ‘Link’ makes good
•AUSTRALIA — Greg Campbell sees Ewen McKenzie as skipper
Bouquet of Barbed Wire
•NEW ZEALAND — Don Cameron sifts through the ashes
Birtwell's Happy Band
•CANADA — Peter McMullan talks to coach Ian Birtwell
Blowing the Big Chance
•USA — Randall Liebermann blasts World Cup TV exposure
The Case for the Defence
•SOUTH AFRICA — John Robbie is sure of Springbok strength
Around the World
•BERMUDA — The Classic is socially serious •HONG KONG — Alvin Sallay reports on scuppered Springboks •International Crossroads •DUBAI — Queensland to hot to handle  
Should South Africa host the next World Cup?
On the surface it's very attractive; superb stadia, an advanced infrastructure and a rugby culture second to none.
But can the game afford to hold its showpiece in an unstable country where sport is a political football?
On The Air…
with NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
A majority sport in the making
So 46 per cent of all adult males in the ABC1 socio-economic grouping in the South-West of England watched the Rugby World Cup Final! 34 per cent in Scotland, 40 per cent in Wales — and across the whole ITV network the average figure was 27 per cent of ABC1 men.
By comparison, the Soccer World Cup Final of Italia '90 reached 11 per cent of ABC men on ITV and 31 per cent of ABC men on BBC1.
In overall terms audience delivery, to quote a respected analyst, was probably ahead of most initial forecasts with, predictably, ABC1 men outperforming all the demographic groups.
Compared to the Soccer World Cup the rugby appealed to the ABC1 and younger elements to a greater degree.
Although the total viewing audiences were significantly less than that achieved by association football, this, it is suggested, is partially to be explained by the differences in transmission times, for, unlike the soccer event, no ‘significant’ matches were played during the peak television viewing times of the day.
England v New Zealand on a Thursday afternoon was never going to grab the world's biggest television viewership!
But even during non-peak viewing hours, and even for matches that did not involve the Home Unions, the figures for rugby are impressive enough.
Just consider the additional impact that might have come from more popular scheduled kick-off times (floodlit games all round?) when, again in ABC1 men ratings, New Zealand v Italy ‘scored’ 11 per cent, Wales v Argentine 16 per cent , France v Canada 11 per cent , New Zealand v Canada 13 per cent and Australia v New Zealand 16 per cent .
It is high time we ceased to allow people to talk about rugby union as a minority sport — even a post-World Cup modest club match on Rugby Special rated two million viewers.
The 1991 World Cup generated unprecedented interest in rugby union and planted the sport firmly in the top league of spectator sports.
May the ‘sales and recruitment’ campaign amongst the clubs continue at full throttle — especially amongst the junior age groups, who voted with their TV ‘on’switches that rugby is the game they like best.
Now let's get them with the playing kit on!
No time for respite, as, with the World Cup scarcely out of the way (ticker-tape celebrations Down Under and all), thoughts turn to 1995 (and, in this issue, South Africa the hosts —‘yes’ or ‘no’!) and, more immediately, the start of a new International Championship.
How fortunate we are — uniquely — to have this hardy annual event reappearing with each New Year.
The Five Nations Championship is understandably the envy of the rest of the rugby world and what spice will be added to the coming encounters — notably when England travel once more to Murrayfield on the opening day and return to Paris in February; when Ireland, so nearly conquerors of champions Australia, run out once more at Lansdowne Road, and Wales begin their brave attempt to rise like some Phoenix from the ashes.
The excitement beckons — and I'll go no further at this stage than to wonder whether the Championship record of exactly 100 years ago might be repeated in 1992, when England beat Ireland, Wales and Scotland (just!),
Scotland beat Wales and Ireland (just!) and  Ireland beat Wales.
France were not part of the tournament in 1892, and 100 years later I would be reluctant to predict precisely what their impact will be this time round, Villepreux or no!
Finally, at a sad time for Rosamund and myself, our sincerest thanks to so many rugby friends who have extended, through kind words and deeds, their sympathies to us on the tragic death, after a short illness, of our daughter Charlotte.
May 1992 be a year of peace and happiness for all.
LETTERS
LITRE LETTER!
One law for the rich…
FOLLOWING the excitement of the well-run World Cup, certain observations force themselves upon me.
Firstly, we should look back to see how things could be improved.
Secondly, and most importantly, the quality of the refereeing should be examined.
Regrettably, it seems to some of us that a large proportion of the World Cup referees ‘chickened out’ of difficult and contentious decisions when they involved more powerful and vocal countries, but didn't hesitate to punish the lesser countries e.g. Calder's butt and the Argentina v W. Samoa punch-up.
The former was a very serious act of foul play and the latter of no importance in a well-controlled game.
It is high time the variable quality of international referees and the anomalies that abound in interpretation were sorted out by an International Board Survey.
In addition, this criticism of referees could be extended to their manifest reluctance to referee the line-outs in a fair proportion of the games.
This also refers to the touch judges.
Penalty tries appear frequently in divisional games, usually for repeated collapsing of the scrum on the defence try-line.
None in the World Cup.
This suggests to some of us that (a) the quality of the referees is poor (b) there is a rugby law for the rich (internationals and World Cup) and another for the poor (divisional games).
Loyal Norling praised the refereeing of the games; but from where I was sitting in most of the games an unfit Norling with his flair and two good touch judges would have been preferable to most of the referees I saw.
Rugby was the winner
NOW that the World Cup is over and we are back to the league games again, I think that all rugby supporters who were able to go to the matches or to watch it on television must admit that rugby was the winner.
Australia were worthy champions and English fans must not be downhearted even though we lost.
England played some of their best rugby for a long time.
And let's not forget Western Samoa, Canada and Italy — with the last two really giving the All Blacks a fright — and Ireland, who were so near to bringing off a great quarter-final victory.
Let's hope that the Five Nations Championship games show us that all the Home Nations are also capable of good and fair rugby.
The idea of increasing the value of a try to five points is one I don't think should be accepted.
If the drop goal were reduced to two points and the penalty goal to two points, that would be more sensible.
I would also like the team awarded a penalty and gaining ground to be given the line-out throw-in.
Also, do not allow a player to make the ball dead behind his own goal-line unless he is being tackled; a player making the ball dead when there is no player within 10 years of him should have to take a drop-out from under the posts.
Scotland's death march
MY heart goes out to all Scotsmen and women, who watched the World Cup Third-Place Play-off at Cardiff.
I thought Welsh rugby was slow, but the band's rendition of Flower of Scotland was more like a death march.
You could see the pain and anger on the faces of the players.
Did the Welsh have no faith in Scotland at all?
I honestly thought they were going to win.
As the English wife of a Scot, we all join in with the singing, except when they play England — even our little girls, aged 4½ and 2½ years.
Let's hope someone buys some batteries for the bandsmen before the Five Nations match next March.
‘Disgusting display’
HAVING watched almost every game in the World Cup, firstly in my Irish colours, and then in my Scottish colours (although I live in Dublin, my mother was Scottish!)
I am sorry to have to say ‘shame on you Finlay Calder’ for two disgraceful incidents, and ‘shame on you, Scottish rugby powers that be’, for taking no disciplinary action against him.
Can it be that you condone his actions?
It certainly was a disgusting display from a man who has bowed out from the game very publicly.
When he found the game too fast for him, he resorted to ‘thuggery’!
Had the head-butting incident (in the game against New Zealand) taken place in Princes Street, he would probably have been arrested.
Tall poppy syndrome
ON Thursday 31st October, two days before the World Cup final, it was with dismay that I read one of my schoolboy heroes, David Duckham, being reported as commenting that he would be ‘embarrassed and very sad if England won the Cup playing the way they did against Scots’.
When great ex-players join the media bandwagon of knocking successful teams one can't help feeling there may be a tinge of jealousy in their comments.
If the English performances in Paris and Edinburgh had been executed by New Zealand they would be proclaimed as awesome and unstoppable.
In contrast, England were branded dull and boring.
The players and coaches should be immensely proud of themselves for their performances.
Any sport is about playing to your strengths and playing on your opponents' weaknesses.
This England did superbly and came out on top.
They should have to make no apology for that.
Despite the outcome of the final, my message to Will and the boys is thanks for the memories; for me they will live forever, and I will have great pleasure in years to come to say ‘I was there’, not ‘I was embarrassed’.
No glory in defeat
THE Australians must be laughing all the way back to Sydney at the thought of the World Cup Final.
Who wants to come second?
New Zealand, Australia and Scotland for that matter would never settle for second just to please a fickle press.
Why are England expected to settle for it and be happy with a ‘well done’ and a pat on the back then the next day be criticised by the same pressmen for not catching the ball at vital moments!
The British press always knock British winners in any sport, so why listen to them?
Winning the World Cup was more important to real English rugby supporters than anything.
It was wrong to change a winning formula during the most important rugby game ever played.
We all know that England can play an expansive game; they proved this in the 89/90 season (and again came second).
Who wants glory in defeat?
You play to win or you'll always come second.
I, for one, would have settled for a 3–0 victory.
That would have been glory enough for me.
A World Cup final is the wrong time and place to prove a point and the English management must take the blame for letting the press and the Australians sucker them into self destruction.
Is it not ironic that Australia won the final playing in exactly the same style that England were so slated for — to win !
ITV's moving obstacle
AS has been pointed out in your magazine, the ITV coverage of the World Cup was very good, although promises that the BBC would be totally outshone did not really come to much.
However, I still have a little complaint to make.
I went to Cardiff to watch the Third-place Play-off between Scotland and the All Blacks and stood in the West Enclosure.
We even arrived at the ground nice and early to be assured of the prestigious place leaning against the fence at the front.
All went well until the match started and the cameraman arrived.
For the rest of the match he proceeded to annoy me and my fellow spectators by positioning himself right between us and the action.
It was really uncanny the way he did it all the time.
Being right in line with the posts we had expected some sort of obstacle to look round but not a moving one!
This problem must also have been worse for some people because, even though I'm only 16, I am 5ft 8ins.
So the smaller children in the crowd must have had awful problems.
I appreciate that the television companies have to get the best shots of the game or we'd complain about that, but I think they should bear in mind those people who have paid to see the game and, in some cases like mine, travelled a long way to see the match.
South Africa set fair
TWO letters by readers carried in the November 1991 issue of RW&P prompt me to send you my views on what must be the most important issues facing the IRB and future Rugby World Cup tournaments.
First, take the point made by Mr. Holloway from Germany, who says that South Africa (they should have been granted a dispensation and welcomed to World Cup 1991) must surely go through the full qualifying process for 1995.
This gentleman has said a mouthful and God bless his soul.
The absence of South Africa from both the 1987 and this year's tournaments stood out like a sore thumb.
True, Namibia was not a country when the 1991 World Cup preliminaries were held in Africa, but look at the challenge from Africa in the form of Zimbabwe.
Japan's devastation of a country which had lost to Namibia on the eve of the World Cup was noting less than a scandal and a disgrace to international rugby.
And I hope RW&P will be able to throw some light on the absence of Kenya in the qualifying African Zone set-up.
I saw them play in Hong Kong some years ago and they looked a jolly good side.
Zimbabwe's divorce from the Currie Cup Competition has contributed to the sad state of its rugby.
(The true picture was unfortunately not told to RW&P readers by the much-travelled Chris Thau in one of his recent reports.
Over to you, Robert Mugabe).
Without that South African link, Zimbabwe's rugby, and even that of Namibia, should they shun their former ‘ruler’ for long, would only drag itself into the doldrums.
I believe the world cricket authorities have got their act right by bringing in South Africa into the World Cup at virtually the eleventh hour and the IRB should not be stuck in the mud.
South Africa should be given the 1995 World Cup without batting an eyelid.
The other aspect of the 1991 World Cup that certainly caught the TV watcher's eye was the inconsistency among the referees.
They appeared to have one law for the big boys and another for the minnows.
Jim Fleming sends off a Western Samoan and an Argentine while Finlay Calder's head-butting went ignored and so did some of the forwards from France against Canada.
Ed Morrison allowed John Jeffrey to come in from an offside position and ‘collect’ a passing movement between two Japanese players while Hayashi was tackled without the ball when a try seemed certain for Japan.
All these setbacks didn't matter, old chap, because the referee only has eyes for  the big boys.
One does not hope to see Les Peard around in the same way as the name of Winston Jones vanished after he handed Scotland their 1984 Grand Slam on a plate, aided and abetted by the British press and its tirade against French forward play.
The headhunter?
I HAVE just read the November issue of RW&P and feel that I must write and comment on Wayne Shelford's article.
Whilst I agree with many of Mr. Shelford's comments I find it hard to believe his comment on high tackles.
This World Cup has been a showcase for the game both in this country and world-wide.
Many people are expressing an interest in playing the game and no doubt many parents will be interested in mini-rugby for their children.
Then Mr. Shelford makes his pathetic statement on referees clamping down on the high tackle.
So, the high tackle is the action of real men?
What rubbish!
It is the action of a player too limited in skill or sense to do anything else.
It is far tougher to dive at the legs of an oncoming player than to haul them down by the neck or straight-arm tackle them as they run past you.
How can we attract players to the sport if a top class player is advocating potentially dangerous play?
Perhaps Mr. Shelford should speak to some of the players in our sport who have been seriously injured by high tackles and then see how tough he feels?
I trust that Mr. Shelford's comments are not those held by the staff of RW&P or in future issues can we look forward to ‘Wayne's Top 10 maiming tips for mini's’ or ‘Eye gouging and ear biting for beginners’.
I have played rugby for several years at various levels.
Obviously I have not played at any level anywhere near that of Wayne Shelford, but I feel that the sport is quite tough enough without making it downright dangerous!
Cynical Campese
WE WILL never know if Campese, Farr-Jones et al were right: whether the cover would have reached Rory Underwood before he reached the line.
Off the field, Cup in hand, perhaps the end justified the means?
Campese dismissed the matter, but when he chose to put less confidence in the cover on the field and deliberately knocked down Peter Winterbottom's pass, Bevan should have taken that as an admission that the so-far impregnable ‘Gold Wall’ was about to be breached.
Campese's decision robbed 60,000 in the stadium, and countless millions around the world, of what would have been one of the most intense and fascinating finales to the World Cup, with England only three points behind, their heads up and winning score in sight.
Would Underwood have scored?
Who knows?
But this was surely one occasion that, for the good of the game, the benefit of the doubt must surely have been given to England, regardless of the word of the law.
A penalty try would not have given the World Cup to England in itself as they still had to score again.
But, for all that effort and the manner in which they attacked from the kick-off, I believe they deserved that try.
As it was, however, as in the Soccer World Cup of 1984, the hand of a legend brought England's World Cup dreams to an end.
The press-gang in its place
WHILST much has been said about the abilities of the players, the coaches, the referees, the managers etc, little has been said about the standards of journalism.
My belief is that sports journalism is there to inform and, most importantly, to stimulate debate.
The purpose of my writing is to say how refreshing it was to read Nigel Starmer-Smith's well-balanced view on Wales' performance in his November ‘On the Air’ column.
You were right, Nigel, to say that there are talented individuals not yet part of a team — and you were right to say that Western Samoa are a bit useful.
So much of the national press seem to have lost their hold on what is real and what isn't.
Michael Calvin wrote: ‘Cardiff Arms Park is as much a relic of former glory as the pithead wheel of an old mine’!
In reality Cardiff Arms Park is one of the top three sporting venues in the UK — a super place to watch sport — and sport is what it is.
Did Manchester United's relegation to Division Two, England's failure to qualify for the Argentina Soccer World Cup, Australia's mid-70s cricket XI, see the demise of their sport?
No.
Sport is cyclical.
The Welsh have had the number of quality players from which to  choose diminished by rugby league.
So their performances in the short term will reflect that.
Exceptional victories by the youth XV, the U19s and U21s in recent times will be reflected in the long term.
Then, as Starmer-Smith so rightly said, ‘Wales will bounce back’.
The rugby public is generally a knowledgeable one.
It needs sensible, thoughtful journalism, not the crass sensationalism adopted by the dailies and Sundays (even the ‘quality’ ones).
I'm glad your article belongs to the former.
Play it again, Sam!
THANKS TO RW&P the World Cup will have to be played all over again.
I assume that will be the organisers' decision having seen the picture on the front of the November edition.
This clearly shows Kirwan holding on to Webb long after the scoring pass was given to Jones.
If this obstruction, obviously intended to stop Webb playing any further part in stopping the move, had been noticed, the try would have been disallowed, the game drawn and England would have played Canada and so on.
Or maybe, rather than a total replay, just award the Cup to England due to Campese's blatant obstruction on Underwood just as he was about to tackle Horan.
No run down the line, no line-out, no Cup.
Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT
Praise the Board
THE members of the IRB deserve praise for at last grasping the nettle where the laws are concerned.
After the World Cup they rose to the occasion and agreed on proposals which, when adopted next year, will fundamentally change the structure of the game.
For the second time since the 19th century the value of the try has been changed and for the second time this century the drop goal value has been altered.
The try is to be worth five points while the drop goal will count for two points.
In general the law changes look like long overdue positive steps which strike the delicate balance of encouraging attacking enterprise while also punishing sides intent on killing the ball in defence.
The prohibition of the anti-game scrum-half dummy from the base of the scrum is also to be applauded, while the crooked allowance on quick line-out throws before a line-out has formed will certainly encourage rapid counter-attacks.
Write in and let us know what you think about the new law changes — we will be looking at them in greater detail in next month's issue.
Dragons are coming
THOSE Welsh fathers whose sons hero worship Emyr Lewis and Robert Jones rather than Ian Rush and Mark Hughes could be in for a nasty shock next Christmas when they discover the Welsh rugby kit they bought this year may well be out of date.
That, at least, is one implication of the WRU's five year £1.25m deal with kit manufacturers Cotton Traders .
Not only that, but that team playing at Cardiff Arms Park and wearing red shirts with green collars and redesigned feathers emblem will now be called the Dragons (and will have the dragon emblem on the right arm).
The contract allows for a change in kit design within the next five years.
Says WRU marketing director Jonathan Price: ‘Young people identify strongly with teams that have attractive character names and playing strips’.
Charlotte Starmer-Smith
ALTHOUGH the circumstances have been so sad, the staff of the magazine have been reminded recently how much the rugby community will rally around when one of its members suffers a loss.
Nigel and Rosamund Starmer-Smith's tragic loss of their daughter, Charlotte, has clearly affected many of you as deeply as it has us.
Hundreds were able to pay their respects and express their condolences by turning up at a charity rugby match at Shiplake College, Berkshire, in aid of the Charlotte Starmer-Smith Memorial Fund which aims to purchase medical equipment for the treatment of blood diseases.
If you didn't, though, and wish to make a donation, then please do so to:Charlotte Starmer-Smith Medical Fund,.
Spitting image
A LATE penalty against a local team in the French Championship is not for faint-of-heart referees.
The current anti-British hysteria in France made matters worse because it was awarded by a Scot by the name of Ian Goodall.
Goodall had been invited to referee the First Division game between Tarbes and Brive.
His penalty against Tarbes in the last minutes of the game levelled the score 18–18.
The home crowd was not pleased and hooligans (described by French journalist Jacques Verdier as ‘imbèciles’) spat on the Scotsman as he left the field.
‘In France the local side is expected to win, hence the intensity of the reaction’, said Goodall.
He needed a police escort when he left the stadium.
Men of the moment
THE World Cup may be well over, but there's no forgetting some of the performances we saw in October 1991.
The Famous Grouse Awards at the Café Royal, London, paid tribute to some of the greater moments in the competition, handing out awards for the most notable feats.
Picture on the left are prizewinners (left to right):
WORLD CUP ISSUE RECORD 65,000 SALE
Rugby World & Post hit a new peak with a record 65,000 sale of the October World Cup preview issue.
This eclipsed the previous best sale achieved by the magazine with the Wales Centenary issue of October 1980 by some 23,000.
Thanks to all you readers out there for helping us to reach this target during a recession which has hammered the magazine trade as hard as any.
We have done our utmost to provide you with the best possible product but if you have any complaints or suggestions as to how it could be improved don't hesitate to let us know.
Season's Greetings — and don't forget your subscription!
From the heart
ALTHOUGH John Kirwan might be in a honeymoon mood at the moment after the whole All Black team turned up at his recent marriage in Italy (see pages 54 and 65), his good humour is unlikely to last too long if the NZRFU meeting on December 12 and 13th decides to take action against him over his public announcement that he would not make himself available for the All Blacks if Auckland coach John Hart is not Grizz Wyllie's successor as national coach.
The ultimate expression of player power hasn't gone down too well back in New Zealand, where the NZRFU chief executive George Verry said: ‘I can't recall a precedent for such comments, but I'm sure the rules have provisions for dealing with players who bring the game into disrepute’.
Ominous stuff.
If Kirwan is serious — and hooker Sean Fitzpatrick assures us he is — then it is possible that he will not wear the silver fern again because, even though Alex Wyllie is no longer in contention, there's no guarantee that Hart will get the job.
North Harbour's Peter Thorburn, Otago's Laurie Mains, and Wellington's Earle Kirton are also in the running, as are Andy Leslie, Ross Cooper and Graham Hamer.
All Black wing John Kirwan strides down the aisle in Treviso, Italy, with his new wife, Fiorela Tomasi, an international volleyball player.
Rutherford's reply
AS ENGLAND start to look towards fashioning a team that can win the next World Cup, the RFU have appointed a new coach Dick Best only until the end of the season.
That raises the question of whether or not that gives him the sort of ‘job security’ necessary to experiment with the new players coming through in the hope of building a side capable of beating All Blacks, Wallabies and Springboks.
But RFU Technical Director Don Rutherford assures RW&P that this just isn't so.
‘Everyone's appointed on an annual basis.
Even though Geoff Cooke was appointed through to the World Cup, his was only a yearly ‘contract’, and his position was reviewed by the RFU each year.
There's nothing at all sinister in that.
‘Whether or not you are invited to stay on has nothing to do with results, it's the performances that matter.
What we're interested in is how Dick (Best) can blend in those new players who will start to come through this year’.
Bath plug
CONGRATULATIONS to our new Assistant Editor Richard Bath, who (thanks to a large slice of beginner's luck!) kept a clean sheet in his World Cup predictions in the October preview issue.
This feat could have earned him £6,000 from the bookies if he had put his money where his mouth was.
As it is, Richard, previously the Rugby Correspondent of the Western Daily Press in Bristol, has had to make do with a bottle of Glenfiddich…
Still going strong
At an age when most men are window shopping for zimmer frames, Ron Marsh is looking forward to his 41st year of rugby with Old Dartfordians after making his debut in December 1951.
The skipper of the Vets and the ‘C’ side first started life as a sprightly 13 stone winger and doesn't — as yet— have any plans to give up.
‘After all…you're a long time retired’, he says.
‘SEEN & HEARD
‘Times have changed.
I can't get used to the hair gel and body lotions after matches’—PAUL ACKFORD (England lock) when announcing his retirement.
‘I'm still an amateur, of course, but I became rugby's first millionaire five years ago!’—DAVID CAMPESE (Australian wing).
‘When you spend as much time as we did trying to stop others scoring tries, you don't have much time to argue with the ref’—ZIMBABWE's REPRESENTATIVE when accepting the World Cup Fair Play Award.
‘The disappointment of losing in the final has gone.
You realise you have taken part in the best game of rugby that has ever been played’—JEREMY GUSCOTT (Bath and England centre).
‘I picked up my teeth from the pitch and wanted to play on, but a dental consultant from the crowd advised me to have them put back as soon as possible’—JAMES CHANDLER (Bedford wing) after the Pilkington Cup home defeat by Harlequins when he was alleged to have been punched by an England flanker.
‘They tried to pull me into a scrum once and they invited me into the showers with them’—GAIL PARKER (a lady referee) on problems encountered when trying to control men.
‘There comes a time when it's not worth the commitment you've got to give’—ALEX WYLLIE (retired All Black coach).
‘There is a band of mercenaries going round the circuit, but I wouldn't pay them in washers — even the big names’—JOHN PERKINS (Pontypool coach) on player transfers in Wales.
‘Bristol have the best young backs in the country bar none’— Painter, Redrup, Hull and, on the day, we could not get near Morgan’—PETER POLLEDRI (Clifton captain) after the Pilkington Cup defeat at Bristol.
‘Tell me.
Are there any better stand-offs than Barnes in England?’—GEORGE HOOKS (London Irish Coach) after his side had lost their opening league games to Bath — and Stuart Barnes.
‘It was all about heart.
Our players were magnificent in defence in the second half and we somehow managed to keep the Irish out’—RICHARD GACHES (Thurrock captain) after the shock defeat of London Irish in the Pilkington Cup third round.
Should it be SOUTH AFRICA 1995…?
South Africa is in a state of social and political flux as it enters a new non-racial era — yet it is still the favoured venue to host the 1995 World Cup.
MICK CLEARY argues that no matter how anxious we are to welcome them, the arguments for SA '95 are not as persuasive as they might at first appear.
No sooner had Derek Bevan blown the final whistle at Twickenham, than faint noises could be heard from over the horizon.
Within a few days the whispers had become a roar — South Africa for the 1995 World Cup.
The chant is certain to be sustained until the International Board announce their decision at their annual meeting in Auckland next April.
But why?
What has South Africa got to offer?
Magnificent stadia.
Well, yes that's true.
Magnificent hospitality.
Okay, I'll give you that as well.
Magnificent support.
Well, now that you mention it, yes.
But apart from stadia, hospitality and support, what has South Africa got to offer?
A magnificent rugby culture, top-class competition, commercial opportunities.
Okay, those as well…
Grounds for optimism: Ellis Park, Johannesburg, is a 60,000 all-seater ground, the biggest of several magnificent stadia in the country.
It's very easy to be seduced by South Africa's case.
It meets, and even surpasses, all the criteria laid down by the World Cup committee after the inaugural event in 1987; that there should be healthy commercial environment, that the event should be well supported and that it should take place in only one country.
As we know, the committee decided to ignore that last objective in 1991 and plumped for five countries, a decision which left those playing in France out in the cold.
However, to 1995.
On rational grounds South Africa would seem the ideal place to host the next tournament.
Next April's meeting need do no more than put a tick alongside South Africa's name and we can all start booking our tickets for the 1995 thrash.
If we did it would be very dangerous indeed.
For the whole thrust of the South African lobby is not rational but emotional.
Nostalgia tends to be an acute instinct in most sportsmen: in rugby players it can be positively overwhelming.
They remember the great journeys through one of the most beautiful countries in the world; and they remember that the South Africans could legitimately claim to be the world power.
The World Cup has not been the same without them.
Those are the reasons that South Africa have put forward — or, more correctly, have had put forward on their behalf — for hosting the show.
Persuasive as both the rational and emotional arguments are, two critical areas are ignored.
The first is obvious, or, at least ought to be.
South Africa is not stable.
No matter what great advances have been made in the last 12–18 months, there is still an awful lot of blood being shed in the country.
People are killed every day, almost as a matter of course in South Africa, largely as a result of the internecine tribal disputes.
Sadly, the deaths no longer even make the headlines, so commonplace are they.
At the moment there seems to be a consensus within South Africa for change.
Terrific.
But what happens when the right-wing minority decides that they've had enough of this liberal claptrap about integration?
What happens in two or three years time when the ANC's political aspirations have not been met.?
Can anyone really put their hand on their heart and say that there will be no violent backdrop to the 1995 World Cup?
Might not the presence of that tournament in the country excite feelings on either side?
And might it not also stimulate the worst possible scenario or terrorist activity?
It happened at the Olympic games at Munich in 1972.
Can anyone say it would not happen in South Africa in 1995?
Of course no-one can guarantee anything.
The very first international tennis event to be held in the country was disrupted by 30 coloured demonstrators, protesting at the exclusion of the Tennis Association of South Africa, just three weeks ago despite massive security.
In fact, the bigger the event, the better the target.
It would seem to be that there is still an enormously long way to go before anyone can predict with even a reasonable amount of confidence that the security of the event will not be a problem.
Therefore, the IB has to decide to have a last minute replacement on call in the event of a deterioration, or, if that proves logistically and financially prohibitive, reject the South African claim altogether.
There are a number of significant steps that have to be taken before the IB can even contemplate making that sort of decision.
Up to now the unity talks between the SARB and the black SARU have been far from smooth.
The SARU are determined that they shall not be pushed into premature agreement with the other bodies just for the sake of becoming part of the international fold.
SARU's president, Ebrahim Patel, recently stated that:
‘We don't want unity just for the sake of international tours.
We don't just want a merging of our unions either.
We want a new union to be formed which will represent the interests of everyone.
Unity to us is a means of finding a way towards peace and justice in South Africa’.
Of course progress has been made.
But how far will it have gone before that decision is made next April?
And who is to say that whatever deal between the two sides is struck will actually last?
There is one other nagging doubt about the South African case which, I have to admit, is a wholly emotional objection.
Just what have South Africa done for the game during their isolation?
Answer: they have bribed, connived, schemed, cheated and bullied everyone in sight, just to get the odd game or two.
If they weren't actually paying the players — Cavaliers, South Pacific Barbarians, Centenary Tour — they were always threatening to break away and instigate a professional circuit if they weren't given games.
During this period England and Wales broke off relations with them.
Latterly there was an attempt by the South African authorities to distance themselves from the activities of the money men.
In truth, through, their protest was no more than a token one.
They did nothing to root out the men who bankrolled the 1989 Centenary Tour which was brought together in such a sordid, furtive fashion.
Should all this be conveniently forgotten now that the boycott is about to be lifted?
Yes it should, but only if South Africa holds up its hand and admits that money did find its way into certain bank accounts and that the game in South Africa has been awash with money for many years.
Otherwise we are back to that old hypocritical state where the game is amateur in name only.
Bring South Africa back in by all means, but let's have some honesty this time around.
Come to the ball…
Lucrative invitations to the 1989 Centenary games were difficult to resist.
What of the other contenders — Canada, Argentina and New Zealand.
Only the latter is a serious player.
Both Canada and Argentina admit that it would only be by default that they would take on the task of staging the tournament.
The Canadian Rugby Union's director, John Billingsley, stated that his union's bid was contingent upon support from the international rugby community.
The approach would have to come from they rather than the other way around.
‘For the moment Canada has no plans to press its suit for 1995’.
That said, continues Billingsley: ‘Canada has much to offer in terms of geographic location, climate and language.
 If an invitation were issued, it would provide an incredible opportunity to encourage the further growth of rugby in both Canada and the USA.
Canada offers some superb indoor stadia and the technology exists to enable natural turf, of a quality suitable for such an event, to be installed on a short-term basis.
There are also appropriate facilities in most cities’.
If Canada were to meet the logistical and commercial demands of the organisers, ought they not to be seriously considered?
There is much to be gained form spreading the game far and wide.
The World Cup is the perfect vehicle for doing so.
Why not be progressive and try to take the game to new areas of the world?
To return to New Zealand, for example, runs the danger, symbolically at least , of exalting the old, traditional ways of the game.
Canada ought to be given the encouragement of making a serious bid.
As for Argentina, they cede their ground to South Africa.
According to Carlos Tozzi, the president of the Argentine Rugby Union, they have no desire to trump South Africa's bid.
He maintains that Argentina owes a lot to South African rugby.
He  recalled that it was on tour in South Africa that they were christened the Pumas.
As a result of this close, long-standing relationship, they would endorse South Africa's claim over their own.
Former ‘Bok glory boys (l-r) Frik du Preez, Jannie Engelbrecht and Jan Ellis hoping the new generation enjoys the same opportunities.
If the South African option were withdrawn then Tozzi feels that Argentina are more than equipped to step into the breach.
Although there are no rugby stadia in the country of sufficient capacity, there are several soccer venues which could more than adequately serve rugby's needs.
The River Plate stadium in Buenos Aires holds 75,000 whilst the Velez Sarfield takes around 50,000.
The provincial grounds all hold between 40–50,000. a lot of improvements to the country's infrastructure — transport, TV, telecommunications — were made for the Soccer World Cup in 1978.
There is one other country that has been floated as a serious contender — Japan.
Their case is best put, or rather rejected, but the long serving chairman of the Japanese Union, Shiggy Konno.
‘We have not made a bid to stage the 1995 Rugby World Cup.
Although we may be qualified to do so in certain areas, mainly commercial, we could not really be considered a top-class rugby-playing country strength-wise and have therefore decided not to bid.
I do not think we could bid for the money part as Japan has the reputation of trying to get its own way by money.
I certainly do not want rugby to follow this pattern’.
What should the IB do then next April?
It will not be an easy decision.
Perhaps what the authorities need to consider in the few months available to them is just when a decision needs to be made.
Of course the more time available the better.
But, when it may literally be a matter of life and death, might it not be worth putting things on hold for another twelve months?
After all, this World Cup did not get on the road until two years before the event.
If a decision has to be made in April 1992, then South Africa has some way to go yet before proving its case.
Springbok great, TOMMY BEDFORD (1963–71), gives an insight into the power struggle between the different governing bodies within the South African game.
FOR THE International Rugby Board and its member nations, the solution of the South African ‘problem’ would have been a godsend had it happened either before, during or immediately after the recent Rugby World Cup .
They would then, with all the fanfare and attendant publicity, have been able to welcome South Africa back into the international fold with the added perk of hosting the Rugby World Cup in 1995.
They would, at the same time, thereby have removed any suspicion that they had perhaps underhandedly supported the South African Rugby Board, one of their founder members, in ways contrary to the demands of a vociferous international opposition and an unrecognised (in international rugby circles) South African Rugby Union.
But the South African Rugby Board and the South African Rugby Union continued to get bogged down, as they had been for the last three years, even with the help of intermediaries of the stature of Nelson Mandela, in their attempts to reach accord and form one, united body for rugby football in their country.
In the ‘new South Africa’, as with all sports, this has become the prerequisite for South African rugby's re-entry into the international arena, no matter that those sympathetic to Danie Craven's SARB feel other options to exist.
They do not.
It may be unfortunate in the unity talks between the two opposing factions that Ebrahim Patel has thus far chosen to make what many would consider to be totally unrealistic demands for his 93-year-old SA Rugby Union.
Its predominantly black and brown members have virtually nothing to offer a united body other than themselves and their supporters.
Furthermore, it could just be that his union might contain diverse political factions within it which, thanks to years of forced and unenforced apartheid, have come to permeate every fabric of society and may well have forced SARU into an on-going powerplay with SARB.
The behaviour of Danie Craven and his 102-year-old SA Rugby Board in this matter could be just as problematic.
The Board has had to weather its own political upheavals and adjust to changing circumstances.
It has taken the black South African Rugby Association and the ‘coloured’ South African Rugby Federation under its wing, and they no doubt now want to flex their own muscles.
But the SA Rugby Board has traditionally had the major slice of South Africa's rugby cake, built as this has been on white wealth, sponsorship, patronage, assets, expertise, media coverage and the rest.
The Board could easily stage and manage any world cup through its own, almost unlimited resources.
To be expected to relinquish this power, and give up some of the spoils to the likes of SARU, who had been at the forefront in demanding the non-participation of the Springboks in international competition since it was ‘impossible to play normal sport in an abnormal society’, must, understandably, be a difficult to swallow.
In the complexities of such a situation the International Rugby Board obviously should not rely on SARB and SARU to achieve unity before they are to announce who will host the Rugby World Cup in 1995.
But if SARB and SARU did unite before then, given the personalities involved, can the IRB be absolutely assured that unity between SARB and SARU will still prevail in 1995?
An in that case, now certain can the IRB be that admission to those World Cup matches will not only be freely available to, but will be as readily affordable, by the majority of South Africans, and not necessarily only the privileged few?
If the IRB has any qualms in answering these questions come April 1992, they should think very carefully if South Africa is to be a serious contender in what would probably be the first genuine and major international event ever held in the country.
Secretary of the International Rugby Board, KEITH ROWLANDS, sets out the criteria by which the organisers will determine next April who is to host the 1995 World Cup.
THERE IS little doubt that a final decision as to the next hosts of the World Cup will be made in April 1992.
I personally would have preferred that decision to already have been taken.
There is simply so much to do and we are already a little behind the schedule.
Until we know who is going to stage the event, we cannot get on with working out the qualifying format for 1995.
The host country is seeded and with contenders from Canada, Argentina, South Africa and New Zealand there are any number of permutations to sort out.
There is no one dominant factor that will decide who gets the vote.
There will be a whole matrix of things to consider: The infrastructure of the game in that country; geographic and climatic factors; social infrastructure in terms of hotels, hospitals and security; size of stadia and also the commercial potential of the country's market place.
I would like to stress that the commercial consideration is only one of many elements and is certainly not the most important.
Rugby World Cup Ltd — which comprises its three directors, Russ Thomas, Marcel Martin and Sir Ewart Bell — are at the moment putting together a critical review of the 1991 event.
That report should be ready early in the New Year.
As a result of their conclusions, some of the bidders may wish to amend their application or, indeed, withdraw it altogether.
After that, RWC will present a package to the International Board in April, when they will then be in a position to make their choice.
There will be no fact-finding missions to any of the countries in question.
We already have enough data on all the relevant areas and, indeed, know from personal experience most of the venues mentioned.
All these countries have handled incoming tours in the past with considerable ease and all their faculties are well documented.
As far as I am concerned there is really no possibility that the venue will not be announced in April 1992.
If any of the contenders have not got their act together by then, then it is simply too bad.
BEST…on borrowed time?
Australia have shown you have to lose so that you can eventually win.
But, as RICHARD BATH discovers, England's appointment of coach DICK BEST for less than a year means that, instead of a bright new era, we can expect a diet of pragmatism and playing the percentages.
Can you remember the last time you were given a hospital pass?
You know, the one where some lumbering forward finds himself on the openside and, just as he is about to get well and truly creamed, he ships the ball — and the whole of the opposition's back row — over to you?
It's not that you didn't want the ball.
Quite the opposite, in fact.
It's just that you have been waiting all afternoon for it to arrive and now have little choice but to try and bludgeon your way through the waves of cover tacklers.
Know that feeling?
Well, so does England's new coach, Dick Best, the man the RFU have given until the end of the season to prove that he deserved to have the appointment renewed.
Best had been the heir apparent ever since he burst on to the representative scene as the architect of the London Division's remarkable 21–10 win over the touring Australians at Twickenham in '88.
In that game his side displayed a verve and fair rarely seen in English rugby, let alone at a senior representative level, as they ran the bemused Australians ragged.
The national side followed London's lead and England took the Test with a blistering display of 15-man running rugby, eventually finishing convincing 28–19 winners.
The rugby world stood up and took notice and Best was marked out as a man destined for greater things.
Since then 37-year-old travel agent has steadily climbed the greasy pole towards the job he has coveted most — that of England coach.
And although the path from Harlequins coach to Geoff Cooke's right-hand man hasn't been without its problems, there has been a sort of inevitability about his gradual promotion to the national squad.
But there are those who take issue with Best's appointment.
London have certainly dominated the divisional championship, and on those results alone, few could argue with his succession to Uttley.
Critics, though, point to a mediocre record at club level — Harlequins’ strength in depth has never been reflected in either their cup or league results — and to an England ‘B’record that does not stand any sort of comparison with that of his famous predecessor, Alan Davies (who England gave the boot).
So why wasn't Davies, who worked miracles with such meagre resources at Nottingham (as has become more and more apparent this season) and had a near unblemished record as England ‘B’ coach, given the same opportunity at the top level that Best has now been given?
And why hasn't Jack Rowell, the Bath coach, been pushed with the same vigour that Best appears to have been?
It is certainly true that Rowell had very little success with the South West divisional side, but then — with the possible exception of becoming Welsh coach — there are few more thankless tasks than trying to create a cohesive representative side amid the passionate parochialism that provides West Country rugby with its strengths and its limitations.
But surely the fact that Rowell has been the brains behind the most successful side in modern British rugby, as well as the man who managed to mesh the England Students into a force so strong that they were able to play World Cup quarter-finalists Canada on their home turf this summer and lose by less than 20 points, puts him on a par with Best.
Rowell, though, is hugely loyal to his Bath players and there has always been a worry that he would promote Bath men without due regard for the balance of the side, as Ron Waldron did with such disastrous results for Wales.
Best, a former Harlequins captain and coach, is acutely aware that the same charge could be levelled against him.
‘I'm very glad that all the Harlequins players were a part of the England set-up before I had anything to do with it’, said Best.
‘People have moaned about a Harlequins bias in the current England team, but they did alright this year didn't they?
They won the Grand Slam and got to the final of the World Cup.
You can't really argue with that, can you?’
Best himself seems to have few doubts as to why he got the nod, citing the growing importance of the Divisional Championship as the single most important factor in his — and England's — meteoric rise.
‘There has to be some step between club and country.
I'm pleased that the Divisional Championship has been on everybody's lips around this time each year.
It's the reason why England have done so well in recent years, and, of course, it's something that's very close to my heart’.
England's Best — spiky and articulate.
But Best, spiky and articulate though he is, is above all a pragmatist.
With England ‘B’, his brief was to bring on young players and to keep fringe members of the England squad ticking over, rather than to aim to win every gage, and that's what he did with the result that a whole crop of younger Englishmen — Back, Moon and Rodber, to name but three — are ready to make the transition to the full England team.
With London, he says, the 15-man game was just the natural one to play when there were backs of the calibre of Harriman available.
To put down the open, running rugby style he has pursued at Harlequins and with London simply to necessity would be wrong, though, for attack as the best form of defence is where Best's basic instincts lie.
Hard taskmaster.
Dick Best's ‘raising the tempo’ at a recent England training session.
But, in the year when England should be starting the rebuilding programme with 1995 in mind, they have wasted Best's proven talent for moulding a youthful team that can play expansive rugby.
That talent was presumably the main reason for his appointment, and that's only right and proper because if there's one thing England can learn from Bob Dwyer, it is that you sometimes have to be prepared to let a young side lose in the short-term to gain in the long-term.
By giving Best a contract of less than a year, the RFU have asked the ultimate pragmatist to devise the most foolproof method of extending his own tenure — and that's the safety-first approach.
To complete the analogy, it's as if the RFU is a lumbering forward giving a hospital pass that leaves Best no room to sidestep, no alternative but to put his head down and put his trust in the tried and tested battering ram technique.
That is surely no basis on which to retain or discard the national coach.
‘At the moment I've no thoughts at all about preparing for the next World Cup’, said Best.
‘I've only been given a year's contract, so the main priority will be to win all the matches, using essentially the same side that played in the World Cup.
If we win those games, then I'll start thinking about what comes after that.
‘My main function will be to complement Geoff Cooke.
Really I'm just looking to raise the pace and the tempo of the England side.
We're a little one-paced at the moment, so I want to raise the pace of the training sessions, although that doesn't mean we have to bring in new blood quite yet’.
But whilst Best is certainly under pressure to continue England's winning ways into the Five Nations Championship, the realist with the acid tongue and the blunt manners, which have been the bane of countless committeemen and lacklustre trainers over the years, is by no means just a dour pragmatist.
What comes across is his deep determination to do himself justice and an abiding love of the game.
‘Rugby is all-consuming at any level.
The further up the ladder you go, the more it begins to take over your life.
I even like going on tour.
I always think that it's just the same religion, different cathedral’.
BEAUMONT AT LARGE Huge sums of money were generated by the World Cup and it is of the greatest importance that most of it goes back into the game and its development.
But it is no less important that players, especially self-employed men like Mike Teague, should not be out of pocket as a result of sacrificing their work time for pre-tournament training and then the competition itself.
Teague now faces a dilemma.
He has said he lost something like £15,000 in potential earnings as a freelance builder and an injury suffered in the tournament has meant that he is unable to work — so he loses out both ways.
As he is a victim of his own loyalty to the England cause, the RFU's credibility can only be maintained if he is compensated — even if this means contradicting the edict of the 1890's which caused the original rugby league to break from the union code.
It is up to each individual union to deal with this problem, but the obvious right course for all of them is to compensate for broken time — and this included the RFU.
In England, in particular, it's high time that both sides — administrators and players — came out into the open and made it quite clear what they want and what they are prepared to do.
There are far too many grey areas with endless different interpretations open to every side.
What cannot be ignored is that the players are the ones who provide the entertainment, sometimes at considerable personal cost.
It's not good enough to say that by becoming international stars they are compensated by the kudos this brings with it and that their personal fame enables them to cash in.
Tell that to Mike Teague, who can only make money if he can work.
Fudging on issues must end now, otherwise there'll be a real threat that England players will call a halt in droves, considering that their sacrifices have not been justified.
With the Five Nations fast approaching I hope that most England players shelve any retirement plans — Paul Ackford and Mike Teague excepted.
At the same time it would be wise for Geoff Cooke and his team to recognise that the squad should still be supremely fit after the World Cup and ought not to be flogged to death by being put through intensive squad weekends.
The approach to the tournament should be as low key as possible with changes being made only where absolutely necessary.
Over the next few years leading up to the 1995 World Cup there'll be plenty of time to slot in replacements as they are needed — particularly to the front-five where Jason Leonard will probably be the only one available for the next tournament.
Priorities are a new tighthead and locks plus a back-row.
The backs are still young and should mostly be available in 1995 if they can retain their interest.
It's up to the RFU to make it worth their while.
The RFU should also take the overdue step of encouraging the development of the game in state schools by paying teachers for the time they spend coaching.
There's no point in sending them off on endless — no doubt excellent — courses if there's no incentive for them to use up large slices of their spare time in teaching the game.
They'll just not do it if they are not paid and a chance to develop the game will be lost.
It's true that there are plenty of YDO's, but without the help of teachers in the schools they could fighting a losing battle to take advantage of the favourite publicity emanating from the World Cup.
ENGLAND ROUND-UP
Bath — business as usual
Bath are still favourites to retain the Courage Division One title, but below them, it's a case of the old order well and truly changing.
The new boys at this level,London Irish and Rugby , both put up fierce debut challenges before narrowly losing to Bath and Gloucester respectively.
The Exiles can also take encouragement, earning their first points at this level when they gained a creditable away draw at Northampton .
But for every two up-and-coming clubs that make the grade, there are always two on the way down.
It might still be a little premature to consign famous old clubs Nottingham and Rosslyn Park to relegation, but both have been well beaten by a resurgent Bristol — whose youthful side have been setting a blistering pace at the Memorial Ground so far this season — and their other results indicate that they face an uphill struggle to maintain their First Division status.
Elsewhere,Orrell are flying the flag for top flight northern rugby in their own, inimitable style.
Rosslyn Park and Saracens have both endured an early season steamrollering from Wigan's finest.
Of the other main contenders,Wasps got the better of Harlequins in their league opener, but neither looks sharp enough to worry Bath this year.
Leicester continue to blow hot and cold, although one of the reasons they looked a little below par in their first game was because they were playing a Gloucester side that could be a dark horse for the title.
Coach Keith Richardson is always keen to play down their challenge, but in the Cherry and White's Centenary Year there will be few tougher teams to beat.
Outside Division One , it is the usual lottery.
But, as far as early season form will allow,London Scottish (Division Two),Clifton (Division Three),London Welsh (Division Four South)and Wade Dooley's Preston Grasshoppers (Division Four North), all are strong promotion candidates.
As in Division One , it is two famous old clubs that are on the receiving end of things in Division Two and Three .
Liverpool St Helens , relegated from Division One last year, look destined to make it two drops in two years, as do Third Division Headingley who, racked by internal politics, are contemplating a new life in Division Four North .
SCOTLAND
BIG AL gives it a bash!
The Glasgow High-Kelvinside prop AL WATT, at 6ft. 5ins and 19 stone one of the bigger ‘beasties’ on the British scene, discusses his shift from lock to front row forward with BILL McLAREN.
Alan Gordon James Watt would seem to have the ideal credentials for an international lock.
Just 24, he is 6ft 5ins and just on 19 stones and yet he is no cart-horse.
He had played flanker for his club, Glasgow High-Kelvinside, and no.8 for Glasgow Under-21s, but had become thoroughly established as a lock, the position he played in at Kelvinside Academy in Glasgow, where he  benefited from the guidance of the school coach, Peter Billington, for Scottish Schools against Ireland and England in 1985, for his senior clubs side and for Glasgow at senior district level.
The Scottish selectors, however, rated his prime potential value to Scotland as a prop and the genial giant is in the process of seeking to establish himself in the tighthead position.
Some knowing souls disagree with the national selectors' assessment in reckoning that Watt is too tall for a prop and that in the 1990 District Championship he was the outstanding ball-winner at the front of the line-out.
On the other hand, if he makes it as an international tighthead, that line-out capability will prove a handsome bonus as well as his ballast in a Scottish scrummage which has struggled of late.
When the national selectors' viewpoint was put to him, Watt took up the challenge: ‘I was happy to give it a real bash.
So much to that I made it clear to my club that I would like to be selected as a tighthead’.
He even played in the club second fifteen as a prop in preference to being at lock for the first although, when the senior side was in relegation danger, he acceded to the club selectors' request to revert to lock to help them to safety.
Now his club's tighthead, he has gone out of this way to improve his scrummaging technique with specialist advice from among others, his boss, Sandy Carmichael, the 50-times capped Scottish and Lions tighthead Iain Milne (‘immensely helpful’) and Jim Telfer (‘he is just the kind of coach I need because I can be a bit lazy and the fact that he just keeps at you all the time was very good for me’).
In the past two weeks he has had to scrummage against Scotland's World Cup looseheads, David Sole and David Milne: ‘They certainly got the better of me but I like to think that I am learning all the time and that that will lead to my improvement’.
The last six months have proved somewhat hectic for Watt and full of the unexpected.
He was chosen for Scotland's tour of North America in May, played in four of the six games, including the two non-cap Tests, and scored three tries: ‘I was delighted to go but I never thought for a moment that I would make the Test side.
I felt that I still had so much to learn and there were recognised props in the squad.
So it was the surprise selection of my career when I was picked against America and Canada.
‘The American game was very enjoyable.
They are big and physical, but I thought I coped not too badly with the pressure.
But I was up against a big, strong lad called Eddie Evans in the Canada game and that was very hard work.
We were pleased to see the Canadians do so well in the World Cup after they had beaten us over there’!
The next step was selection for the World Cup squad: ‘Actually, I was lying in bed with ‘flu on the Sunday morning of a squad session from which I had called off when Bill Hogg, the SRU secretary, telephoned to say that Iain Milne had been forced to withdraw.
Then Duncan Paterson, the selection convenor, came on to say that I had better get myself over to Murrayfield as soon as I could!
‘That was a shock, too, and I suppose I wandered about a bit about a bit aimlessly before having a quick breakfast.
I was packing my kit when it dawned on me that the squad session would be over before I got there and that I would be concerned mainly with being kitted out as a member of the World Cup squad’.
The big fellow's progress will be followed with intense interest by those on both sides of the fence in the argument about his best position, but he soldiers on, keen to learn and with no pretensions.
‘I'm still a bit of novice where scrummaging is concerned.
As a lock, if your prop asks for a special effort at a scrummage you just hollow your back, get your feet right and give it all you've got.
‘At prop, if you do not show aggression and attack your opposite number, whilst contributing to making sure that your own ball is protected, you can be certain that your opponents will give you a hard time.
‘I have found that the stamina required for propping is greater than that as a lock.
I take my hat off to those front row men.
My ambition is to earn the respect of rival props as a scrummager.
If I can prove myself to them then things could progress from that.
‘You cannot expect to be in the national squad unless you can prove that you are good enough, so I just have to continue the learning process, equip myself fully for the task, get a bit fitter and that, hopefully, will be at least half the battle’.
‘Geech’ stays on
Despite the retirement of coaching team-mates Jim Telfer and Derrick Grand after the recent World Cup, Ian McGeechan has committed himself to a further term as Scotland's principal coach.
The 1992 Five Nations Championship will, therefore, be his fourth at the helm.
Life without ‘Geech’, as he is affectionately known, is incomprehensible to many of a squad  who have risen to world prominence as a direct result of his guidance.
Yet there was serious thought given to his continued involvement by McGeechan, a 45-year-old public relations manager with Scottish Life .
‘With everything that has happened over the last couple of years, I just want to stand back a bit and have a couple of weeks to think about it’, he said, before later confirming his desire to lead a new-look Scotland in 1992.
Big All Watt smashes a path through the Zimbabwe ranks during Scotland's emphatic World Cup victory.
SCOTTISH NOTES by Bill McMurtrie
RICHIE DIXON , the Scotland B coach for the past three seasons, has been promoted to helping to coach the senior team.
The Currie High School PE teacher will be in charge of coordinating the forward' coaching, assisting Ian McGeechan and Douglas Morgan .
McGeechan and Morgan continue as selectors.
So do Duncan Paterson , the team manager,Graham Young , and Ian Lawrie , with Dixon the one newcomer to the selection committee.
JIM TELFER 's expertise and long experience have been grated from the national coaching team onto the Scottish Rugby Union.
The 1984 Grand Slam coach has been co-opted into the SRU committee to help to bring through new coaches for the future.
Edinburgh Accies scrum-half Ian Maclean scrambles the ball away as his opposite number Mike Hall makes a despairing lunge as the champions lose out to David Sole's men 15–21 at Meggetland in the league.
Three first-division clubs have announced new sponsorship.
Jed-Forest signed a £30,000 deal for three years' backing from the TSB ,Melrose will receive a minimum of £10,000 this season from Concept Group , sponsorship which, through bonuses, could rise to £15,000 if they win the national championship and the Border League, and Stewart's Melville have a season's £15,000 support from Dial Office Systems .
Melrose have also renewed their seven sponsorship with Bell 's the Perth-based whisky company committing £150,000 for the next three tournaments.
The Melrose guests on April 11 will include Amatori Milan (David Campese 's club), the Irish Wolfhounds (last year's winners),Bay of Plenty , the first visitors to the tournament from New Zealand, and the US Cougars .
GLASGOW ACADEMICAL 's Mac-Gregor brothers,Calum and Graeme , are back together.
Graeme has returned to New Zealand after a season with Academicals' Edinburgh namesakes.
Two other Edinburgh players have switched to Glasgow clubs.
Jeremy Richardson ,Edinburgh Academicals ’ 1987 World Cup lock, has joined Glasgow High/Kelvinside , and Richard Hastings has swopped from Currie to West of Scotland .
GEORGE GRAHAM , the Glasgow and Scotland ‘B’prop, has left Stirling County to go to rugby league with Carlisle .
SCOTLAND will return to a victory venue for the B international against France on February 2.
The game will be played in Albi, where the Scots won 13–10 in 1984.
ABERDEENSHIRE , celebrating their centenary this season, have linked up with Glentanar footballers and St Ronalds cricketers to build a £140,000 clubhouse at Woodside.
SCOTLAND'S UNDER-18s will break new ground with matches against Spain and Ireland in the spring.
The Spanish match will be in Glasgow on Saturday, April 4, and the Irish game in Dublin a week later.
Work on the first stage in MURRAYFIELD 's redevelopment, building stands to replace the north and south terracing, will begin immediately after Scotland 's final home match in the Five Nations' Championship, the game against France on March 7.
By the end of the World Cup the Scottish Rugby Union's debenture scheme had raised more than £22m of the £37m needed to finance the overall redevelopment.
Youth rugby in Scotland will be sponsored with £200,000 over three more years by Digital , the electronic company.
The original deal was for the same time and same sum, but the difference now is that the new contract covers rugby only for the age bracket between 16 and 18.
The Scottish Rugby Union are thus free to enlist sponsors for the younger age groups.
The ANGLO-SCOTS won only one of their four under-21 championship matches on their visits over the Border in September and October, and that was an upset.
They beat the South 16–9 at Kelso but lost to Edinburgh, Glasgow and North and Midlands .
FRED McLEOD , from Stewart's Melville, is Scotland's new representative on the International Rugby Football board, replacing Gordon Masson , who is now the SRU president.
MELROSE won the first major sevens of the season, beating Hawick 24–6 in the final of Glasgow High/Kelvinside 's Ryden tournament.
CHARLIE BISSET , a member of the elite club of players who have turned out for three Scottish districts, has been elected as an Edinburgh representative on the Scottish Rugby Union committee.
He played for Glasgow while he was with Jordanhill, North and Midlands out of Stirling University and Edinburgh from Heriot 's, his current club.
Glasgow High/Kelvinside are hopeful that Shade Munro 's prolonged absence will be over in the New Year.
Munro has been out of rugby since his complex leg break in April, 1990, an injury that forced him to drop out of Scotland 's tour to New Zealand that summer.
SCOTLAND will not be competing in the Hong Kong Sevens next year.
The SRU turned down an invitation because of a packed calendar.
PRESTON LODGE are to join with local football club Preston Athletic in a £500,000 project to upgrade Pennypit Park.
Glasgow High/Kelvinside pick up the McEwan's club of the month award for October after huge victories over Glasgow Accies, Queens University Belfast, Kilmarnock and Stewart's-Melville FP.
They went through the month undefeated.
WALES
CAPTAIN SCARLET
You know that times are changing in Wales when a man as outspoken and innovative as Llanelli's GARETH JENKINS can become a national coach and selector.
STEVE BALE talked to the Scarlets' rebel with a cause.
Gareth Jenkins possessed one of the outstanding talents of his Seventies' generation but injury prevented it demonstration at the very highest level and it is as a Scarlet, the epitome of Llanelli as player and coach, that he has always been seen and highly regarded.
No-one, therefore, should underestimate the length of the step Jenkins has taken in agreeing to assist Alan Davies in coaching Wales.
But there again, by his own admission Jenkins is having the best both worlds.
Denied a selection vote because of his continuing association with one particular club, he can carry on coaching Llanelli while also — at last— having the input into the national team that many have for years wanted him to have.
All this, and he is only 40.
‘It's an opportunity to keep my club commitment going and have a look at what the Wales set-up entails’, he said in one of the many television interviews that followed his appointment as Davies's no. 2.
In other words, if he doesn't like what he sees, the eventual succession from Davies to Jenkins would not, as is now widely assumed, be inevitable.
‘I'm sure I'm there just to concentrate on coaching and I'm sure that's the first thing I need to look at’, Jenkins also said.
‘My first aim has to be success with Llanelli but now that I've accepted this position I'm going to be totally committed to developing Welsh rugby’.
Divided  loyalties such as infected Welsh rugby when Neath had their recent preponderance in the national squad?
Not a bit of it.
For one thing, Jenkins is far too astute to fall for that, and for another other Welsh clubs are enthusiastic in his support.
And, by the way, Jenkins pulls no punches on the prospects for the Wales side now partly his to command: ‘Substantial improvement is going to be necessary before we can even consider winning’.
It is only a couple of years ago that Jenkins rejected out of hand the Wales involvement he has now taken on, and — until Davies and the Wales manager, Robert Norster, beat their path to his door — he has tended to use the expression ‘poisoned chalice’ whenever anyone sounded out his interest or rather the lack of it.
The point was that Jenkins was a nonconformist, a rebel even; an ‘unqualified’ coach who would disdain the Welsh Rugby Union coaching certificate, which to others is a glittering prize, as a scrap of paper.
He has also, on occasion, been one of the WRU's sharpest critics.
Consider this from May 1989: ‘I have to live within the set-up but I don't have to agree with everything that happens.
That doesn't mean I necessarily disagree either, but if I'm asked a question I give an answer.
Since they can't stop me doing that, I've made my views on Welsh rugby very clear.
WE used to lead the way, set the trend; things have been allowed to drift so much that now we're struggling to catch up’.
In this them-and-us situation, Jenkins was emphatically one of ‘them’ out there on the ground.
Less than three years on he is one of ‘us’ in the establishment and happy to acknowledge that the reorganisation for which he stridently called is, albeit belatedly, being carried out.
Jenkins has enjoyed great success with Llanelli: the Schweppes Cup in 1988, the Welsh Merit Table and Cup final in 1989, the Cup and second place in the inaugural Heineken League in 1991.
But his failure to attend a WRU coaching course (a sin of omission shared with Ray Prosser, perhaps the finest coach of forwards Welsh rugby ever had) coupled with his outspokenness denied him access to the magic circle.
Not that it worried him.
‘My beliefs, interests and ambitions lie purely and simply in coaching Llanelli’, he once said.
‘As the club have never expected me to have a coaching certificate, I've never considered it worth the effort just to get a piece of paper.
There have to be some standards but a track record is more important than spending three weekends away being taught something you already know, and I'm quite happy to stand or fall on my personal record.
I don't expect the Union to like that, but I'm perfectly happy as I am’.
Compare that with his current view; ‘Coaches, like players, should have ambitions’.
Talking of personal records, Jenkins' as a player was an eccentric mixture of distinction and disappointment.
A superbly energetic and inventive open-side flanker, he was 21 when he played in the Scarlets which beat the 1972 All Blacks.
Most believe he would have played for Wales but for a serious knee injury in 1975 which put him out of rugby for two years.
Stand and deliver!
Jenkins' men show how it's done as Neath succumb to the Scarlets 23–23 in the recent Division One clash at the Gnoll.
This was the worst, but by no means only, such blow.
Of the five successive Club finals in which Llanelli appeared from 1972–76, Jenkins played in only two.
He missed the 1972 defeat by Neath with a broken ankle, returned for the '73 win over Cardiff and then missed the '74 defeat of Aberavon after needing 20 stitches in a head wound suffered in a charity match a week before the final.
He reappeared in the following year's repeat win over Aberavon, but by the time Swansea were beaten in 1976 his knee had left him idle again.
Once he had recovered he played on, not quite as convincingly as  before, until 1979.
In 10 years with Llanelli his grand total of games was a miserly 260.
Gareth Jenkins —‘The freshest, most innovative Welsh analyst of modern rugby’.
After two years spent coaching his home village club, the aptly named Furnace, Jenkins was back at Stradey Park in 1982 for a five-year apprenticeship as assistant coach to Alun Lewis.
Since 1987, when he had a difficult first few months while the recently arrived Jonathan Davies was recovering from injury, he has established himself as the freshest, most innovative Welsh analyst of modern rugby.
In a neat piece of role-reversal, Lewis, who went on to become the Wales Under-21 coach, is now Jenkins's assistant at Stradey.
Just because Jenkins, courtesy of Davies and Norster, has become an insider does not mean he will keep his thoughts to himself.
Nor should he, for he has much of value to say.
‘The organisation of the Welsh Union should recognise and understand that club coaches are the developers of international players.
Only when they become international players do they become the responsibility of international coaches.
Therefore, you need a system to be in place at club level just as much as at international level’.
This is precisely what the Union has gone some way to doing with its appointment of Glen Ball, Leighton Davies and John Perkins — respectively Neath manager, Maesteg coach and Pontypool coach — to act as Alan Davies's go-between with the Welsh First Division clubs.
In these changing circumstances Jenkins is willing to accept his responsibility, as club coach as much as assistant national coach, for Wales' present condition and uncertain future.
‘We, the club coaches, should be as accountable for Welsh success as international coaches are.
It's absolutely no good expecting international players to develop the correct habits of fitness, conditioning and preparation if we don't instil them at club level.
What we are talking about is moving the responsibility down a stage so that there is a system in place that recognises individual club players and helps them when they move up.
There are a lot of players at the moment who can't make the step from club to international rugby’.
What Jenkins is suggesting would also have the wider benefit of bringing the leading clubs and the Welsh Rugby Union into the same camp.
This division and those between bigger and smaller clubs, and between east Wales and West Wales, are among the most damaging bequests of a history whose many years of glory occurred despite (certainly not because of) native parochialism, introspection and even sometimes indolence.
In his newly exalted position, Jenkins may come to choose his words more carefully, but it was only the other day that he was saying; ‘There is no doubt we are poor; it's no good pretending we are not.
We are a third-rate rugby nation at present, but that doesn't mean we have to stay third-rate’.
In the end you have to become part of the establishment, Gareth, but never let them remove or circumscribe your right of free speech; you use it too well and the rest of us cannot do without it.
Wall-to-Wall
PENARTH , for so long the chopping blocks of senior Welsh club rugby, gained their first-ever Heineken League win by beating Ebbw Vale 13–12.
And they did it away from home after trailing 12–3 at half-time
BILLY THOMAS , the former Cardiff, Abertillery and Wales hooker, continues to make a contribution to rugby 30 years after winning his last cap.
Billy, back coaching Bedwas , says: ‘At 58 it's likely I'm the country's oldest coach — and the dullest’!
Making a welcome return to the Ebbw Vale squad is South African STEFANUS ‘BARLIE’ SWART .
An outstanding tight-head prop from Western Province , Swart played 17 games for Vale during the 1989–90 season.
SIMON McCRACKEN , a 21-year-old fullback, has made the jump from fourth division Blackwood to first division Newport in a style which stamps him as a player to watch.
GRAHAM DAVIES the former Cambridge blue and Wales ‘B’wing, has joined Bridgend after his surprise omission from the Neath squad.
PONTYPOOL will tour New Zealand next July, playing six games in the Bay of Plenty, Waikato and Auckland provinces.
South Wales Police head for Hong Kong at the end of the season to play Hong Kong Police the Royal Regiment of Wales and an Invitation XV.
Pontypridd captain STEELE LEWIS had a three-week suspension imposed on him by his club following what was described as ‘an internal incident’.
Centre Lewis, who continues as captain, sat out three league matches.
Former Wales fullback PAUL THORBURN started the Heineken League season by completing 200 games for Neath .
On the way to that milestone he scored 1,934 points made up of 73 tries, 407 conversions, 275 penalties and one drop goal.
His next target is to become the first player to reach 2,000 points for the Welsh All Blacks.
A black border surround the cover of the Welsh Brewers Rugby Annual — signifying that the game in Wales at international level is dead!
Editor Arwyn Owen writes: ‘Never in the previous 22 editions of the annual have we had to record such disastrous episodes of failure by our senior national team…our game is at its lowest ebb in history’.
Despite the gloom and doom, this popular annual remains a bargain buy at £3.99 — providing a fact packed review of Welsh rugby at all levels.
The Welsh national team is about to undergo yet another change — this time in the design of their jerseys.
Details of a deal with leisure wear company Cotton Traders will be announced shortly.
The two tries wing GLEN WEBBE scored against Saracens took his total for Bridgend to 250 — and he has since increased that to 255.
Bridgend's other scoring star, fly-half Aled Williams , has made a sparkling start to the season with 160 points from 12 games — including 23 against Cross Keys , 27 against London Welsh and 30 against Glamorgan Wanderers .
The shock waves caused by the resignation of ALAN PHILLIPS as Cardiff coach could be rippling around the Arms Park for quite some time.
Phillips, believing that some players had lost confidence in him, quit after 2½ years in the post.
But there is also a feeling that he was manoeuvred out because of a split in the Cardiff camp.
Whatever the rights and wrongs of a sad situation, the fact remains that the club has made a dreadful start this season — winning only four of their first 13 games.
There is certainly enough talent in the squad to stop the rot.
That is now the task of Peter Manning and Malcolm Childs , the new joint senior coaches working under team manager John Scott .
DOWN THE LINE
with PHIL BENNETT
No fly-half factory productivity bonus!
Wales was once known as a fly-half factory, but since Jonathan Davies went North there has been not a single successor of world class selected for the national team and at the moment the signs are not good that one is about to come off the production like.
There are, however, two — perhaps three — who might eventually make the grade.
With the wisdom of hindsight it's obvious that Mark Ring, who in his Pontypool days looked as if he might be the answer to all our no.10 prayers, was unfit and a liability in the match against Australia.
His international career may be over.
Top of my list of ‘possibles’ is Colin Stephens, who had a poor spell last season after Llanelli's loss against Neath but had recovered by the time of the Schweppes Cup final.
This season his form was confirmed, appropriately enough, against Neath at the Gnoll, where he demonstrated his main assets of speed off the mark and eye for an opening.
But he must work on his kicking in general, especially where he is trying to find touch.
At international level the likes of Gavin Hastings crucify failed touch attempts.
He also needs to improve his drop-outs.
Once he gets the basics right he could be really good.
Colin Stephens — the most promising prospect from a limited stock of fly-half talent.
Next is Aled Williams of Bridgend, whose consistency in domestic matches, which might not be transferred to internationals, should have earned him more than a replacement honour (out of position) against Namibia in 1990.
Some call him a good bread-and-butter player, but he has not apparent weaknesses.
If he has, they will only be discovered if he is put to the test.
Neil Jenkins of Pontypridd was badly exposed last season and the summer tour to Australia was truly a baptism by fire, but he has the physique to return to the top level if his confidence can be restored.
He has all the basic attributes and tackles well into the bargain.
All three have fine club scrum-half partners — Robert Moon at Llanelli, Robert Howley at Bridgend and Paul John at Pontypridd.
Another fine prospect is Adrian Davies, the Cambridge University captain, but he hasn't been blessed with much luck recently and I hope his experiences in Australia, when some of his team-mates threw in the towel, will not have destroyed his confidence.
All could take a leaf out of the book of Grant Fox, who performances for New Zealand were the result of constant practice at all the basics.
He may have been off colour in the World Cup, but he had set a fine example to others.
The World Cup illustrated what high standards our aspiring outside-halves must achieve.
Top man for me was Michael Lynagh of Australia with the Western Samoan Steve Bachop next in line.
The other Home Unions do not have brilliant fly-halves, but they are all consistent, play to their strengths, enjoy good scrum-half partners and know that they are virtually certain to be selected, which makes their jobs much easier.
Rob Andrew, Craig Chalmers and Ralph Keyes may not be everyone's cups of tea and it's quite possible that someone like Colin Stephens may turn out to be a far greater player, but for England, Scotland and Ireland each one has shown that he is virtually indispensable.
All three of them have produced when it comes to ‘bottom line’ basics which is why they all now appear in their respective sides automatically.
They play to their strengths intelligently.
The Welsh lads have a long way to go before they match that sort of consistency, but it only needs one to become a permanent fixture for everything to change.
IRELAND
HAMILTON GOES FOR IT!
‘Decisive action in the hour of need denotes the hero but does not succeed’.
GORDON HAMILTON'S magnificent try against Australia fits Hilaire Belloc's rhyme to a ‘t’ but, as SEAN DIFFLEY discovers, this hero will run and run…
You could earn your living sailing nowadays.
And it's good fun, too’.
Thus spoke Gordon Hamilton, the scorer of that try at Lansdowne Road against the Australians.
It wasn't quite the case of an interview running off the rails, or the legendary cowboy —(me, not him)— galloping off in al directions.
It was, simply, Gordon explaining that ‘the try’ was scored on the fourth anniversary, roughly, of stopping — weighing anchor?— at the Canaries en route in a 47-footer across the Atlantic to the USA.
He had taken a sabbatical that autumn from the family business, opted for a life, or, more accurately, a few weeks, on the ocean wave.
The Hamilton Run: 1.
The big sprint, ball in hand.
It was a time, too, for a bit of thought about the future, both career and sport.
In the USA there was an offer of a job.
It was tempting right enough.
But at home there was the secure place in the family business and, important among the priorities of a 22-year-old, the dreamy days on the Belfast Lough with the Royal Ulster Y.C., or the lazy days on the Royal Belfast G.C. fairways.
2.
Keeping Campese at bay in a full-blooded charge for the line.
So rugby won?
‘And how!
This year of 1991 I was out on a boat once’.
Gordon Frederic Hamilton is a product of Campbell College, one of the great rugby nurseries — Mike Gibson, Ken Kennedy are among its most noted products.
The ‘Frederic’ denotes the German infusion in the family — his great-grandfather was German — and on his mother's side there is the Scottish influence.
Going to Dundee University, then, wasn't such a culture shock.
His subjects were business administration and German.
German?
‘I can get by’.
Next step was London to work for a shipping company and to play rugby for Blackheath.
In that season with Blackheath he was chosen for Kent and played in flanking company with Micky Skinner, against Queensland.
‘That season’, he reckons, ‘I discovered I had something to offer; that I could play with the big boys.
Perhaps I should have gone to London Irish, but they were a bit far away from where I was living’.
What the sojourn with Blackheath and Kent did bring home to Gordon Hamilton was the tendency, even those few years ago, of the Irish selection committees to ignore overseas talent.
He believes that had he remained in Belfast, his elevation to the Ulster team and the Irish squad might have come much earlier.
So, like so many in Irish rugby, he welcomes the arrival of the Irish Exiles project which aims at enrolling the large number of those with Irish qualifications who live in England, Scotland and Wales, and up to year or so ago were almost totally ignored in Ireland.
But the new approach, with Ciaran Fitzgerald keeping in close touch with his London Irish contacts, with the brothers John and Barry O'Driscoll in Manchester and with Feidhlim McLoughlin in Newcastle, means that now the Irish net is being widely cast.
Not that, nowadays Gordon Hamilton is allowed to fade into any sort of anonymity.
The try that has been reckoned the try of the World Cup ensures that.
While England will recall forever Obolensky's try, Wales the depredations committed on England by Keith Jarrett and his 19 points — including that try — in Cardiff in 1967, the Irish have elevated the Hamilton try to the highest point in the Great Pantheon of Irish rugby feats.
‘I'm not being modest about it, but I was lucky to be in the right place at the vital moment’, he says.
‘The results have been amazing.
One man sent me a sequence of photos.
I've had newspaper cutting sent to me by other people.
Obviously many look on it as a significant occasion which is very, very flattering’.
3.
The stuff of legend as Egerton's last ditch tackle fails.
But, Gordon confesses, the try really resulted from him being a bit slow on the occasion.
‘We have a good code system and I know where the ball should be, but it's not too often that it is where it should be.
As it happened, being a bit slow to the action, I was in a position to see exactly what was happening.
I burst on to the pass from Jack Clarke, had a wee look and saw I was in the clear.
‘You're going to have to go for it’, I told myself, and off I went.
The next morning I felt awful.
It wasn't just the defeat, how near and yet so far away.
It was just that the World Cup had been such a marvellous occasion, a tremendous experience.
All 26 members of the Irish squad had got on superbly, just like a club side.
There wasn't any kind of conflict or argument throughout the whole time of our assembly.
There were so many good things.
We were all sad it was over’.
But now to the future and the Five Nations Championship where the Irish are quietly confident that, with a virtually unchanged squad, they could well be highly successful.
‘It's been said that I am a much improved player this season’, Hamilton says, ‘but I believe that the difference is merely that I am that much more confident.
And getting nine caps in one year is something special.
‘I believe that this club atmosphere in the   Irish squad is very important.
We have shown our critics that the summer reverses and the indifferent form in the warm-up matches meant nothing.
We showed when we pull on the green jerseys, when the real chips are down, that we would die for each other.
‘But I think we must move the ball a bit more effectively.
We are well aware we must do that but I'm sure we will with the confidence of the good displays in the World Cup behind us’.
Gordon Hamilton signalled his very serious approach to rugby and the international game when he moved from NIFC to Ballymena at the start of the season.
It was a wrench because the Hamiltons have always been associated with ‘North’.
His father, Jim, is a former captain of the club.
But, as Gordon said at the time, ‘to maintain my challenge for a place on the national side and even to take part meaningfully in the national squad training, it is necessary to train and play club football at the very highest level’.
Ballymena are one of the top sides in Division One of the All Ireland League but his old club were demoted from Division Two last season.
It's a pattern that Irish rugby will see a lot more of in the coming years as the successful clubs in this new, competitive All Ireland League attract the top players.
It's a scene in which only serious players will survive.
Gordon Hamilton will have time for sailing boats only in his bath.
IRISH REPORT
with Sean Diffley
Since the World Cup, the Irish international squad and its commercial manager,Tom Power , have been locked in discussions with the IRFU on the vexed question of the potential commercial earning powers of the players.
The players have been represented in the discussions by Ciaran Fitzgerald, Phillip Matthews and Brendan Mullin .
During the World Cup, and both before and after, the players have been prevented from arranging deals.
The IRFU president Tony Browne and the chairman of the IRFU amateur subcommittee,Roly Meates , are said to have been very sympathetic towards the players.
But that apparently, is not the general approach.
But both sides have agreed to further talks and both say that they are hopeful soon of a successful outcome to the discussions.
STEVE BACHOP , the Western Samoan outside-half who impressed so much in the World Cup, is back for his second successive season with the Dublin club,Blackrock College .
Bachop, brother of the All Blacks scrum-half, returned immediately to Dublin after his team was beaten by Scotland .
In fact, he turned up to his Blackrock club ground at Stradbrook, to watch his brother Graeme training for the New Zealand side in preparation for the Lansdowne Road semi-final.
WILLIE ANDERSON 's day-job may be with the Irish Rugby Football Union as a development officer, responsible for the northern part of the island, but his interest in his club,Dungannon , is still very strong.
Not only is he captain of the club, but he is playing a major role in the Dungannon team's bright start to the All Ireland League .
Last season, Dungannon won the Ulster League which qualified them for a ‘round-robin’ series with the other provincial winners in a bid to gain entry to the AIL .
So, not only did Anderson's Dungannon qualify, but they quickly went to the top of the Division Two table and are now making a great bid for promotion.
CORK CONSTITUTION , winners last season of the inaugural All Ireland League , are struggling this season.
Their problem is a horrendous run of injuries.
There was good news at the start of the season with the leading flanker,Pat O'Hara , joining them from Sunday's Wells .
But the good mews petered out rapidly especially in the back row where O'Hara was the only one to come through a game against Old Wesley in Dublin.
Flanker Len Dineen received a broken ankle, and no.8 Victor Donnelly knee ligament damage.
Neither is likely to return to action for many weeks.
Brian Rigney — back soon.
BRIAN RIGNEY , the Greystones lock who was to have been an important part of Ireland's plans for the World Cup, is recovering rapidly from his knee injury sustained in Namibia .
Rigney, the strong redhead, had to return home for the tour and Donal Lenihan was flown out as his replacement.
Rigney has been training quietly on his own over the past few weeks and believes that he will be back in action in the New Year for Greystones.
His ambition, of course, is to challenge for his old place in the second row of the Irish scrum.
WHAT EDDIE BUTLER SAW…
It's all very well attracting massive new support, but what do you do with it when the World Cup is over?
Even the Five Nations Championship might appear a little limp after the events of the autumn, so what chance has club rugby of hanging on to any of the converts in the meantime?
Well, league and cup matches may not have quite the lure of England and Australia, but, as far as I can tell, clubs are doing their utmost to keep rugby's momentum going.
This season the domestic affairs of England and Wales, at least, seem to be destined for dramatic pathways all the way into the spring.
Take London Irish, for example.
There they were on the first, belated, league Saturday of the season, celebrating their arrival in the first division, unveiling new-look Sunbury as a showpiece of healthy ambition and running Bath so close that the perennial might of the champions was instantly called into question.
Then, two weeks later, London Irish set off to play Thurrock, a short trip involving an exit from the M25 and the Pilkington Cup .
However, easy or hard the Irish find league life from now on, they will offer new, unpredictable dimensions of entertainment.
Meanwhile, Bath were issuing a reminder that reports of their decline were a little premature.
They welcomed Nottingham to the Recreation Ground and stuck 50 points on them, an ominous warning to everyone that it's not just World Cup teams who can set new standards.
Bath have as many people running off the ball, as many ball-handling forwards, as many backs capable of giving a looped miss-pass as anyone at any level.
They also revealed a new generosity of spirit, deciding that, if they carried on playing thus, they would win everything with such ease that the various English competitors would lose their sparkle.
So, Bath surrendered a league point on the grounds that they had fielded an ineligible player, New Zealander Laurie Heatherley, against London Irish.
And, no doubt, if ever John Hall discovers the identity of the anonymous benefactor who spilt the beans, he will want to shake him warmly by the hand and offer him thanks on behalf of his club and the good of all in English rugby.
Even in Wales, where gloom and doom should have been the order of the next year or two, the clubs have set off in a style which has brought, instead, a nervous smile or two.
Llanelli and Neath put on a show as good as anything seen for a long time at club level.
But just when it seemed that the former were to disappear up a one-club road to exclusive excellence, along came Newport and beat them to mark the first real return on all the investment at Rodney Parade.
The week before, the name of Llanelli outside-half Colin Stephens, was being bandied around as the latest answer to all of Wales' woes.
Then, suddenly, it was the vets, Paul Turner and David Waters, who still controlled Welsh rugby.
It's a good, dramatic blend and, given that the rest of the Heineken League is equally topsy-turvy, it makes for an entertaining diversion while Alan Davies, Bob Norster and Gareth Jenkins wrestle with the real problems on the big stage.
Not all club matches are overflowing with new confidence or a new desire to experiment with tactics beyond safety-first.
But that's perfectly acceptable in a game with a history of variety.
Survival, based on tried and trusted methods, is as much a dramatic factor in the theatre of club rugby as fresh sights.
What really matters at the moment is that the rugby pot keeps itself on the boil, so that it won't need too much of a boost from the fickle flames of European International rugby, when it returns in the New Year, to reactivate the interest of the casual followers uncovered by the World Cup.
Hand-me-down: Bath's Phil de Glanville, gives Nottingham's Kevin Stiles the push as they crush the Midlanders 52–0 in the Third Round of the Pilkington Cup.
Anybody who thought that Bath's tight grip on the Pilkington Cup was over had better think again.
Andy Robinson's side may be a blend of the old and the new, but they still look like the side to beat again after demolishing Nottingham in the first round and drawing last year's losing finalists, Northampton, in the quarter-finals.
No doubt coach Jack Rowell will already have pencilled in the champagne breakfast he gives his players every time they win the league or cup for May 2nd — the day after the Pilkington Cup final.
RUGBY WORLD POSTER
100,000 HAIL THE AUSSIE ACES!
When the Wallabies first heard of plans to stage a tickertape parade through the streets of Sydney to acknowledge their World Cup victory, there were grave reservations.
‘What happens if nobody turns up’? quizzed more than one anxious Wallaby.
After all, rugby union has been the poor footballer brother to rugby league in Sydney for decades.
Rugby league's media coverage has reached saturation point while rugby union has always struggled to maintain a constant high profile among both the media and the public.
But the Wallabies' World Cup campaign and ultimate victory has resulted in a nationwide level of rugby union interest which has never been previously registered.
And that interest was reflected when over 100,000 people filled six blocks of George Street from Circular Quay to the Town Hall to cheer home the Wallabies.
There have been previous sporting tickertape parades for the 1982 Commonwealth Games team and the 1989 Ashes-winning cricketers.
But neither reached the noise and level of support that the Wallaby parade received.
Instead of the Wallabies asking if anyone would turn up, there were several city employers wondering if any of their staff would turn up after the 30-minute parade ended followed by a ceremony at Town Hall where captain Nick-Farr Jones was presented the key to the City of Sydney.
Coloured streamers, toilet paper, telephone book pages, shredded paper and confetti rained on the players from skyscrapers, while building site workers clambered off scaffolding and others out of office windows to cheer Farr-Jones and his players.
The public's response was so overwhelming that the procession of cars, which each carried two team members, was halted several times as fans surged around the cars asking for autographs, shaking hands and giving the occasional kiss.
The Wallabies knew there was high interest in Australia when they prepared for the semi-final and final matches.
The sheer weight of goodwill fax messages told them of this fact.
So did the record-breaking domestic television ratings.
But the response during the tickertape parade astonished the players.
Hooker Phil Kearns said: ‘If winning can inspire so many people than I can put up will the months of hard slog, sleepless nights, aches and pains and fleeting fears of failure that make up a World Cup campaign.
This is overwhelming.
I didn't think so many people cared’.
Flanker Simon Poidevin's smile resembled a split water melon for the duration of the parade.
‘In a word, sensational.
I'm stunned by it all’, he said.
The parade was organised for the players and the public but the day was even more special for 13-year-old Julian Stewart, a sufferer of cerebral palsy.
Young Julian was at kerbside when the car set off and David Campese asked him if he wanted a ride.
He was then picked up and rode the entire parade sitting between Campese and Kearns.
This was no PR prank but just a genuine and touching gesture by Campese.
Touchdown!
Ewen McKenzie (left) and Tony Daly raise the ‘Cup of Good Cheer’ during the tickertape cavalcade through Sydney.
Some minutes earlier, Campese and Farr-Jones were announced as worthy additions to the New South Wales Sports Hall of Champions by Premier Nick Greiner at a ceremony prior to the parade.
They will join other Australian rugby legends such as Sir Nicholas Shehadie, Tony Miller, Peter Johnson, Ken Catchpole and Simon Poidevin among other Olympic and international sports stars.
In fact, it was a roller-coaster few days for Campese.
He was not exactly the Australian Rugby Football Union 's pin-up boy when his Italian club Milan initially refused him permission to participate in the parade.
But he finally slipped into Sydney and left having signed a lucrative new deal to assist Australian rugby's  new television broadcaster,Channel Ten , with their marketing of rugby for the next three years.
This deal with Channel Ten will ensure that Campese continues playing Test rugby despite his statements earlier this year that he would step down from international rugby and establish a permanent business base in Italy.
The Channel Ten broadcasting deal shocked the Australian public as the Australian Broadcasting Corporation has been televising rugby for 30 years.
In contrast,Channel Ten had been televising rugby league for 18 years until Channel Nine recently acquired future rights.
The ARFU's decision has still yet to sink in with many rugby traditionalists but Channel Ten displayed instant commitment to their new deal when they televised the tickertape parade live throughout Australia.
Sheer weight of dollars forced the ARFU to change hose broadcasters and the finer details, such as broadcasting times, have yet to be finalised.
However,Channel Ten has already stated that it will be keen for more night games which would be shown live during prime-time viewing.
And, judging by the ABC's World Cup ratings, the heightened interest in Australian rugby could be well served by night games.
Sydney and Brisbane have always been strong rugby cities but Perth's astonishing ratings figures have delighted the ARFU.
Following the World Cup and the success of this year's Golden Oldies Festival in Perth, the ARFU is certain to play a Test match in the Golden West in the near future.
And, if talks with the West Samoans are successful, a Test with Peter Fatialofa's men of next year may be the first match.
Already, Scotland and the All Blacks, the losing World Cup semi-finalists, will be touring Australia and the Wallabies will have to run onto the field without the direction and inspiration of captain Farr-Jones.
Farr-Jones, a Wallaby since 1984 and a new father this year, said he will restrict his rugby to club level with Sydney University next season but may return in 1993.
A day to remember for 13-year-old Julian Stewart as he enjoys the ride flanked by Phil Kearns (left) and David Campese.
‘There is a tour of Ireland, Wales and hopefully South Africa at the end of next season and I won't be able to make it.
It's too long to be away from home or to have the baby with us and there is also work’, he explained.
‘It would be wrong for me to play in the Tests against Scotland and the All Blacks and captain the side and not be around when the guys go on tour.
So for the sake of selection continuity I won't be playing representative rugby’, he added.
Other faces who will be missing are winger Rob Egerton, who will be in the United States where his wife will be studying, while both Steve Cutler and Jeff Miller have announced their retirements.
FRANCE
ANGLOPHOBIA — fact or fiction?
As England stormed the battlements of French rugby in the World Cup, the old cry of ‘Anglo-Saxon conspiracy’ was heard again.
CHRIS THAU argues that the welter of recriminations and the Dubroca Incident are only the latest instalments in the long-running French obsession…
One of the less savoury aspects of the recently concluded World Cup has been a revival of the old xenophobic clichés.
And, if some of the attacks of the Scottish press and public before the England semi-final seemed rather excessive, they pale into insignificance when compared to the Anglophobia that  preceded , but mostly followed, the French quarter-final defeat in Paris.
The Dubroca incident added insult to an already severely injured state of affairs.
This is a worrying phenomenon.
and, with the Five Nations Championship around the corner, the issue must be addressed before recrimination and bitterness degenerate into open hostility.
There are several reasons for the current situation.
One could argue that the poisonous atmosphere in rugby is a rather sad reflection of the vitriolic exchanges between politicians.
Anti-British hysteria has always been a politically convenient sidetrack for European politicians.
The humourless pronouncements of the French Prime Minister, Edith Cresson, the arm-wrestling contest within the EEC, the ‘lamb war’ guerrillas .
They have all played their part in creating a near siege mentality in the French public and media.
Nationalism in its crudest forms has always been the ally of the ruthless operator, irrespective of the context — political, sporting or cultural.
It provided simple answers to seemingly intractable questions.
But the current levels of Anglophobia in France have a different basis.
First and foremost, France have not been playing well.
Differences between the two coaches, Jean Trillo and Daniel Dubroca; disagreements between manager and chief selector Henri Foures — a man of unchallengeable credentials and integrity — and his coaches; the obsessive argument about money among the players, all within a background of the civil war tearing apart French rugby, have compounded an already controversial World Cup build-up.
France's meaningless pre-tournament tour to the USA was marred by violence, both against the opposition and within the French squad.
Even so, the French might have been able to pull through had the great motivator, Jacques Fouroux, been around.
On an emotional day like October 19, he could have made the difference between success and abject failure.
As Jean Trillo rightly observed, this was a Fouroux side without the inspirational Gascon: ‘They missed him.
They are all little Fouroux.
They have the nostalgia of his time.
The chaps speak like him, react like him’.
Naturally, without Fouroux the motivator — both Trillo and Dubroca are low key, understated individuals — some of the players felt uneasy and found the extra bit of motivation in the ritual bashing of the English.
Mesnel, known for his Anglophobic outbursts, was always at hand with a vitriolic comment about the ‘perfidious Albion’ and what he called ‘the legendary  hypocrisy of the English’.
A rather tasteless melange of Wellington and Edith Cresson, Nelson and Trafalgar seemed designed to provide the missing edge and allay the self doubts.
France was a side torn apart between Trillo's desire to make risk a factor in the gameplan and Dubroca who, as the spiritual heir to Fouroux, had favoured the safety-first approach, no matter what he may have said in public.
The French struggled for nearly sixty minutes against a generous but raw Romania, ran riot against a Fijian side well below par and short of the menacing inspiration that made them a fearsome proposal in 1987, while the game against Canada exposed the shortcomings that England later exploited with relish.
However, despite their obvious inability to concentrate and regain the magic form of the previous Five Nations campaign, the French failed to lower their sights.
Defeat was simply not contemplated, hence the bitterness of the aftermath.
Besides, while the financial implications of the defeat by England have never been revealed, one can safely assume that the loss has deprived the French players of a fair amount of endorsements and sponsorship.
‘Imagine the horror…beaten at the Parc’,L'Equipe magazine said in an editorial.
Very seldom in the history of French sport has a national team found itself under an almost moral obligation to win’, said the same editorial.
In such circumstances, the only possible explanation of the defeat in the quarter-final was a conspiracy of the English-speaking world against France.
The conspiracy theory has always been used to explain away unpopular defeats at the hands of France's Anglo-Saxon neighbours.
In this respect, the jingoistic excesses of some of the French newspapers (Le Figaro in particular) have been unprecedented.
Jacques Fouroux maintained a sane approach when he wrote after the Paris quarter-final: ‘It's true that since the beginning of the World Cup the refereeing has played a significant role in the outcome of the game, but it would be chauvinistic to say the same about the way Mr. Bishop has refereed.
We were wiped out in the scrum and in the line-out.
So the English tested Blanco — that was totally fair and pragmatic’.
Dubroca's outburst — totally out of character for a player recognised for his sense of fair play and a captain admired for his commitment — though indefensible, was perhaps understandable: the man has been under tremendous pressure since the beginning of the World Cup, and he cracked.
In France referees take the stick when one side is on the losing end, and feels, rightly or wrongly, that they could have won.
It was not Dubroca's fault that the story gathered momentum and became a headline in the English-speaking media for nearly two weeks while the World Cup bandwagon was still rolling on.
It was not the fault of the British journalist either, as Dubroca was led to believe by the French reaction to his outrage.
With the honourable exception of L'Equipe , who condemned the incident in no uncertain terms on its front page, the French press had an ambiguous, if not sympathetic, reaction.
It was the fault of both World Cup and French Federation officials who showed a lack of sensitivity and insight.
Instead of acting instantly in the ‘greater  interested of the game’ and convincing Dubroca to do the honourable thing — which would have cut short the entire argument — they tried to sweep the story under the carpet.
That not only outraged the international media, but it has brought the game into disrepute.
French flare: Philippe Sella gets a lecture from referee David Bishop after flattening Rob Andrew with a right-hook during the ill-tempered World Cup quarter-final at Parc des Princes.
Dubroca — a man overwhelmed by the demands of the job — has accused the British media of pursuing a vendetta against him.
He is wrong.
The English-speaking media applauded Daniel Dubroca as a player and captain on countless occasions, but still felt duty-bound to criticise him for his arbitration.
French  ambivalence is the real culprit.
At no time did the French Federation issue a statement deploring the behaviour of their national coach.
It is no secret that the FFR has been crippled by a protracted civil war, raging with various degrees of intensity for more than a year.
On the other hand, Dubroca, even before Fouroux's exit, was one of Albert Ferrasse's favourite sons.
It is quite obvious that the old man allowed his emotions to overrule his judgement in this instance.
Ferrasse's low-key reaction to the incident contrasted vividly with his robust treatment of Jean-Pierre Garuet after the Lourdes prop was sent off in an international against Ireland a few years ago.
In the hope that the dust would settle quickly and the episode be forgotten, the French convinced the World Cup Chairman Russ Thomas to ‘close the file’, a shabby reaction which outraged press and fans alike.
On the other hand, Ferrasse, a shrewd politician and operator, sensed the prevailing mood in France and played the conspiracy card.
He criticised the way the selection of referees for the knock-out stages of the World Cup had been made, conveniently ignoring the fact that René Hourquet had been selected, only to turn down the appointment.
Ferrasse used the word ‘lepers’ to describe the way he felt the ‘English’treat the French, further heightening the existing tension.
As the argument was brought to an end by Dubroca's resignation, Ferrasse enraged his countrymen by revealing that one of the English IRB representatives, Albert Agar, had demanded that Dubroca be brought before the Board to account for his behaviour.
Ferrasse, rightly, explained that the former coach has already been punished for his  misdemeanour , and he then threatened to resign from the Board unless the Dubroca issue was allowed to rest.
Since then, the issue has been rumbling on in the French press, being kept alive for the fast-approaching Five Nations Championship.
The ridiculous talk of an anti-French conspiracy — borrowed from the pages of the political script writers — is rubbish and should be consigned to the dustbin.
One hopes that under the open style of management of the new FFR president, Jean Fabre, France will escape the siege mentality that became the hallmark of the previous administration.
No doubt the French World Cup director, Marcel Martin, could contribute to a new level of understanding and co-operation between the feuding neighbours.
Logie Bruce Lockhart, the former Scottish international, said in a letter published in a French newspaper: ‘Don't attach too much importance to the mistakes of the referee (real or imagined) or to an Anglo-Saxon plot schemed by the perfidious Albion’.
The newspaper felt compelled to answer back and finished with this illuminating piece of wisdom: ‘Why has Clive Norling, one of the best Anglo-Saxon referees in the world, failed to be selected for the World Cup?
Is it because he speaks French’?
FRENCH CONNECTION
Uncivil War
DECEMBER 14th is the date of the transfer of power in French rugby.
It is the day when Jean Fabre , the president-in-waiting, takes over from the long-serving incumbent Albert Ferrasse .
Or rather, when he should take over according to a scenario worked out when the Ferrasse-Fabre coalition was born.
Fabre, who had hoped that he could win a clear mandate at the Extraordinary AGM of the French Federation in April has had to compromise and join Ferrasse, until then one of his foremost opponents.
The loser in April was a certain Robert Paparemborde , better  known to the British public as the prop with sloping shoulders who was very difficult to scrummage against.
It appears that Monsieur Paparemborde is an equally difficult political opponent.
Though in the minority and  benefiting from the support of the partisans of the former national coach Jacques Fouroux , Paparemborde mounted an effective opposition to the Ferrasse-Fabre axis and has emerged as an influential powerbroker.
If Fabre wins the vote in the Federation Executive then he will take over, although no one knows for how long.
If Paparemborde manages to upset the vote, the Secretary of the Federation,Bernard Lepasset , is the one who could benefit — though not for long.
Seen from this side of the Channel, French rugby politics seem complicated and obscure.
They are also very petty.
While all the contenders profess great loyalty to French rugby, they have conveniently forgotten that, while they argue, France does not have a coach or a selection panel.
It is quite amazing that the opposing factions seem unable to find enough common ground to decide on a coaching appointment.
If Fabre takes over, he will appoint Jean-Claude Skrela and Jean-Michel Aquirre as coaches, with Pierre Villepreux as technical director in charge of planning and playing philosophy.
Villepreux, however, has a long-term contract with Italian club  Benetton  Treviso and he is unlikely renege on it unless the French Federation is prepared to match the terms of the deal.
This is unlikely, so, if Fabre wins, Villepreux will act as technical guru for Skrela and his friend Aguirre while still coaching Treviso.
The chairman of selectors could be Michel Crauste , another former international.
If the Paparemborde/Fouroux/Lepasset group manages to upset the transition of power, then Pierre Berbizier could be the surprise appointment as national coach.
However, if a stalemate occurs, then new elections would seem to be in the offing.
Thank goodness France does not start its Five Nations campaign until February 1st, giving them another two weeks to put their house in order.
In the dock
FRENCH courts are kept busy by rugby players.
International prop PHILIPPE GIMBERT from Beglès-Bordeaux , a club which had acquired an unsavoury reputation even before they won the French Championship, has been fined FF8,000 (about £850) for damages resulting from a punch in a club match against Rodez in December 1990.
At the receiving end of the violent punch Armand Proietti was severely injured and required surgery.
He took Gimbert to court and won.
Gimbert was found guilty of inflicting bodily harm according to Paragraph 309 of the French penal code.
This is not the first time, nor is it the last that a player will end up in court following a rough exchange with an opponent.
What is really worrying is the attitude of the officials concerned.
Andre Moga , the president of Beglès and one of the so-called ‘barons’ of French rugby, made the following comment: ‘If Rodez had had a good president at the time this would not have reached court’.
The president of Rodez,Philippe Laut , rightly rebuked the Beglès man.
‘We would never have reached this point if the Federation had accepted its responsibility and punished Philippe Gimbert’.
In another development, a court in Grenoble found a player from the third-division club Rives-Renage ‘entirely responsible for the consequence of his lack of direction’, and sentenced him (and his insurers) to pay damages of FF923,000 (about £10,000) to his victim Joseph Nieto , the president of the visiting club,Jarrie .
Nieto was walking alongside the touchline when a ball kicked from within the field hit him in the face, breaking his  glasses .
One piece of glass pierced an eye and he lost his sight.
The court found the poor kicker guilty.
Student World Cup
France have commenced preparations for the World Cup!
It is the STUDENTS WORLD CUP which is taking place in Italy this summer.
Among those involved in the trials are French internationals Fabien Galthie, Philippe Saint-Andrè , and Thierry Lacroix .
BEST BOOKS OF THE YEAR
Only days to go and you're sweating?
Worry no more about the last-minute presents.
Book publishers all over the world have joined the rugby boom, producing a record number of books.
STEPHEN JONES (The Sunday Times)wades through.
Christmas BOOK REVIEW
THERE HAVE been a few tactical errors made in the winter lists of new rugby books.
Many of the dozens of books that have just been published in the Autumn list were meant to take advantage of the surge of interest caused by the World Cup; but a few will simply be killed by the rush, lost for ever.
However, some gems shine on through and five in particular deserve your investment, for different reasons.
The Heinz World Cup book is the only official history of the tournament and will obviously appeal as a keepsake to jog warm memories of a wonderful month in the history of the sport.
It is a lavishly illustrated and beautifully laid-out book with contributions from many leading journalists and also from key figures such as David Campese, Rob Andrew, Gavin Hastings, Grant Fox and a host of others.
The book has come out in remarkably quick time, a great tribute to Ian Robertson , the editor, who must have beavered away ferociously.
The Who's Who is a book of weighty significance masquerading as a fun succession of player profiles compiled from questionnaires sent to the top 350 or so players in the four home countries.
On one level, it is vastly entertaining and a rattling good read.
On the other hand, this second annual edition scores as mightily as the first in the insight it provides into the thoughts of the top echelon.
What emerges?
First, that rugby players are a highly intelligent, dedicated and wise bunch.
Second, that any official who ignores them is on dangerous ground.
For example, there is a large body of opinion making the obvious point that the scrum-wheeling law is a nonsense.
Far more important, roughly 94 per cent of the players who express an opinion on the amateurism question demand action and clarification on the whole issue.
If the authorities do not respond to the opinions of the players then they are on dangerous ground and their motives might be questioned.
Adedayo Adebayo's suggestion to improve the game should also be given serious consideration.
‘More drinking’, he says.
Bill McLaren 's autobiography is a delight.
It is warm and informative, human and well-written.
Bill is not simply the Saturday voice of Grandstand , owner of the most taken-off tones in sport.
As a dedicated PE teacher he played an outstanding part in developing Hawick as a wonderful rugby club and, more than that, his contribution to the image of the game is unsurpassed.
He is also superbly crafty in the book in inserting, so gently that the recipient wouldn't even notice, the odd barb.
Cornwall, Rugby Champions is a delight of a different sort.
It may not quite be a Booker Prize contender is in itself but for the memories it brings back it is a wonder.
For me, that marvellous day last season when Cornwall won the County Championship , when Twickenham became a sea of gold and black and when London became Cornwall for the day, is the most vivid of my whole career as a recorder of the game.
The Encyclopedia of World Rugby is a monumental effort by Keith Quinn the NZTV  commentator .
It has thousands of entries on all the aspects of the worldwide game.
It looks splendid, it reads well and as a coffee-table volume, worth dipping in to regularly, it is great stuff.
Technical
Rugby The All Blacks' Way — J J Stewart (Crowood Press, Marlborough, Wilts: £9.99).
Skilful Rugby Union — Geoff Cooke (A & C Black, London: £7.99).
Rugby Tactics — Peter Winder (A & C Black, London; £10.99).
Rugby — Fit For The Game by Jim Golby (Ward Lock, £4.99).
Fit For Rugby — Rex Hazledine & Tom McNab (Kingswood, £9.50).
Mostly slim tomes these.
The  Hazeldine/McNab  partnership has transformed the shape and  endurance of England players;Cooke has transformed the inner man.
Anthologies
Take the Ball and Run, a rugby anthology — edited by Godfrey Smith (Pavilion, London £14.99).
Front Runners by Brough Scott (Victor Gollancz, London, £13.99).
Godfrey Smith , a dear colleague and long-serving columnist on the Sunday Times , has provided a much-needed anthology of rugby writings down the years.
He has ranged far and wide, amongst the writings of Richard Burton, Richard Llewellyn and P.G.
Wodehouse, among many others and also, thankfully, has extracted from Rugby, Body and Soul , that marvellous book on Welsh rugby and life by Bill Samuel.
Good reading (apart from my bit).
Front Runners the best of Brough Scott's writings in the Sunday Times and Independent on Sunday , is not a rugby book but includes the odd rugby piece.
Brough, who has won as many awards as he rode winners in his national hunt career, writes so delightfully because he cares, because he sees sport as a writer and also as a fan.
This is some of the best and most fervent writing sport has seen.
Autobiographical/biographical
Will Carling: Captain's Diary 1989–91 — by Will Carling ( Chatto & Windus, £14.99).
Carling's England — The making of the World Cup team by Barry Newcombe (Harper Collins, London; £14.99).
In Touch — Rugby, Life Worth Living , by Ian Williams (Kingswood — an imprint of Methuen, London) £14.99).
John Gallagher — the world's best rugby player?by John Gallagher with Chris Brown (R&B Publishing, Harrowgate; £14.95).
The difference between self-penned autobiography and biography is that often, the biography scores for comprehensiveness.
You can hardly discuss your own strengths and weaknesses without self-consciousness.
Will Carling's effort is a good record, although a little too caught up with imagined slights of the press last season.
The blurb for Barry Newcombe 's book, the story of England's climb to respectability, describes him as one of the game's ‘sanest analysts’.
I suppose that makes the rest of us a little bonkers.
Ian Williams , the Wallaby wing, has produced a very fine and worthwhile book, not least because his first-hand experience of rugby in Japan provides a vivid insight.
Because of the language barrier and culture shock, such insights are far too rare.
Gallagher 's book, generally disappointing and uneventful, is a sad monument to a sublime rugby union player who is in the process of failing in his rugby league career.
Hopefully, he will pull through although at the moment he is a perfect illustration that rugby league's vaunted reputation for picking talent and making hard-headed business decisions is so much hot air.
Historical
1905 and All That — by Gareth Williams (Gomer Press, Dyfed; £8.75).
Feet, Scotland, Feet — the book of Scottish Rugby (Glasgow Herald) edited by Derek Douglas, with Bill McLaren, Bill McMurtrie, Brian Meek, David Steele (Mainstream, Edinburgh; £14.99).
The All Blacks — by Terry McLean (Sidgwick & Jackson, London: £14.99).
English Rugby — a celebration (Daily Telegraph) edited by Ted Barrett (mainstream, Edinburgh £14.99).
Who's Who of Welsh International Rugby Players by John Jenkins, Duncan Pierce, Tim Auty (Bridge Book, Wrexham: £16.95)
Major tomes here and each any every one a credit to beavering authors.
Gareth Williams ’ is a heavy yet entertaining sociological study of rugby in Wales, the Scottish effort is more colourful pot pourri than history.
The Telegraph 's effort is part-history, part extended magazine; The Welsh Who's Who is a dedicated effort by the authors, with details of every capped Welsh player.
Pointless
The Unofficial Rugby World Cup Songbook — collected by Roger Ring; illustrated by Nerg (Crazy Books, Edgewood; £3.99).
It's cheap.
It would have to be.
Perpetuates the dire age of violently sexist songs of an age when rugby should have been ashamed of itself.
AUSTRALIA
MELBOURNE'S MISSING ‘LINK’ MAKES GOOD
The only slight cloud hanging over the Australian World Cup celebrations was the realisation that Nick Farr-Jones would not be there to lead them out in their next match.
His decision to take a year off from international rugby has left selectors with the difficult choice of going for a short-term replacement or of opting for long-term continuity.
GREG CAMPBELL casts an eye over the principal contenders and comes up with a Victorian prop.
The decision by World Cup winning Wallaby captain Nick Farr-Jones to step down from representative rugby in 1992 because of family and business reasons introduces the question: ‘Who will take over the leadership reins’?
It is a question which will take on a more hard-nosed approach once the euphoria of post-World Cup celebrations die down and the reality of the 1992 season, with the test challenges of Scotland and the All Blacks plus the Wallaby tour of Ireland and Wales and possibly South Africa, arrives.
Farr-Jones has not only proven himself to be the world's leading scrum-half, but his captaincy over the past four years has grown in maturity and stature with each test and tour match.
Many skippers over-simplify the role of a captain by praising the role of their team-mates and coaching staff.
But during the heat of a test match battle, the instantaneous decision by a captain can have an irreversible effect.
Take, for instance, Michael Lynagh's courageous decision in Farr-Jones' absence in the Wallabies' quarter-final clash with Ireland at Lansdowne Road when the fighting Irish were three points up with only minutes remaining.
Do you elect to go for the drop goal or go for the try?
Lynagh elected to play for the try and history now records his match-winning touchdown in the corner when brilliantly scooping up David Campese's desperate in-field pass.
On the basis of this decision along Lynagh, Farr-Jones' deputy for three years, is the worthy and logical successor to the captaincy.
Lynagh's credentials are also supported by his role as Queensland captain in 1991, taking over from former test lock Bill Campbell.
But the interesting new question is whether Lynagh's decision to play the closed Australian season with the  Benetton club in Italy will prevent him from becoming the new Wallaby skipper.
Ewen McKenzie — Farr-Jones' successor?
It is unlikely the Lynagh will be released from his Italian club duties before May-June, by which time Queensland's season will be in full swing and the Reds will be playing under a new skipper in Lynagh's absence.
The unknown factor is whether this absence will force the national selectors to look elsewhere.
Simon Poidevin, like Lynagh, has previously led Australia into test battle and will also be a strong candidate for both New South Wales and Australia.
But given that Poidevin turned 33 just days before the World Cup final, will the national selectors prefer to look for a long-term leadership continuity as both Australia and England did when appointing Farr-Jones and Will Carling respectively?
So id long-term continuity is what the selectors will look for and if Lynagh's Italian experience rules him out as a contender, who is the man to fill Farr-Jones' vital boots.
Tim Gavin, the Wallaby no.8 who missed the World Cup because of a severe knee injury, has both the presence and the respect of both team-mates and opponents plus the international experience to do a most capable job.
Hooker Phil Kearns, at only 24, is undoubtedly going to be around for many years to come and successfully led the Australian under-21 team to victory over New Zealand under 21's four years ago.
But the player who could be the surprise nomination is tighthead prop Ewen McKenzie.
There are many who dislike the idea of a front-rower calling the shots because the role of their position demands their heads to be down more than up.
Since he finally won test honours against France in the domestic series in 1991 McKenzie has established himself as arguably the world's best tighthead prop.
Prior to that, he served a very useful apprenticeship when  touring with the Wallabies in 1988 and 1989 and, for most part, was the deputy to Andy McIntyre, who is Australia's most capped tighthead prop.
Stomach for the fight — McKenzie shows his credentials in giving his colleagues a helping hand in the line-out during the World Cup final.
McKenzie is not a flamboyant character but a deep thinker about rugby and life in general, a worker both on and off the field and a crucial team-member.
He is highly respected and is Anthony Herbert's assistant judge in the players' court.
He also dispels the belief that front-rowers are a slab of prime beef with granite fists and a thick concrete block resting on their shoulders.
As former Wallaby Peter FitzSimons cleverly writes, ‘McKenzie can not only write the words ‘cut-out pass’ and knows what it is, but he can actually throw one.’
McKenzie, who goes by the nickname ‘Link’, is part of a crucial Wallaby front-row chain in partnership with his Randwick clubmate Kearns and loosehead prop Tony Daly.
It is a front-row unit which has provided the solid battlements from which the enterprising Wallaby backs have taken world rugby by storm.
If McKenzie ultimately gains the captaincy, it will herald an amazing career as he learned his rugby in the Australian Rules stronghold of Melbourne.
During his early teens, McKenzie was a competent soccer player but, as he grew his nimble-footed agility was lost.
Then one afternoon at Scotch College, a school-friend asked him to play a game of rugby.
And just for the sake of interest, he accepted.
Because McKenzie know little or nothing about rugby, the coach tossed him into the front row.
McKenzie recalls: ‘I didn't even know where I should stick my head’.
Despite these understandable teething problems, McKenzie quickly blossomed as a leading Victoria Schools rugby player and toured the United Kingdom with the state in the early 1980s.
In an attempt to further his rugby career, McKenzie loaded up his car and headed north to Sydney and arrived at Randwick.
McKenzie initially felt unwelcomed in the unfamiliar surroundings until he saw an old Melbourne friend who introduced him to the irrepressible club coach, Jeff Sayle.
‘I was about to leave and find another club until I met Jeff’, explained McKenzie.
McKenzie was urged to play a season with the Randwick Colts (under-20) and the first player he met was a burly hooker called Kearns, who like Farr-Jones, was unable to win a first XV team berth at prestigious Newington College.
McKenzie and Kearns struck up an immediate friendship and prop-hooker understanding and are now the cornerstones of the Randwick, New South Wales and Australian packs.
Displaying his sense of humour, McKenzie quipped: ‘I think I've had my arms around Phil more often than I've had them around my fiancee’.
Despite his humble rugby origins in Melbourne, McKenzie quickly learned the lessons in the toughest trade of the game and won Wallaby selection on the tour of England, Scotland and Italy in 1988 where he pressed for test selection.
But McIntyre's experience and craft won-over the selectors.
A year later, McIntyre was unavailable to tour France and Canada.
A test position was certain for the First Test in Strasbourg until he suffered a knee injury and his goal was denied.
It wasn't until France toured Australia in 1990 that he finally won his first cap.
In doing so, McKenzie became the first born and bred Victorian to play test rugby since Edward ‘Weary’ Dunlop, a legendary soldier and winner of a V.C., in 1932.
‘To come from Melbourne and play rugby for Australia was something special.
If I can do it, I'm sure there are plenty of other talented players in Victoria who could do the same’, he said.
During the World Cup, McKenzie was much sought after by the Victorian media and public.
He handled dozens of radio interviews and wrote a column in the Sunday Age — a remarkable achievement in itself given the postage stamp size of attention rugby receives in the south.
At only 26 and with 16 caps and four Wallaby tours behind him, McKenzie's test future seems assured.
And it may not be too long before the question is asked in a game of Trivial Pursuit ‘who was the last Victorian-born sportsman to captain Australia’?
NEW ZEALAND
A BOUQUET OF BARBED WIRE
DON CAMERON sifts his way through the ashes of an All Black demise that began well before the loss of the Webb Ellis Cup…
As New Zealanders sifted through the ashes of their World Cup defeat they were beginning to realise that after forming a recipe with which to win the Cup in 1987 they just as surely set up a system which would lead to losing it in 1991.
And, curiously, it took a rugby league man, Graham Lowe, the New Zealander who has been an outstanding coach at home, in England and now in Sydney, to really pin-point the reason why the All Blacks did not retain the Webb Ellis Cup.
Lowe was in Auckland promoting a video of his life and times — inevitably referring to him as a ‘master coach’ which is now becoming one of the more boring sporting clichés — and was asked what he thought of the All Blacks' failure to bring home the Cup.
Lowe quickly made the telling point that whenever he saw film or photographs of the All Blacks they always looked as grim and serious.
They had, said Lowe, forgotten that rugby was a game to be enjoyed.
It was a simple, but very pertinent observation and re-emphasised that over the last 18 months or so the All Blacks have been steadily squeezed in the nutcracker of their own ambition.
The pressure became too much as sponsors, fly-by-nights and average New Zealanders sent them off to the World Cup with the message that all New Zealand expected them to win.
The other part of the losing recipe was supplied by the players and the New Zealand Ruby Football Union.
In 1988 the team management was set up with John Sturgeon, an austere West Coaster as manager; Alex Wyllie as coach; John Mayhew as doctor and David Abercrombie as physiotherapist.
Each, in his own way, was something of an expert, especially Mayhew and Abercrombie who also had solid rugby backgrounds.
Strained partnership — Grizz Wyllie (right) was never sold on having John Hart as a partner.
The management and the team grew together into, in the early stages, a tight-knit organisation.
They won in 1988 and they won again in 1989 and they won early in 1990.
They became a very tight, interconnected and self-esteeming group.
Too close, as it turned out.
The strong Auckland group within the team took up a position of influence.
Sturgeon became over-protective of his players to an impossible degree.
The use of a local lawyer as the team spokesman after two All Blacks were involved in a post-match scuffle in Llanelli in 1989 did not reflect at all well on Sturgeon's ability as a manager who could stand aside and view the matter dispassionately.
Neither did the sending of one or two injured players to Argentina earlier this year reflect well on the team management.
It became very much a matter of the old touring buddies looking after each other.
Wyllie's limitation as a coach, which had become obvious in 1988, were glossed over while he and his team were winning.
He discarded his captain Wayne Shelford in a rather messy episode in mid-1990 only to find a few months later that Shelford's replacement also had his faults.
By the time the Argentinian expedition was over the home critics began to fire their arrows — and the team put together their shields and hoped the shafts would bounce off.
Not all of them did.
Grant Fox, for instance, was sorely troubled by the allegations that he had been part of an Auckland spearhead which had had Shelford removed, and that his personal failings had been responsible for the indifferent play in Argentina and the loss of the Sydney Test to Australia.
Wyllie came under closer scrutiny by the NZRFU for a variety of reasons — his unwillingness to have John Hart as an influential coaching partner, his inability to keep to selection announcement timetables and then his rather desperate efforts to have Mike Brewer, the one on-field forward whom Wyllie could  rely on for solid advice, put into the team even while suffering a painful foot injury.
But while these voices of dissent grew louder and louder, and began to breed that stony-faced aspect about which Lowe later remarked, the New Zealand rugby public were being swept along by the manufactured, hyped-up waves generated by the hucksters and the lackeys determined that their clients would get full return for spending their sponsorship and advertising dollars.
The players, who already knew the value of the advertising dollar, were endlessly pumped onto the television advertisements (most of them in soft focus) as they mouthed clichés and manufactured statements about what they hoped to do at the World Cup.
There were hakas and waving flags, and such high-falutin' gushing that, in comparison, the crusades might have appeared as just a quick trip around the block for a gratifying little scrap.
People were shoved into buying this or that, for the benefit of the advertiser and the undying good of New Zealand rugby.
This cloying commercial clamour had the New Zealand public wound up.
Everyone had the World Cup on their lips, the advertising ratings were very healthy — even if the structure of a team which had been too long in the comfort-zone was less than robust.
The All Blacks worked their way past England in the opening match, but with so many flaws their following matches against Italy and the United States, and then the quarter-final against Canada, were invested with extraordinary importance.
These matches were required to show whether the All Blacks tight five were still able to cut the mustard, whether the loose forwards could combine, whether New Zealand could put together a backline attack without having Joe Stanley as the lynch-pin.
And all this with made-over wings at fullback.
Heavens above.
The Americans, Italians and Canadians should have been brushed aside.
Yet the All Black confidence and ability to dominate had sunk so low that the three minnows all had parts of the match when they outplayed the All Blacks with embarrassing ease.
So the grey-faced All Blacks, the man who had forgotten they were playing a game, went to Dublin and played with the verve  of men on their way to the gallows.
Men on their way to the gallows?
Fitzpatrick and Fox turn away as Campese scores in Dublin.
The team were still wrapped together in the comfort zone of a four-year period when each had cosseted and protected the other.
No-one had noticed that while they huddled together the armour-plating had rusted away.
Losing the William Webb Ellis Cup was bed enough for the NZRFU on the eve of its 100th birthday.
Losing most of the All Black team a few days later was even more embarrassing.
Yet only a few days after the Wallabies had tucked the Cup safely away, as they thoroughly deserved to do, NZRFU officials were bustling about trying to find out what their players were up to.
In recent years the habit of the All Blacks leaving together and returning together after a trip to Europe has disappeared.
Some players have remained for the northern winter in England, France or Italy, to pursue the loose change of world rugby.
Others have had holidays.
But this year the All Blacks broke new ground.
They obtained permission from the NZRFU for most of them to drift away from Twickenham and eventually to arrive in the northern Italian town of Treviso.
There would band together to play a charity match and a few days afterwards attend the wedding of John Kirwan to a young lady of Treviso.
Perhaps the terms of reference were slightly vague, but the NZRFU probably considered that their lads deserved a break, and so gave general permission for the expedition to Italy.
So everyone drifted off, apart from Eddie Tonks, the NZRFU council chairman, who remained in London for the International Board meeting.
Then came the uncomfortable news that the All Blacks' opposition in Treviso would involve some South African players.
Even now  no-one seems quite certain whether this was a fact, a half-fact or the product of a fertile imagination.
But, like all rumours, it grew and flourished.
For a start, Naas Botha, the Springbok wonderboot, would play against the New Zealanders.
They two or three other itinerant South Africans would be involved.
Within a day or two it appeared that a complete South African team would be fielded and Treviso might just see the start of rugby's World War III.
With everyone else gone Tonks had to fend for himself so he tried to find out the truth.
Eventually he reached Kirwan and was assured that no South Africans would be involved and that the match has some sanctity as the proceeds were to go to child cancer research — not that that dissuaded some cynics from suggesting that some players may have taken their share.
Tonks has for months been juggling the possibility of an All Black tour to South Africa next year — something close to his heart — but was aware that the continuing divisions between the rugby groups in the Republic made such a tour impossible.
Tonks feared that the All Blacks playing a South African XV at Treviso would so widen the gap in South Africa that future combination might almost be impossible.
0
So Tonks was able to rest easy that no South Africans would play at Treviso.
But not for long.
For very soon, cam the news that the wandering band of All Blacks had come to earth in Vichy, France, and had played a match against a French selection.
About the time this match took place, Tonks was in the IRB meeting room alongside the French delegate and was not impressed that they had not made him aware of the game — if they in fact knew about it.
Tonks was incensed about the Vichy venture, as were the NZRFU folk at home, everyone was embarrassed that they had no way of knowing where the All Black party were, what was involved in the game, and where next the travelling group might surface.
The NZRFU rather prides itself on its official-player liaison, of treating its players handsomely, and it rather hopes that they in turn would treat the NZRFU with courtesy, if not affection.
So the NZRFU saw the French venture as a snub, a slight on the NZRFU administration.
There was not much else they could do.
The NZRFU, predictably, sent off a ‘please explain’ letter to the French Federation, asking who had arranged the match, whether the players had received financial reward, and so forth.
Just as predictably, the immediate French reaction seemed to be a silent Gallic shrug of the shoulders.
After some silence the NZRFU sent off another rocket to the French Federation.
At the time of writing the French reaction was, predictably, again the same.
Possibly because the French Federation may actually know nothing about the game.
Back home the NZRFU critics regarded the Vichy venture as another sign that the NZRFU was losing its control of its leading players.
Andy Haden said, from far away on a local radio programme, that the Vichy-Treviso jaunt was just another part of the growing player-power.
Haden sounded just a little off-key about the whole affair.
It was just the sort of nose-thumbing exercise toward the NZRFU that Haden would loved to have devised and put in action.
And here was someone else stealing his rebellious thunder.
While the middleweights were sparring away, the heavyweights of the All Black selector-coach battle were staying in their corners.
Nominations for the three All Black selectors closed on November 27.
The NZRFU council was due to appoint the selectors on December 14.
Alex Wyllie and John Hart were both exhausted after the rigours of the World Cup and the constant press bombardment.
Hart has formally been nominated by the Auckland union, but he has informed Auckland and several other unions who support him that he wants more time to decide whether he really wants the toil and trouble of being the All Black coach.
Wyllie, on the point of launching his biography which immodestly refers to him as ‘The Legend,’ says he no longer wants the job and has not let his name be put forward.
The odds are that the NZRFU will be happier now that Wyllie has decided not to stand.
But this does not mean Hart is a certainty.
Hart has attracted some sharp criticism, especially from Otago and southern parts of the South Island.
They have put forward their nine-year coach Laurie Mains, and are winding themselves up to the point of wanting him as coach, first-up.
Other nominees are Ross Cooper, who helped Romania during the World Cup, Peter Thorburn, after seven years with North Harbour, and the wondrous Wellington duo of Earl Kirton and Andy Leslie.
Kirton spent a year as an All Black selector when Hart was out of favour and now seems embroiled in a television commentary career which largely involves tearing strips from the referee and running a one-man coaching clinic at the same time.
Leslie, the former All Black captain, took over the Wellington team some time after Kirton departed that job.
Wellington could not make up its mind, so nominated both.
A long-shot bet at the moment could have Mains (coach) Leslie and Thorburn as the 1992 panel.
CANADA
BIRTWELL'S HAPPY BAND
PETER McMULLAN talked to coach IAN BIRTWELL, the former Englishman who took Canada from also-rans to the success story of the World Cup.
While individual players have rightly been singled out for special mention, the very considerable success of Canada's World Cup campaign was based on a concerted team effort.
It's this thought that remains uppermost in the mind of coach Ian Birtwell as he looks back on those sixteen memorable days in October when Canada came charging so boldly from the ranks of the ‘possibles’ to achieve quarter-final status.
‘All my high points are related to the team effort, the commitment the lads showed on the field and to their ability to play for 80 minutes against top quality opposition.
If there is to be any  criticism of our play, it is in relation to our tactical awareness, to the fact that we sometimes made wrong choices which more experienced people would not have made’.
As an example, Birtwell cites the New Zealand game in Lille, when the Canadian backs were given the balls in situations when the pack had stopped going forward.
‘That was a fundamental error’, he says.
In the context of what Canada achieved — solid victories over Fiji and Romania, a six-point loss to France in a game that most Canadians feel could just as well have provided another win, and, finally, defeat by New Zealand and a heart-stirring two-try finish — Birtwell and his squad have good reason to be satisfied.
As he says: ‘The first game against Fiji was very important to us and the first try we scored (by fullback Scott Stewart on a return pass from left wing Steve Gray) was incredibly important.
‘It was done with such proficiency, with all the components working well…a counter-attack situation, driving play, back-up support, excellent passing, good body positions going into contact.
That to me was one of the most rewarding moments over and above when we got into the big game against New Zealand.
‘What we have done over the past two years is to improve on our ability to retain the ball in contact, to drive very successfully as units (as the All Blacks found to their cost in Lille) and to deep those drives going.
The drives we put on against New Zealand were things that we had worked on and it was very satisfying to see them coming off, not just for the forwards but for the backs as well.
Fifteen people working together against some very talented opposition’.
While Birtwell, who is a fisheries research scientist with the Canadian government in Vancouver, has still to decide whether or not he can continue to devote the time needed to coach the national team, he has no doubts as to what the future holds.
‘I think Canada will do very well  over the next four years.
We have set the platform for things to move ahead.
The challenge will be to get consistent, good quality opposition and to have these Canadian players, or people like them, coming together regularly.
Obviously we are losing some players to retirement, and other who are planning to play elsewhere, and we are going to have to bring in new people.
Against this loss we still have those players who sat out and who are very close to the standard of the team that played’.
Ian Birtwell (front left) with his happy Canucks (l-r) Rob Van den Brink, Norm Hadley, Gareth Rees, John Robertsen, John Graf, Chris Tynan and Mark Wyatt.
Birtwell sees the challenge facing the Canadian Rugby Union just now centred on the need to bring the new faces in early and quickly.
‘Give them suitable opposition that will help in their development towards the next World Cup.
Not too great a challenge right now, but a development programme to build up confidence, the ability to play at the highest level.
‘We did it well this time, I think, and there was a progressive build-up, not a sudden challenge.
For example, we did not go to Australia in July.
That would have been a mistake.
Instead, we prepared with a series of games at the local level here in B.C.’.
Canada's selection policy came as a surprise to many observers, with changes made in the side that defeated Fiji in preparation for Romania and yet again in a winning team for the final pool game against France.
Again the decisions were based on sound judgement, the depth of the Canadian squad a Birtwell's own coaching philosophy.
‘In all games I coach I never go in with the understanding that there is only one person for one position.
Even at the club level I have always tried to bring in people from lower divisions because, sooner or later, the people playing low down will get higher up — some, not all of them.
‘We have had the same situation over the last two years with the Canadian squad.
We have endeavoured to give people who are very similar in talent the opportunity to play, so what we did in France was not difficult.
We had a squad and we picked according to what we wanted to do on the day.
It showed our system worked and it certainly wasn't a brave decision to make those changes.
‘Nor was it a high risk situation from my point of view, because for these were tried and tested individuals we were putting on the field.
It may have come as a surprise to some, especially those nations where they have a fixed XV to which they only add as time goes by’.
Birtwell acknowledges that there are advantages to having a settle side, but he also pinpoints what he sees as great drawbacks to this approach.
‘When some of the XV disappear through injury or some other reason it means that, all of a sudden, you are dealing with a new player who has to be parachuted in and the pressure on the individual is acute.With us, if you can alleviate that pressure in advance then so much the better’.
NEWFOUNDLAND — PROVINCIAL CHAMPIONSHIP SUCCESS STORY
It's a far cry from Lille, World Cup excitement, the All Blacks and a crowd of well over 30,000 to an open field on the University of Victoria campus where BRITISH COLUMBIA opened its defence of the Canadian Senior Provincial Championship , on November 9 and 10.
Although only eight of the 23 British Columbia players who went to the World Cup were on hand for the two games it was enough to see the host province safely through to championship no.23 by virtue of wins over Alberta — and that was a close call indeed — and NEWFOUNDLAND .
The story of the weekend was most certainly the success of the team that travelled the full vast width of the country to emerge as only the second-ever to represent Newfoundland in the final.
In the first semi-final they took Ontario completely unawares with a dashing try in the opening minutes by centre Greg McKinney which his partner Dennis Clarke converted for a 6–0 advantage.
It proved enough for a most handsome victory over decidedly off-colour Ontario and it was an enormous pity that Rod Snow , the dynamic Newfoundland no.8, sustained a neck injury that kept him out of the final.
B.C. , who won the 27th final 35–3, were thankful to be ahead by three penalties to one at the interval against a Newfoundland XV that showed a little respect for a line-up that included World Cup players in Dan Jackart, Ron Vanden Brink, Jeff Knauer, Roy Radu, Steve Gray and Tom Woods .
Prop Paul Szabo , who had done so well against New Zealand in Lille when Jackart was injured, was on hand for the opening match with Alberta along with flanker Bruce Breen , who had the misfortune to break a bone in his wrist.
B.C. won this semi-final 18–16, four penalties and a goal to four penalties and a try, and could have been eliminated had Troy McDonald , the Alberta outside-half, been successful with a difficult drop goal in the final minutes.
British Columbia's forward strength and willingness to work the ball wide in the second half, as injury-hit Newfoundland, tired, brought five tries, two of them pushovers for the expected result.
No.8 Colin McKenzie , who excelled with 40 tries for BC Old Boys last season, had three scores, including the pushover efforts, with the others claimed by wing Steve Gray and centre Ron Towes .
Outside-half Bob Ross showed his worth as a kicker, supplying three penalties and three of five conversions while Clarke kicked Newfoundland's single penalty.
Alberta, who had played so well on the Saturday, were beaten 14–6 by Ontario in the third-place game the next day and, while the winners looked a lot more together than they had against Newfoundland, they definitely suffered throughout from the absence of their outstanding flanker,Al Charron , ruled out by a World Cup rib injury.
Five members of Canada's World Cup squad, including four who played in the final game against New Zealand in Lille, will be proving their worth overseas in the coming months.
Lock Norm Hadley and no.8 Glenn Ennis , two of the mainstays of Canada's increasingly impressive forward effort this year, have gone to Japan to accept appointments in the international marketing department of the Suntori Corporation , a major brewing company.
They expect to be in Japan for two years and will thus be eligible to play for Suntori in the national championship next season.
The business experience will be invaluable, especially in an era when Canada is setting high priority on Pacific Rim links, with their first priority coming to terms with the language.
Monty Heald (Ontario), a former national team manager and selector, is the new President of the Canadian Rugby Union.
He succeeds Alberta 's Barry Giffen who stepped down after four years at the annual general meeting held in Victoria on the weekend of the national championships in early November.
Heald is replaced as director responsible for national teams by Keith Wilkinson (Quebec)with Ieuan Evans (Alberta), who follows Mike Hutchinson (B.C.), the only other new member of the board.
Continuing appointments were those of Jan Curnow (B.C.) referees and laws;Mike Dinning (Ontario) coaching and certification;Rick Graham (Nova Scotia)youth and national championships;Jo Reinbold , women's rugby, and Alan Sharp (B.C.) treasurer and deputy president.
Sharp was also appointment to be Canada's delegate to the IRFB for the next two years.
Fullback and captain Mark Wyatt , who 29 caps in 10 years is just two fewer than the Canadian record set by lock Ro Hindson between 1973 and 1990, was not the only one to retire after the World Cup.
Hooker David Spiers , who played against Fiji and New Zealand , has called it a day long with lock John Robertsen , who was injured against France after appearing in the opening win over Fiji.
Reserve flanker Roy Radu will continue at club level but will not seek to add to his total of twelve caps.
USA
Blowing the big chance
The World Cup hardly caused a ripple Stateside.
The Final will not make it onto American TV screens until four months after the event.
RANDALL LIEBERMANN explains why…
While participating in the second Rugby World Cup was a great learning experience for the United States national team (despite a 0–3 record and being outscored 113–24), for US rugby this recent World Championship was a promotional disappointment.
The failure of TSL, the London-based World Cup broadcast management company, to get adequate television coverage of the event in the United States was potentially very damaging to the future of US rugby.
In these recessionary times, and with USA rugby currently without a major sponsor, the airing of ITV's excellent programmes might have stirred the American general public's interest in rugby.
Sponsorship money doesn't grow on trees in the States.
Only by convincing companies that there's a mass audience interested will any significant sponsorships materialise for US rugby.
Television exposure is the most significant outlet for this exposure in the United States, but rugby was only ranked 103rd out of 114 spectator sports in a recent survey by the Sports Marketing Group of Dallas, Texas.
So, with such an attractive product as the Rugby World Cup available, it was extremely important that TSL secure as large and widespread a viewing audience as possible.
They failed on both counts.
The phones began ringing off the hook at Rugby US a few months before the World Cup began, with callers wanting to know when and where they could see the matches on television.
No-one in the United States Rugby Union had a clue about coverage and neither the union nor the magazine was ever sent a press release.
After a dozen or so phone calls, we finally discovered that TSL had secured coverage on Sportschannel America , a national cable sports network which reaches approximately nine million households.
Unfortunately, the Sports-channel package consists of 17 weekly, one-hour highlight shows, with the national feed on Saturday mornings at 10am (wedged in with the children's cartoons).
The programmes didn't even start until Saturday morning on October 26th, around the very same time that fly-half Rob Andrew was clinching England's 9–6 victory over Scotland in the first semi-final.
And Australia's 12–6 victory over England in the final won't be aired in the US until nearly four months after it was played.
This scenario would be bad enough if Sportschannel America was the only network willing to air the event in the States.
But it wasn't.
John Morgan, the producer of a weekly rugby programme airing on the Prime Network (with 23 million subscribers — 14 million more than Sportschannel ), indicated he had offered TSL coverage on his ‘Rugby World’ show, which has slots on Saturday and Sunday afternoons and early evenings.
Morgan said he never got a reply from the English company.
Morgan also claimed that TSL paid Sportschannel around £1,750 per show for air time, while his offer was for free.
Furthermore, Pete McEwan, head of international production for TV New Zealand related a similar story.
McEwan's company was bringing the live World Cup feed to New Zealand through Los Angeles and also sold the feed for all 32 games into Canada.
‘We offered TSL a live feed for the US market at a cost of $1,000 per show, but they never got back to us’, said McEwan.
‘I think TSL did a very poor job of selling this World Cup’.
Although some US rugby enthusiasts were able to tap into these satellite transmissions to view the matches live, the majority have not seen the heroics of the best players in their sport.
And, without television coverage to keep them honest, US newspaper and sports magazine editors once again chose to ignore the World Championship of one of the world's most popular sports.
Most dishearteningly,Sports Illustrated , the country's premier sports magazine, sent over ex-Patriot Clive Gammon (who I talked to at the US-New Zealand and England matches) but not one line has appeared in the magazine yet.
The Sports Illustrated issue after the World Cup final, however, did include stories on a disabled powerlifter, off-track betting parlours in France and a youth chess club in Harlem.
But it had no room for rugby's World Cup.
It was quite a disturbing scenario for anyone interested in promoting US rugby and greatly set back our efforts.
Hopefully, the organisers of the 1995 Rugby World Cup will learn from this public relations disaster and make television coverage in the United States, the world's biggest market, more of a priority.
Eagles eyrie: Playing to an empty house across The Pond.
SOUTH AFRICA
THE CASE FOR THE DEFENCE
The 'Boks may be ring rusty but, says JOHN ROBBIE, they are top-heavy with talent and anyone who writes them off does so at their peril…
It was Charles Caleb Colton who said that man is an embodied paradox, a bundle of contradictions.
I'm not sure about that but I am sure that the relative strength of a South African side is the subject of heated debate all over the rugby world and, depending on who you speak to, the ‘Boks are either the true World Champions or a collection of dinosaurs, hopelessly out of touch with the modern game and in for a rude awakening.
It's extraordinary to be sitting in the middle and listening to the different sides of the argument.
Who would want to be a juror at the Trial of South African Rugby?
Exhibits A and B are the Rugby World Cup and the Currie Cup Final.
Both had their moments and, for the first time, both were shown all around the world on television.
Both received praise for the presentation, the colour and the crowds but mixed reviews when it came to the standard of play.
With South African Rugby in the dock the Council for the Defence would point to the record of the Springboks.
They demolished England in 1984, comprehensively beat an excellent Cavaliers side in 1986 (with neutral referees) and, despite the years of isolation, managed to defeat, admittedly with some difficulty, the FNB world side that toured in 1989.
Since then a number of really promising youngsters have emerged and most South Africans feel that the mid-nineties will be the peak of an outstanding generation, as was the case with 1986.
The Prosecution would point to the 1991 Currie Cup Final and ask for some evidence of the power of South Africa.
The game should have been a classic but clearly wasn't.
It was grippingly exciting, sure, but the handling was disappointing, there was a lot of kicking and, perhaps of greatest concern, was the poor quality of both side's ball retention.
Time and time again one of the sides went into a contact situation with the ball and lost it to the opposition.
This rarely happened in the World Cup, even when a minnow played against a giant.
There's a lot of truth in the criticism and South African supporters at the World Cup who dismissed all the sides as sub-standard would do well to take note of it.
However, just look at the way that refereeing has influenced certain facets of the international game.
Ruthless penalising of malingerers and also of sides going over the top has brought about a quiet revolution.
Attacking sides can now repeatedly drive and place the ball safe in the knowledge that, providing support is there, possession will be retained.
This applies  to backs as well as forwards and centres have become, once again, key players in the strategy of committing opponents and then moving the ball wide.
This style will suit the ‘Boks to a tee.
Wahl Bartmann, Tiaan Strauss, Jannie Breedt and Ian MacDonald of the forwards and centres such as Pieter Muller and Jannie Classen will revel in this approach, as will all of the very physical players who make up the game here.
The ‘Boks will love it.
South Africans were very disappointed by the attacking limitations displayed in RWC 1991.
Ask yourself how many times an attacking fullback burst into the line to release his outside runners.
In the big clashes it was a rare sight.
Three fullbacks Andre Joubert, who played so well at Murrayfield, Gerbrand Grobler and Hendrik Truter, are attacking players who can scythe through defences from set and broken play.
They recognise that they are the only unmarked players on the field and, as such, the key attackers.
Surely with one of these at fullback both England and Australia would have been far stronger units.
Indeed, although their tactics were laudable, how many times did the England backline movement really look like succeeding in the Final?
It makes you think.
The line-outs are also an area of concern.
Gone are the days when a South African lock will rise like a Saturn Five, defying gravity for what seemed like an eternity, to pluck the ball two-handed and present it to the lucky scrum-half.
Unfortunately South Africans have had to adopt the shambles of the international line-out.
It's a pity the world did not adopt the early binding interpretation of the old South Africa, but there you are.
However, those who know South African rugby will appreciate that the more physical and confrontational the forward exchanges, the more the local forwards will love it.
What is the overall point?
The point is that there are areas in the South African game where standards have clearly fallen behind the rest of the world.
However, these limitations are far from unsurmountable.
Like the Japanese with their physical problem, the Fijians with their attitude to the fifteen-man game and perhaps Wales, Scotland and Ireland with their limited resources of top-flight players, the South Africans have minor challenges in adaptation and practice.
On the topic of resources, it's interesting that a player like Harry Roberts, who made Scotland ‘B’ and played with distinction for a number of top clubs, plays for Transvaal but would be fighting against top opposition for a third or fourth place in the hooker rankings in South  Africa .
Given the size and athleticism of the players here, the fanatical will to re-emerge as a world power and the fact that countries are queuing up to give the ‘Boks experience, then the message is clear.
Write off the ‘Boks at your peril.
One man who will never wear the colours of South  Africa is Jan Lock.
He was chosen as tight-head for the ‘Boks against the FNB side in 1989 but injured himself on that same day and never got the elusive cap.
His was a similar case to that of Emmet O'Rafferty who was chosen for Ireland in the late seventies but never played.
He was also desperately unlucky.
Jan was making a comeback this season and played in the curtain-raiser to the Currie Cup Final .
He retired before the end, collapsed in the dressing room and passed away.
The whole country was stunned and the collective grief is a testimony to his popularity.
Allegations of steroid abuse were made and publication of the post-mortem results have been delayed.
Jan Lock, an iron man on the field, a family man and a friendly comedian off it, was 28.
He'll be sorely missed.
Let's end with a look at a player who will certainly come into ‘Bok contention in the years to come: Ian McDonald.
In fact, he played in the end-of-season ‘Bok versus Junior ‘Bok game in Durban.
This was an interesting exercise as the main side played in full colours but were awarded no caps.
They saw off a spirited junior challenge, at times in style.
Ian McDonald is 23-years-old.
He stands about 6ft 4ins and weighs almost sixteen stone.
Two  seasons ago he was rated tenth best tighthead flanker in the country.
This season he has been a revelation.
He wins a lot of ball in the line-outs and as such is a useful character to have at top level, in tandem with a big no.8.
He is surprisingly quick for such a big man and his tackling is extremely aggressive.
He plays for the Rand Afrikaans University in Johannesburg and is a certainty for Transvaal.
With Jannie Breedt and the mercurial Francois Pienaar he makes up a back row that is ideally suited to the type of game South  Africa will need to play to beat the best in the world.
He could well be to South Africa what Willie-O now is to the World Champions.
Incidentally, lest any Scots are looking for replacements for their back row, Ian is as Afrikaans as the ‘Bok of days gone by who, when asked about language difficulties in France, replied that two expressions were all that was necessary: ‘ Parlez-vous and Kamer toe’(Afrikaans for ‘to the room?’)!
Transvaal flanker Ian McDonald — a revelation
AROUND THE WORLD
Bermuda becomes socially serious
As Andy Haden, captain and cook of the New Zealand party at this year's Classics tournament explained: ‘Being socially serious and seriously social’ is a demanding business.
No sooner had they arrived in Bermuda than there was the stern challenge of the Irish to be met on the field, a barbecue to be arranged, the All Black cabaret act to be sorted out, the necessary mopeds to be booked, and the '91 brew of the ‘Dark and Stormy’ to be tested.
They just sit back and relax.
An All Black relax?
You must be kidding!
They were at the World Classics to win since those upstart Aussies already had one major tournament to boast about this year, and they were not getting their hands on this one.
‘I'd prefer this one anyway’, said Haden.
Hence the rumours of in-camera, pre-Bermuda fitness screenings of the over thirty-five-year-olds.
The Aussies, under the guidance of Andy Slack (‘out best entertainment has nothing at all to do with rugby’) quickly got to grips with their imported beer after the disappointment of losing to a late Welsh try in one of the opening games.
With likes of Ken Wright, Roger Gould and Enrique Rodriguez (nice bow tie, Rico), they threw the beer cans away and ran some beauts.
‘It doesn't get any easier’, confessed Slack, a theme reiterated by quite a few during the competition, especially those playing from memories of yesteryear glories.
The ‘Dark and Stormy’— a local mixture of rum and ginger beer — was an apt description of the conditions for this marvellous event.
Under the newly constructed lights at the National Sports Ground, the players ignored the elements and hangovers to provide truly entertaining and competitive rugby.
You don't expect players to be warned for excessive aggression at this level, but they were, and the first to be admonished was an old hand at listening to finger pointing lectures.
His name?
None other than Paul Ringer, pirate of the Welsh fancy dress night and  frustrated crooner of their cabaret act.
Mike Roberts and company provided the very original humming choral backing.
It wasn't immediately evident from some camps whether the idea was to continue in a serious vein of rugby competition or subject themselves to the physical demands of the concentrated social calendar.
The Irish began their serious training (for the social tournament) in New York and never quite recovered).
The States contributed some fine tries but kept their finest hour to a rendition (it didn't matter about the multiplicity of keys) of ‘American Pie’.
The hosts, and what a superbly organised lot they were, with the help of few French travellers, gave a good account of themselves, notably against the tiring Irish.
In the semi-finals the Welsh lost to England, which gave the English a bit of a problem.
How serious should skipper and ITV pundit Steve Smith tell his men to take the final against New Zealand?
The decision was to retire to a private island and bar, give the mike to Mike Rafter and leave the rest to changing-room adrenalin.
Bill ‘Running Bear’ Cuthbertson and his braves from Scotland did themselves proud in the semi-final against New Zealand, even better was an untransmittable version of the Highlands ‘Haka’.
Yet when the final came around, frivolity — England sang ‘Look on the bright side of life’ in response to the ‘Haka’— gave way to an enthralling forward battle with the All Blacks giving way to no-one.
They achieved what they had set out to do, and so the thirty-six hour homeward journey would be that more tolerable.
Going round in circles — the Scots try to outflank the NZ Haka.
HONG KONG
SPRINGBOKS SEVENS TRIP SCUPPERED
South Africa was the team that everyone — from organisers, the public, to the media — wanted to see at the 1992 Hong Kong Sevens.
But any hopes of seeing the Springboks were, however, dashed when the Republic's two rugby bodies failed to unite under a sole administration in time.
The failure of Danie Craven's South Africa Rugby Board and the mainly-black South Africa Rugby Union to get their act together forestalled grandiose plans by the Hong Kong Seven organisers to use their world-famous event as the door through which the Springboks would make their re-entry into the rugby world.
‘Like many of you, I hoped that South Africa would be playing here next year.
But it is not to be’, said a disappointed Don Watson, chairman of the Hong Kong Rugby Football Union.
Watson's lament might have been couched in Shakespearian speech.
But it was apt.
The Hong Kong Sevens had tried desperately to attract the team that has a lure more powerful than any single rugby side in the world today.
The organisers responded to the possible lifting of sporting restrictions on South Africa by reserving a place in the 24-team line-up when invitations were sent out in June this year.
For several months the Hong Kong Sevens waited, hoping that the country's two rugby bodies would unite as quickly as they had in some other sports — most notably cricket.
But while their cricketing cousins were making history at the Calcutta Eden Garden pitch, rugby was still embroiled in the hard world of politics.
With no hint that unification was soon forthcoming, the Sevens' organisers sent their invitation elsewhere, and despite the absence of the Springboks, the April 4–5 tournament will still see some new faces.
They may not be in the same class as the Springboks, but Namibia and Romania will be as heartily cheered by the tournament's crowd when they make their appearances next year.
As for South Africa — it will have to be 1993.
‘Given the uncertainty of the situation, and the need to progress with organising next year's tournament, we decided to put South Africa's participation on hold for another year’, said an exasperated Watson.
So everyone will have to settle for Namibia and Romania, who will make a refreshing change but are not expected to challenge the Southern Hemisphere stranglehold on this tournament.
Missing from the last tournament are Scotland , because of a hectic domestic schedule, and Spain and the Soviet Bears , who both  stand down automatically after a two-year run.
France are the only member of the Five Nations to accept an invitation, although it can be expected to see a number of England 's high-order in the Barbarians side and Irish charm amongst the Irish Wolfhounds .
The dates of the draw for the 1992 event will be February 20.
The Classics is here to stay.
It is a massive undertaking for the organisers (and their livers).
For those who have participated this year the diaries have been filled…
Bermuda World Classics 1992, Nov 7th–15th.
DUBAI
Queensland too hot to handle
as if beating England and supplying half of the World Cup winning side was enough for one year Queensland also won the 22nd Dubai .
While Oman's Muscat took on the mantle of regional champions, Queensland provided a masterly performance against Bahrain Warblers .
The only two unbeaten sides, Warblers and Queensland, met in what was probably the best final ever seen at the tournament.
A first-half try by Queensland flier Paul Carozza was quickly countered by Warbler Eric Rush and despite Rush adding a second, Carozza scorched across the sand pitch to bring the Australians back to 10–8 before completing his hat-trick.
When Queensland eventually ran out 20–14 winners.
Hot-shots!
Harvey Thorneycroft on the move for Millfield O.B. 's as the take on Toulouse.
International Crossroads with Chris Thau
Russians out in the cold
AFTER their successful World Cup outing,ITALY recommenced their FIRA campaign last month in Moscow .
The Italians beat the Soviets 23–3 on a freezing cold day at the Fili Stadium in Moscow, the first ever Italian in the Soviet Union.
The Soviets fielded a young and relatively inexperienced side and, as always, showed tremendous athleticism and an appetite for combat.
However, their technical know-how does not match their physical prowess.
The Italians scored four tries to none — one each from Venturi and their captain Pivetta and two by electric winger Marcello Cuttitta.
‘They put us under tremendous pressure.
It is a raw side but very promising, commented his brother, prop Massimo  Cuttitta .
The Italians who, under Bertrand Foucarde , have rediscovered the art of tackling, defended beautifully and counter-attacked dangerously.
The Soviet side, deprived of the services of their veteran trio Mironov, Tikhonov and Frantzusov, seem to have lost steam lately.
In fact, a couple of weeks later the Soviets, a Russian/ Khazakstan selection in everything but name, managed to survive a spirited Spanish challenge in Seville with a last-minute try by centre Konovalenko, converted by fly-half Nikolaev.
With two minutes to go, Spain were leading 16–12 but careless defence — perhaps a premature relaxation — allowed the Russians to snatch a precious win for their survival in the FIRA First Division.
The Soviets scored three tries (Zacharliuk, Negodin and Konovalenko) to Spain's two (Fidel Castro — no relation — and Pablo Guierez).
Spain led 9–7 at half-time.
Canucks go east
CANADIAN World Cup stars Glenn Ennis and Norm Hadley have turned down lucrative offers from several French clubs to join Japanese club Toshiba instead.
Hadley, who holds joint French-Canadian nationality, was a particularly hot pick for the French.
The Nice club had flown the 6ft 9in giant for their training camp in August, but failed in their attempt to sign him on.
Japan has joined the international club circus recruiting players of international calibre for their domestic competition.
Gareth Rees , the gifted Canadian fly-half has already signed for the French club Merignac , a side captained by Philippe Berbizier, the brother of Pierre.
Italian frontrunners
MILANO and Treviso are the leading contenders for the ITALIAN CHAMPIONSHIP title.
Milano, sponsored by media magnate Berlusconi , are coached by Mark Ella and are the current title holders.
Their line-up features a host of stars — from the Cuttitta brothers to the gifted Italo-Argentine Diego Dominguez .
The foreign player in the team is World Cup superstar David Campese .
Treviso , sponsored by the  Benetton  family empire, are coached by Pierre Villepreux of France and feature Michael Lynagh .
On the account of their relative performance against Rovigo , another leading Italian club, the Milanese must be the front runners.
They hammered hapless Rovigo by 40 points, while Treviso worked hard to prevail 36–24 over Naas Botha 's Rovigo.
Ironically, all five Treviso tries (Rovigo scored two) were scored by forwards, an obvious hint that the master of backplay,Pierre Villepreux , has not yet made his mark on the team's playing pattern.
The All Greys
FOLLOWING the intervention of the IRB (very keen not to jeopardise the talks between the SARB and the SARU ) the planned game between the All Blacks and a selection of South African players currently playing in Europe has been abandoned.
Both the SARB and the Italian Federation have vetoed the idea — the game was scheduled to be played in Italy.
The New Zealanders instead played an Italian selection the week before the wedding of the All Black winger,John Kirwan , to a beauty from Treviso , Fiorela Tomasi.
The All ‘Grey’ New Zealanders (expressly forbidden from using the name and the All Black logo) wore a classic grey outfit and called themselves ‘Lyons Tea XV ’.
Before the Italian game the New Zealanders entertained the public in Vichy , France, when they appeared as the ‘Friends of Richard Loe XV ’ against the French Army .
Welcome to the club
THE IRB admitted five new members:Andorra (a country playing in the FIRA second division),Chile (arguably the second strongest nation in South America),Luxembourg, Hungary,and Latvia (the first nation of the crumbling Soviet empire to join the Board).
‘We are not very strong but are very willing to learn.
This is why we are here’, said Andris Ozois, the President of the Latvian Rugby Federation on the day of the World Cup Final.
In line to follow the Latvians are Georgia and the Ukraine — two of the powers to be reckoned with from former Soviet rugby.
Moldavia, Khazakstan and Uzbekistan are expected to follow suit.
Canada, Italy, Japan and Argentina have joined the ‘Big Eight’ of the Board as members of the Executive Council .
Welsh Catch 22
IN HIS unmistakable style,Micky Quinn describes his troubles affecting Welsh rugby: ‘In the Gulf War a Welsh Guardsman was lying wounded after a fierce attack in the desert.
One of his legs was shattered by shrapnel and lying there in the burning sun he prayed to God, ‘Please God, accept my three wishes — Please send down St. David — you know, we in Wales have tremendous faith in St. David’.’
‘OK’ said God, ‘granted’, and St. David suddenly materialised in front of our wounded warrior.
‘Here I am,’ he said ‘What are your two wishes?’
‘Oh, St. David, my leg hurts, I'm losing a lot of blood.
Please do something’.
St. David took a close look at his leg ‘Sorry old son, nothing I can do.
It's too bad.
You may have to lose it altogether.
Now what's your third wish?’
‘Oh, St. David, you know that we in Wales are very proud of our rugby.
We love our rugby more than anything else’.
‘Yes, I know’ said St. David ‘I played outside-half myself in the Heavens team.’
‘You know, St. David, that Welsh rugby has been having a terrible time lately.
The English beat us in Cardiff, the French destroyed us, it's really very bad.
Please can you do something to help Wales win the World Cup’?
‘Well, my son, that's a very hard one — maybe — let's have another look at your leg’!’
WHISTLE STOP!
THE CLIVE NORLING COLUMN
The referees for the 1991 World Cup were always going to be placed under close scrutiny by the media, as well as spectators both at the ground and watching on television, and so it turned out.
At the commencement of the tournament it was made clear that referees had been instructed to apply Laws 18 and 19.
The tackled player carrying the ball must immediately play the ball and not hold onto it.
But, perhaps more importantly, no other player could (Law 18. (2)(d)) wilfully fall on or over a player lying on the ground with the ball in his possession.
In the early pool games, the referees proved to be very strict indeed in applying this particular law, even to the extent of penalising players who had been pushed on top of other players lying on the ground with the ball.
The penalty count in the early games went well over the 30 mark, particularly in the England v Italy game at Twickenham, where it appeared that the Italians wanted to kill the ball on the ground every time.
I have already had countless phone calls and letters from Rugby World & Post readers asking about the law of repeated infringement and if it could apply to a team as well as an individual player.
Repeated infringement comes under Law 26 Foul Play,(2)(d).
‘It is illegal for any player…to infringe repeatedly any Law of the game’.
The notes to this Law make it clear the course of action to be taken: ‘It is a question for the referee whether or not a series of the same offences by different players of a team amounts to repeated infringement.
 If he considers that it does, he should give a general warning to that team and, if the offence is repeated, he must order the offending player off the field.
In deciding the number of offences which should constitute ‘repeated infringement’ the referee should always apply a strict standard in representative and senior matches.
On the third occasion a caution must be given’.
It is always difficult for a referee to apply this law.
Several refereeing colleagues, asked why the advantage law was not applied when Laws 18/19 on the ground had been infringed.
Most referees will tell you that when a new directive comes out on a particular law, referees tend to concentrate on that law, sometimes at the expense of refereeing other laws.
Law 8, Advantage states ‘The referee shall not whistle for an infringement during play which is followed by an advantage gained by the offending team…a mere opportunity to gain advantage is not sufficient’.
The World Cup referees must have felt that the ball had ‘been killed’ on the ground and that it was therefore necessary to blow straight away for the penalty rather than wait for the advantage to occur.
Hopefully, all players at all levels will now realise that rugby is a game to be played by players standing on their feet and that those who wilfully fall on or over other players on the ground to prevent the ball being played will be penalised immediately.
In the closing stages of the tournament I felt that the message had got through to the players about staying on their feet, and there were less penalties given for this offence than in the pool games.
This allowed the senior referees to relax more with their refereeing and the games flowed accordingly.
I thought that my  colleague Derek Bevan had an excellent final with the right approach of whistle and advantage.
The obvious talking point after the game was the deliberate knock-down by David Campese, which prevented the ball reaching Rory Underwood.
Derek decided that in the position that Rory was standing, plus the possible cover defence from the Australians, that a try for England would probably not have been scored, so he simply awarded a  penalty kick.
Law 12 Try and Touch-Down states: ‘A penalty try shall be awarded between the posts if but for foul play by the defending team…a try would have been scored’.
In this instance the foul play was the deliberate knock-down, and Derek had to be sure that Rory would have caught the ball and that no Australian would have legally prevented him scoring a try.
In ITV's studio at Twickenham the debate was intense about the incident, particularly the fact that play was still some 22 metres from the Australian goal-line; however, distance does not affect the referee's decision to award a penalty try.
A similar incident  occurred with me in 1983 between Australia and Argentina from even further out from the goal-line, and on that occasion I felt Australia would definitely have scored a try but for a deliberate knock-on by the defenders and awarded a penalty try.
If the referee has any doubt as to whether or not a try would have been scored he can only award a penalty, exactly the decision in the final.
I am sure our English readers will be disagreeing with me!