

S.A. — DO WE HAVE LIFT OFF?
ENGLAND v S.A. 80 TICKETS ON OFFER ENGLAND EXTRA inside 1992/93 FIXTURES PULL OUT
contents
Fixtures 1992–93
International and domestic events listed in detail
New Laws
Clive Norling wrestles with the need to absorb 19 changes
Your Country Needs You!
Steve Bale urges precedence for country over club interests
Hastings — The Heir Apparent
Bill McLaren talks to the skipper in waiting
Probyn — holding back the years
Mick Cleary reveals the secrets of England's veteran prop
Dad's Army
Mick Cleary on which England veterans will reappear in 92–93
…and Mickey Mouse as Official Mascot!
John Robbie slams SA's management selection for Europe
NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA IN SOUTH AFRICA
•S.A. — do we have lift off?— Nick Cain asks whether South Africa can cope with the World Cup
•Dwyer's Wallabies walk on water — Steve Jones sees trouble coming from the new ruck/maul law
•South Africa v New Zealand — the one that almost got away
Buck's Broadside
Wayne Shelford says defeat was good for South Africa
Aussies Raise the Standard
Greg Campbell describes how ARFU president Joe French tackled a sticky situation on the tour to S.A.
Take it away, Champ!
.
South Africa v Australia — Wallabies on top of the world
Off the Beaten Track
When the tour ends, head for the Okavango
Whitbread Player of the Month
Leicester & England ‘B’ flanker Neil Back spotlighted
England v South Africa Tickets Offer
Your big chance to see an historic encounter
Pick-me-up for the Men in Green
Heather Kidd reports on Ireland's rebuilding process
Chasing James Bridie's Dream
Bill McMurtrie on the rise of the Anglo Scots
OVERSEAS
•AUSTRALIA — Wallaby skipper warns on SA's poor infrastructure
•NEW ZEALAND — Don Cameron on a yen for the Rising Sun
•SOUTH AFRICA — Bedford Blasts at the big city slickers
•FRANCE — Penaud looks the Part, Pierre Berbizier tells Chris Thau
•ARGENTINA — Pumas sent to slaughter, says Eric Weil
•CANADA — Peter McMullan  describes a brutal schedule
The World's Best
Peter Jackson reviews the top international marksmen
PLUS •ON THE AIR •POSTBAG •ROUNDABOUT •ENGLAND ROUND-UP •WINDOW ON WALES •IRISH REPORT •SCOTTISH NOTES •YOUTH •COTTON OXFORD AWARDS •CLASSIFIED  
Will this shot of Springbok lock Adri Geldenhuys come to symbolise the big lift-off for South Africa — or just a temporary reprieve from sporting isolation?
Politics must play a major role in any decision — but how long can the organisers afford to defer their verdict on whether the country is stable enough to stage World Cup 1995?
On The Air…
WITH NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
Creeping unease
It's difficult not to get involved in, or at least take a view on, the current Great Educational Examination Debate that's sweeping the UK — the standards being achieved, or not achieved, as the case may be; the fairness of a system that employs different examining boards with different syllabuses and differing subject ingredients and, importantly, with varying amounts (from zero per cent to 100 per cent) of coursework that may benefit from parental/teacher ‘assistance’ in varying degrees.
Over the last few years I can admit to having heard enough of the individual experiences of examination candidates to make  me totally cynical about a system which confers, supposedly, passes and grades of equal status on students in public examinations that cover so wide-ranging a diversity of structure and subject content.
But, thankfully, the public debate will have helped to ensure  that no longer can the glaring inadequacies of the system and its inherent unfairness to participating individuals remain ignored.
Honesty and secrecy seldom go hand-in-hand, and it may be that the example of open discussion and fair play in education has some lessons for the world of sport.
Unfortunately, however, it is money and commercialisation, not standards of play, that are tarnishing the image of major sports.
What have we seen of late?
A sordid battle for soccer's TV rights; an English Open Golf Championship shorn of its leading contenders because of an appearance money rumpus; a near walk-out by athletes on account of a purported $200,000 appearance fee for Carl Lewis.
As for rugby…well, nothing quite so glaring, yet still enough to provoke a creeping unease about affairs at the highest international level, whether it concerns incomplete accounts for the 1987 World Cup; unfulfilled profit projections, by a huge margin, with  disturbing outline accounts emanating from the 1991 event; and what seem to be, at the time of writing, so many unanswered questions about the 1995 World Cup.
It is not the entirely understandable worries about the choice of South Africa as the tournament venue when that country is in so delicate a political — and hence economically sensitive — state, but rather the veil of secrecy that seems to shroud all commercial aspects of the next World Cup event.
Even some way down the scale it would have been interesting to know what size bag of silver would accrue to the coffers of the RFU in return for abandoning the traditional white England jersey.
Does everything have to have a ‘For Sale’ sign on it these days?
Had we but known that money was so scarce,RW&P would willingly have sent round the collection box to gather money to compensate the RFU in return for keeping the England jersey white (or, for that matter, the WRU for keeping the Welsh jersey red).
Now as England prepare to play Canada in the first (non-World Cup) international in the multi-coloured, all-singing and all-dancing strip (with the natty little colour bit on the shorts)— the first change since March 27th 1871 — let no-one say we did not mourn its passing.
Still, there's nothing secretive or lacking in discussion on the new laws in operation — and how refreshing to mention something that does not invoke the subject of money.
You'll have heard already a whole range of opinion on their validity and usefulness.
I side with Bob Templeton, the Australian coach, and his pragmatic approach.
‘The new laws are there, there's a lot of work to be done in implementing them and coaching players to best effect.
There's no point discussing at this stage the pros and cons — better to learn to stay on your feet and make sure you keep the ball available for use in ruck and maul’.
Plenty of food for thought ahead to go with your pint of Whitbread Best Bitter, Flowers Original, Heineken or Courage over the bar!
Now about that little matter of club sponsorship.
Can we paint the grass with the company logo, paint the crossbar, the ball, the touch-judge, the hooker's face, shave our heads?
Changing times, indeed!
Rugby POSTBAG
SEND YOUR LETTERS TO: RUGBY WORLD & POST,
Jekyll and Hyde Scotland
THE HISTORY of the Scots in rugby is full of contradictions.
They have been either obstinately ultra-conservative and hide-bound by tradition or they amaze all and sundry by initiatives.
Examples of the latter include the installation of an electric blanket at Murrayfield, which has meant that they are the only home union not to have had a Five Nations match postponed within the last 30 years, whilst they always have a venue for important representative matches available there if the weather tries to sabotage the programme.
The Scots were also the first home union to introduce a fully competitive league programme, which they did in season 1973/74.
In contrast they still do not have a national knock-out cup, although one is promised for 1993–94.
They were also the last of the home unions to award caps for internationals against France and they steadfastly refused to pick any capped players for ‘B’ internationals, which they have from this coming season stopped playing.
Instead, they now talk about ‘A’ internationals, although Ireland are describing their match against Scotland ‘A’at Lansdowne Road on Monday, 28th December 1992, as a ‘B’match!
Scotland ‘A’ are also supposed to be meeting Italy on Saturday, 19th December 1992, in Aberdeen, but one wonders how the Italians will be expected to approach this fixture.
Do they send a ‘B’ side, an ‘A’team mixture of full caps and ‘up-and-comings’or a fully representative national team?
Would it not be nice for the SRU to encourage the latter course and pick a full Scotland team to meet them, treating the match as a full ‘capped’ game?
But will they?
Ireland did it against Italy on New Year's Eve 1988 and Wales are scheduled to award caps for their game with the Italians in Cardiff on October 7th this year, so why not do the same, Scotland?
The final ‘Jekyll and Hyde’ example shows both characteristics in one fell swoop.
They were the first country to organise an international sevens tournament, which they did to celebrate their Centenary in 1973.
An injury time try by Keith Fielding won it for England against the brave Irish.
However, as has been reported in International Crossroads, they have been awarded the 1993 World Cup Sevens, a decision which did not meet with general approval, and as there is a rebuilding programme at Murrayfield only 38,000 fans will be able to watch the tournament on each day.
Trim the leagues more
I AM writing in response to Mr. Gage's letter in September RW&P in which he says that there is not a proper step between the club rugby and international rugby in England and that there will be too many league matches for top players.
My suggestions would be to trim the top two divisions to eight teams each and then play the leagues on a home and away basis, thus having only 14 league matches.
As for the representative level I would restructure the county championship.
There are currently 27 county teams in England so the logical thing to do would be to divide the counties into three divisions of nine.
The counties would then play each team in their division once.
The matches would be spread out between September and December.
At the end of the season there would be a simple ‘two up, two down’ basis.
In the first division the top two teams would play off at Twickenham for the county title.
The main advantage with this system would be that players from junior clubs could get noticed by selectors and make their way up the representative ladder without having to move clubs.
First five-pointer?
ON the first day of the season (September 1st) Penzance-Newlyn played Penryn.
Within three minutes of the 6.30 (approx) kick-off Charles Nizzen, playing at no.7, had scored a try.
Was this, perhaps the first 5-point try scored in this country?
Delicious hors d'oeuvre RUGBY is a minority sport in Holland but those who do play are mad keen.
The rugby-playing region is The Hague, Leiden, Amsterdam and Haarlem.
I recently attended the 5th Euro Rugby Trophy Tournament at Leiden who have as their club motto ‘Doorzetten Is Onze Kracht’(Fortitude is our Strength), which the players have adapted to ‘Drinkken Is Onze Kracht’—‘Drinking Is’…
Founded in 1971 DIOK have built themselves up as the strongest outfit in Holland and were Dutch champions in 1981, 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992.
The Euro Rugby Tournament currently has four participating teams — and over the years visiting teams from the UK have included Bath, Harlequins, Kelso and Cardiff.
This year's tournament took place between 14 and 16 August with Bridgend, Gloucester and G.S.D. de Cascais Portugal as the visiting teams.
In the final between Bridgend and Gloucester, after a flash of brilliance from Glen Webbe towards the end when he went over for a magnificent try and another brilliant individual effort by him when he sent over Mark Jones, Bridgend clinched a 22–12 victory.
This was a thoroughly enjoyable tournament for which Eric Jan Berendsen of DIOK must take a large slice of credit and it was also superb as an August pre-season  appetizer .
The hospitality was excellent and I can recommend it to all fans who feel starved of their rugby in late summer.
The event is there to stay.
Ban this padding
SOUTH Africa's re-entry of the rugby scene promises much extra interest (their general approach could make them the ‘French’ of the Southern Hemisphere), but I was concerned to see that a few of them, Naas  Botha in particular, were wearing shoulder pads.
Since no commentator or studio expert remarked on this as anything unusual, can we assume that by the next World Cup rugby players will resemble American Superbowl players?
Some ‘protective’ measures can encourage recklessness or excessive aggression.
Gum shields are one thing (having rattled my teeth on many a South African hard field in bygone days, and having been bitten more than once in scrums, I wish they had appeared long ago), but shoulder pads are entirely different and their acceptance could change the game for the worse, in my opinion.
Why denigrate other code
MAY I take this opportunity to say how relieved I was to find that the August 1992 issue of your splendid magazine was largely free of the indefatigable hostility directed towards rugby league football by its immediate predecessor?
I have loved rugby union all my life and will continue so to do; the thrilling Australian rugby league tourists of 1982 and 1986 meant that I could no longer choose to ignore the other code of rugby football.
I simply do not see the need to exalt one code by denigrating the other.
Now for some uncomfortable questions: What legal or, dare one say it, moral basis enables the rugby union authorities to discriminate against individuals who once had the temerity to accept payment for playing rugby league but who so dearly want to resume playing rugby union?
Is there not one prominent rugby union footballer or journalist who is compelled to criticize this scandalous and absurd state of affairs?
When will you all stop regarding rugby league converts from union as persona non grata— who will ever forget the WRU's public humiliations of Jonathan Davies?
Rugby World & Post will be better off by ceasing to ululate on the supposed demise of John Gallagher at Leeds and simply grant him an interview instead — I can't be the only admirer of this great All Black fullback to want to find out what is really going on.
I do hope you will be courageous enough to publish this letter.
I am hopeful that it does not impinge upon the game's great amateur status — I leave that sort of thing to the likes of Naas Botha and David Campese.
Changes essential
AS an avid fan of South African rugby, I was delighted to see the 'Boks back playing officially in the international scene.
Some of the greatest ever test series have included the Springboks — nobody loves a free-flowing, fast game more than the South Africans.
I watched with great interest the encounters in August with the All Blacks and the Wallabies.
Although the game against the All Blacks was entertaining, the flaws in the Boks line-up were evident to see and changes should have been made for the following encounter with the World Champions.
A brilliant set of backs, but a poor pack, with the exception of Uli Schmidt (surely the greatest ‘forward’ in the world); the forwards' contribution was minimal in what had promised to be a great encounter up front.
A couple of back-row changes and a second-row change were badly needed and I are sure the humiliation against the Wallabies could have been avoided if the selectors had acted on the evidence.
I await for better selections and performance in the autumn from the so-called ‘heirs apparent’ to the Webb Ellis Trophy .
Gimme that old style rugby
IN mid-July 1991 training began in St. Just for any child under 16 who wanted to play rugby union — at that time I had no kit and no idea of how to run a junior/mini rugby club.
Thanks to Graham Waters of St. Just and Frank Butler (Cornwall YDO) the ‘Mini All Blacks’ took to the road on 1st December 1991 for their first game against Redruth.
Considering there were no pre-season fixtures they did quite well with an end of season total of 29 games played.
Seventy boys and girls from U6 to U14 played rugby — most of them for the first time ever.
They lost more games than they won — and some were drawn.
After each game you would be forgiven if you thought they had always won, because, win or lose, their only concern was ‘who are we playing next’?
These young persons' attitude to the game reminds me of how the old game used to be — when there were no leagues and no cup competitions.
In those days we had not a care in the world, the only thing that counted was the game in which we were playing.
In those days rugby was for rugby players, not spectators.
It is only the very young player who can now play in the spirit of the game and enjoy rugby for what it used to mean.
Right blend was sent
I FELT I had to comment on your England ‘B’ article of June 1992 by Paul Stephens.
Firstly he criticises the standard of opposition, whereas Ireland's first team only played two so-called hard games — Auckland and Canterbury.
Both times they were slaughtered, and they found their games against ‘lowly provincial opposition’ quite ample including the defeat by Manawatu plus hard/close games against Bay of Plenty and Poverty Bay.
Does it make more sense to be beaten 62–7 or play tight competitive fixtures like Southland and NZ Universities as England ‘B’ did.
Paul Stephens says it was no more than New Zealand's third string side with the best 30 on tour (though Turner and Cooper played against the World XV and Seymour and Rush were picked to tour South Africa).
The same could be said of England ‘B’ because, apart from the regular England XV, many others — e.g. Redman, Robinson, Rodber, Pears, Hill, Hall, Heslop and Oti — weren't considered or available.
He wonders why Thorneycroft was pulled out of the student squad and Pepper was not when it's obvious that openside flanker is a position where England have strength in depth whereas not on the wing.
He bemoans the fact that players such as Dawe and Barnes went on tour but after their failure of the Argentine '90 tour it is obvious that a balanced, experienced squad was necessary.
He says a case could be made for Manchester's fullback, but in no sport are players picked from outside the national leagues — and  anyway we can all spend hours picking players unlucky not to tour.
Finally he asks, have we forgotten how effective Little and Horan were while commenting on the age aspect, but it doesn't work like this.
Just because Australia has two great 21-year-old centres doesn't mean every rugby-playing country does.
So let's not feel too depressed that we didn't send 20-year-olds, half from northern clubs, and half from southern ones.
Any more than that I wasted five minutes reading his articles?
Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT
Wallabies tap a rich seam
BEFORE the two-pronged Antipodean attack on the Springboks few  South Africans were prepared to anticipate a plummeting fall from grace.
If he had known what fate lay in store for his beloved Boks perhaps State President F.W. de Klerk would have decided against holding a midweek reception for the three teams about to lock horns for the supremacy of the Southern Hemisphere some 200 metres down an old mine shaft on the Johannesburg Reef — Shaft 14, Gold Reed City, to be precise.
It was, of course, not the Springboks but Nick Farr-Jones's Wallabies who were to emerge from the restored gold mine shining as brightly as a 24-carat nugget to inflict on South Africa their worst-ever defeat in international rugby.
Thankfully the old saw that ‘you can't call yourselves world champions until you've beaten the Boks’ has been laid to rest and now, politics allowing, the South African game can get on with the long overdue task of putting its own house — in particular its over-powerful domestic unions — in order.
This applies not only to bringing the Springboks up to running speed on the international scene but also, and more crucially, to ensuring that the process of black and white integration stated by the formation of SARFU advances far beyond the fundamentally cosmetic union achieved to date.
Where playing standards are concerned the years of isolation  definitely seems to have blunted South Africa's sense of ‘street wisdom’ in terms of both tactics and selection — and a dismal Currie Cup final in the wake of the tours, in which Natal beat Transvaal 14–13, indicates that the learning curve may take time.
Certainly the Springbok squad for their tour of France and England has more than a touch of the curate's egg about it.
The Bok selectors do, however, seem to have made an effort to add some pace to the back row in the form of Pretorius and Richter, both of whom showed well when Northern  Transvaal produced comfortably the best provincial performance of the Antipodean tours to take the Wallabies to the wire.
Captain's convention —(l-r) Naas Botha, F.W. de Klerk, Nick Farr-Jones and Sean Fitzpatrick looking for nuggets at the bottom of Shaft 14 at a reception given by the State President in the week before the Ellis Park test.
Samoa needs your help!
IT would be difficult to exaggerate the economic disaster that befell Western Samoa when the South Sea Islands were struck by Cyclone Val.
The small, thriving community has been devastated.
Help is desperately needed — and rugby friends can do their bit.
Clubs are asked to support a special appeal, organised by the Commonwealth Trust , by sending £20 to the Disaster Appeal which will qualify them for entry into a draw with many prizes — headed up by Cathay Pacific 's donation of two First Class London/Hong Kong round trips plus tickets for the 1993 Hong Kong Sevens — as well as tickets for just about  every top sporting event to be staged next year in the British Isles — test cricket, rugby internationals, Open golf, Grand National, Formula One racing, and so on.
So please sent your club donation of £20 to the Disaster Appeal,.
Finding time to tie the knot…
So busy are international players that they are lucky if they are able to find the time even in summer to tie the knot.
However, England's Simon Hodgkinson (left) did marry Fiona Radley with guests including Will Carling and Dewi Morris (getting in some tackling practice), whilst Wales' Garin Jenkins (right) and his smiling bride clearly enjoyed their big day.
Right priorities?
A COACH, who became so incensed with his opposite number at an U8 match in New Zealand, has been banned for three years for punching and knocking him unconscious with the result that specialist surgery might be required for a fractured cheek bone and other complications.
Quite an example to set before 7-year-olds.
The incident occurred in Whangarei and the alleged aggressor was John Rankin-Hurst of the Waipu club.
His victim was Hikurangi laboratory technician Bernie Hately.
The Waipu club, who are considering an appeal against the local union suspension, had better make sure of their ground unless they wish to become a laughing stock.
Laughing boys…or getting shirty?
AS A barometer of public opinion RW&P 's Postbag seems to give a fairly good cross section.
All shades of opinion are generally represented — some well beyond the  pale , others so ‘colourful’ that they are beyond inflicting on the magazine's readers.
There is almost always a pro and con view — except when England decide to change their shirt design again.
It was unanimous last time and it looks like going the same way this time, especially after Joe Punter saw the new design in the press.
It appears that the RFU is as much the villain of the piece as Cotton Traders, the Fran Cotton and Steve Smith-owned kit company, whose World Cup shirt was dropped by the RFU before the Five Nations despite the fact that the company had a cast-iron contract that covered the tournament.
After much fretting and threats of legal action, the RFU had little choice but to back down — and endorse a strip that is if anything, more garish than the last effort.
Now we have three shirts in existence at the same time: England wore the World Cup strip at the Lord's Taverners sevens, the traditional strip at the Selkirk sevens and will don the new kit against Canada.
So which kit does Dad buy his boy for Christmas.
I would have tried to ask Dudley Wood, secretary to the RFU, but he didn't show up at the new kit's launch…
Having fun during their modelling assignment at Twickenham as the new strip is unveiled are (l–r) Dewi Morris, David Pears (in the alternative strip), and Jason Leonard.
Bishop — take a bow!
KIWI referee David Bishop has had an exciting year, what with being ‘congratulated’ in the Parc des Princes tunnel by Daniel Dubroca and then being asked whether he minded being wired for sound to the whole stadium for the Springbok-Wallaby clash at Newlands.
Bishop, never one to duck a challenge, agreed to cooperate in a South African-led venture which enables anybody with the cash to buy or hire a small walkman-like  receiver to tune into the ref during the match.
The upshot was that Bishop had a superb match as he sought to keep the game alive by constructively cautioning and chivvying the players to stay within the bounds of the  permissible .
He's also something of a clairvoyant.
Turning to Naas Botha just as he was preparing to kick off the second half, Bishop remarked, ‘We're in for a hell of a 40 minutes, Naas’— just what sort of hell Botha would rather not have found out…
David Botha — definitely promising!
£17,500 worth of thanks!
THE RAFFLE for the Charlotte Starmer-Smith Medical Fun at the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading, raised £17,500 (Fund total now £97,000)— much of it from the rugby community.
Thanks to so many who provided 90 great prizes — especially Air New Zealand, Rhino Rugby Products, Nike, Programme Publications, Rugbyclass Coaching Holidays, England tea members and many more.
And well done the major prize-winner,Mr. S. Davies of John Broom & Co., a keen rugby supporter who is now set to have a rather special honeymoon following his wedding next month — off with his bride to New Zealand!
Good timing!
Thank you all.
Ed.
‘SEEN & HEARD…
‘Lighten up and think positive.
There's no reason to feel dejected about the future.
The Springboks will rise again ’— BOB DWYER (Australia coach) after his team's overwhelming victory at Cape Town (26–3).
‘The answer to them then, as now, is a categorical ‘no’.
I'll play the odd game for the Harlequins Gentlemen for some exercise and also in charity events, but that is all ’—PAUL ACKFORD (former England lock) on rumours that he might be persuaded to return to the international scene.
‘We want to win for as long as we can because it would be a long way to go for just one game.
We don't want to end up in the beer tent at three o'clock ’—DICK BEST (England coach) about the Selkirk Sevens, where his seven lost in the quarter-finals to Gala.
‘If the top players are interested in unification they will offer to help in clinics and such, because these children should have the chance to play for South Africa ’—NGONDE BALFOUR (SARFU development officer with responsibility for underprivileged areas).
‘They should drop the entire pack ’—IVAN VODANOVICH (former New Zealand coach) after seeing Australia destroy South Africa in Cape Town (26–3).
‘What happened at Ellis Park is a set-back.
We want all sports bodies to discuss the situation, but Verwoerd will not be allowed to rule this nation from the grave ’—NELSON MANDELA on the singing of Boer national anthem Die Stem at Ellis Park before the Test against New Zealand.
‘Australians are the world champions.
They have proved it.
It is tough to come here and win.
It has been a wonderful experience to play against them ’—NAAS BOTHA (South Africa fly-half and captain) after the rout suffered against Australia.
‘We always knew they were rugby crazy, but so are the New Zealanders and the Welsh.
At least they sometimes respect your privacy and aren't so rude and arrogant about it ’—MICHAEL LYNAGH (Australia fly-half) complaining that South African supporters lack manners.
‘We have already received a letter from Littlehey Prison asking for more away (Courage League) fixtures ’—DUDLEY WOOD (RFU Secretary) whilst answering queries about the fixtures schedule for 1992–93.
CLIVE NORLING on the NEW LAWS
To say that my first game of the new season was out of the ordinary would be a massive understatement — never in 25 seasons of refereeing have I had to learn and interpret 19 law changes and then get to apply them first time up in a game in France between two clubs from England and Scotland!
The game between Wasps and Stirling County was part of a tournament in St Jean de Luz, just outside Biarritz, and was played under the new laws.
As both sides were positive in their approach to the new laws, the game was fast and flowing, with Wasps pulling away in the final quarter to win 35–10.
It was noticeable that infringements occurred in the last quarter more than in the rest of the game and I put this down to tiredness and a resulting lack of concentration.
The main points that I picked out from the game affecting the law changes are:
1) Players in front of the kicker who still advance forwards towards the opposition.
2) Players still falling on the ball after a tackle.
3) Players using their outside arm in the lineout to win the ball.
4) Tackled player and tackler not moving away from the ball on the ground immediately.
It was good to see South Africa back in the international fold after so long.
The games against New Zealand and Australia were interesting to watch, if only to see where South Africa really stands in world rugby.
Both games showed the tremendous amount of work needed in the Republic to restore the team to the top in international terms.
An interesting point of law occurred during the test when New Zealand scored their first try through no.8 Zinzan Brooke following the award of a penalty five metres from the home goalline.
Several readers have asked if the kick was correctly taken, and what would have been the decision if defending players not on the goal-line had prevented Brooke from scoring a try.
Firstly, the taking of the kick.
Law 27, Penalty Kick states that: ‘It may be taken by any player of the non-offending team and by any form of kick provided that the kicker, if holding the ball, must propel it out of his hands or, if the ball is on the ground, he must propel it a visible distance from the mark.
He may keep his hand on the ball while kicking it’.
Obviously this requirement was complied with by Brooke.
So, moving on to another requirement of this law, which states that ‘When a penalty kick is taken the following shall apply:(a) The kick must be taken without undue delay;(b) the kick must be taken at or behind the mark on a line through the mark;(c) The kicker may kick the ball in any direction and he may play the ball again, without any restriction except if he has indicated to the referee that he intends to attempt a kick for goal’.
Readers who saw the game on television will recall that Brooke did exactly as the law required and so the try was legal.
Moving on to the question of defenders stopping the try by not standing on the goal-line,Law 27(e) is clear about what the offending team must do: ‘The opposing team must run without delay (and continue to do so while the kick is being taken and while the ball is being played by the kicker's team) to or behind the line parallel to the goal-lines and 10 metres from the mark, or to their own goal-line if nearer to the mark.
Retiring players will not be penalised if their failure to retire 10 metres is due to the rapidity with which the kick has been taken, but they may not stop retiring and enter the game until an opponent carrying the ball has run five metres’.
The last part of that law is crucial, in that the ball carrier can run five metres without a defender touching him.
If the penalty award is five metres from the goal-line, as in this case, then defending players must be standing on the goal-line when the kick is taken if they wish legally to prevent a try being scored.
If they are not on the goal-line five metres from the mark when the kick is taken and they then illegally prevent a try being scored the referee's decision would be the award of a penalty try.
The talking point from the test against Australia was not so much David Campese's 50th try in internationals, but the lead-up to the score itself.
Tim Horan had kicked the ball well into the home 22 metres area when Danie Gerber collected the ball and was immediately tackled by Horan.
The ball was released as per Law 18 , Horan collected and fed Campo for the try.
The question was: Did Tim Horan play the ball after the tackle legally?
The new law change for this situation,Law 18 Tackle (1)(b)states: ‘After a tackle any other player must be on his feet when he plays the ball’.
So, what constitutes being on the ground?
WE can see from the definition of a tackle that: ‘If the ball carrier is on one knee, or both knees, or is sitting on the ground or is on top of another player who is on the ground, the ball carrier is deemed to have been brought to ground’.
So being ‘on his feet’ means that no other part of his body is in contact with the ground.
Horan was on his feet, just, when he played the ball and so the try was legal.
Congratulations Campo on number 50.
We also saw in both tests the law change allowing a quick throw-in from touch.
But when should a quick throw-in from touch.
But when should a quick throw-in be allowed and when may it be stopped?
Here we need to look at three areas of Law 23 Touch and Line-Out , which states B)(1): ‘A lineout is formed by at least two players from each team lining up in single lines parallel to the line of touch in readiness for the ball to be thrown in between them.
(B)(7): The ball may be brought into play at a formed lineout or by a quick throw-in without waiting for players to form a lineout.
(B)(5)(c):…a quick throw-in is taken, from any point along the touch-line between where the ball went into touch and the goalline of the team throwing in the ball’.
It would therefore appear that a quick throw-in is only allowed when a lineout has not been formed in law.
Referees should use common sense on this approach, perhaps shouting ‘lineout formed’ if they see a player planning to take a quick throw-in when the forwards have lined up ready for the original lineout.
I look forward to hearing your views on this subject.
With the new season now on top of us, it might be appropriate to expand on the new laws and to try to give the intentions behind the changes in certain areas.
Law 6 Referee and Touch Judges 
A player who had an open or bleeding wound must leave the playing enclosure until such time as the bleeding is controlled and the wound covered or dressed.
Law 10 Kick-Off 
A place-kick is now only taken to start the game, or to start the game after half-time.
After a score the game will be restarted by a drop kick from the centre of the half way line.
If from a kick-off the ball crosses the opposing team's goalline, a scrummage will be formed at the centre of the half-way line.
The intention is to speed up the taking of kick-offs and to stop the time wasting practice of kicking the ball dead instead of keeping it in play from the kick-off.
Law 16 Fair Catch (Mark)
A fair catch can be made by a player who is running when making the catch inside his 22 metre area.
Law 18 Tackle, Lying with, on or near the ball 
Perhaps the most important law change to  emphasise that rugby is played by players standing on their feet; this season after a tackle any other player must be on his feet when he plays the ball immaterial of what distance he is away from the tackle.
The message is simple; if you are on the ground after a tackle you are out of the game!!
Law 20 Scrummage 
Safety is the main concern here.
Front-row players should follow the sequence of crouch, pause and engage only when the ball is available to be put in immediately.
The referee will indicate the readiness to form the scrummage by using the word ‘engage’.
Also to get the ball away quickly from the scrummage, the scrum-half cannot convey to his opponents that the ball is out of the scrummage i.e. he cannot dummy the ball.
Law 21 & 22 Ruck & Maul 
This experimental law has caused the biggest outcry even before it has been played.
It all revolves around who get the put-in to the scrummage following a stoppage at ruck or maul.
The law now gives the scrummage to the team that was not in possession of the ball at the start of the ruck or maul.
This should encourage a more fluid game with better techniques in rucking and mauling.
From a refereeing point of view, when the maul becomes stationary the time allowed for the ball to emerge is the equivalent of the time currently allowed for the emergence of the ball from a collapsed maul.
If the maul is stationary but the ball is being moved back and out in the maul then the referee will allow time for the ball to emerge.
However, a second drive forward is not  permissible once a rolling maul becomes stationary.
Law 23 Lineout 
Here the changes are an attempt to get clean possession.
There must be a metre gap between players of opposing teams in the lineout.
Only the jumper is allowed to move for the ball with either his inside arm or with two arms.
Supporting players in the lineout can only move when the jumper has touched or caught the ball.
The emphasis should be on supporting and protecting your own jumper and not illegally interfering with the opposing jumper.
If referees are strict on the metre gap then we should start to see cleaner and better quality lineout ball.
A quick throw-in may be taken from any point along the touchline between where the ball entered touch and the goal-line of the team throwing in the ball.
Only the original ball can be used, and must have only been touched or handled by the player throwing in.
When kicked directly into touch from a penalty kick, the ball will be thrown in at the lineout by the team which kicked the ball into touch.
So not only will illegal play be penalised by surrendering possession of the ball, but now ground will also be surrendered (and possession) when the ball is kicked to touch.
So the penalty for illegal play is increased.
Players take note.
If a free kick is kicked on the full into touch then the lineout is back opposite the original mark for the free kick.
This includes a free kick taken from inside your own 22 metre area.
Law 24a Offside in General Play 
In my opinion the best law change alongside the tackle law.
This now prevents players who are in front of the ball from advancing forward towards an opponent waiting to play the ball.
This change should stop the aimless kicking downfield.
Players now need to know clearly when they are onside or offside in order to  follow the ball.
Law 26 Foul Play 
It is unfortunate that we have in the Australia v New Zealand Second Test seen a player have his nose broken through illegal play, and the player's union concerned choosing not to use this new law change.
This states that, where a player commits an act of foul play which has not been detected by the match officials, that player's union has the discretion to cite that player to show cause why he should not be held accountable in the same way as a player who has been ordered off the field of play.
The intention of the IB is clear; it is to clean up the game at all levels particularly the shop window of the internationals.
Perhaps it is time for the IB to appoint its own disciplinary committee to act where individual unions refuse to do so.
Otherwise this law change is meaningless.
I am sure that within the first month of the season, pens will be put to paper concerning the new law changes.
I would ask everyone involved in the game to allow a little time for these changes to settle in both with players and referees.
If we all look positively at these changes then I think the game will go forward; however, a negative approach or ‘how can we get around these changes’ approach by players and coaches will only cause problems for all concerned.
Let's give the game a chance.
Use it or lose it.
Springboks Adolf Malan and Johan Styger try to keep the ball from Wallaby hands at Newlands.
WALES
YOUR COUNTRY NEEDS YOU!
Club loyalties had a ruinous on the Welsh game over the past decade, says STEVE BALE.
Now it's time for the national side to take precedence.
In Wales the club-v-country argument has gone on for longer even than the locust years — a constant, nagging reminder of the manifold and manifest divisions that have wrought such damage on Welsh rugby.
Robert Norster, national team manager and most definitely a product of the new enlightenment, ventures to hope that at last it is changing.
Others have still to be convinced but, from Norster's standpoint, it is simple — and anyone with any sense would have to agree that his logic is unimpeachable.
‘The success of the national team is a prerequisite for success at every level’, he said.
Anathema as it may be to Welsh Rugby Union ears, this was something they realised at Twickenham at least five years ago and we have all seen the felicitous results.
So Heineken's recent big-money renewal of their sponsorship of the Heineken National League has to be seen in a wider context than the clubs who belong to the league.
More than £2 million, serviced by £1 million in marketing support, is striking recognition of the value of the league but, frankly, without a successful shop window it would be meaningless.
‘People are growing more realistic than they used to be’, Norster added, judging that the divisive ways of the recent past are being addressed.
To which the answer is ‘Not before time’, but that presupposes that it is true.
How many Welsh coaches, for example, see their role as not only achieving success for their clubs but also furnishing players of quality for the new multiplicity of Welsh squads?
When Alex Evans, the Australian now in charge at Cardiff, said as much, it was like a shaft of inspiration.
Still, things are not what they used to be.
When Wales won the Triple Crown in 1988 with a team who had amble development left in them, the future looked bright; then came a calamitous tour of New Zealand followed by sundry other mishaps and the  outlook became as dark as an All Black jersey.
That is an appropriate metaphor for the club v country division that came next.
First there was the John Ryan era when the then coach declined to choose players from the leading club, Neath.
Result: defeat which left Neath effectively and more or less openly pulling against what Ryan perceived to be the national interest.
On a Saturday in December 1988 Wales, without a single Neath players in the starting line-up, were humbled at Cardiff Arms Park by Romania; on the Monday afterwards, as Neath were about to take out their frustration on Bridgend, a gateman at The Gnoll whispered in my ear: ‘Great result Saturday, wasn't it?’
I have told this story umpteen times before, but in this context it bears repeating.
Pointing the way forward.
Wales assistant coach Gareth Jenkins (right) and coach Alan Davies (left) have argued that the only way to revitalise the Welsh scene is to place national interests above those of clubs.
Then Ron Waldron became coach and his own Neath players suddenly filled the Wales bill.
Result: even worse defeat, culminating in the degradation of last year's 60-pointer by Australia and the shenanigans that followed at the post-match dinner.
At Ballymore Welsh rugby bared its soul and it was screaming.
It had never been so low, and by then virtually the whole of the (non-Neath) rest of Welsh rugby was pulling against the national team.
Again, I well recall the secretary of a leading club saying just before one international: ‘I hope they get stuffed ’And they did.
Overcoming these rivalries, which would be pretty were they not so debilitating, has proved harder than talking about them.
We have had big clubs v small clubs, east Wales v west Wales, above all at the moment the big clubs against the union, all of them undermining the fabric of the national game, everyone seeming to be suspicious of everyone else.
But don't take my word for it; this is not a figment of the journalistic imagination.
Graham Tregidon became WRU president at the annual general meeting in June and one of the first things he did was go into print in the next issue of the union's newsletter to plead unity.
‘We Must Stand United!’ blared the headline.
The very fact that he felt impelled to do so told its own story.
‘There is one key area in which I hope to have some success over the next year and that is in bringing the clubs and the union closer together’.
Tregidon said: ‘It was obvious at the AGM that there is an us-and-them syndrome still lurking among the membership.
The union, and that means the general committee elected by the club as well as the professional staff appointed by the committee, are working for the benefit of everyone involved in the game in Wales.
We are all on the same side and are accountable to each other.
If we all pull together, then we can be a successful force in world rugby again.
If we bicker and backbite, then we will divide even further, fall and fall, it's a very simple equation’.
The good thing about the president's intervention is that it publicly recognised a problem that needed solution the very antithesis of WRU custom and practice for most of the past dozen or more ostrich era.
But will the clubs, more especially the big clubs for whom the internationals play, ever agree to dance the union's tune when every issue that comes up between them ends up simply coming between them?
Last season ended with a ferocious row over the Bank Holiday scheduling of the Schweppes Cup semi-finals, though as usual the clubs backed off, their threats as empty as ever.
In fact they deserved every sympathy but they succeeded only in making themselves look obstructive and unreconstructed, relics of the pre-meritocratic days before the Heineken League, which of course they fought until the last ditch was so full of water they had to jump out.
But worse is that it comes at the very moment Davies and Jeff Young, the WRU technical director, and forward-looking others have put into place a representative structure designed to facilitate the flow of full international candidates.
Four or five ‘B’ and U21 matches a season plus training weekends at full, ‘B’, development and U21 levels mean a bigger commitment to Wales than ever — by baleful coincidence, at the very moment the commitment to clubs has never been bigger.
Clearly this cannot go on; hence the reason the union, almost as soon as the 12-club leagues are in place, is wondering whether and how to reduce them again.
Is could be seen as a classic example of the muddle that has been prevalent at the top of Welsh rugby except that the pressures here — unrecognisable from those in other home unions — are so many and varied that it is impossible to respond to them all, let alone resist them.
‘We can't tell clubs and players what to do; that would be unrealistic in any international sport’, said Davies, who was present at the Bledisloe Cup series in Australia.
‘But there is a strong feeling in Wales that we need to come back, and to do that we need to compete at world level.
‘In countries like Australia and New Zealand the leading players play in the region of 25 rep games a season, perhaps a dozen or so of which will be full internationals.
WE have to match that level of performance and we won't do so if a player is playing 40 games a season of which half a dozen are representative.
We have to increase the representative nature of our rugby’.
We live in hope.
Perhaps one day it will be realised by all that when Wales struggle every component of Welsh rugby is liable to struggle too.
As the opposite is also so, the priority is evident but does the vision exist among men who sometimes fail to see beyond the end of their noses?
We all fall down.
Club rivalries and Ron Waldron's Neath-based selection policy made Wales's tour to Australia last year an unmitigated disaster both on and off the pitch.
HASTINGS
the Heir Apparent?
With Scotland's 1990 Grand Slam side gradually disbanding, BILL McLAREN talked to one of the ever-presents, laid-back fullback and captain-in-waiting GAVIN HASTINGS
With David Sole and Sean Lineen joining that renowned loose forward trio, John Jeffrey, Derek White and Finlay Calder, in retirement, Scotland will lean heavily this season on the experienced players who remain and, perhaps most of all, upon Gavin Hastings, still only 30, who has played in 41 cap internationals as well as in three tests for the British Lions.
He also has to be a front runner for the captaincy of Scotland and indeed, if so chosen, would become only the eighth to do so from the fullback position, following W.D.
Brown (Glasgow Academicals), Dan Drysdale (Heriot's FP), Keith Geddes (RAF, Wasps and London Scottish), Angus Cameron (Glasgow HS FP), Ken Scotland (Heriot's FP), Stewart Wilson (London Scottish) and Andy Irvine (Heriot's FP).
Nor is the powerful Watsonian short of leadership experience, having skippered Watson's College, Scottish Schools (notably to a shock win over the England Schools in 1980), Watsonians, Cambridge University, London Scottish, the Anglo Scots, the Barbarians at the Hong Kong Sevens and, also last season, the senior aide in the official Scottish trial when his gifts of inspiration by personal example almost turned the tide.
Gavin Hastings (left) celebrates his part in the World XV's First Centenary Test victory over hosts New Zealand with David Sole, who he is tipped to succeed as captain of Scotland.
His well-being is of even higher importance to Scotland now that Peter Dods, such an admirable understudy with 23 caps, had decided to call it a day.
The Scots are grooming a dashing 20-year-old wing-cum-fullback, Ken Logan of Stirling County, as a future last line.
He became the first from his club to be capped, in the Second Test of the recent tour of Australia in Hastings' injury absence, and he played for Scotland ‘A’ against Spain in Madrid on September 12.
But the vast experience, stability and guidance to young colleagues that Hastings can impart has to be of particular import to Scotland's 1993 efforts.
Likeably laid-back and a philosophic kind of personality, Hastings currently has a crucial priority — recovery from back damage that kept him out of that Second Australian Test.
Not only has that disc problem proved frustrating, but so has the inactivity temporarily imposed by a series of exploratory tests to assess the damage: ‘Having been injured in the second tour match against Queensland I got back to full fitness, played in the First Test and was looking forward to the second.
Two days before it, however, when we were running through some back moves, my back seemed to lock out and I couldn't move freely at all.
‘It has been my decision not to do any training so far this season.
I really needed a rest and my hope was to be fit for the start of the National League programme at the end of  September , but I doubt if that will be the case.
I am doing some special strengthening work that has been recommended and that hopefully will bring about recovery and will make surgery unnecessary.
‘I certainly felt badly in need of a rest, having trained and played for the last two to three years virtually without a break.
In the cold light of day you come to realise that you just cannot do it all the time, that the body comes to a point where, for the moment, it has had enough.
The World squad matches in New Zealand were great and I felt in fine fettle there but after injury in Australia it has been quite a struggle.
I have been lucky to have been on plenty of tours and hardly missed a training session or match so, by the law of averages, I can't complain about that disappointing end to what had been a very enjoyable season.
‘But you just have to put it all behind you and I just hope that my back trouble will clear up and I'll be able to start playing again soon’.
As golf is another favourite Hastings sport and an ideal means of relaxation it probably doesn't help his back problem that he gives the ball such a lick as to threaten to land it in the next kingdom!
Although Scotland's record in Australia was nothing to write home about, Hastings pointed to lengthy travel and a demanding itinerary as factors whilst also seeing several  pluses from the tour: ‘I don't think folk realise the scale of the country, the amount of travelling involved and the totally contrasting conditions you can encounter.
Our first midweek fixture was on a Thursday, the second on a Wednesday and the third on a Tuesday.
So we were playing three games  every six days and that just doesn't allow enough recovery time from injuries.
I'm sure that the lessons from that tour will be kept in mind when the next tour itinerary is arranged.
Giving it some.
The sheer distance of Hastings’ place-kicks is one of Scotland's strongest attacking weapons, as his successful kick from his own half against Ireland last season showed.
‘Having said that, there is no doubt that Australian rugby is on a high.
They have something like 40 players and they are very competitive and very strong and they caused us a lot of problems.
It was very encouraging, however, that several of the younger players did very well and challenged for test places.
You need that, to have fellows pushing like that.
It makes the more experienced guys look to their laurels.
‘Another thing I admired about young lads like Ken Logan, Gregor Townsend and Peter Wright is that they have the right attitude, a little bit of cockiness.
You need to have that and it is no bad thing provided, of course, that at the same time you are prepared to listen and benefit from good advice.
‘I don't believe that Scotland has fallen far down the pecking order of top rugby nations.
There is nothing wrong with being realistic and I suppose Scotland has about 20 or so players who could fit into the national side without weakening it, especially as we have recently lost a third of that national side.
It is true also that we do tend to play above ourselves.
Scotland has had a fairly successful period over the past two or three years and some think that we might not now be so successful — but there is a lot of talent up here.
We now have Scotland ‘A’ fixtures and the U21s are having more games.
In that way more of our players are being exposed to a more demanding grade of rugby.
The more of our young lads who to on tour and experience the higher standards of rugby in other countries the quicker they will develop and come through as cap challengers.
It is also important that we should get on well as a squad and, in this regard, we are very fortunate in the quality of our coaches who very quickly make every newcomer feel very much part of the team’.
Whether Hastings is invited to take on the role of Scottish captain is for the future, but he acknowledges the good fortune he has enjoyed in playing under such inspiring leadership: ‘You only need to look at the names of players who have captained Scotland to be aware of the tremendous honour it represents.
I've been lucky enough to play with several international captains — Colin Deans, Gary Callander, Finlay Calder and David Sole — and they have all been splendid leaders, different in their own ways but earning the respect of their colleagues.
I think that is the most important quality — gaining the respect of your fellow players and setting alongside that your performance on the field.
Clearly each player so honoured brings his own style and personality to the job and we couldn't have had a better example than from David Sole.
No one could every doubt his qualities as a leader and his tremendous commitment to the task both on and off the field’.
Nor would the captain's off-field obligations cause Hastings concern, for his work with the Carnegie Partnership carries a PR type of role, part of which involves meeting people and dealing with clients and the media as well as assisting his old school, Watson's College, and his club, Watsonians, in a business capacity.
They are clients of the Carnegie Partnership which involves Scotland's fullback in coaching the Watson's College schoolboys three times a week and being responsible for developing the commercial side of his club.
Notwithstanding the merit and extent of his achievements, Gavin Hastings still retains the desire to reach out for the best of which he is capable with as yet undiminished zest: ‘Unless you set yourself tasks and ambitions, unless you have new targets, there isn't much point in playing.
Whether it is an ambition to help Watsonians to win the Division One title or Scotland to win another Grand Slam or the next World Cup, you have to have in mind just what you seek to achieve.
‘I'm very competitive, having been brought up as one of four brothers and with parents who are competitive too.
Anyone seeing me train knows that I revel in preparation and competition.
I still enjoy beating some of the young guys at our various fitness tests!
I'm in my thirteenth season of senior rugby, I thoroughly enjoy every moment and I would not with to play for any other club than Watsonians.
‘As for the law changes, I have watched games on television and have been impressed with the way in which the Southern Hemisphere countries have adapted to the new requirements.
There are more opportunities for quick thinking and it should make things very interesting with the need for players to be constantly on the alert.
The game could be a bit quicker with more chances for catching opponents by surprise and I have no doubt that David Johnson (Watsonians, Glasgow and Scotland ‘A’ coach) will be studying the possibilities so that hopefully Watsonians will be at the fore in adapting their style.
Scotland too’.
PROBYN
holding back the years
If England prop JEFF PROBYN, now 36, had a motto it would be: if you're good enough, you're young enough.
But retirement is not the only dirty word in his lexicon as MICK CLEARY discovered.
The hit man has been called in a few times to finish off Jeffrey Probyn yet never once has he managed to carry out his murderous brief.
The first Saturday of the 1992–93 season and there, as big a pain in the neck for the opposition as ever, is Probyn in his England colours.
On several occasions the obituarists have been poised, ready to send the man to his grave with a few solemn words of recognition.
First the lawmakers tried to do it.
In the mid-Eighties they ruled that the scrummage must be above shoulder height.
The end was nigh for the old tradesman prop: bring in the bulky back-row forward.
One game later, Probyn and his mates were back in their rightful position and flankers, nursing and cursing their unfamiliar bruises, were back in theirs.
A few years down the road and along come the fitness men with their clipboards and stop-watches.
These guys will soon weed out these old, wheezing ‘flabbies’ in the front row.
Get rid of the pensioners: bring in the fit young props reared on body-fat  callipers , VO2 max and three Weetabix for breakfast.
Probyn, 37 next March, has seen them all off and fully intends to continue doing so for the  foreseeable future.
‘Age is all in the mind’, says Probyn.
‘Just look at Linford Christie or even Lester Piggott.
If you're good enough, then you're young enough’.
He's a singular man is Jeffrey.
He's one of the strongest scrummagers in the game yet has rarely been inside a gym in his life, although a few of his international colleagues swear that he must be a closet trainer.
‘He just never lets on that he's done any fitness work’, says one.
‘But I bet he does it in secret’.
Jeffrey rarely lets on about anything.
One of his great hallmarks is the stare: not a demented warrior eyeball-to-eyeball look, but that rather silent, unassuming, dismissive look which can wind opponents up to breaking point.
‘I'm happiest when the opposition are hitting me’, says Probyn.
‘Then I know that I've got the better of them.
They only do it when they're struggling.
It's a great feeling’.
A couple of Frenchmen last season were the latest to try and rearrange the Probyn features but to no avail.
‘That was all a bit of a shame’, recalls Probyn, ‘because the French are without doubt the best set of forwards you play against.
Unfortunately they're also the worst set as well.
They lose their composure so easily.
As their mental control goes so too does their technique.
I love playing against them because you never know quite what you're going to come up against’.
Quite how much longer opponents have to come up against Probyn's unrelenting shoulders is unclear.
Probyn himself fears that the decision may be taken out of his hands.
‘Selectors can get a bit confused sometimes’, he says.
‘They can get stuck by this fear that they ought to be planning for the future.
And so out go the old troupers and in come the fresh-faced kids.
Now it's rarely the case that the replacement is actually a better player than the so-called old fellow.
He might, in a few years time, become one but who knows.
Your national side may not have a future themselves by that time if they've lost every game in between.
‘I would say that England's recent success has been due, in no small way, to having experience on the side.
Why tamper with a successful formula?
The stopwatch may suggest otherwise but so what.
To my mind we've gone overboard on fitness.
Not that is isn't important.
Of course it is.
But of at least equal importance are skills.
You may be fit and fast but if you can't scrummage or drive a lineout, they you're no good to anyone.
‘I also think that the older player has a much greater mental edge.
Last year's Championship for example was a rather low-key affair.
Now that may sound arrogant and patronising on my part to say so.
But there was a certain inevitability about our second Grand Slam.
Perhaps the World Cup had taken too much out of the younger sides.
I don't know.
But I do know that England drew on an enormous well of self-belief.
We knew how to pace ourselves and how to prepare ourselves mentally’.
Probyn is one of the few players on the international scene to have played the game at every level: from Old Albanians, Streatham and Croydon through Richmond and Wasps to the first of his 33 caps in 1988.
As a result he's probably better placed than most to reflect on the advance of professionalism.
‘My line on the matter has always been fairly clear’, says Probyn.
‘If no-one gets any money, then I'm quite happy.
I play the game for fun and that will always be the prime motivation.
It's a hobby: my job is elsewhere.
However, if some people in the game are getting money then it ought to be shared out.
It's as simple as that’.
As things stand the division of money within the game is fast becoming a simple reflection of everyday life: a few get rich, the rest struggle along.
‘You can't blame those individuals who have cashed in’, says Probyn, ‘they're simply taking advantage of the system.
They'd be fools not to.
However I don't have a rugby-related job nor even a rugby-related car.
So when I have to weigh up whether I can afford to trade in my battered old VW and think of those who have a BMW or Mercedes, then you begin to wonder at the sense of it all.
‘Obviously certain players in certain positions will always be a more attractive proposition to sponsors or advertisers  than those of us who inhabit the less glamorous parts of the field.
However without the grunter there would be no ball for the others to run with’.
Run With The Ball was the name of the England squad's promotional campaign during the World Cup.
It was hoped to make between £5–10,000 for each player.
In return for the presence of players at various corporate functions the RFU's elite sponsors would contribute monies to the development of the game as well as to the players' pool.
So far Probyn has not been to impressed with the results.
‘We've had about £1,000 each’, he says.
‘I've no idea what has happened to the rest.
We'll probably find out in due course but it has been a disappointment.
Par of me couldn't give a monkeys about the entire operation.
But another part is determined that if there is a few bob about then I want my share’.
He may be approaching 37, but durable England tighthead prop Jeff Probyn has no plans to give way to ‘the fresh-faced kids’ just yet.
Probyn recognises that whenever there is money about, then the potential for bad blood creeping in is always there.
He insists that at the moment there is no such point of friction within the England camp.
‘The whole issue of money in the game is, in England at any rate, a new one.
Things are sill being sorted out.
It would be nice to believe that the International Board could sort it out, but they don't seem to want to.
It may be that the England management themselves will have to draw up a code of conduct in order to keep everyone happy.
Me feeling is that there should only be team promotions and that the money should be split.
‘I've no moral objections to being actually paid to play.
My reservation is that I don't think the game could sustain it.
Of course the top boys would be all right.
But what about Redbridge RFC around the corner from me in East London.
They won't survive if they have to pay.
In fact, never mind them, I don't think some of the first-class London sides would survive.
So what would you get?
A few clubs with all the money and all the best players.
The rest would go bankrupt.
‘As I've said there's nothing wrong with money in itself.
But there is, as we know from work, a price to pay.
Already the game has a higher profile.
As that happens so the tabloid press get interested in the game.
How long before we read about ‘Will Carling In Love Shock With  Savile Row Taylor?’
Look what happened to Wade Dooley last year.
He gave Doddie Weir a whack and he's  vilified by the press for three weeks afterwards, some of them suggesting that he was not fit to be a policemen.
It's absurd.
‘How long before we get drugs in the game?
In fact, they're already down there in South Africa by the look of it.
I'm pretty sure that we're clean in the Northern Hemisphere.
But if you up the financial incentive to achieve, then that too might change’.
Much has changed in Jeffrey Probyn's time in the game.
In essence he hasn't.
Off the pitch he's in the reproduction furniture business.
On it he is very definitely the genuine article.
And remember: if you see someone swinging a punch at him come next January in the Five Nations then you know that England are on top again.
The update on DAD'S ARMY
They think it's all over — but it isn't yet.
A new international season looms — England play Canada at Wembley on October 17th — and still official retirement notices have to be received from Dooley, Winterbottom, Webb or Probyn.
Most people through that the four would join Rory Underwood and Simon Halliday and bow out at the top, having achieved the historic second Grand Slam.
They are still with us.
The only old-timer to be pensioned-off appears to be Mick Skinner, and that was someone else's decision, not his.
Geoff Cooke left him out of the first international squad gathering on the grounds that Skinner had dropped down a division to play with Blackheath and therefore was obviously not too bothered about his international prospects.
Skinner, quite rightly, wasn't too happy.
Mike Teague would also be put out if his comeback with second division Moseley were to go so well that he's in contention for a place.
Who would write off a player of his stature?
When Geoff Cooke was asked last season about who would be available to him he suggested that he would not be too interested in players pledging themselves only to one final swansong against South Africa in November.
Cooke wanted to build for the future.
He soon realised that the only relevant future is, as the old cliche has it, the next game.
He'll be delighted to have the old hands to call on.
There's no doubt that the street-wisdom of the English forwards has been of huge value to them.
England should stick by the tried and trusted and not just in the short-term.
At the moment pretenders to the forwards' crowns are in short supply.
Who would go into the second row?
Nigel Redman?
Martin Haag or Martin Johnson?
Simon Dear of Harlequins perhaps?
No-one has yet made a significant case for inclusion.
Of course the argument runs that until they're given a run no-one knows quite what they can do.
Look at the impact made by Paul Ackford for example.
There comes a point when new players have to be drafted in.
But only at the moment when they have proven themselves to be better than the incumbent.
If England, with four or five new faces in the side, were to lose to South Africa, then the blow to morale would be considerable.
Confidence has been the critical factor in England's success these past two years.
You don't acquire it overnight; but you can lose it overnight.
Who will linger longest?
Dad's Army and waiting for the final push —(l-r) Hill, Teague (obscured), Winterbottom, Dooley, Probyn and Ackford (the only one to have retired so far).
SOUTH AFRICA
…and MICKEY MOUSE as Official Mascot!
They may have proved  naive on the field of play but, says JOHN ROBBIE, the two emphatic defeats did the Springboks less harm than the myopic selection of the old guard to manage the coming tour to Europe.
Stunned disbelief followed by panic.
That would just about sum up the general South African reaction to the record 26–3 defeat by Australia.
‘Heads must roll’ screamed the headlines in a paper that had, before the game, seemed to agree with the selection of the national side.
It was all gloom, doom and despondency.
The South Africans were well beaten by the All Blacks, murdered by the Aussies.
The facts are as simple as that.
No excuses are offered.
Congratulations to the victors.
In many ways the results are the best thing that could have happened and all is certainly not lost.
First, let's look at the buildup to the tests.
The Australian World Champions and also the All Blacks came to South Africa fresh from the nail-biting Bledisloe Cup series having both had warm-up visits, from Scotland and Ireland respectively.
In addition, New Zealand had enjoyed the Centenary Series.
The players were tired, sure, but were able to lift themselves for one-off tests against South Africa.
In comparison South Africa had played a few unconvincing trials fitted into the domestic Currie Cup programme.
The proposed warm-up tour had been cancelled.
The good news is, therefore, that despite having been beaten by better sides, improvements are certainly to be expected.
The pressure is off South African players.
No, they are not the real world champions (a ridiculous claim in the first place).
Yes, technically South Africa has fallen behind.
However, potentially the players are every bit as good as are their opponents.
Realising that potential should be challenging — and fun.
Perhaps it would be fairer to judge South African rugby at Twickenham in November when South Africa will have had a build-up comparable to that of the visitors who won so well.
That would seem to be most appropriate strategy for the wounded SARFU wouldn't it?
Look to the future by maximising all potential both on and off the field.
Imagine therefore the surprise when the tour officials were named.
First came Professor Johan Claassen, the legendary South African lock of the Fifties and Sixties and less than legendary manager in New Zealand in 1981.
His original appointment this year was also as manager.
This has now been modified to that of SARFU representative, whatever that means.
Selector Abie Malan will be manager and John Williams is coach.
Then came the news that Williams will not be getting the assistant he wanted.
Despite having coached Northerns so well in tandem with Williams in the late Eighties, Eugene Van Wyk was refused and Ian Kirkpatrick, who has not coached at provincial level for at least a decade, has been named.
Kirkpatrick is a marvellous rugby man, but surely his expertise is with the development of youngsters he enjoys so much.
Rumours about that Van Wyk — and therefore such successful current coaches as Harry Viljoen of Transvaal and Natal's Ian McIntosh — were not considered because they never wore the green and gold.
It's a ludicrous proposition.
As a local paper pointed out, such thinking would have prevented Bob Dwyer from coaching Australia.
One thing that was clear from the visit of the Aussies is the importance of public relations.
Despite the intensity of the tour, the pressure for information and the interest by everyone, the Aussies came through with flying colours.
They were relaxed and open and the presence of Greg Campbell, a name well known to Rugby World & Post readers, was a blessing.
Accurate and pertinent information was prepared by Campbell, a professional rugby journalist, and made available to the same breed.
Interviews were arranged, players were briefed and, even in the emotional and crowded dressing room after the test, Campbell kept a cool head and handled things perfectly.
Visiting journalists and TV crews were helped.
He had his job and did it exceptionally well.
South Africa have named for the same job, not a professional journalist, but Dr. Nick Labuschagne, a man who has just been ousted as President of the Natal Rugby Union.
He is an extremely nice man and was seen to be a successful and popular president, although his name was linked to allegations that certain transactions were not totally above board.
The question is whether he is the right man for the sensitive media liaison portfolio.
A paper suggested that, in keeping with the selection of the management team, Mickey Mouse should be adopted as the official mascot.
Nice men all but surely not the management for South Africa's first major tour since 1981.
Another body blow to South African morale was the decision by Jannie Breedt not to make himself available for the tour.
He has played in Sicily for the past few years and has decided to renew his contract.
While South Africa tour, Breedt will be playing and coaching Italy.
Mind you, given recent developments there is now some doubt concerning the tour itself.
The whole anthem affair has been dealt with and the minute's silence at Newlands went some way to repairing the damage of Ellis Park.
In a country where gestures are important, the official playing of the anthem at Ellis Park was insensitive to many people who had seen the very acceptance of the tours as a major compromise.
The unsavoury bickering between Transvaal President Dr. Luis Luyt, the ANC and the SARFU over whether or not playing the anthem broke a formal agreement or not tended to cloud the issue.
It was a row South African rugby could have done without.
The development programme is also a sensitive issue.
Throwing money at the problem is surely not the way to convince people of sincerity.
Although work is being done amongst the underprivileged one gets the impression that the real commitment shown by cricket — and Dr. Ali Bacher in particular— is lacking.
Morne Du Plessis has been involved in private work in this area.
Perhaps he is the man to galvanise things.
Nobody doubts the honest endeavour on the field, but will that be undermined by off-field shenanigans?
S.A. — DO WE HAVE LIFT OFF?
Rugby is a religion in South Africa.
But, it is that very fascination — bordering on fanaticism — with the game that has turned the Afrikaner sport into a political football, as the All Black and Wallaby tourists found out.
But, asks NICK CAIN, can the World Cup organisers allow themselves to let South Africa's intense love of the sport blind us to the fact that, unless political and economic stability are rapidly established, giving the tournament to a country in turmoil could have massive repercussions.
Do we have lift-off?
If we are talking about the Cape Canaveral school of lineout ‘jumping’ favoured in South Africa the answer would be an unequivocal, yes.
But the stakes are so much higher than the mere semantics of the laws relating to lifting at the lineout.
They are about South Africa's suitability as the hosts of the 1995 World Cup and by implication the role of sport, and rugby in particular, in the economic and political future of the country.
The troubled waters of South Africa's over state have impinged — quite correctly — upon its sporting consciousness for as long as most of us can remember.
The recent tours of the Republic by New Zealand and world champions Australia demonstrated that it still continues to do so — and how.
However much you may have heard, without actually going there, it is difficult to appreciate just how far rugby is woven into the warp and woof of South African society.
The disproportionate hold it has on the psyche of white South Africa was evident as soon as the two-pronged Antipodean assault on the previously unconquered Springbok citadel got underway.
For this writer it began when, shortly after stepping off the plane in Johannesburg, it became apparent that a few stitches sustained by the All Black winger Terry Wright in a training accident was deemed as worthy a front page news story as the continuous blood-letting in the Natal townships between rival ANC and Inkatha factions.
Throughout the tours rugby enjoyed this elevated profile but, overblown and sometimes fanatical as this media coverage might have appeared to outsiders, nothing in South Africa is quite what it seems when you peer beneath the surface.
The simple truth is that for the duration of the tours rugby became the political football in the power-broking struggle currently being played out between the various factions in South African politics.
The tours, after all, had only proceeded because the ANC's ‘government in waiting’ had, following the drawing-up of pre-tour agreements, given the go ahead to the New Zealand and Australian Rugby Unions.
They in turn had then received the green light from their respective governments.
Eight years of isolation, broken only by the ‘buying-in’ of the 1986 Cavaliers and 1989 World XV tours, subsequently came to an end in Durban when the New Zealanders kicked off their first official tour on South African soil for 15 years.
King's Park donned its best festive garb for the occasion and, self-indulgent though it appeared in the face of widespread township violence and the ANC's call for a two-day national strike, white South Africa decided to take a break from its myriad woes.
The battle for Southern Hemisphere supremacy was joined again amid the resurrected dream of blue skies, braiis ( barbecues ) and rugby.
The freshly unveiled Natal anthem ‘15 Men of the Last Outpost’, a folksy ballad, was unwittingly to become a fitting epitaph for not only Natal but for nearly every other South African side that took the field against either set of Antipodeans.
In playing terms most of the South African provincial sides were indeed relics from the past.
Their tactical  naivety and non-dynamic ‘donkeys-and-backs’ approach made them no match for the super-fit ‘new age’stars from Down Under.
The All Black mean machine, battle-hardened if a little bruised from its Bledisloe Cup exertions, cut a clean swathe through South African provincial rugby.
After Natal (43–25), they saw off a punchy Orange Free State outfit (33–14), the disappointing Junior Springboks (25–10) and a heavyweight bunch of country boys representing Central Unions (39–6).
Their hard-nosed ‘method’ rugby and its ultimate reward when they blitzed the Springboks for the first two-thirds of the test at Ellis Park to build an unassailable 20–3 lead.
But, although they nearly ran out of steam and were forced to settle for a less than emphatic 27–24 margin of victory as the ‘Boks came back at them, Sean Fitzpatrick's side — with the Jones boys Ian and Michael, Zinzan Brooke and Frank Bunce outstanding alongside their skipper — were worthy of being the only New Zealand side ever to go through South Africa undefeated, albeit on an abbreviated tour.
The fall-out from the highly-charged display of white, predominantly Afrikaner, nationalism at Ellis Park, and the furore over the official playing of the ‘Die Stem,’ anthem contrary to the tour agreements, rapidly marginalised the achievements of Laurie Mains and his ‘macho’crew.
Exit the All Blacks, enter the Wallabies — in South African eyes the disputed heavyweight champions of the world.
It soon became a case of ‘Advance Australia Fair’ on almost every front.
Initially the Australians showed that they were unprepared to be manipulated by quietly but firmly refusing to commit themselves to the ANC's extra-curricular initiatives for a Boipatong visit and the wearing of black armbands during matches.
The grasp of the ‘realpolitik’ of the situation on the part of their administrators was impressive (see pages 38 and 39 ) and that, combined with their own integrity in never wavering in their adherence to the pre-tour agreements, meant that for once sport could hold its head high in the fact of profound political pressures.
The tour subsequently went ahead, but the  Wallabies didn't let the grass grow under their feet as they waited for the ANC to make a decision.
Instead they fought the corner for multi-racial sport by taking themselves off to Zwide, a township near Port Elizabeth (see pages 38 and 39 ), where they held a coaching clinic for black and coloured youngsters.
This coming together at Dan Qeqe stadium was far more of a genuine gesture towards bridge building than most of the internal initiatives according to Malcolm Klaasen, the ex-SARU convenor of the Eastern Cape Veterans Association, and an outspoken critic of the lack of change wrought by the unification process.
Klaasen's contention that ‘the only integration that has gone on so far has been among the top officials’ seemed to be borne out by the fact that we had to wait for the penultimate game of the tours to seen the first nonwhite player take the field.
To their credit the Springboks took a leaf out of the Wallaby book by holding their Friday training session before the test in a township for the first time ever.
The visit to Nyanga near Cape Town may have been tokenism, but at least it was a step in the right direction.
They failed to make anything like the sort of headway the following day when they met the Wallabies in the rain at Newlands.
Although the Australians, who had a magnificent second half, only pulled away to a resounding victory in the last ten minutes, the harsh truth is that the Boks never looked like scoring.
The double-headed defeat of the Boks sent shock-waves through the sporting community — i.e. most of white South Africa — the magnitude of which hadn't been felt since the 1974 Lions demolished the myth of Afrikaner rugby supremacy.
But although the argument over who were the real world champions was emphatically settled in favour of Nick Farr-Jones's side, the political machinations before, during and after the tours have made it painfully clear that rugby is a sideshow — albeit one with significant political influence — in the scheme of things in South Africa.
In the light of the Boipatong massacre and now the shootings in Bisho in the Ciskei it must be clear to the International Board that a political solution must come before a rugby solution.
Much as I would love to see the 1995 World Cup help to kickstart the South African economy as overseas visitors pour in to fill impressive stadia and savour the beauty of the land, the facts are that as things stand rugby will be used as a political pawn.
Here's the scenario.
It's the World Cup quarter-final between South Africa and Wales at Ellis Park.
The ANC, frustrated with the continual political impasse, call for a mass rally near the stadium on the afternoon of the match.
Afrikanerdom is out in force and on its way to the ground…
It may be Africa, and life may be cheap by comparison with that in the Western world, but just try to imagine this happening at Twickenham or Cardiff Arms Park: as the car park revelry goes on late into the night a youth slips into an official marquee and steals some equipment from it.
Security guards spot him as he tries to make his getaway — and shoot him dead.
The youth was black.
It happened at Kings Park, Durban, the night Natal played New Zealand.
Centre Tim Horan was a firm favourite with the black and coloured youngsters who showed up at the Wallaby coach-in held at the Dan Qeqe Stadium in the Zwide township near Port Elizabeth.
Naas Botha — the hero of Nyanga — after the Boks first-ever township training session.
WALLABY WONDERS WALK ON WATER!
NEW LAWS
Nightmare in the making
Don't be fooled by the hugely entertaining test in South Africa  —it was only the brilliance of Australia that stopped this show piece game — played under the new laws — from turning into a shambles, says STEPHEN JONES (Sunday Times).
If that dreadful mid-Atlantic ‘celebrity’ who rummages through other people's houses in the appalling ‘Through the Keyhole’TV programme delved through the house of Australia rugby, he would find any amount of shimmering silverware — the World Cup itself, the Bledisloe Cup, and so on— but the contents would tell you nothing about the true greatness of the inhabitants.
There would be noting to indicate how compelling and sweeping is the style, how wonderfully well Nick Farr-Jones and Bob Dwyer and their men conduct themselves.
Nor do the trophies alone mark their finest achievements.
For me, the two glories of the current team, one of the greatest the world has seen, are two halves of rugby.
The first came during the World Cup semi-final in Dublin, where by their first-half performance, by the control and by the cutting edge of David Campese, they ravaged New Zealand.
The second came recently at Newlands, the imposing Cape Town stadium — at least, it was imposing till they tore out large bits to install even more corporate hospitality guzzlers — where by their second-half performance they imposed themselves on South Africa and crossed the final frontier of world rugby at a surging gallop.
On the latter occasion, the Wallaby control was even more praiseworthy because it was a foul Cape day with squelching underfoot.
And that control became positively wondrous when you consider the other altered circumstance — in Dublin, the Australians were operating before rugby forgot its central themes, before it came charging off the tracks and awarded the put-in to the other team in indeterminate rucks and mauls — turning rugby into an uncontrolled and frothy nothing.
At Newlands, the way in which Australia compensated judiciously, changing the plays, ploughing on through the mud with high kicks, by forcing the lineout, by their discipline and tactics around the fringes, was an object lesson.
Some people declared that it was a triumph for the new laws, bless them.
It was very far from that — it was a brilliant but compensatory effort.
I would be not in the least surprised if that Wallaby performance goes down in history as the best given in the one year that the law lasts — surely, even though players and referees will work their way round some of the problems, it will only last the year.
Certainly, Dwyer hopes to.
He never missed an opportunity to criticise the new ruck/maul laws and he had an absolute right to do so — because it is he who has found ways to minimise their dreadful effect, because he was never one of those coaches who sought refuge under the old laws, and because he is the finest coach in the world by results, demeanour and inspiration.
But wait a minute, Bob, someone said as he was giving his almost daily diatribe against the law change in South Africa.
Surely it was you Aussies who were behind the tranche of law changes?
‘If it was’, said Dwyer, ‘then no-one bothered to ask the Australian coaches or players’.
The final condemnation of the change is that no-one consulted  formally these top men in the sport before passing the show-stopping law and, furthermore, that the lawmakers left so much still to be ironed out.
The first heroes in the battle to adapt to the damage are the referees at all levels who have sat down amongst themselves, worked out interpretations, decided what to ignore in the letter of the law; and because the superior team can no longer launch sustained driving to sap the opposition, you find that inferior teams are still fresh as daisies at the end.
No final avalanche.
Even superior fitness hardly mattered a damn.
‘The new law is a leveller’, said Dwyer in frustration.
And now, something else is dawning on us.
For the most part, what we saw in South Africa were the effects of the law in matches between teams of relatively high class on hard pitches with a dry ball — and with relaxed interpretations of the laws.
Significantly, the home referees in south Africa and Sandy MacNeill and David Bishop, the two test referees, were prepared to wait and wait for the ball to emerge from rucks and mauls.
Hence, there were very few ‘turnovers’, perhaps only two in a game.
At least this muted, just by a little, the effects.
Judging from early games in this country, and especially by the dreadful Leicester v England match, our referees are going by the book and will blow rucks and mauls dead far more quickly.
There will be more turnovers (more rucks and mauls ended without the ball emerging), more frustration.
Still more horrors — if rugby under the new law is difficult to play and to control on a dry day in South Africa, imagine the effect in marshy old England in the mud and rain of January; imagine the shambles the game will become at the lower levels in those conditions with the sanctuary of the next scrum no longer available to the team carrying the ball.
At best, it will become a ping-pong of kicking.
In his programme article for that Leicester v England match, Tony Russ of Leicester predicted that the new law, which intends to free up the game and lessen the effect of kicking, would have the opposite effect.
He was on the button.
It will have an opposite effect, and a drastic one.
‘We're Number 1, mate!’
The undisputed champions of the world — Bob Dwyer's Wallabies.
The coach celebrates the resounding 26–3 victory over South Africa at Newlands with (l-r) John Eales, Phil Kearns and Ewen McKenzie.
Hard pitches, dry ball…and referees prepared to wait for it to emerge.
Northern Transvaal no.8 Adriaan Richter and Wallaby no.8 Sam Scott-Young await the verdict during the Wallabies' hard fought 24–7 win.
THE ONE THAT almost GOT AWAY
THE TESTS
All Black attack!
A mighty occasion and a mighty tussle, despite being blighted by the ‘anthem affair’.
In a sense the scoreboard lied by suggesting that the Springboks had run New Zealand close.
The All Blacks, who took control of the game through a massive 23–11 lineout advantage and the athleticism of their pack, were in command for all but the final quarter.
Having established a 20–3 lead through tries by Zinzan Brooke, Kirwan and Timu they allowed South Africa back into the game.
With Botha calling the shots the ‘Boks demonstrated their strength at running first phase possession by scoring late tries through Gerber (2) and Muller before the clock curtailed their late assault.
Touch and go.
John Kirwan juggles with the ball as his Springbok counterpart, Pieter Hendriks, makes a despairing final attempt to stop the progress of the All Black winger.
BUCK'S BROADSIDE
Arrogant delusions dispelled by the All Blacks and Wallabies, South Africa have a hard row to hoe to get back to the top.
But, says WAYNE SHELFORD, much as it hurts, defeat was the best thing that could have happened…
Defeat will do South Africa good.
I'm sure that none of the Springbok players will have felt like that as they came off the pitch, but, in the long run, the losses will benefit them.
They may help to dispel some of the arrogant delusions prevalent in the country.
South Africa, particularly in the Australian test, were a long way off the pace.
Yet you still came across people who thought that South Africa would have won the last World Cup.
The return to the top will not be easy and it will not happen within the next 12 months.
It may not happen before the World Cup in ‘95.
It's easy to pinpoint what is wrong.
Putting it right will not be so easy.
If coaching were simply a matter of putting down on a piece of paper 10 points to improve, we'd all be world beaters.
Correcting faults takes time; instilling good habits takes time; and finding the right coaches as well as the right players to put all this into effect will take time.
South Africa have set about things the right way however.
Going on tour, exposing yourself to the best that there is, painful as it might be, is the only way to get better.
When North Harbour were aiming for the top in New Zealand it took four years of struggle — getting beaten by the top provinces — before we managed to make our own mark.
I think Northampton have had a similar experience.
The theory is always straightforward; putting it into practice is not.
So, what is wrong with South African rugby?
The deficiencies were fairly obvious.
The forwards are nowhere near dynamic enough.
It's all very well have big, strong guys, but no use at all if they're 10 metres behind the play.
South Africa had no-one of the athletic calibre of John Eales, Ian Jones or Michael Jones.
If they are to prosper they have to find them.
The back row in particular needs to be revamped; speed is a more quality at international level than bulk.
Body positions, lineout techniques, defensive alignments, all need a good shake down.
The best coaches will recognise this and set to work.
That apart, South Africa did give the best two sides in the world a game.
Naas Botha has been written off after his performances.
I thought, however, that his tactical use of the ball in the game against NZ was excellent.
His kicking was off; so what?
We know what he can do in that department.
He'd be a fool to throw it all away now that SA are back in business.
A good tour and there might be another five years in him.
Of course the South Africans must start grooming back-up fly-halves.
Men not in Botha's mould, nor like some of the bangers I saw in some up-country games.
The youngsters should be given their head, encouraged to develop their all-round skills.
That is the way forward.
Certainly the ball skills of the three-quarters in the tests were impressive.
It'll be tough for South Africa in France and England.
Of that there is no doubt, but the tour will undoubtedly be rewarding.
Off the pitch, too, South Africa has a lot of ground to make up.
The hotels and transport system are simply not up to scratch at the moment.
South Africa would struggle, as it stands, to host the ‘95 World Cup.
The desire to change though is, I believe, there.
But it won't come easy.
AUSSIES RAISE THE STANDARD
THE POLITICS
The French Connection
When the Ellis Park anthem episode jeopardised the Wallaby tour, the diplomacy of ARFU president JOE FRENCH saved the day.
For the Australia media  corps who covered the recent Wallaby tour of South Africa, the everlasting memory of Australian Rugby Football Union president Joe French will be his conducting an impromptu 11.00 pm press conference followed by another at 2.30 am in  his hotel room dressed in a pair of shorts and a singlet.
The media corps were not dressed much better as they tossed on whatever was nearest after being woken from a deep sleep.
They arrived without shoes, their hair like birds’ nests and bleary eyed wondering what all the fuss was about.
Little did they know that French, together with hard-working ARFU executive Bob Fordham, had been working for over 12 hours attempting to salvage the Wallaby tour after pre-tour conditions, such as the non-playing of national anthems, were inexplicably ignored at Ellis Park the previous day when South Africa celebrated its return to international rugby against the All Blacks.
The Ellis Park row had plunged the future of the Wallaby tour into grave doubt and for French it signalled the possible heartbreaking end to four years of endless and dedicated hard work to have rugby sanctions against South Africa lifted.
He may have been conducting a formal press conference in very informal dress at a most abnormal time.
But one thing for certain, as far as the tour was concerned, French was not going to be caught with his pants down.
He had fought too hard for too long to let this tour be abandoned only days from the test.
Few people know about the great lengths and the key behind the scenes roles French and Fordham played in South Africa's return to the international rugby scene.
Ever since the aborted rebel Wallaby tour to South Africa in 1987, French had made it a personal goal to see the Springboks return to the international stage.
French began his campaign immediately after the rebel tour was cancelled when he, together with ARFU officials Norbert Byrne and Ross Turnbull, held discussions with the then Australian Foreign Affairs Minister, Mr Bill Hayden.
This initial discussion led to further meetings and opened the doors to the mutual swapping of information.
Left: Joe French.
Above: White nationalism at full mast at Ellis Park as the flags unfurl and ‘Die Stem’ is sung.
Eventually French had talks with the African National Congress sports spokesman, Steve Tshwete.
French recalled his first meeting with Tshwete and his delegation saying; ‘They were pretty tough guys.
I remember saying to him ‘I have to look after my national sporting body’.
And he said ‘well Mr President, we have no rights’.
I was stumped.
‘That was a very important meeting as I gained an understanding of what they wanted for rugby to be unified.
Tshwete was a supporter of rugby unification and he got the old South African Rugby Football Board and the South African Rugby Union together at the conference table’, said French.
With unification finally completed, Tshwete visited Australia earlier this year and the ARFU was given the green light by the ANC and by the Federal Government for inward and outward tours to South Africa.
The ARFU's decision to tour South Africa was not simply because sanctions had been lifted.
The reasons went much deeper.
‘Firstly, the ARFU wanted to assist the new South African Rugby Football Union's development fund.
By touring South Africa, one third of tour proceeds will be spent on developing rugby in those areas which had previously been disadvantaged.
Secondly, the tour represented the last chance for some Wallaby players to ever tour South Africa’, said French.
The Boipatong massacre became the first major hurdle which rugby had to overcome and this led to the implementation of All Black and Wallaby tour conditions such a the minute's silence prior to each test, the display of peace and democracy signed at match venues and in match programmes, the non-playing of national anthems and the removal of any official flying of the South African national flag.
French was a guest in the VIP box at Ellis Park for the South Africa v All Black Test and he know there were to be immediate problems for the Wallaby tour the moment the first chord of Die Stem was struck.
‘Eddie Tonks (New Zealand Rugby Football Union chairman) was sitting behind me and I turned and looked at him and we eyed each other.
We couldn't believe what was happening.
But Louis Luyt had deliberately and with malice aforethought stuffed things up’, recalled French.
‘After the game Ebrahim Patel was terribly annoyed.
F.W. De Klerk was also there and he was annoyed and he had an animated talk with Tshwete in the corner of the room’.
The following day Patel telephoned French at the Burgerspark Hotel in Pretoria advising him the ANC's regional director had called a special meeting with the National Olympic Sports Congress for Monday morning recommending that the tour be cancelled.
Patel then drove from his Johannesburg home to Pretoria prior to the Wallabies' departure for Port Elizabeth to try and rescue the tour.
Telephone discussions resumed immediately French and Fordham checked into the Holiday Inn in Port Elizabeth.
As far as French was concerned, the Wallabies were in South Africa because the ANC had agreed to the tour and, if they withdrew their support, the team would return immediately to Australia.
SARFU had done little to try and rectify the damage created at Ellis Park so French and Fordham took the initiative prior to the special ANC meeting.
No longer could French and Fordham take a back seat advisory role.
‘We had to spur them (SARFU) on.
SARFU had to distance themselves from the happenings at Ellis Park’, said French.
As a result of French's urging, a five point statement was then released by the SARFU at 1.30 am on the Monday morning, several hours before the special ANC-NOSC meeting, clearing the SARFU from involvement at Ellis Park.
In part the SARFU's statement read: ‘We wish to state publicly that, contrary to press reports, the executive of the SARFU did not authorize the playing of the national anthems of New Zealand and South Africa at the Ellis Park test.
‘We regret in respect of the national anthems our undertaking has been violated and breached and we apologise unconditionally to anyone who has been offended by this breach’.
Left: Louis Luyt fertiliser magnate and President of Transvaal RU.
Immediately after his infamous singlet and shorts press conference, French and Fordham woke Wallaby manager John Breen, coach Bob Dwyer and captain Nick Farr-Jones to a meeting to inform them of the happenings over the previous 12 hours.
The Wallaby team  hierarchy were convinced the tour would be aborted.
Farr-Jones went so far as to telephone his wife Angela in Sydney saying she should expect him home within days.
However, French and Fordham remained optimistic.
After their special meeting, the ANC then released a statement saying the tour was still hanging in the balance ad pointed the blame squarely at Louis Luyt.
But this was not good enough for French as he had to consider the Wallaby players who had a fixture 24 hours later against Eastern Province and the test with the Springboks four days later.
As a precaution to the tour being cancelled, the Wallabies were booked on flights back to Australia via London.
‘We weren't getting anywhere and the ANC said they were still to reach a decision.
I said to them it was placing the team and the ARFU in a terrible situation and I gave them a 5.30 pm deadline otherwise the tour was off.
WE had nearly all of the travelling world rugby media staying at the same hotel as the Wallabies and decisions had to be made’, he said.
The ANC then sent me a statement which, in my opinion, wasn't good enough.
I couldn't get through to Tshwete so I then called in the Australian Ambassador in Pretoria, Colin McDonald, to personally contact Tshwete and get a firm decision.
Colin was successful and the ANC advised him  that the tour would proceed’.
It was a mightily relieved French who then issued a press statement to this effect.
He then added the rider; ‘Out of this nettle of danger, we have plucked a flower’.
Two days later, following further investigations by the ANC, NOSC and SARFU into the Ellis Park controversy, the ANC formally and publicly stated it would continue to support the tour and the test between South Africa and the Wallabies at Cape Town.
Assisting the Wallabies' push for the tour to continue was the meeting ANC president Nelson Mandela held with French, Fordham, Farr-Jones, Breen and Marty Roebuck hours before the Ellis Park test.
Little did anyone know of the furore which was about to break six hours later at Ellis Park.
‘We received work via the Australian Embassy that Mandela couldn't attend either test but wished to meet the Wallabies’, said French.
‘He was terrific and spoke openly about how pleased he was that the tours had taken place.
He called in his full executive to meet us and I'm sure at the end of the day that this meeting went a long way to the tour going ahead instead of being cancelled’.
S.A.R.U. 's side of the street
Current unification — cosmetic or cast-iron?
The playing feats of Danie Gerber, Naas Botha, Morne du Plessis and other famous Springbok stars have been praised, analysed and religiously recorded for posterity writes Chris Thau .
Their portraits adorn the posh dining halls of the South African stadia: Newlands, Ellis Park, Loftus Versfeld etc.
However, nobody has recorded the progress of the likes of Peter M'kata, Eric Majola, Solomon Mhlaba, Gassiem Jabaar, Bomza Nkohla, Salie Fredericks, Ronnie Louw, Cissie Damons, Lenny Mathews or Desmond Kramer, although virtually all of them were players of note, arguably the best of their generation.
The simple reason for which they failed to make the headlines and fire up the imagination of rugby pundits around the world is that they were blacks and coloureds in an apartheid-ridden South Africa.
They were all famous within their own communities, but non-persons outside them.
‘M'kata was a natural, one of those geniuses that emerge from time to time in the game.
He could have gone all the way’ his former coach Mahommed Aghredien said.
Aghredien, who played for SARU and is classified as coloured (his father was Malayan and his mother Norwegian), has been working hand in hand with Bill Cunningham — a back-row forward, who played for the Springboks on their 1959 internal tour — to develop rugby in townships around Port Elizabeth for nearly two decades.
‘Had the current changes taken place 10 years ago, many of the kids I coached in townships could have reached the top.
They were genuine Springbok material.
But they never had a chance.
I have been coaching black kids for more than 20 years.
In fact as rugby is concerned I am colour-blind: give me a rugby player, be it white, blue or yellow, with two hands, two legs and a bit of a brain and I love it’, Cunningham said.
‘It's an uphill struggle to change the mentality of people.
There is resistance to change.
People still think in racial terms, whereas we are pioneering multi-racial rugby as a way of life.
We, myself and Bill, although we have been doing the same thing for more than 20 years, could not really work together.
I was classified as a coloured and he was white.
In fact, the last digit in identity book still tells you that I am not ‘white’.
But no-one cares about those things nowadays’, Aghredien added.
During their short stay in Eastern Province the Wallabies expressed an interest to come out to visit and possibly coach in a township.
Cunningham and Aghredien, together with the local rugby factotum — Dan Qeqe, a legend in his  own lifetime — made the venture possible.
When the Wallabies arrived at the ‘Dan Qeqe’ ground named after the inspired player, administrator and community leader who convinced Ford-USA to put money up front to finance it, and inspired the township youngsters to build it, they were met by an expectant crown of youngsters.
The Wallabies coaching clinic was a great success and a tribute to the efforts made by the likes of Dan Dan Qeqe.
The man himself, is quite outspoken about past and present, but mostly about the future.
‘We did not have this ground in the '70s.
We were  practising on a municipality ground, but we were kicked out of it because we refused to play against England.
Rightly or wrongly we believed that as long as we were discriminated in every walk of life it would be absurd to pretend that everything was OK in rugby and play against the English and then go back to the township.
However, there is a future in the current unification process if everyone is sincere.
This process should bring whites and blacks together, from an early age.
The racial integration must be made natural, to avoid the divisions of  apartheid , blacks, coloured, whites etc.
We blacks and coloured are seen as aliens from another country by our fellow Port Elizabeth citizens.
That's where we must concentrate in rebuilding the fabric of society’, said Qeqe.
Hands across the Great Divide?
Dan Qeqe (right) greets EP president Trevor Jennings.
TAKE IT AWAY CHAMP!
THE TESTS Wallaby wipe-out!
Throughout last season's World Cup the rest of the world got used to seeing South Africans proudly parading their ‘Springbok World Champions’ banners.
Come testing time, though, it was a different story altogether as Farr-Jones's side put on an awesome second-half display in the rain and mud at Newlands.
The charge that they were World Champions by default clearly rankled with the Wallabies.
It showed as they rattled up 18 unanswered points in the last 10 minutes — including a 50th test try for Campese — to inflict the Boks' heaviest-ever defeat, and give their retiring skipper a rousing send off.
Clutching at thin air.
South African blindside Wahl Bartmann misses the boat as Wallaby scrum-half Nick Farr-Jones feeds his backline in the crushing Australian victory in Cape Town.
PLAYER OF THE MONTH
NEIL BACK
Off the field you may not notice him.
He's smaller than most forwards, quietly spoken and unobtrusive of manner.
On the field you cannot fail to notice him.
 Lightning quick, fearless in the tackle and always in the thick of the action.
Neil Back was one of the few stars to emerge from the England ‘B’ tour to New Zealand.
Even the Kiwis were staggered by his bravery in going for the ball on the floor.
Meet the Player:
Age:23.
Ht:5′10″.
Wt:13st 10 lbs.
Position:Flanker.
Honours:Eng.
Schools/Colts/U-21/B.
Meet the Man:
Job:Life Assurance, AXA Equity and Law, Coventry
Status:Single
Hobbies:Squash, badminton
Most important quality needed for success:
Confidence in own ability, dedication, and, as I now realise after my shoulder injury, luck.
Reflections on career so far:
Just a natural, competitive sense of frustration not to have won full honours, but I am not complaining.
If England had not been so successful, then perhaps I would be moaning.
Opinion of other sports:
It would be nice to earn £15,000 for playing sport, but it's not an issue with me.
What would most like to see happen in the game:
All unions should abide by same laws of the pitch.
How do you get away from the pressure:
I don't see training and playing almost full-time as pressure.
I've grown up with this type of regime.
ENGLAND ROUND-UP.
For your bookshelf
WITH the new season getting underway and Christmas beginning to loom, there has been a plague of books clogging up RW&P 's mailing system, some of them annual publications, others one-offs.
The most eagerly awaited one, as ever, was the authoritative Rothman's Rugby Union Yearbook , edited by Steve Jones (of Sunday Times fame), and now in its 21st year.
Published by Headline and costing £14.99, this tome is as invaluable as ever.
Talking of annual tomes, the Courage Club Directory and the RFU Handbook — bricklike publications if  ever there were two — have also just surfaced again.
The RFU Handbook is as interesting and informative as ever and is available at £8 from the RFU Shop, while the Courage book has been divided into five separate books (National Leagues and the Midland, South West, London & South East and North divisions).
For anyone involved in the game at the grass-roots level, the divisions books are invaluable — they give a pretty comprehensive run-down of every club in the country by division — and only cost £3.50 in their revised form, £9.99 for the National Leagues book.
The RFU sponsored yearbook, edited by Barrie Fairall of the Independent and published by Harrington Kilbride, is also due to hot the shelves at some stage over the next month or so and is very good value, as is the Whitbread Rugby World Yearbook , edited by Adrian Stephenson and Ian Robertson and produced by Leonard Associates — a rip-roaring book even if the staff of RW&P (all contributors to this fine, fine publication) say so.
More news come publication.
Two training books have also come to light this month.
The first is called Tactics of Success: Rugby , and is written by Chris Jones of the Evening Standard (Ward Lock, £4.99).
The bulk of the book is 30 main moves, with examples from actual games.
The blurb says that this book was written ‘to help people learn from their elders and betters’.
The other coaching book which will help us all develop the tactical subtlety and expertise of your Grant Fox or Michael Lynagh is Winning Rugby by new Richmond coach Roger Uttley (Stanley Paul, £9.99).
Well illustrated and informative, if Richmond win all their games by at least 30 points then buy it quickly before stocks run out.
Longer qualifying time?
THE RFU, horrified by the 12 departures from Gloucester this summer, may well extend the qualifying period for players who change clubs beyond the present four months.
Speaking at the launch of the Rothmans Rugby Union Yearbook 1992–93 RFU president Danie Serfontein warned that this could happen if the union feels that it cannot put an end to illegal inducements, which he described as being ‘widespread’.
At the same function RFU secretary Dudley Wood said that the problem is worse in France, where the national club championship is the dominating force, whilst the president added that the RFU had twice been prepared to act against clubs but held back for lack of clinching evidence.
The Way Ahead
FOLLOWING on from last month's report on club management (p79 of September's RW&P ,Jim Saker of Loughborough University Business School, co-author with Sarah Massey , has reminded us that copies of the full report (price £15 inclusive of postage & packing) or the synopsis (£3) and information on training workshops can be obtained from him at Loughborough University School .
Barbarian Help for Stoke Mandeville
THE BARBARIAN F.C.
have a small stock remaining of their Centenary Souvenir Dinner Brochures, and would be happy to send them out to keen rugby folk in return for a cheque for just £1.50, which will be used to raise funds for the paraplegic centre at Stoke Mandeville.
Send your order to Casdec Ltd .,
and you'll receive a special piece of rugby history.
The Young England Rugby Club has been in existence for two years but is now being relaunched as a major part of the RFU youth initiative with its own clear aims and ambitions.
It is a major project for the RFU, with a recruitment drive to match.
Half a million application forms have been printed and are being sent all around the country, via over 1,000 blubs, nearly 3,000 schools and through the RFU youth development officers.
The club exists to support youth rugby in clubs and schools in this country.
It is an important forum for RFU communication with young rugby players, as it represents partnership rather than authority.
It is important that the members feel involved in their own club.
To be an effective tool the club must appeal to the target membership.
Therefore the role of the Young England Rugby Club is to enhance involvement in youth rugby by creating a direct link with the very top of the game, and that means the RFU and the England squad.
The club exists as a reinforcement for all the work already being done by the RFU youth development team, the counties, the rugby clubs and schools.
Through the club magazine,Tryline , it will also be an additional communication vehicle for their work and Will Carling has been asked to be the first honorary president of the club as he lead the very team which embodies the aspirations of the club itself.
It is hoped that the club will quickly reach a membership of 20,000, with a year on year increase after that.
It is open to anyone aged between 6 and 16, girl or boy, who wished to join.
The annual membership fee is £15,(there is a £3 enrolment fee for new members) and the new members' package consists of a Gilbert rugby ball, with Will Carling's signature, a Young England Rugby Club T Shirt , a membership badge, a personalised membership card, and four editions of the Young England Rugby Club magazine ‘Tryline’.
Applications are available from the Young England Rugby Club Office .
England captain Will Carling, the honorary president of the Young England Club, shows off the new national kit at the club's launch at Twickenham.
The club's aim is to have 20,000 members within the year.
Flowering 'Quins
EVEN though the country is in recession leading rugby clubs seem to encounter few difficulties in attracting sponsors.
One of the latest to succeed in that direction are Harlequins with the announcement of help to the tune of £350,000 over the next four seasons from Flowering Original , an offshoot of the Whitbread beer company, which already sponsors the Welsh Heineken Leagues.
An added bonus for ‘Quins is a kit agreement with Canterbury from New Zealand covering three seasons.
The sponsorship money will be used to upgrade facilities at the Stoop Memorial Ground because, according to chairman Roger Looker, ‘We recognise we have a long way to go towards what we consider to be adequate facilities, particularly if we sustain our growth’.
Winters in S.A.
WITH the forthcoming visit by the South Africans looming large, the RFU have taken the opportunity given them by the All Black and Wallaby tours to South Africa to get in some early homework on the Boks.
You might think that there would be a long line of officials  queuing up to undertake such a testing spying mission — and apparently there was.
So who did the RFU choose to go on their look-see mission?
Step forward openside flanker Peter Winterbottom of Quins ,England and — in the recent past —Natal and Transvaal .
WINDOW ON WALES
The ‘Phoney War’ is over!
The month of August is rugby's ‘phoney war’.
Club training intensifies, the odd trial match gets sneaked in, speculation about player movement increases, and the sevens tournaments get (some) players back in the swing.
The WRU (bless ‘em) are also good for the odd pronouncement.
By the time this is read the club season will be under way and we can assess how players adapt to the new laws.
Mike Hall, the new Cardiff captain, takes the Bridgend cover on the outside to touch down during the 15–5 quarter-final win during the recent Worthington Welsh Sevens at Cardiff Arms Park.
Sevens
This year's events attracted more official attention than before since Wales will be sending sides to the World and Hong Kong Sevens in 1993.
Robert Norster confirmed ‘we plan to have people at all the major tournaments and I hope the players will realise they are being watched’.
One interesting name quickly out of his blocks (o.k., corny) was former Olympic hurdler Nigel Walker, now retired from athletics and back with Cardiff for whom he played youth rugby.
He is ‘determined to make the first grade’.
He made a useful start in helping his club to victory in the Cardiff High School Old Boys Sevens where they beat a Nationwide VII 40–14 in the final.
Walker scored nine tries in the event, picking up the MVP (shades of the US — most valuable player) award.
How he makes the transition from the open spaces of sevens to the narrow confines of the 15-a-side game remains to be seen.
The Cwmtawe Sevens , one of the premier events, was won by a Scottish Seven led by Craig (I'm staying at Melrose after all) Chalmers, and including a Dods (Michael, not Peter).
They beat Saracens (including Justyn Cassell) 22–18 in the Final.
A week later the now well established Great White Water Buffaloes triumphed in the popular Aberaeron Sevens beating London Welsh 28–14 in the Final.
Kevin Withey and Ceri Jonathon starred for the winners, Mark Douglas for the losers.
Meanwhile Welsh international Mark Titley and Newbridge wing Alun Harries were putting on a show for the selectors at the Bridgend Sevens in helping their invitation team ‘The Welshmen’(management includes Messrs.  Ring and Webb) to victory 22–16 against Llanharan in the Final.
Player News
EVENTUALLY Mike Hall emerged as the choice of Alec Evans as Cardiff captain.
He was hardly General MacArthur in declaring ‘we will do better’.
In the meantime the ‘will-they, won't they’(move) scenario was played out right to the death.
Of the big fish, immediately pre-season David Evans had still not found a home.
He wants to be no.10, but it seems Newport and Bridgend suggested 12.
Paul Turner succumbed to the wooing of Steve Smith (ugh!) and headed North (well, to Sale ).
David Watkins muttered ‘contingency plans’: fans muttered David Evans, Neil Jenkins…
: Jenkins muttered ‘I can't play and rugby, I am still banned’, but told the Western Mail he was ‘not moving from Pontypridd and that is final’.
Newport failed to get one international reserve prop —Gloucester 's Peter Jones but Llanelli claimed another in David Joseph from Swansea .
Union News
WALES nominated Alan Davies and Robert Norster for the positions of coach and manager to the British Lions in New Zealand next year, and both were invited for interview, but the appointments of McGeechan and Cooke were surely for rubber stamping only.
Glenbuterol — buzzword of the month.
The fate of Welsh weightlifter Andrew Davies brought to mind the whispers about several of the Welsh pack of fairly recent vintage.
WRU's position from Dr. John Davies was recently quoted in the South Wales Echo : ‘It's virtually impossible to stop, and what those people who use steroids don't consider is the harm they do to themselves ‘.
The conclusion to the ‘Report on Anabolic Steroids’ b; y the Welsh Committee on Drug Misuse — all sports — notes ‘that steroids are being used in many parts of Wales, most of it without medical supervision.
Although in some circumstances it would appear that steroid use was very sophisticated, in many instances knowledge about drugs and injection technique was very poor’.
Food for thought.
Scotland have made good use of their Anglos over the years.
Wales are now getting in on the act.
Brigadier Rolph James and Peter Taylor at London Welsh are instrumental in developing a Welsh exiles format.
Part of the process is a triangular tournament with the Scots and Irish at U21 level.
This will be held at Old Deer Park, Richmond on November 7th/8th.
International referees Derek Bevan, Steven Hilditch and Jim Fleming will officiate.
All clubs received a letter warning them against organising practice or trial matches before the season officially starts on 1st September.
On behalf of the WRU Peter Owen said ‘If any club goes ahead with a practice match or trial match and we get to hear about it , then we will take immediate action’.
I heard of some.
Perhaps nobody tells the union, or have they one deaf ear?
Finally, the union are now adopting the ‘Twickers line of ‘when you can't beat Mike Burton, join him’.
In the knowledge that member clubs make international tickets available to ‘sponsors’ for an appropriate fee, the union will now offer to buy back tickets from clubs at several times face value, and organise their own corporate hospitality.
One has to admire the (unaccustomed) realism  behind the project.
Perhaps we can look forward to an extension of this realism into the players payments, drugs etc.
Player merry-go-round
THIS makes regular stops for people to get on and off.
Depending upon who you speak to and what you read, the following are included in this year's likely participants:
To Cardiff P Newbridge's New Zealand no.8, Hemi Taylor,Bridgend 's back-row man Owain Williams and Mike Budd, and Swansea wing Bleddyn Taylor.
To Newbridge — Bridgend prop David Austin (linking up with new forward coach, Gareth Williams), returning Newport wing Alan Harries, and Abertillery lock (of the skyscraper tendency at 6ft 8ins), Emyr Williams.
To Newport — Welsh U21s centre Justin Redrup, previously with Bristol , and potentially a big catch in Welsh outside-half David Evans from Cardiff (or will he be the one that got away?).
To Swansea — Andrew Sutton exiting Newbridge , and Jason Ball following father Glen in departing The Gnoll.
From Pontypridd — Jonathon Mason, Neil Eynon, and Mike Butts all returning to their previous club,Second Division Mountain Ash .
The loss of reserve scrum-half Robert Davies to Aberavon is on the cards.
This list is meant to be accurate at the time of writing.
However it is  subject to offers, counter offers, whims and fallings out between now and the first Saturday of September.
The traditional trek to Cardiff Arms Park continues.
Watch out for those returning with tails between legs before mid-season.
Clearly they cannot accommodate both Taylor and Williams, but Alec Evans is though to fancy the latter as captain, having previously been impressed with him playing club rugby in Queensland .
IRELAND
PICK-ME-UP FOR THE MEN IN GREEN?
Irish rugbymen are no longer allowed to dream of improbable needs.
The record defeat on the summer tour to New Zealand showed the true dismal state of affairs.
But, as HEATHER KIDD reports, the rebuilding process should be underway by the time the Wallabies arrive.
Just what did Ireland learn during the tour to New Zealand?
A little or a lot?
Those questions will soon be answered thanks to the imminent arrival of undisputed world champions, Australia.
The awesome yellow-and-green rugby machine, cock-a-hoop following series victories over New Zealand and South Africa, will be a tough test for the Irish.
Ireland's captain in New Zealand, centre Phil Danaher, sees the Australia tour as providing a useful indicator as to the lessons learned Down Under, but doesn't anticipate an exact reading of the state of Irish play.
‘A one-off international doesn't always show a true picture’, Danaher says.
Although he is predicting an interesting encounter between the two sides on October 31, he views the unavailability of Nick Farr-Jones as a big plus for Ireland.
‘Farr-Jones introduced a new dimension to Australia's play with his superb leadership and ability to control the game.
He'll be a big loss to their team’.
Bearing in mind Ireland's First test performance  against New Zealand in May Danaher gives his team a fighting chance against the Wallabies if they can gain an even share of possession.
‘Against the All Blacks in Dunedin we won a lot of ball and very nearly won the match.
In the Second Test we struggled for possession and spent the whole match backpedalling’.
Irish tour captain Phil Danaher ponders his side's prospects.
One-off internationals tend to suit Ireland as both New Zealand and Australia can testify.
Few Australians and no Irish rugby supporter will ever forget Gordon Hamilton's try in the latter stages of the 1991 World Cup quarter-final.
Unfortunately for Ireland, the next try, Michael Lynagh's match-winning  masterpiece , ended Ireland's dreams of World Cup glory.
Ireland assistant coach Gerry Murphy says that a realistic aim for this 1992–93 season is to try and win home matches or at least make it extremely difficult for an opposition team to win at Lansdowne Road.
‘That's the way it used to be’, Murphy says, ‘and we ought to start from that premise’.
Murphy is a big fan of Australia rugby and its administration.
Following the tour to New Zealand, Murphy spent over three weeks in Australia studying their organisations.
‘As in Ireland, rugby is a minor sport in most regions but the Australians are doing  excellent player development work right through from their top schools players and U21s to senior level.
I see no reason at all why we can't develop a similar system here.
We've always had good schools teams.
‘Hopefully, following the tour to New Zealand, there is now a realisation of what needs to be done and of just how appalling we are in certain areas.
Our defence was very poor.
On certain occasions we got it right, but at other times it was a joke.
Club sides could have defended better’.
Despite the Second Test trouncing by New Zealand, Murphy says Ireland needed that match, ‘We'd have come home with a very mistaken picture of our true form if we'd left after the first international’.
But Murphy, like Danaher, is not unduly pessimistic about the future of the Irish game.
Several players developed well on tour, namely loosehead prop Nick Popplewell, second row Paddy Johns and backs Peter Russell and Vinnie Cunningham.
Success may not come swiftly but both men seem sure that it will arrive.
Several key factors will influence just how quickly Ireland can get its rugby back on the right track: fitness, tough competition and coaching.
Fitness requirements have altered dramatically in the last five years and the recent law changes make it even more imperative that players be fitter, more mobile and faster around the pitch.
New Zealand led the way, thanks to Jim Blair, in developing individual fitness requirements for each position.
Australia and England have heeded the call.
Ireland tagged along, trying to prove that playing on reserves of passion and pride were good enough.
The results speak for themselves.
Since returning from New Zealand the Irish squad has been working on fitness programmes under the guidance of Dr. John Kirwan, who heads the national training centre at Thomond College in Limerick.
It is already apparent that players are much fitter than at the same time last season.
The introduction of the All Ireland League competition two years ago gave the Irish club scene a much-needed boost but the hoped for flow-on effect to top level rugby has yet to be realised.
It is early days yet and the first division contains only nine teams (next season the number will be upped to 11) which accounts for only a small percentage of Ireland's playing strength.
The provincial competition should be a valuable stepping-stone to international rugby.
Not only is it pitting top provincial players against each other but it is also providing them with opportunities to play even tougher, more competitive rugby.
Unfortunately, provincial rugby has become Ireland's poorest relation.
Last season, an overwhelming number of players declared themselves unavailable for the competition, a sure indicator that they set little score on the provincial matches and they think the national selectors do likewise.
This season a new team has been included in the competition which kicks off in mid-September.
Irish Exiles will join Connacht, Ulster, Leinster and Munster, and should provide tough opposition to the traditional Ireland-based sides.
It is expected that the Exiles team will be made up largely from players based in England, and possibly a few from France.
A London Irish player from Western Samoa, second row Mata'afa Keenan, is also expected to declare for Ireland and thus become eligible for the Exiles.
The introduction of foreign players to Irish teams is not new but the flood has been severely curtailed thanks to the IRFU's three-month probation period, a new ruling brought in at the end of last season.
Vigorously opposed by a number of clubs the IRFU has stood firm but ironically the flow of foreigners has continued, albeit in a different direction.
The club scene is now inundated with New Zealand and Australian coaches, due in no small part to the success of Garryowen, current AIL champions under their New Zealand coach, my husband, Murray Kidd. the IRFU is also getting in on the act with the appointment of former All Black captain and current Wellington coach Andy Leslie to its coaching panel.
Leslie arrives in Dublin mid-October for a three-month period.
He will be working alongside the union's director of coaching, assisting coaches and coaching coordinators through to U21 level.
It's not a giant step, but any demonstration of a willingness to accept outside assistance must be seen as a positive move.
The Irish  hierarchy are not anticipating a miraculous recovery to form this season.
Such an expectation would be unrealistic.
But the game's top men are hoping they can devise a constructive plan for improvement so that the awfulness of the past few seasons might soon be no more than a bad dream.
Down but not out.
Fullback Jim Staples received a helping hand, but it will take more than the magic sponge to get the Irish side back on its feet.
IRISH REPORT
with Sean Diffley
IN exactly 12 months time Dublin will stage the International Golden Oldies festival when 6,000 of the seer and mellow generation will furnish teams for what is expected to be the biggest celebration yet.
In Perth in 1991 there were 162 teams taking part but Bryan O'Neill, the director of the Irish operation, has already received entries for 144 teams — and there are still 12 months to go.
Bryan was manager of the Irish teams which played in 1981 at Long Beach, in 1985 in London and in the 1991 Perth Festival, and he says: ‘They were wonderful events, all of them, but we are planning in Dublin to make 1993 the jewel in the crown’.
This eighth international festival takes place between Saturday, September 25 to the following Saturday, October 2 and is sponsored by a goodly collection including Heinz , the Irish Independent newspaper group,Guinness and the Irish Tourist Board —Bord Failte .
Tony O'Reilly, who has scored a try or two in his time around the world, is the motivating force as far as Heinz and the Independent are concerned, and Guinness, of course , are the ever-present force in Irish sporting events.
Gullivers are looking after the travelling arrangements and the widespread tentacles of the Irish Tourist Board make it certain that golden oldies all over the world have got to hear about the festival.
One of the big ‘selling points’ is that the playing centre of the festival is at Belfield the large and leafy and green university campus (University College Dublin), with all the 20 playing grounds adjoining.
And of the expected 6,000 visitors, 1,200 can be accommodated in the nearby  students'  dormitory area.
And Belfield is less than 20 minutes frequent bus service to the city centre.
And plenty of excellent hotels are within minutes of Belfield.
Recently the International Secretariat of the Golden Oldies was in Dublin to run the rule over the arrangements and all the indications were that the officials were pleased with all they saw.
The official visitors included Bryan Craies from Auckland , who is the world chairman, Jeff Butterfield from London , Alan Forno (Australia), David Graham (Canada)and Mike Scully (USA).
All enquiries relating to the festival can be addressed to Festival Director .
The seven-day programme with each team playing at least three matches includes a spectacular opening ceremony, a gala welcome party with buffet and Irish cabaret, and a Grand Finale Gaelic dinner.
Those will be the main highlights of an interesting few days.
But rigid timetables will be kept to a minimum.
The emphasis is on relaxation.
STRANGELY, the national coach of the Irish teams down the years has had little direct contact with the four provincial coaches.
But Ciaran Fitzgerald and manager Noel Murphy met the four provincial coaches recently, and a closer rapport has been devised.
They are George Hook (Connacht), David McMaster (Ulster), Garrett Fitzgerald (Munster)and Jim Glennon (Leinster).
Ciaran Fitzgerald says that the purpose was to standardise fitness programmes for the players and avoid repetitious work, and to seek to avoid clashes with provincial and national squad sessions.
‘But even more so would be the benefit of their experiences which will be invaluable to me at national team level’.
Fitzgerald believes that coaches will now be in a position to work to a common pattern and not pull against each other‘like spancelled goats’.
Fitzgerald feels that the provincial coaches can act, too, as eyes and ears for his own selectors.
Surprisingly, it has taken a long time to arrange something that most would have considered to be basic.
Chasing James Bridie's dream
James Bridie had the Anglo-Scots summed up, though nothing to do with his work on those notorious Edinburgh grave-robbers, Burke and Hare.
The early-century playwright said that he did not rate highly the Scot who had succeeded in becoming an Englishman unless his rugby was good.
Before and after Bridie's pronouncement Anglo-Scots have been striving to do well on the international field at home.
J.P.
Davidson was the first Anglo-Scot to play international rugby; the first of the Royal Indian Engineering College forward's two caps was against England in 1873, still in the days of 20-a-side, and rarely since then have the exiles not been represented in Scotland's team.
Iain Laughland, for one, has gone on from being a long-serving cap from London Scottish to be the exiles' representative on the Scottish Rugby Union committee and, ex officio, chairman of the Anglo-Scots' committee.
In looking back to his playing days, you cannot think of him without Jim Shackleton.
Similarly, Mike Campbell-Lamerton and Frans ten Bos.
Remember also Norman Bruce, Peter Stagg, Alastair McHarg, Bill Cuthbertson, Ian McGeechan and the Biggar cousins.
Think further back to the famous Oxford three-quarter line of Iain Smith, Phil Macpherson, George Aitken and A.C. Wallace.
Sole — once an Exile
Iain Milne, Heriot's much admired and respected Bear, was briefly an Anglo-Scot with Harlequins.
Another famous prop, David Sole, captain in the memorable Grand Slam in 1990, was first capped out of English rugby, while he was with Bath.
Like Milne, Ken Scotland, that classic attacking fullback a generation before his time, was an Anglo-Scot, as well as a Herioter.
Despite all that those and others have contributed to Scottish rugby, the exiles have had a tempered love-hate relationship with us back home.
Anglo-Scots had a theory — perhaps justified by Bridie's remark — that they had to be twice as good as a home-bred player to break through into the national team, whereas those North of the Border believed the corollary.
Intermittently, after 1948, the Anglo-Scots came together to play as a team, usually against a home district.
Yet the exiles had no structure of their own.
Their teams were chosen by the national selectors.
Small beginnings
All that changed, though, a dozen years ago.
The Anglo-Scots now field an under-21 team.
It had small beginnings when Ian Muir, formerly with Cambuslang and West of Scotland, took a team north for a game against Edinburgh at Murrayfield in November 1984.
Occasional fixtures followed against the home districts, and the exiles entered the under-21 championship in 1989.
They now have sponsorship in their own right from School Book Fairs.
Not content with that championship the Anglo-Scots have joined their Welsh and Irish counterparts in holding a triangular under-21 tournament at the London Welsh ground on the weekend of November 7 and 8.
The sponsorship and the three-way tournament are developments that Ansen Westbrook, the under-21 Anglo-Scots' secretary, can talk of with great enthusiasm.
With a committee base, senior and under-21, the Anglo-Scots have been able to spread their selectors' scope wide.
Their spy network, like a mixture of the CIA, M15 and GCHQ, searches the length and breadth of England and Wales.
They dig deep especially to maintain the under-21 resources.
Yet they are never satisfied.
They are convinced that other players with Scottish connections are there to be found, and like the Irish and Welsh, the Scottish exiles have launched an appeal to attract players will Scottish qualifications.
Fulton Paterson, the Anglo-Scots' secretary, and Ansen Westbrook eagerly await news of any newcomers.
Who knows a modern equivalent of the Oxford three-quarter line may be waiting to be found.
SCOTTISH NOTES
GRANT FARQUHARSON ,Gary  Armstong  's deputy at Jed-Forest , has joined Gala so that he can be more certain of playing in First Division rugby.
For the same reason Derek Stark ,Ayr's Scotland ‘B’wing, has switched to Boroughmuir .
ERIC PAXTON ,Kelso 's former international flanker, will be coaching the South's U21 team this season.
His assistant will be Rob Moffat , who retired last season ad the Scottish School 's coach.
AUSTRALIA
With the next World Cup due to be held in less that three years time the Wallaby coach and skipper warn that
‘S.A.…needs to improve infrastructure’— FARR-JONES
Several leading Australian rugby identities have raised doubts about South Africa's ability to stage the 1995 World Cup.
They have publicly expressed their concerns after witnessing events first hand when travelling throughout South Africa during the Wallabies' whistle-stop two-week tour in August.
Their concerns are not centred on stadiums but focused rather on the off-field, non-political areas such as hotels, communications and domestic travel.
Wallaby skipper Nick Farr-Jones, Australian Rugby Football Union executive member Ron Meagher and Queensland Rugby Union executive director Terry Doyle are worried that South Africa does not have the necessary infrastructure to cope with the huge demands the World Cup will place on the country.
Farr-Jones was the first to voice his concerns on arrival in Sydney after the Wallabies beat the Springboks 26–3 at Cape Town's Newlands Stadium.
Farr-Jones said South Africa needed vastly to improve its infrastructure to handle the pressures of the 1995 World Cup.
‘It seemed like the hotels couldn't cope with one touring team in terms of faxes, telephone and general service.
Those things have to be good if you're going to hold a World Cup because there is going to be a huge influx of tourists’, said Farr-Jones.
‘One Wallaby player waited 11 hours for one fax to be sent to Brisbane while another member of the Wallaby team was unable to raise the international operator at 3.00am for a collect telephone call’.
Doyle supported Farr-Jones' comments and blamed South Africa's international  isolation for their problems.
‘They've got great stadiums, good rugby organisations and very astute administrators from both a corporate and organisations point of view.
But they still have a lot to learn in terms of communications, hotels, airports, the movement of people and the sensitivity to visiting teams’, he said.
Unlike Farr-Jones and Doyle, Meagher was at the coal face of the tourism problems as he led a group of 48 Australian supporters who travelled throughout South Africa during the tour.
‘In my opinion they can't stage the 1995 World Cup.
It's too quick, too close for them to get their house in order from the tourists’ point of view.
‘They need more time to get that industry into shape.
They're clearly not used to a lot of tourism.
And if we had problems, imagine the difficulties if 20,000 supporters arrive for the World Cup’, he added.
Meagher expressed his concerns to RWC chairman Russ Thomas during a meeting prior to the Ellis Park test between South Africa and the All Blacks.
Thomas asked Meagher to send him a written report.
Reinstated from league
FORMER Wallaby fly-half Tony Melrose has been reinstated to play rugby in Sydney next season after playing 10 seasons of rugby league with four different New South Wales rugby league premiership clubs.
Melrose was granted permission to return to play the amateur code by the New South Wales Rugby Union after an eight-month dispute where Melrose threatened to take legal action.
The NSWRU reinstated Melrose under regulation 7.5 which allows a union to re-admit a player under ‘special circumstances.’
NSWRU executive director Gary Pearse said Melrose's special circumstance was his ‘substantial contribution’ to coaching since retiring from rugby league.
The NSWRU's decision seems certain to lead to the Australian Rugby Football Union's support of New Zealand Rugby Football Union's second application to the International Rugby Football Board for a new interpretation on reinstatement and admissions to the game.
Melrose was captain of the famous 1977–78 Australian Schoolboys team which travelled the United Kingdom, Ireland, Europe and Japan undefeated.
This team produced 10 Wallaby players, including the Ella brothers and dual rugby international Michael O'Connor plus former Australian rugby league captain, Wally Lewis.
Melrose played six tests up to 1979 after making a magnificent debut when the 1978 Wallabies trounced the All Blacks by a record 30–16 margin in the Third Test at Auckland's Eden Park.
He switched to league after the 1979 Wallaby tour to Argentina.
During his rugby league career Melrose played for Parramatta, Manly-Warringah, Eastern Suburbs and South Sydney and reached NSW honours at a representative level.
He retired from rugby league in 1989 and was reinstated to coach Parramatta rugby union reserve grade in 1991 before taking over as first grade coach this year.
Melrose comes from a strong rugby family with his elder brother Gregg a member of past Parramatta premiership winning teams while younger brother Brian has been a regular first-grade player with both Parramatta and Western Suburbs.
All are back with Parramatta and their father Les has been first grade manager.
The Melrose saga began earlier this year when he was one of several players, including former Wallaby Mitchell Cox, who applied for reinstatement to play the game.
Melrose was given a verbal assurance by a senior NSWRU official that his application would be approved.
However, all applications were refused.
But Melrose was adamant he wanted to return to union ranks.
He sought legal opinion and then stepped up his fight.
He claimed players applying for reinstatement should not be prejudiced by the amount of money they received from rugby league.
He believes that the intention to play professionally is ‘crime’.
The ARFU then stepped in to take over all applications regarding admissions and reinstatement.
When Melrose was asked to fill in a further application he refused to do so saying all the relevant information had been sent to NSWRU.
The NSWRU's decision is sure to lead to a host of new applications.
Former Wallaby scrum-half Brad Burke is certain to step up his campaign to be readmitted after a brief stint with Eastern Suburbs.
Director steps down
NSWRU executive director Gary Pearse will resign from his post at the end of October.
Pearse, the former Wallaby flanker, intends to establish his own sports marketing company and the NSWRU is set to be his first client.
No announcement has been made as to his replacement.
Lending a helping hand.
Wallaby fly-half Michael Lynagh ships on the ball to a black boy during the impromptu visit to the Zwide township near Port Elizabeth.
NEW ZEALAND
A YEN FOR THE RISING SUN
Five top players shocked their province by upping sticks and setting sail for Japan.
As DON CAMERON reports, they are unlikely to be the last New Zealanders to make the move.
There has been quite a staggering traffic of internationals into and out of New Zealand and provincial teams in recent years — and now a highway has been invitingly posted.
Japan has long featured in New Zealand rugby, but in a rather detached way.
Then the contact became closer as Japanese national and club sides zeroed in on New Zealand as a convenient training area.
Along the way Mark Finlay, briefly an All Black fullback, and Marty Brooke, on the fringe of joining his two brothers in All Black colours, were attracted to Japan on working/coaching assignments.
At the same time there was a steady stream of All Black or representative players trekking to and from Italy and France .
But now Japan is becoming a favoured target.
In the space of a week no fewer than five North Harbour players of various stature announced they were leaving for substantial playing-working contracts in Japan, ranging from two to three years.
The most prominent of these was Kevin Schuler, an All Black replacement in Wales and Ireland in 1989, a captain in the second-tier divisional side in 1991 and an All Black in Australia this year.
Schuler went to Australia as a junior loose forward but, as the injury toll rose and his form improved, he won his first cap in the Second Test against Australia at Brisbane.
Sadly, he suffered a severe knee injury in that test, and was sent home along with Mike Brewer and Paul Henderson, who both suffered similar fates.
Schuler had earlier had an approach from a Japan steel company and, as he waited for his knee to heal, he wondered about his future.
He had had a series of injuries, he did not have reasonable employment, and a plainly lucrative offer from Japan had appeal.
So Schuler accepted it, knowing that by the end of it his prospects of regaining an All Black place might have disappeared.
Laurie Mains, the All Black coach, was plainly displeased at Schuler's decision, for it came about the time that Mains was hoping rugby league scouts might not be chasing his All Blacks in the next few months.
At the same time as Schuler made his decision Scott Pierce, a regular member of the New Zealand sevens side and a long-service North Harbour man, also said he was heading for Japan.
Pierce took the logical view that he did not expect the All Black selectors to be interested in him again.
Besides, he rather liked the idea of a well-paid break in Japan.
Within a week three other North Harbour players were heading for Japan, making five from that union.
One was Paul McGahan, a senior North Harbour player and a former All Black halfback who played on the tours of France and Argentina .
McGahan had an All Black trial this year, but slipped out of the reckoning.
The recurrence of a niggling pelvic injury — plus difficulty in gaining consistent employment — turned McGahan toward the Rising Sun.
The other two players were both club men, Glenn Brill, a Silverdale forward with a brief North Harbour record, and Nigel Ward, a high-scoring loose forward with Silverdale and then Northcote in recent times, but with no real chance of becoming a regular North Harbour player.
In passing North Harbour continue to be prominent in the to-ing and fro-ing of leading players.
Frank Bunce and Eric Rush, Auckland-bred but unable to command a regular place in the Auckland side, changed to North Harbour last season and gained a jumping off place into the All Blacks this year.
Even during the All Black tour of South Africa Ant Strachan, the surprise-packet of an All Black  halfback this year, realised he was not likely to displace Jason Hewett, the World Cup no.2 halfback who has since been rejected by Mains and his selectors, from the Auckland position.
So Strachan in mid-tour signed up for the East Coast Bays club and the North Harbour seniors in a bid to get consistent first class play.
Strachan did not make the change immediately, for he crocked a shoulder in the test against South Africa and had a three-week stand-down period immediately after he returned from tour.
The passing parade of international players means that even with the loss of McGahan, North Harbour can still call on three international halfbacks: Strachan, Matthew Vaea and Tu Nu'auli'itia — the latter two Western Samoan World Cup halfbacks who moved to North Harbour clubs last winter.
 Nu'uali'itia came by way of the Counties senior side.
A North Harbour backline these days can start with  Nu'ual'itia (or Vaea) at halfback, Ian Calder (by way of Otago, New Zealand Colts, Wellington and Hong Kong ) at fly-half, Bunce at centre, Timo Tagaloa (formerly Wellington and Western Samoa) on one wing, Rush on the other, and home-grown Warren Burton at fullback.
In contrast North Harbour can field a pack completely comprising locally produced players, with Apollo Perelini, the Western Samoan loose forward, as the only outside candidate.
Auckland's incredible run as holder of the Ranfurly Shield goes on and on.
At the time of writing Auckland have won an away challenge against Marlborough 55–3 and then beaten Otago 21–16 at Eden Park.
This win stretched Auckland's record to 50 consecutive defences of the shield since winning it in 1985.
At that stage Canterbury had just equalled the old defence record of 25, set by Auckland in 1960–63.
Otago made a brave challenge, led by Mike Brewer in his first appearance since a series of injuries took him out of the All Black tour of Australia.
Afterwards Brewer said he could see Auckland holding the shield for as long as they could keep together their very strong scrum of Olo Brown, Sean Fitzpatrick, Steve McDowell, Michael Jones, Gary Whetton, Robin Brooke, Mark Carter and Zinzan Brooke — All Blacks all.
However, Grant Fox showed he is not always the infallible points-scorer and shield holder.
He succeeded with only two of then attempts from a slushy field against Otago.
Otago will soon be without Mike Brewer — he has accepted work with the Canterbury sports wear company and will be based in future in Christchurch.
Brewer hopes to finish the season with Otago, but is uncertain about his playing future in Canterbury.
Surrogate Samurai.
New Zealander Chris O'Neill was the first Kiwi to sport the red and white of Japan when he played at the 1990 Hong Kong Sevens — but he almost certainly won't be the last.
SOUTH AFRICA
BEDFORD'S BLAST
Former Springbok skipper TOMMY BEDFORD's exclusive column — only in Rugby World & Post 
This column argues the South African officials have been helping to professionalise the game by creating elite city clubs which cream off the best resources at the expense of the poorer, less fashionable sides.
Judging by the number of recent articles, letters to newspapers and magazines and general comment on the future of the game, it is the controversy over professionalism which has rightly become the item for debate.
Even Nigel Starmer-Smith concluded his editorial piece last month of the inevitability of the acceptance of professionalism, with a ‘hopefully, though, we will find that the game will not suffer as much as we fear’.
I fear though you are hopelessly optimistic, Nigel.
I have in my own way tried to point out that, of the world's leading rugby nations, the game in south Africa has suffered badly not only as a result of its years of isolation — as many of those who have just visited the country during the New Zealand and Australian tours believe — but precisely because our officials have for a very long time been at the forefront of the trend towards professionalism.
And, as it is also obvious that this tendency is becoming a worldwide one, it means that the game will in due course suffer everywhere as it has suffered in South Africa.
Thirty or forty years ago, when South African players across a very broad spectrum were renowned for their prowess and professionalism on the field of play, things were very different.
In those days the game was played amongst the 15 provincial unions which constituted the former SARB in a spirit inspired by the International Board.
This spirit was truly possible because the provincial unions were a composite blend of town and country, founded on a basic pyramid structure of after-school games for schoolboys, healthy competitive rugby at club level most Saturday afternoons all winter long for the mass of players.
Occasionally — maybe eight or ten times a season on the remaining Saturdays — there were first class fixtures for select fifteens representing the unions in the Currie Cup competition.
It was this fundamentally sound structure which made the game readily accessible to everyone in those unions and led to the South African game being so strong, so great, and so famous.
That was because it enabled the whole rugby fraternity to participate, with financial reward being the last thing on anyone's mind.
Amateurs all, this also meant that the Springboks were chosen from dorps in the Boland and the Border as well as from the cities of the Transvaal and Northern Transvaal.
In the last 30 years, and long before the amalgamation in March of the white and black and brown rugby factions, the unions were gradually split and sub-divided until now they number perhaps 26. of these, 20 are rural, including Boland and Border, and have been weakened to a point where they are virtually powerless, impoverished, dying or dead.
There will be no kiss of life to resuscitate them either.
For today it is the other six elite urban ‘test match’ unions who have been engineered to dominate South African rugby.
All the action is with them now, and they have all the money.
They have the money because they have the glamour, and because they have the glamour they have the television, the media, the sponsorship, the grand stadia, the lush accoutrements for officials and plush hospitality boxes for the favoured — and yet more glamour.
This is where the players are attracted, and this is where they are offered their perks because this is where it can be afforded.
This is why Springboks these days come from only these six unions, as we saw in the recent internationals.
South African rugby has really come to this: a game for 90 players from the Transvaal, Northern Transvaal, Western Province, Eastern Province, Orange Free State and Natal who get wonderfully reimbursed for the expense of now playing 23 or more first-class fixtures in a season against one another while the rest hardly get a look in.
And this is why, in spite of the years of ostracism, it was possible for the Springboks to lose by only three points to the All Blacks and 23 points to the Wallabies.
As for the poor old majority of ordinary rugger buggers playing at club level (roughly 40,000 of them), well they have just bee forgotten, relegated as they are, especially in the ‘test match’ unions, to timetables dictated by the 90 and playing any days but Saturdays.
Club rugby, through this wealthy, first-class ‘tail’ wagging the club ‘dog’, has been decimated, as has the system which once had 15 viable unions catering for all players at all levels in a rather rough and amateurism but entirely wholesome — and ultimately highly successful and fairer — why.
It is surely this trend in South Africa which must be resisted by those who love rugby around the world.
Now that isolation is over South Africa's unwholesome pre-eminence in making money and fame out of the game for a few over-exposed players (at the expense of enjoyment of the game for the many) could be infectious.
The IB is already hastening down this path.
Its officials today orchestrate an annual plethora of money-spinning international tours of such proportions that it would be unreasonable for players fulfilling these official commitments at this level not to be compensated financially.
The lesson which can be learnt from South Africa regarding professionalism then seems to be that, as I pointed out last month, there is a contradiction in allowing a mercenary spirit to dominate an amateur game.
Thus, surely there should not be more prestige matches played by fewer paid combatants in front of passive and hospitality-packaged crowds, but more active support for the playing of the game by as many players as possible at as many levels as possible.
FRANCE
PENAUD LOOKS THE PART
The Argentine tour has left French coach PIERRE BERBIZIER with a battle hardened squad as he told CHRIS THAU
During the last week of August, the French started their buildup to the Springbok series.
Twenty-seven veterans of the summer campaign to Argentina (minus centre Christian Coeurville who is involved in exams), along with the ‘tired trio’— Sella, Mesnel and LaFond — and the ‘banned trio’ of Gimbert, Benazzi and Roumat, and Sebastian Conchy (the Begles and French students flanker) met for a squad session in Leon in South West France.
Coach Pierre Berbizier and assistant Christophe Mombet, who both flew over to follow the fortunes of the Springboks in South Africa, rejoined their players for a light training session and a day of fitness tests.
The message to the players is ‘beware’.
Don't be deceived by the result against Australia.
The Springboks are among the best in the world’, Berbizier warned.
The South Africans lacked a yardstick.
They confronted the best in the world without knowing exactly what to expect.
That was obvious from their performance.
They were surprised by the intensity of the response, their rhythm suffered and their perception of the space-time rapport is not of the highest calibre.
But there is nothing wrong with their set-piece department, and their overall ability to play out wide.
Instinctively, they are good players; what they need is exposure to international matches.
After that they will be a threat to anyone.
‘Their predicament was emphasized by the problems experienced by their captain, Naas Botha, who never managed to bring his forwards into the game.
With a back row which was very strong and relatively heavy, the South African forwards struggled to stay in the game.
Besides, Botha does not defend, which is not really a problem because he stayed miles from his scrum-half, Du Preez, and made him look terrible with a slippery ball.
‘But he is a good player, though.
He has a great vision of the game, and can play stunning rugby — just as he did in the test against New Zealand when some of his tactical options were simply excellent.
‘We will be ready to receive them at the beginning of October.
The backbone of France is naturally the squad that toured Argentina.
Overall it was a good tour and several players grew both in stature and confidence.
The side has also welded together emotionally and some of the players who went to Argentina have a great future in the game.
‘Take Penaud, for example.
His position as fly-half requires not only skill and vision, but also confidence and experience.
While technically he is a very accomplished player, we had to build up both his confidence and experience.
Initially, therefore, he was encouraged to play his individual game, to look after himself and not be obsessed with the players around him.
We knew that because of his inexperience his reading of the game was not his strongest asset.
As his confidence grew we carefully started to build a player able to play for the others.
‘I think he is now a far better player than the youngster we threw in at the deep end against Wales last season.
You don't start with 20-year-olds by asking them to be a service to the collective.
That comes with age, experience and confidence.
Alain Penaud — encouraged to play his own individual game.
‘There are several players around who have gone thorough the same type of metamorphosis.
Christophe Deylaud has been encouraged to express himself and he is improving in heaps and bounds.
Aubin Hueber has already made the jump.
He is already playing for the team and has the qualities to perhaps captain France on day.
Sadourny emerged as a remarkably confident player, but the challenge from Ougier is very strong.
It is a pleasure for the coach to have two players as good as they are challenging for positions.
‘As I said before we left for Argentina, Sella, Mesnel and Lafond were welcomed back to the squad.
They have shown tremendous enthusiasm and a great appetite for work.
That's been very pleasing and offers me very attractive playing options.
‘Those suspended before the trip to Argentina have also been reintegrated — Benazzi, Roumat and Gimbert — while Mougeot will join the others when he gets fit.
Lascube has served his suspension, as did Moscato, but the latter will have to show that his discipline has improved before he is to be considered for selection again.
‘The tour will also allow us to see other players in action.
South Africa start their tour with the game against the ‘Espoirs’ in Bordeaux which, to us, is a very important game.
The Espoirs are the French Second XV, mainly for the younger players not yet ready for full cap games.
‘The Espoirs went to Zimbabwe this summer, and I understand that several of them had an outstanding tour.
We want to see them in action against South Africa.
Thirteen players from last year's Espoirs are now in the French squad, which tells you how significant this side to our development plans’.
ARGENTINA
Pumas sent to slaughter
The two tests defeats by an understrength France in Buenos Aires brought the series of test defeats for Argentina to 10 since they beat the touring England team 15–13 on August 4 last year.
This led to the usual talk of dismissing coach Luis Gradin, the man in charge throughout this period of successive defeats, but he will stay on at least until the end of the year when the present Argentine RU committee changes.
There was also renewed discussion, however, about bringing in a foreign coach, preferably from New Zealand, to work alongside Gradin to prepare the team for matches against Spain in Buenos Aires at the end of September and the Pumas tour to Spain, France and Romania starting mid-October.
There were also calls for the selection committee to comply with a ruling which says that no player out of his own club's first team should be picked for the Pumas.
This was chiefly aimed at Pumas captain Pablo Garreton who, since moving from his native Tucuman to Buenos Aires for work purposes, has been wallowing in the Belgrano club's lower teams.
Garreton received a lot of the stick for the defeats against France and his Pumas days seem to be numbered, if not finished, especially after he told the French press that he would be playing in that country next season.
Long-serving Argentine RU president Carlos Tozzi is truly worried.
One of his immediate suggestions is to form a committee composed of all previous Pumas coaches to find solutions, but this is unpopular even among the coaches themselves.
At least one of them, Hector ‘Pochola’ Silva (who currently trains the Buenos Aires selection), has openly refused to form part of such a committee and thinks all the others should do likewise.
‘The Pumas’ critics should not be so dramatic.
We have to admit that it's a question of generations.
We have not got such good players as in the past and those we have now should be motivated as much as possible’, he said.
Former Puma star, Marcelo Loffreda, thinks that ‘Our rugby as a whole has deteriorated due to the way it has been managed by our officials and this crisis has made itself felt in the Pumas in the last two years.
Gradin is the reflection of what has happened to all of us.
We have not learnt from mistakes.
It looks as if we like bashing our heads against a wall.
‘Experience tells us that a team has to have a balance of young and experienced older players.
But again they picked a team of boys, as they did in the last two World Cups.
A youngster, with 14 other youngsters as team-mates, is just being sent to the slaughter.
This was specially obvious in the Second Test against France when the boys had nothing left.
The worst thing is that officials and coaches are not willing to listen to other opinions.
‘The players are not to blame’, he continued.
‘They are not clear on their objectives and are not given the technical tools to use on the field so that they cannot play to their potential.
But for that to happen players of experience and a leader on the field — missing against France — are also vital.
The whole emphasis of our rugby must be changed and, if that means changing people, it should be done.
‘Officials must concentrate on popularising and organising the game and not on personal relations and politics to stay in power.
There are too many people among them who think they know it all’.
Jose Maria Santamarina, a current Puma, does not quite agree: ‘We can't deny we have failed.
The results show that.
But this teams needs more continuity than up to now and it can still do a lot better.
We must only overcome our immaturity and, within a short time, the results will improve.
Mistakes were made, but correct them it is not necessary to change the general structure.
I think the same players and coaches should go on this year's European tour.
‘They say we lacked courage’, said Santamarina, ‘and the traditional fighting spirit of the Pumas.
But they (the French) did not beat us physically but because we lost our cool…and there were worse problems, especially the lack of a leader.
Before we had (Hugo) Porta who was ideal — but he isn't there any more and the whole of Argentine rugby is suffering a crisis.
For the last few years it was held up by 20 players of outstanding international standard and we did not realise that technically we were dying’.
Former Puma tighthead Serafin Dengra, now playing in France, adds: ‘The Argentine RU is to blame for the present low standards.
They insist on continuing with an old structure (that on amateurism) which no longer exists anywhere else in the world.
To compete at top international level one must comply with certain basic concepts, such as training for four months before a test series.
But this is not done.
We want to stay at the top level while doing the same things we did 40 years ago.
It is absolutely necessary to allow sponsors into the game.
The Argentine RU seems to be the only one which can allow itself the luxury of having half a team of top internationals  watching the game’.
Serafin Dengra, the former Puma tighthead prop, now plying his trade in Italy, blames the Argentine RU for the losing streak.
He was referring to Argentine players with clubs abroad who, according to local laws, cannot play for the Pumas.
And he also insisted that the crisis is to deep that there have to be important changes at the top within the union: ‘There must be less politics, more work…
I think the officials themselves must realise that changes are necessary’.
The problem now is that the leading countries will not be so keen to invite Argentina to tour, although they may continue to like coming to Argentina.
France wanted to cancel Argentina's tour this year, eventually compromising by reducing it to three matches only because the Argentine RU said ‘If we can't come to France, you can't come here’.
CANADA
BRUTAL SCHEDULE
PETER McMULLAN describes a hectic round of pre-Wembley warm-up games for the Canucks…
Vancouver lawyer Rod Holloway, who doubles as coach of British Columbia and assistant coach to Canada 's national squad, warned his players in mid-July they were embarking on what was certain to be a ‘brutal’ schedule.
First came a 7,000 mile, six day round trip from ocean to ocean for Rugby Canada 's two games in Newfoundland; then back to the west coast with all the healthy B.C. players involved in one or more of the eight games undertaken against Swansea and Northumberland .
While not every top player was able to travel to Newfoundland, Rugby Canada still mustered a powerful squad that included 10 internationals, eight of them World Cuppers.
The first game with legs still weary, was won 31–14 over a young and energetic Newfoundland XV .
Second time around was more impressive with the Swilers overwhelmed 61–7 as outside-half Gareth Rees provided four tries and eight conversions before returning for a second season of club rugby in France.
With both Holloway and national coach Ian Birtwell looking ahead to the England v Canada international at Wembley on October 17 it was natural to hope for a good start to the new season against incoming U.K. tourists.
Instead it was the visitors who made the early running, albeit by the narrowest of margins in the first three games.
Swansea went home unbeaten, starting with a 40–14 win over Alberta before accounting for a B.C. President's XV 18–17 and British Columbia 18–16.
They it was Northumberland's turn with victories against Edmonton (46–14),Alberta (13–11) and the B.C. President's XV (17–15).
Canada captain and lock Norm Hadley missed both Swansea games with a neck muscle strain while wing Pat Palmer, also with neck problems, and fullback Scott Stewart (twisted knee) were casualties from the President's XV clash with the Welsh League champions in Victoria.
That certainly made a difference three days later when British Columbia faced the tourists at Vancouver's Brockton, a stunning setting on a perfect summer afternoon.
Recalling the turbulent 21–21 Centenary draw between B.C. and Wales ‘B’in 1989, one of the best crowds in years was on hand to see Swansea, workmanlike and without doubt the fitter of the two teams, win by two points with a goal, a try and two penalties to a goal, a drop goal and two penalties.
In Victoria mid-week, the President's XV, with Graf kicking three of his four penalties, had moved into a 14–3 lead before two errors, a missed tackle mid-field and then a missed touch kick allowed Swansea to turn the tide with tries by wing Simon Davies and centre Scott Gibbs.
Gibbs and fullback Tony Clement were full of running at all times and, while B.C. led again 17–15 with another Graf penalty, Swansea were ultimate winners as outside-half Stephen Jones added a second winning penalty to his earlier conversion of Gibb's score.
Jones also made the try with a perfect chip through from a five metre scrum.
It could have been a big day for B.C.'s new president, Vancouver businessman Chuck Plester, but Graf was inches wide with another penalty in injury time.
Northumberland had their outside-half Ian Chandler to thank for the late drop goal that led to a 13–11 victory over Alberta on a day when a freak Arctic airflow brought snow and near freezing temperatures to Calgary.
Kicking was also decisive for the Northerners when they faced the B.C. President's XV in Victoria, winning 17–15 with a last minute try by wing Simon Johnston after four penalties by fullback Nick Robinson had nullified the goal and a try scored by their opponents.
The tide finally turned in favour of the hosts when Vancouver-Fraser Valley , with former Canada scrum-half Ian Stuart and World Cup no.8 Glenn Ennis the only capped players in view, defeated Northumberland 18–14 in another game that did not live up to expectations.
Northumberland found the strength of British Columbia rather more than they could handle in their final game at Langley, a community on the outskirts of Vancouver.
John Graf, whose form at outside-half has been a highlight, captained B.C. In the continuing absence of Norm Hadley and proceeded to score 23 points in a 38–10 result.
In Eastern Canada, Scottish first division tourists Jed-Forest quickly found rugby in Ontario is not to be taken lightly.
They lost to Eastern Ontario 35–8, tied Toronto Scottish 11–11, lost again to Balmy Beach 25–8 and then were crushed 57–3 by the Ontario XV that had earlier dispatched Heriot's 33–0.
LEAGUE OF INTERNATIONAL MARKSMEN
Compiled by Peter Jackson
The World's Best
TOP SCORERS
If he never kicks another goal for England SIMON HODGKINSON will have the consolation of knowing that nothing, least of all ball-doctoring, can damage his figures.
They represent the highest points average in the international game — a fraction above the All Black whom he deposed from no.1.
Hodgkinson's World Cup role may have been depressingly brief and, if it was far from what he wanted, the way the tournament worked out did ensure his arrival at the top of the world kicker's table.
It wasn't just that Nottingham's studious fullback landed seven goals from his solitary World Cup appearance, against the American Eagles at Twickenham last October.
The event coincided with New Zealand on the wane and Grant Fox paying the inevitable penalty.
Despite his subsequent recovery to something like his old form, Fox hasn't quite been able to stop the shrinking process.
A few ricochets have made all the difference.
Had he kicked three more penalties during the Bledisloe Cup series instead of watching them rebound off the posts or miss by a whisker, Fox's average would have been identical to Hodgkinson's twenty-eight points from his last two matches amounts to ample proof that he has made a complete recovery from the doldrums of Dublin last October when he spoke of retirement in the immediate aftermath of the All Blacks losing their titles.
Michael Lynagh is still rattling along towards the four-figure mark but not at the same rate.
In six tests for the Wallabies since the World Cup final his success ratio has dipped below 50 per cent.
Every goalkicker hits a periodic trough and more than once over the last 12 months ‘Noddy’ has been within one unsuccessful kick of handing over to the New South Wales fullback Marty Roebuck.
Against Wales at Cardiff, for instance, he was on the point of giving up.
At each crisis point Lynagh has always kicked the goal, invariably from a difficult range or awkward angle, and dropped back into the groove.
He is, of course, much more than the most prodigious goalkicker the international game has seen or is likely to see, given the reduction in the number of penalty offences.
A more rounded performer than Fox, Lynagh is the best fly-half in the world.
At the rate the Wallabies play test rugby, he may not take much more than another two years to reach the thousand.
He will by only 31 come the next World Cup.
Unlike Hodgkinson, Lynagh and Fox have sustained their consistency over an infinitely longer period.
What Hodgkinson achieved in English terms was to elevate goalkicking to an art form with the metronomic  rhythm of his swing and the low trajectory, more often than not just enough to get the ball over the bar.
The table is nothing more than a rough guide, not an order of merit.
What it does not show is the most revealing statistic of all, the percentage of goals kicked by each player from his total attempts and the degree of difficulty involved.
Such information, alas, is not available.
If it were, I have a hunch that Fox would come out on top.
The fastest kicked to 100, 200, 300, 400, and 500 points, his technique, composure and accuracy, especially from within a 35-yard radius, have made a matchwinner par excellence.
If I had to choose one man to kick a 40-yard penalty from close to the touchline to rescue The Earth from being knocked out of the Inter-Galactic Cup in the last minute, Grant Fox would be the man…
Simon Hodgkinson — metronomic form.
Grant Fox — selected for The Earth as the kicker in the Inter-Galactic Cup.
Michael Lynagh — below his best, but hits the mark on crisis point.
YOUTH
Mike Stevenson reports
SCHOOLS
The World Schools' Rugby Championship at Whakatans (New Zealand) was won by the THE NEW PLYMOUTH BOYS HS (NZ), who beat Avele College from Western Samoa by 16–8.
The two English entrants,Bradford G.S.and Mount St. Marys , could not overcome the handicap of lack of preparation, as the tournament was 12 weeks out of the English season.
The summer term, as the major exam period, was not conducive to the correct preparation.
Nevertheless the experience was tremendous and Geoff Wappett, the Bradford coach, was high in his praise for the organisation of the tournament and the benefit that his young wide received from it.
The new laws were generally well received but Bradford found the stamping and use of the boot intolerable.
Consequently the injury list was formidable.
They lost their scrum-half, Adam Brosnan, after three minutes of the first match and their captain, Jonathan Ions, with a broken jaw in the second match plus four more serious injuries and a host of minor injuries.
Geoff Wappett writes: ‘A great deal was learned by everyone and, should the opportunity occur again, I would recommend that we make the trip again.
The intensity and directness of Southern Hemisphere rugby is emphatic and the game is considerably more physical in attack and defence than our game.
The players, 21 from 28 of whom will be back for the coming season, will be the better for their teething experience’.
RUGBY SCHOOL 's ambitious Antipodean tour took them from the birthplace of the game in England to Nelson, where the first game of rugby was played in New Zealand between the Nelson club and Nelson College in 1870.
The tour entailed well over 50 hours of air travel, a temperature range of nine degrees  to 33  degrees C and 17 beds in 55 nights!
After a day on the Great Barrier Reef enjoying the white water rafting, the serious rugby commenced.
The first game was notable in that, apart from a demanding first win, Sebastian Sloane became the first Rugby schoolboy to score a five point try.
The defeated side was Cairns and District Juniors and one of the four girls in the crowd was heard to suggest: ‘Let's cheer for the poms, you guys’!
The other match in Australia was also won and the finale of the Bledisloe Cup (26-23 to New Zealand ) watched, before departure for New Zealand.
There three defeats and two wins was far from chastening and the final match, against Ratu Kadavulava School in Churchill Park (Fiji), in front of 5000 spectators, was an unforgettable experience.
Rugby lead 16–10 with less than a minute to go but a try under the posts brought a defeat by 17–16 that in David Ray's words ‘…did not seem to matter’.
As master-in-charge of rugby, David Ray writes: ‘In hindsight we took too many players.
With a squad of 22 to 24, we would probably have won six and lost one and drawn one of our eight matches.
Our injury count was remarkably low.
Only the Christ's pack and the Auckland backs had a real edge on us, though we went backwards in every scrum.
New Zealanders really do scrummage and referees take a liberal view of the metre and a half law.
‘We did surprisingly well in rucks and mauls and, as expected in New Zealand, most players went to ground and looked for rucked ball.
Schoolboys play with more aggression and pace than in Britain.
Minimum stoppages are the order of the day’.
‘British touring sides have a choice.
Either tour young and hope to survive, then look to a successful home season or tour old and plan to win at least half your games.
We faced enough hakas to last a lifetime!
It was unforgettable experience’.
THE LEYS , who have been a considerable force in schools' rugby in recent years, prospered on the Austrian tour to earn five wins and a couple of defeats from seven games.
Their ‘B’ team, who also toured, won three matches and lost four.
Like Bradford and Rugby they encountered difficulties with the new Laws, especially those governing the ruck.
The only heavy defeat was at Newington , who were playing their ninth match in six weeks, as opposed to the tourists, who were commencing their season.
Master-in-charge, Austin Jessop, was quick to stress the excellence of the Newington side and to suggest that they would almost certainly have won either at the end of the tour or into a domestic season.
The half-backs, James Pinnington (scrum-half) and his partner Matthew Coe were, as they were last season, most impressive and the excellence of the pack augurs well for the coming winter.
Austin Jessop is appreciating the luxury of virtually being able to name his 1st XV before the school has played a single match.
They will be captained by their talented flanker, Bramall.
Like the other tourists, the hospitality and ‘extra-curricular’ side of the tour was an outstanding success.
RYDAL toured Zimbabwe and, following some problems in recent years, feel, despite defeat in all five matches, that they have laid the foundations for a more successful season.
Rydal were desperately unlucky to lost the services of their capable centre and captain, Charles Evans, who was injured, having scored twice, in the opening match.
Sandle Manor Prep School line up after winning the Boundary Oak School seven-a-side tournament.
The school had its best ever season last year, winning all 12 games played while scoring 312 points and conceding 52.
Harry Townsend reports
COLTS
Colts County Champions Lancashire celebrated their share in a unique treble when the Lancashire RFU held a dinner at Old Trafford to celebrate their senior team winning the Senior County Championship , their U21s sharing the U21 title with Surrey and the colts retaining the national colts title.
County sponsors Bass (Senior and U21) and the trio of British Nuclear Fuels, Thistle Hotels and Morton International (colts) were guests of the Lancashire RFU with RFU President Danie Serfontein and Lancashire Past President Eddie Deacey proposing and replying to the principal toast.
Lancashire Colts begin their defence of the title with their traditional match against Warwickshire , whilst defeated finalists Middlesex , with only Matt Saunders and Andy Turner (both Staines ) and Luke Snowdon (Ruislip ) still eligible, commence an intensive programme with fixtures against Buckinghamshire (September 27th) and North Midlands (October 4th) before entertaining Germany Youth under floodlights at Staines on Wednesday October 7th.
A  weekend tour to Scotland ten days later leads in the County Championship season, all indicative of the care devoted by counties to finding, grooming and coaching talented young players.
Surrey are holding an U17 Festival at Old Emmanuel on September 20th, with their four area teams taking part in a 20 minutes each way mini tournament and coaching day.
Moves to organise an U17 County competition within the London Group were not unanimously supported; but the four counties south of the Thames (Surrey, Sussex, Kent and Hampshire)intend to play informally as part of a progression towards colts county rugby.
Happily attempts are being made to change the colts qualifying date to September 1st from 1993 onwards rather than the anomalous January 1st which has for years disrupted team building by splitting units  established over the years on the September date.
This could be the necessary catalyst to establish a full U17 County programme.
Fourth Division TOWCESTRIANS with an outstanding 1991/92 season in which they won the East Midlands Colts Cup and won 28 of 30 matches, are planning an even more successful campaign, but few clubs could have enjoyed a better pre-season build up than COLCHESTER .
Their U16 and U18 teams, supplemented with players from Cambridge, Braintree and Bury , each enjoyed seven and six match tours respectively to Sweden under coach Kevin Dunne and culminating in victories over Sweden at U16 (19–3) and U18 (16–3) levels.
Only Vandelsborg (7–4) and Sodertalje (11–0), both at U16 level, ran their visitors at all close.
The highlight of the THORNBURY JUNIOR section close season was a visit by Jeremy Guscott to present awards to some 120 young players: an event indicative of the high profile increasingly enjoyed by English rugby   and English players.
The RFU are seizing the initiative with their Fifteen Days of England Rugby campaign between September 5th and 19th, which sets out to market the game among young players and their parents everywhere.
27 constituent bodies are taking the to the roads with their Roadshows, each sponsored by nationally known organisations and with the RFU itself picking up the tab in Leicestershire, Northumberland and Somerset .
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE , for instance, are taking their Roadshow throughout the country and also organising training camps at Aylesbury and Chinnor under Gary Pearce; Buckinghamshire are going similarly with their training camps at Thatcham, Windsor and Reading led by Paul Rendall.
WORTHING in West Sussex are organising a fortnight of varied activities for all ages; whilst in East Sussex,Hastings and Bexhill continue this impetus by holding an Open Day on September 20th sponsored by the Hastings Observer for youngsters aged from seven to 15 at the William Parker School where they hope to build a clubhouse and share club and school facilities.
HASTINGS U14s and U16s were runners-up in their Sussex Leagues , and with the local paper also sponsoring inter-school U12 and U13 seven-a-side tournaments later in the month which have attracted ten local schools, the integration of junior rugby within the senior club and community is apparent.
EXETER are holding a coaching clinic and fitness testing day for young (16 to 19 year old) players on September 15th.
Cumbria have a wide ranging programme including the Pilkington Roadshow in October at Workington, Egremont, Kendal, Keswick and Kirkby Lonsdale whilst David Pears is helping out at Workington on September 2nd and Wade Dooley at Kendal on September 15th.
Notts, Lincs and Derbyshire are promoting the Thorntons Challenge with coaching equipment for clubs to be won, whilst Celinet are offering 15 prizes of coaching weeks in a Prize Draw.
All over England, clubs and sponsors are emulating and even surpassing such initiatives.
Yet perhaps the most imaginative and far reaching scheme is the cross-curricular project developed by RFU senior coach and polytechnic lecturer Tony Butlin in conjunction with Walbottle High School and supported by the RFU and the University of Sunderland .
This provides a stimulating learning experience at secondary school level in all the foundation subjects; information packs were distributed to all schools during the summer and will provide a novel learning experience in a way that will grasp the imagination of young students countrywide.
The London Group and Thames Valley Club Junior Fixture Exchange handled more than 1,000 fixture requests last season in age groups from U13 to U19 and from clubs ranging from Bedford to Basingstoke, Wasps to Harlequins, Old Albanians to the Kent and Essex coasts.
Many a  harassed fixture secretary has been helped at short notice over the past nine years!
Ring or write to Harry Townsend and if you have information about your teams for inclusion in this column, then write only to me direct!
U21
It is business as usual for ENGLAND U21s , although it is saddening to see Martin Turner, a wonderful servant of English (particularly English junior) rugby, retiring as chairman of the England U21 panel in favour of Malcom Phillips with John Elliott continuing as team manager.
Martin had happily seen U21 rugby fully established as third in line in the English rugby hierarchy, and he thoroughly deserved the presentation made to him during the Trent College week by the panel to mark the esteem in which he is universally held.
The U21 qualification date remains September 1st (not the January 1st suggested last season), whilst although the 1992/3 season ends on May 1st with the now traditional match against the French Armed Forces at Twickenham as curtain raiser to the Pilkington Cup Final , it began with a match against Italy U21 s on September 5th as curtain raiser to the Leicester v England match which celebrates the centenary of rugby at Welford Rock.
Further opportunity follows for the squad established after the 1992 Divisional Championship when on  Wednesday October 14th, four days after a heavy Courage League weekend, they entertain Ireland U21 s at Newcastle Gosforth.
Nine of the team selected against Italy, including new captain Richard Bramley (Wakefield), had represented England U21's in the hard fought 21–21 draw in May against the French Armed Forces; two more plus three bench reserves had played a day later in the sweeping 48–12 win against the Netherlands .
Sleighthome, Bramley, Bracken, Clarke, Crompton and Ravenscroft had already earned selection for the Student World Cup team in Italy, and to top it all the first three also enjoyed a trip to Namibia and Zimbabwe with the senior North Divisional team!
Further motivation this season for student and U21 players is the possibility of a July 1993 seven match England U21 tour to Australia ; but with the U21 county and divisional matches, not to mention student representative matches and the demanding Courage League programme, to fit in to the normal season, it's hard work being earmarked as a rugby high flier.
Squad selection for the tour and the French Armed Forces fixture will be made following the 1993 U21 Divisional Championship , but most of the early season squad will still be available for a second year.
The virtually complete Student Five Nations Championship with fixtures played on the Friday preceding senior Five Nations matches, and the U21 Divisional Championship taking place on the Sundays following the last three Five Nations matches involving England, not only poses problems for players faced with selection for both, but also puts a great number of young players in the limelight as the Development Squad for the future is gradually moulded and refined.
Every country is doing  its best to ensure that promising players are not missed; and the first 15-a-side Exiles tournament between the Scots, Welsh and Irish takes place at Old Deer Park on November 7th and 8th with IRB referees Derek Bevan, Jim Fleming and Stephen Hilditch officiating.
The NORTH U21s , managed by Dave Parker, enjoyed their biennial pre-season tour to Marvejols in Central France where they were hosted for their week long visit by French families as the result of town twinning with Cockermouth, and the fantastic hospitality and often adventurous leisure activities were enjoyed not only  by the players but also by referee Fred Howard, who officiated in the first two matches.
The North U21s defeated ASC Montferrand U21s 18–6 in their opening match, tries being scored by flanker Jonathan Griffiths (Wakefield)following a 60 yard break from a lineout by Darren McKinnon (West Hartlepool)and left wing Graham Campbell (Egremont), the sole Cumbrian in the squad.
Tony Handley (Waterloo)kicked a conversion.
Two days later they drew 14–14, after leading 14–7 at half-time in a strength sapping 90°F, with Languedoc/Roussillon Select U21 based on Béziers and Narbonne .
Tries were scored by Newcastle/Gosforth and Newcastle University left wing Mark White, and flanker Simon Henry following a break by Loughborough University colleague Alistair Metcalfe.
Handley added both conversations.
The final match against the local Lozère Regional Select U21s was won comfortably 54–3.
The North, led by Andy Morris, included fellow England U21s Dickon Edwards and Tony Handley; whilst Sleightholme, Northey, Bramley and Bracken, the majority still eligible for U21 Divisional competition, were away in Zimbabwe and Namibia.
Clubs everywhere are realising the importance of U21 rugby in retaining promising players as a natural extension of colts, midi and mini rugby; and COLCHESTER are the latest in this long line with a emphasis on university vacation periods with an U21 orientated 3rd XV in the interim.
Local hero.
England's Jeremy Guscott takes centre stage at an awards ceremony at Thornbury RFC, held for the Bristol club's thriving junior section.