

HIGHLAND FLING
Council study on W.H.R future
by JOHN HUXLEY
THE ALREADY long running battle between the Ffestiniog Railway and the Welsh Highland Railway (1964) Ltd., took another twist this week.
The 1964 company who, like the Ffestiniog, have their headquarters in Porthmadog and want to re-open the defunct Welsh Highland line northwards back to Dinas Junction and possibly Caernarfon, have together with Gwynedd Council issued a statement condemning the FR.
They have hit out at the FR's refusal to reject a lease on the Caernarfon to Dinas Junction section of the former LMS branch to Afonwen and start work on the proposed introduction of a two-foot gauge line which would link up with the northern end of the former Welsh Highland line.
It is the latest shot in the battle to re-construct the 23-mile narrow gauge line.
The two-year row has been rumbling on since it became clear the Ffestiniog Company had taken an interest in the project.
Since the Ffestiniog bid to take over the moribund Welsh Highland company in a High Court action various schemes have been mooted including one by the FR to re-open the Welsh Highland from the north end and the long cherished target of taking the line through to within yards of the tourist attraction, Caernarfon Castle.
Now Gwynedd County Council have announced their intention to commission a comprehensive feasibility study into re-opening the whole line in conjunction with the 1964 Comp[any who have steadfastly maintained their stance of wanting to start reconstruction from the southern end where they are operating a three-quarter of a mile line along former British Rail land beside Porthmadog station.
The 1964 Company's statement read:
‘The Welsh Highland (1964) company is sorry to learn that the Ffestiniog Trust has rejected the very reasonable compromise offered to them by Gwynedd County Council, based on the suggestion in our brochure: The Way Forward.
‘We had warmly welcomed the F.R's plan to rebuild from Caernarfon, along the former standard gauge L.M.S trackbed.
We were, therefore, astonished to learn that they had rejected the offer of the lease of this Council-owned three-mile stretch.
‘It is almost inconceivable  that having so rightly stressed the tourist potential of Caernarfon that the Trust should then fail to seize the opportunity to capitalise on that potential.
‘Not only did the F.R reject the lease of the L.M.S trackbed, but they also:
REJECTED a package, including £300,000 worth of grant aid, towards refurbishment of the trackbed.
REJECTED the lease of 12 miles of the W.H.R trackbed from Dines to Rhyd-ddu.
REJECTED the offer of running rights over the Rhyd-ddu-Porthmadog section of the W.H.R which would have been leased to the '64 Company.
REJECTED the opportunity of healing the rift with the '64 Company.
In the light of the F.R's refusal to compromise the '64 Company has re-assessed its position.
It has now formally resolved:
a)
To pursue a strategy for the rebuilding of the full length of the line in conjunction with the County Council's proposals.
b)
It will establish even closer co-operation and partnership arrangements with Gwynedd County Council for the entire railway from Porthmadog to Caernarfon.
c)
It will immediately seek a lease of the Caernarfon-Dinas section of the former L.M.S trackbed.
d)
It will join with the County Council in promoting the appropriate statutory orders
e)
It will vigorously pursue the rebuilding of the line from Caernarfon, as well as extending from Porthmadog.
W.H.R chairman Al McNicol confirmed that it has always been the Company policy to  rebuild to Dinas.
He said ‘It is enshrined in the Company's Constitution.’
He went on ‘We would have preferred to  build in incremental stages, but we are delighted to have the opportunity of starting from Caernarfon as well as extending from Porthmadog.’
Reacting to the F.R's decision Gwynedd County Council's Welsh Highland Sub-Committee at their meeting on Friday, July 31, resolved as follows:
1.
Recommend that in principle narrow gauge railway should be established a) from Caernarfon to Dinas: b) from Dinas to Porthmadog.
2.
Recommend that the Council pursue: a) the appropriate statutory order in respect of Caernarfon to Dinas: b) the appropriate statutory order in respect of Dinas to Porthmadog.
3.
Immediately, and jointly with the '64 company, commission a comprehensive feasibility study on the entire project, to report in October.
4.
Confirm and underline its close working relationship with the W.H.R (1964) Company.
Welsh Highland Commercial Director David Allan said: ‘This is very good news for Caernarfon; it is very good news for narrow-gauge enthusiasts and it is very good news for the Preservation movement as a whole.’
GORDON Rushton, the Ffestiniog Railway's General Manager, said: ‘The first point is that FR is simply following the terms of the High Court judgement and the second point is that Gwynedd County Council's application to  take over the lease was rejected by the court.
‘The  Ffestiniog Railway have made two offers to the 1964 Company.
We asked whether they would be the support group to a line which we would rebuilt or, alternatively, take a seat on a joint board.
They have rejected both ideas.
‘The way we see it is that if they want to pursue their ideas in conjunction with Gwynedd that is their right and choice.
‘Also there is no dispute between the 1964 Company and the FR as far as we are concerned.
They do not have anything we want.’
Pannier progress
The boiler off GWR Pannier tank 7754 has reached the testing stages and it could soon be re-united with the restored frame and wheelsets at Llangollen workshop.
All aboard for Wenfordbridge
AT THEIR full meeting on August 3, North Cornwall District Council overwhelmingly endorsed the earlier recommendation by the Planning Committee to approve the relaying of the former Bodmin & Wadebridge Railway branch-line to Wenfordbridge for the principal purpose of carrying china clay.
Bodmin and Wenford Railway General Manager Keith Searle commented: ‘We are pleased at the opportunity this now gives us to expand to become one of this country's premier preserved railways, as well as for consequential benefits to the environment and the local economy.
‘Railway enthusiasts will also be delighted that a lengthy section of one of the world's oldest railways will be brought back into use for the purpose for which it was originally built carrying freight from Wenfordbridge.
This it did for all but 150 years, becoming one of the best known and best loved of all our rural branch lines.’
In only its third year of operating the three and a half mile branch between Bodmin General and Bodmin Parkway, the B & W has established itself as a major leisure attraction and is building a reputation as one of the more progressive preserved railways in the country.
Already the only preserved railway to be operating a regular commercial freight contract jointly with British Rail, the present proposals would lift it to a new level of national importance.
Moreover, it would be one of the first schemes to implement the Government's intention of bringing freight back on to the railways.
The higher profile can only result in more visitors to the existing steam railway operation, and therefore to the Bodmin area as a whole, as well as present much needed employment opportunities.
Although the relaying from Boscarne Junction to Wenfordbridge is principally for the movement each weekday of up to 300 tons of china clay, it is hoped that occasional steam special trains can be run to enable passengers to share the undisputed beauty and charm of this part of the Camel Valley.
ELR's ‘current’ affairs
By EDDIE BELLASS
THE EAST LANCS Railway scored a double this summer when it granted power distributor NORWEB permission to lay a nest of six, 33Kv cables along a part of the ELR right-of-way, then secured a three-week contract to haul some of the materials by rail to and from the construction site.
NORWEB, in the process of increasing its supplies to the villages in the Rossendale Valley, was subject to a planning authority caveat that part of the cable route must go underground for environmental reasons.
The easiest and cheapest way of doing this was to excavate an 800 metres long by one metre square trench within a section of the ELR's former double-track roadbed, now occupied by only a single track.
However, the particular site in question, right beneath the M66 viaduct, was not accessible to the road vehicles of NORWEB's cable-laying contractors J. Murphy and Sons.
The obvious solution was for the ELR to put on a daily goods train to service the site from both Bury Buckley Wells yard and a temporary sand  and gravel dump established at Ewood Bridge.
NORWEB not only paid the ELR a commercial rate for the daily goods train but also  made a substantial donation to the ELR-coach restoration fund.
Class 14 0-6-ODH No.
D9531 did most of the work, but on the day your scribe volunteered for train-crew duty, visiting North Staffs Railway 4F 0-6-0 No. 4422 was marked up on the engine roster.
A hydraulic grab loads sand from a ground dump into the 13-ton wagons of an East Lancashire Railway goods train on July 23.
The ex-LMS 4F 0-6-0 No. 4422, on loan from the North Staffs Railway at Cheddleton, was hauling a goods shuttle between this temporary railhead and a NORWEB cable-laying site under the M66 viaduct.
DOUG'S VALLEY DREAM
A DO-IT-YOURSELF narrow gauge railway raises steam for just one month every summer along one of Britain's most famous light railway trackbeds…writes RICHARD BEAN.
Sheen engineer Mr Doug Blackhurst designed, built, fires and helps to drive two twin-cylinder ten and  a quarter inch gauge loco's, ‘Dove’ and ‘Manifold’, which run double-headed up the beautiful Manifold Valley which divides the Peak District counties of Staffordshire and Derbyshire.
And his one-kilometre long metals run up the middle of the now tarmac walkwayed alignment of the former 2ft 6inch Leek and Manifold Light Railway which ran from a North Staffs Railway exchange station at Waterhouses.
No tickets have ever been issued in the Railway's eight-years-long official existence but Doug and the three compatriots that run the service shake a bucket at passengers for donations, and, throughout the 1980's, have raised thousands of pounds for this most worthy of causes.
This year, as the locos dropped their fires for the last time, the cash bag totalled more than £1243.72.
That more than matched last year's total which, considering the unseasonally wet weather this July, delighted the crew.
Mr Blackhurst is the retired chairman of Belle Engineering of Sheen, cement mixer and earth mover manufacturers.
 He would describe himself as a keen engineer rather than‘train spotter.’
‘I am not great railway enthusiast, but derive immense pleasure out of building them and running them,’ he added.
‘We steam up for arranged parties and clubs and have four staunch volunteers and three or four helpers who lay track and run the railway…it would be quite impossible otherwise.’
A decade ago, restless for am excuse to manipulate micrometers and milling machine again, he decided to build a working third-scale model of the Kitson 2-6-4 Tank ‘E.R.
Calthrop’…one of the two loco's which were the Light Railway's sole traction up to its premature demise and named after the nine mile long line's Chief Engineer.
This initially ran on a short demonstration track around the works but eight years ago developed into a plan to run month long charity specials up the former trackbed and based on the Leek and Manifold's former Hulme End terminus.
Six years ago he added two home-made diesel shunters to the operation and then two years ago embarked on an even more ambitious project…two narrow gauge steam loco's designed from scratch, for the line.
‘They are based on a freelance design and one of the main things was make them with a view to easy maintenance,’ explained Mr Blackhurst.
‘There's only two inches clearance between the boiler and the frames of Calthrop which makes it difficult to work on and get at anything when things need doing.
‘They are very simple, boiler feed is by eccentric pump with hand override, Walschaerts valve gear, and they run admirably on wood or coal.’
Although ‘Dove’ took a year to make, ‘Manifold’was only six months in the making because much of the difficult machining was ‘two for the price of one.’
Calthrop, which was built from original plans, is now largely sidelined because of a smoke box ‘riddled’ with corrosion…although she was demonstration-steamed this summer as a static display, amazing Mr Blackhurst when she signalled 40lbs per square even in her tired state.
So all passenger work carriages take 140 people and during July virtually every half-hourly service afternoon train was totally subscribed by some 3000 plus passengers.
Creator Doug Blackhurst on the footplate of one of his self-designed  locomotives .
All of the new ‘Manifold’ Valley locomotive prepared for steam testing.
The Great Central Railway's track gang lay the head-shunt to the Cattle dock siding at Swithland.
Duke pull a success
THE SPONSORED loco-pull at The Railway Age in Crewe, organised as part of the 1992 ITV Telethon Appeal, has been judged a great success, by organisers, The Ivory Tower, The ‘Duke of Gloucester’ Steam Locomotive Trust, and the Trustees of The Railway Age.
Ten teams, totalling 250 people, from a wide-ranging variety of organisations struggled with relative ease in hauling the 156-ton ‘Duke of Gloucester’ over the measured course.
The eventual winners were the team from the BR Diesel Traction Maintenance Depot in Crewe, closely followed by ‘The Mainliners’, a team of BR drivers also from Crewe.
Other teams included: Manweb Plc, Freshpack, The Royal Mail, The Woodside Hotel, Stilton's Cheese Hall pub, and the Rose & Crown at Arclid Green.
Special mention must be made of the team from the BR Electric Traction Depot who managed to field no less than 10 female members in their team.
Co-ordinator of the event, James Shuttleworth, said: ‘I am absolutely delighted with the way the event went.
Although it is still not clear how much we actually raised, initial indications are for a figure in excess of £3,000, which is superb.
I hope we will be able to run another similar event in the not too distant future.’
The 71000 Trust are looking forward to a number of other interesting activities during the latter half of 1992.
Following the appearance, in the company of 70000 ‘Britannia’ at the rescheduled Open Day at Bescot on Sunday August 30, 71000 is due to return to Crewe in order to work a charter for Northampton Railway Society.
Planned for Sunday October 4, this train will start from Bedford, picking up at Kettering, Market Harborough, Hinckley, Nuneaton and Crewe, with steam haulage from Crewe to Hereford and back outwards via Chester, returning via Whitchurch.
Ticket prices start from £39.00 and further details are available from Bill Wright of Northampton Railway Society, who can be contacted on:(evenings).
71000 will be returning to Didcot Railway centre shortly after, for winter maintenance, and to take up duties as part of the Southern pool of locomotives for the SLOA Winter programme, details will be announced shortly, although a number of trips using 71000 have been  pencilled in.
On a sad note, the Trust regret to announce the death, on July 29, of L.T. (Tom) Daniels .
Tom, who worked for the British Caprotti poppet valve-gear manufacturers, Associated Locomotive Equipment Ltd, was instrumental, not only in the original design of 71000, but also in the rebuilt carried out by the Trust.
As one of the Trust's honorary Vice Presidents he was closely consulted during the rebuilding process, with particular reference to the task of manufacturing the Caprotti gear and decision to fit a Kylchap blastpipe.
Latterly, he had advised the Trust on their plans to alter the valve events, with revised profiles for the exhaust cams.
Hopefully, this will prove to be a posthumous tribute to someone to whom the Trust have cause to be grateful, and are much saddened by his death.
The winning team with the Duke of Gloucester.
Steam in the South
MERVYN TURVEY
SUSSEX TIMEWARP
VISITING the Bluebell Railway is almost like going back some 30 or 40 years in one's life.
The only contribution to the present is the fact that it is possible only to reach the railway using modern transport in the form of a motor car or bus.
However as soon as the ticket office is approached the experience begins to take you back into the past.
This is the boast of the excellent leaflet which is produced to give prospective visitors timetable information and details of other facilities.
This document suggests that a ‘day out on the Bluebell Railway’ is a journey into the past.
Emerging onto the platform at Sheffield Park, the southern-most station on the line, one is immediately  transformed into an environment which is rich in the details of some 40 or 50 years ago.
The gentle movements and hissing of the steam locomotives is enhanced by the architectural surroundings and the everyday clutter of porters' barrows, luggage, fire buckets and all.
The staff are alert and responding to the needs of their guests and are dressed appropriately to support the scene.
There is a wealth of detail to absorb before strolling along to visit the locomotive sheds.
Here there are rows of steam locomotives in a large shed, some waiting to be overhauled and others stored until their services are required.
To one side is a well equipped works which enables the railway to undertake repairs and refurbishment to high engineering standards.
Outside in the sidings is the usual collection of bits and pieces, tender tanks, boilers, wheel sets, all of the items which go together to supply a well organised railway.
At Sheffield Park excellent facilities have been provided to satisfy the inner needs of the human being.
‘Puffers’ self-service restaurant offers a good selection and the ‘Bessemer Arms’, the Victorian replica pub provides fine food and bar facilities.
Both are situated in a new building which fits the scene admirably.
Make a visit of Sunday in the high season and there will be four locomotives in steam at least.
One is usually shunting around the yard while the other three are operating the  service , every 40 minutes, to the northern-most section at New Coombe Bridge.
Taking a ride is another adventure into the past.
The railway has a magnificent collection of coaches in a variety of liveries.
For a small extra charge it is possible to travel in the observation car.
It is the L.N.W.R. Observation Car No. 1503.
It is  almost between Llandudno and Blaenau Ffestiniog.
The views across the Weald from the windows of this coach are impressive as the train trundles towards Horstead Keynes and beyond.
At Horsted Keynes there is another experience of the past well supported by memorabilia of all sorts and often hosting a special event of  some kind .
On my visit it was a Craft Fair which stretched along the island platforms adding to the interests of the visit.
Also at Horstead Keynes are the carriage sheds where work is undertaken to restore coaching stock to working order.
This facility is also open to the public making it possible to watch the enthusiasts and craftspersons at work.
The Bluebell Railway often hold special events to add to the attraction of the visit.
Next weekend holds a special attraction for youngsters who are members of the railway's own Stepney Club.
They are invited to attend on Saturday to meet ‘Stepney’ which will be hauling their own special train.
The railway will be operating as normal and anyone who turns up on the day can join in the fun.
Sunday will see the high season 40 minute service operating.
Whether there is a special attraction or not a visit to the  Bluebell is a memorable occasion.
SPECIAL EVENTS, however, seem to bring extra awareness and attention to help preserved railways to maintain their progress.
The ‘Friends of Thomas’ weekend on the Swanage Railway sponsored by Book Club Associates and cleverly programmed to coincide with Swanage Regatta and carnival brought record crowds to the railway.
Four thousand and twenty six passenger journeys were recorded in two days over the weekend of July 26th and 27th.
David Green, Passenger Manager was absolutely thrilled with the response even though it meant adding extra coaches to some trains especially the 18.00 departure on Sunday.
Even more interesting was the fact that over 300 cars were parked at the  Park and Ride facility at Harman's Cross which obviously reduced the level of traffic along the road to Swanage by that amount.
One small concern is that the planned facility for Norden, west of Corfe Castle will have parking spaces for only 150 cars.
The experiences of this July weekend may encourage a rethink of the plans for Norden.
Also they should encourage the objectors to the railway's extension to realise that there is a case for considerable numbers of cars drivers being prepared to leave their cars and let the train take the strain.
Alleviating the traffic congestion at Corfe Castle by 300 cars would be a considerable boon any day.
POPPING in on the newest railway, the Lakeside Miniature at Eastleigh, found Clive Upton preparing for the day.
Things are looking up.
He has received some useful media support as well as visits from the local M.P.
and the Mayor on separate  occasions .
Daily passenger figures are averaging 100 but weekends are looking up with more than double that figure each afternoon.
It is worth noting that the railway operates between noon and five p.m. daily, weather permitting.
Ex.
Southern Railway 0-6-0-Q Class No. 541 waits at Sheffield Park.
Behind is a glimpse of the extensive locomotive sheds and sidings which are open to visitors.
Double record for W.S.R.
NOT MANY preserved steam railways can boast two unique happenings in two days, but the West Somerset Railway did just that at its sixth annual Vintage Vehicle Rally and Steam Fayre over the weekend of August 1–2.
Not only did they run the longest steam-hauled train ever seen on the 20-mile line since BR days, but also set a new British mileage record for the longest continuous run of Beamish Museum's replica ‘Locomotion’.
Saturday evening's ‘Severn Coast Express’ was advertised originally as a ten-coach special hauled by  visiting GWS heavy freight loco No. 3822, but turned into a fully laden 14-coach photographer's dream due to public demand for seats.
The special run by ‘Locomotion’ was a late addition to Sunday's schedule, however, after a spectacularly successful weekend event for the WSR enjoyed by at least 9,000 people.
‘City of Truro’ was in light steam for the last time on the WSR as a static exhibit but upstaged for once by a host of traction and ploughing engines, vintage vehicles and other displays!
Set up by WSR Managing Director Mark Smith and Association Chairman John Pearce as a thank you gesture to Beamish Museum and the WSR's workers involved in the rally, the trip by ‘Locomotion’ was a fitting end to a summer of celebrations on the WSR following the Taunton 150 events of last month.
Beamish's replica engine ran  unassisted the four miles to Crowscombe from Bishops Lydeard and  returned after all service trains had finished, but it brought out many local people to witness a piece of history go by.
The eight-mile round trip has only been bettered once before when the loco ran 15 miles for railway celebrations in Sacramento.
‘Locomotion’ will now return home to the North East after its six-week stay on WSR metals.
Similarly, the NRM's ‘City of Truro’ has now returned to York also after a highly successful tour of the main preserved lines in the South West.
A similar tour is hoped for again next year.
However, back to the lengthened ‘Severn Coast Express’.
The train brought one or two doubtful comments from a few WSR enginemen about 3822's abilities with such a heavy train on the line's hard gradients.
But the move delighted a group of GWS workers and members travelling as passengers who claimed it could pull anything!
Thankfully, their big black machine didn't let anyone down!
The firebox and boiler of No. 3822 were equally packed out too, as WSR Driver Dave Williams and Fireman Gareth Winter had the engine just right for the first four-mile assault on Crowcombe Bank.
Breasting the summit with ease and bang on time, the train was ‘chased’ by a host of car bound photographers and enthusiasts, with even the pre-occupied massive throng in the on-train real ale bar pausing to admire the feat!
John Gosling's Midland Steam Scene
FOREST FRIENDS
DFR ready to resubmit Lydney Town application
WITH ITS headquarters at Norchard, the Dean Forest Railway near Lydney, Gloucestershire, supports many features in its favour, from the Lyd Gorge north of the town, to the flat dunes by the River Severn estuary at Lydney Lakeside.
The Lakeside new station takes its name from the nearby lake, where a by-pass road scheme is under construction.
The line was once a mineral extraction route constructed mainly for coal mining in the area.
Evidence of this is clearly  visible at Norchard Station entrance, where a large water discharge pipe provides 75 million gallons in to the River Lyd daily.
This is the lowest point of the local workings in the area and they are drained in this manner.
The railway is fast becoming one of the major tourist attractions in the area of South Wales, although just boasting its English connections being in the  county of Gloucestershire.
A new Museum and large shop offering a very wide selection of railway interest items, including ‘00’ gauge models made of compressed coal (!), has recently been opened.
In the main entrance a fine example of a renovated pump trolley is on display.
Trains are operated on almost an hourly basis throughout the day, using a variety of locomotives from their varied collection.
Hunslet number 3806 of 1953, was in service this day named ‘Wilbert’, after the famous Thomas the Tank Engine author, the Reverend W. Awdry.
The locomotive originated from Cannock Colliery while the other engines including Peckett 0-4-OST 2147 ‘Uskmouth 1’ constructed in 1952, to ex BR Pannier tank, number 9681.
Under restoration in the neighbouring new purpose built workshops were small Prairie 2-6-2T 5541 and an ex-Newport 10 tonnes steam crane being refurbished.
Outside was a Diesel Multiple Unit set B692; 53619/54492, with 0-6-0 shunter D3462 nearby.
George Locker, Duty Steam Day Manager, explained the proposals to extend the line towards the final goal southwards at the exchange sidings with BR, where extensive trackwork still remains.
Work on this project is well in hand and diesel mechanical shunter 03.062 was operating with the permanent staff.
In the northerly direction, the railway is eventually destined to reach Parkway.
One of the major obstacles that the railway faced was the crossing of the main A48 Gloucester to Newport and Cardiff trunk-road, which requires at least two  members of staff on duty for the busy level crossing in the town.
It also provides one of the best photographic opportunities of two different forms of transport, which many railways cannot boast.
Plans to re-open Lydney Town Station have met with some local opposition.
The planning application was turned down after residents complained about the probability of noise, smoke and smell from standing locomotives in the platform.
The passing of trains, however, on an hourly basis seems to have gone unnoticed  too !
The planning application is to be re-submitted.
Trevor Radway, Chairman of the Forest of Dean Railway Company Limited, said there had been many improvements in recent times, and the railway was going from strength to strength.
The opening of Lydney Lakeside, plus the excellent visitors centre at Norchard, had brought in many extra passengers and revenue.
Catering facilities were provided in two original Great Western coaches, where Margaret Radway the Catering Manager, assisted other volunteers in preparing and serving of excellent luncheons .
Mrs. Radway must also be one of the first lady engine drivers in the country on a preserved line!
Outside there was a pleasing touch of a bowl of water for ‘Steamed up Dogs’!
There is a very good variety of rolling stock, particularly in the freight scene, while the majority of passenger stock is of the Mark I design.
Many are still being retained in the blue/grey livery, making a pleasant change from other preserved lines.
One idea being presently mooted, is the application of the Lydney Coat of Arms.
However, lining-out of the stock should not present a problem, with the presence of an expert signwriter David Hughes on the permanent staff.
Marketed under ‘The Friendly Forest Line’, this railway is well worth visiting with ordinary membership available at £10.00, and juniors £3.00.
Family membership is available at £12.50 which includes children under 14 years of age.
Further details of operation can be obtained from The Dean Forest Railway Company  .
D2119 working engineering wagons on the proposed new extension to the Dean Forest Railway into the proposed BR exchange sidings area.
Dean Forest Railway Hunslet 3806 ‘Wilbert’ of 1953 at Lydney Lakeside station after working a service from Norchard (14.00 departure).
Wye Valley recalled at Tintern Centre
CERTAINLY one of the more picturesque places on the railway scene is the site of the original Wye Valley Railway, which once ran between Chepstow and Monmouth.
This route followed the gorge of the River Wye in sight of the famous Offa's Dyke Footpath.
Old Tintern Station, just off the A466 is now a visitors centre and museum, with the original station buildings restored and used as an excellent refreshment room, plus a fine display of artifacts from the railway scene.
Outside, the signalbox has a display by a local wildlife artist while nearby a ground-frame is connected to two Great Western semaphore signals which, when pulled, operate to ‘on-off’ positions.
This is of particular interest to the many younger visitors to the centre.
In the old bay platform, a short length of standard gauge track has been laid, on which there are several pieces of GWR rolling stock.
One is a 1963 built third-class passenger vehicle numbered 5856, and liveried in the former Great Western colours of chocolate and cream.
The coach has been excellently transformed  into a shop and information office, offering visitors many items of local Welsh craftwork at very reasonable prices.
Even Royal Mail stamps are on sale as are jams and preserves.
Coupled to this is a maroon liveried BG (Brake/Guard) W80797 and half used as a Museum and picture gallery in connection with the local railway scene, the other as a general meeting projection room.
Old photographs displayed depict the Wye Valley line in its heyday.
A ‘Fruit D’ coach in mid-grey colours also supported more local craft.
Finally, a four-wheeled 13 tonne coal wagon concludes the short train length stabled, complete with a large notice station ‘No Tipping’.
Although no standard gauge locomotives are based here, there is a five and seven and a half inch narrow  gauge railway which runs some distance up the Wye Valley .
This is operated by the Newport Model Railway Society.
During a recent promotion, the Great Central Railway has undertaken the 1992 visitors survey and questionnaires were given to visitors and passengers arrival with a closing date of August 7.
Twenty-six questions were being asked ranging from  visitors' distance travelled to the railway, method of travel, and time spent on the GCR.
How many attended regarding friends and relations, and children; holiday visit, or organised group travel.
Also asked was information gained of the railway through advertisements, their expectations on the visit, and the rating of the staff.
Question 10 asked the household earnings each year, plus age of those visiting in question 9.
Completed forms were sent to The Marketing Centre, Freepost at Bournemouth, with a prize for two offered on a steam locomotive footplate, or a free meal for two on ‘The Charnwood Forester’ dining car train.
Results are expected to be announced in August.
THE CONSTRUCTION of a new Leicester By-Pass, connecting the A6 Loughborough road to the A50, will cut the Great Central Railway line to Leicester North for a two-month period.
Present plans are for this to be executed in January and February next year, and the bridge will provide the final link of roadways in this area.
The construction of the rail-over bridge, north of Greengate Lane between Leicester North and Rothley, will provide the Great Central Railway with compensation, which is to be put towards the run-round facilities at Rothley.
This will assist in completing the large re-signalling scheme here and, apart from the run-round when required, will assist with bi-directional operation at the station.
All trains during this period will thus terminate at Rothley, from Loughborough Central.
HAPPY 21st SOUTHPORT RAILWAY CENTRE
DERBY ROAD Motive Power Depot was the last of a series of locomotive sheds built in Southport by the various pregrouping railways.
The Liverpool Crosby and Southport Railway, West Lancashire Railway, East Lancashire Railway, Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway each built their own depots at various sites around the town.
Of these only the CLC (Cheshire Lines Extension Railway) and LYR Derby Road sheds survived as working depots into the 20th Century, although until the 1980's, the WLR shed existed as a workshop by the Windsor Road/Hampton Road footbridge.
The first building at Derby Road was a three-road shed erected in 1855 by the East Lancashire Railway.
It was replaced in 1891 by the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway with the present six road shed.
As L & Y shed No. 17 it housed up to 40 locomotives including LYR 4-4-0s, 2-4-2 tanks, 2-6-2 tanks and Dreadnought 4-6-0s for working the passenger traffic to Preston Manchester and Liverpool.
The complement also included 0-6-0s and 0-6-0 saddle tanks for freight work and a selection of railmotors for the Ormskirk and Altcar services.
Building on a steam shed of dreams
THE IDEA of forming a Transport Museum with a working railway was conceived by a small group of enthusiasts in 1971.
An appeal in the local newspaper that year attracted sufficient interest in the project and as a result the Southport Locomotive and Transport Museum Society was formed.
The Motive Power depot at Derby Road had been disused since 1966 when the last steam locomotives were withdrawn from service.
It had been thoroughly stripped by British Railways, and subsequently, vandalised so that by 1971 there were no doors, windows or roof glass left unbroken.
There was no water, electricity or other services, the shed and yard were full or rubble and, worst of all, from a railway point of view no track remained on site.
While negotiations for the lease of the building went on, members of the Society engaged on various fundraising schemes, and they slowly began to clear the shed, restore services, and start to lay track.
Initially track was lifted and transported from redundant industrial sidings in St. Helens, and, in later years from sites at Port Sunlight and Preston.
Six pairs of doors, each 16 feet high, were hung across the end of the shed, having been salvaged from the former Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway electric stock repair shops at Meols Cop.
The last locomotive off the shed in BR days had been a Black Five, No. 45156, in 1966, when the shed closed.
Since those early days, work at the Museum, now renamed Southport Railway Centre has gone on apace.
The rail network has expanded over the years, and in 1976, the Railway Inspectorate gave permission for brake van rides, steam-hauled, to operate from a platform on road three, operated by such museum  stalwarts of the day as ‘Lucy’, and ‘North Western Gas Board’.
By the early 1980s the line had been extended to a purpose-built platform alongside the museum building and line had become fully signalled, controlled by the former Liverpool Riverside Signalbox (Now Steamport No. 1).
In recent years parts of the shed roof have been  rebuilt by contractors, and Society members, hopefully without detracting from the original style.
There is still much to do in this direction.
Funds are the main consideration but the old shed at Derby Road, now 101 years old, is very much intact, and, what is more — serving its original purpose as a locomotive depot, as well as providing a unique opportunity to view what is a fairly extensive collection of rolling stock and motive power.
Many special events are arranged through the year, and a full programme is available at the Centre, or by application by post or telephone.
In 1984 a Company was formed, Steamport 1984 Ltd., to acquire the site from British Rail, with the support of a large group of members, who took a deep breath, and dug into their pockets to help finance a substantial portion of the initial costs, and with the aid of a bank loan, which is now well over half way repaid, the premises became truly home to the exhibits, both privately and society owned.
1992 is the 21st anniversary of the start of what was then an idea.
But it is an idea which has succeeded.
May it go on from strength to strength.
By 1973 agreement on a lease of the site had been reached with British Rail, and the first locomotives, buses and other exhibits were on site.
At this point a Company, limited by guarantee, Steamport Southport Limited was formed to administer the site.
In later years the Company, which now incorporated the original Society, became a registered Charity.
In addition an agreement was reached with British Rail on a rail connection, enabling further locomotives and other exhibits to arrive.
In the mid-1980s this connection showed its value even more when the Centre services the annual Manchester-Southport steam specials from 1985 to 1989, the first steam locomotive to be  serviced being appropriately enough, a Black Five, No. 44932.
ABOVE: Cecil Raikes, the 0-6-4T tank built for the Mersey Railway inside the shed at Southport.
RIGHT: Three locomotives bask in Lancashire seaside sun.
In front is Sentinel 0-4-0 geared engine ‘St Monans’ while ‘Agecroft No. 2’holds centre position.
British locos in Spain
from KENNETH M DOBESON in Madrid
EARLIER this year, the Basque Railway Museum at Azpeitia in the province of Guipuzcoa, was opened to the public.
Housed in the former metre-gauge Urola railway station, and carefully restored to working order, is a Naysmyth Wilson 2-6-0T of 1898, together with two wooden carriages built by CAF, Beasain, in 1925.
This train runs quite regularly most weekends.
Unfortunately, the Urola electrified railway was closed and much of the track lifted, so Azpeitia cannot be reached by train, although there is a bus connection from the original seaside terminus at Zumaya, with train services with both Bilbao and San Sebastian.
Among steam locomotives awaiting restoration, the Museum possesses two Sharp Stewarts, one a 0-6-0T from 1888 and the other a 2-4-0T from 1896.
 Both metre-gauge machines.
In addition there is an Andrew Barclay 0-6-0T of 1925 vintage, originally employed by the Anglo-Spanish construction Co. when they built the Santander-Mediterraneo broad-gauge line in the 1920s.
Other stock includes three metro-gauge electric locomotives and three diesels, plus five electric railcars, all metre gauge.
On the stock list we found four carriages additional to the ones already mentioned, plus three trams, a luggage van and a BUT trolleybus, ex-London Transport, which saw service in Spain after trolleybus services ended in London.
The above items and much more, which is now yet not on display as the Museum has still to build a depot for which, incidentally is planned to include a NEW 16-metre diameter turntable for both metre and broad gauges.
The city of Ciudad Real is to establish another new railway museum in the former RENFE station at Parque Gasset, now out of service due to the construction of the new high speed line between Madrid and Seville.
The Worth Valley Railway's standard class four 2-6-4T 80002 nears completion.
The Naysmyth Wilson locomotive at the Basque Railway museum.
Presidential opening for new museum
STRAFFAN, Co.
Kildare, sixteen miles east of Dublin is the home for the latest Irish steam centre The Steam Museum to be opened in Ireland with the formal opening ceremony being formed by President of Ireland Her Excellency Mrs Mary Robinson.
The Steam Museum is dedicated to the steam engine which was used not only on the railways but in industry too.
Charles Parson of Birr, Co.
Offaly (1854–1931) invented the steam turbine which today is still in use for electricity and ship propulsion.
In the Steam Museum, the Power Hall displays live steam stationary engines made or working in Ireland during the nineteenth century.
Railway enthusiasts will be interested in the Richard Guinness Hall which houses his magnificent collection of many prototypes of early railway engines.
These include  Richard Trevithick's famous Third Model of the first four-wheeled self-propelled vehicle.
A fine brochure with an excellent description of the collection, lavishly illustrated with many colour photographs of the the models on display with text, has been produced and is an excellent publication since it is clear, concise and easy to follow.
The museum building itself was removed from Inchicore, Dublin, and was restructured from the old church of St. Jude, where many steam engineers worshipped and provides a most suitable for this unique and special collection.
Opening Hours of the Steam Museum are — 11.30 a.m. to 5.30 p.m. (last admissions 4.30 p.m.)
Sundays and Bank Holidays all year EXCEPT 24th December to 2nd January.
Every day in August.
On ‘Live Steam Days’ children must be accompanied by an adult.
Party bookings are welcome at all reasonable times.
Further information is available from the Steam Museum by telephone 
The Museum has also a tea house, and souvenir items which catalogue and postcards can be purchased in the reception area.
LETTING OFF STEAM
There's no free rides!
I AM writing in response to the letter from Melvyn J. Stigle in SRN No. 207.
Whilst I do tend to agree with his observations about the pricing of some main line steam tours, I find his comments about ‘no free rides for support crews’ almost unbelievable.
Does Mr Stigle not appreciate that without these hard-working VOLUNTEERS who give so freely of their time and money, there would be no main line steam?
Whilst not a support crew member, I do work in the loco department of a major preserved line, so I have an idea of the work involved, and I for one do not begrudge the support crews anything, they deserve every little perk they get, not to mention the grateful thanks of all those of us who gain immense pleasure from their efforts, including you, Mr Stigle!
Voice your opinions by all means, Mr Stigle, but please think next time before criticising the efforts of those who provide you with our hobby by their unselfish efforts.
Prices are too steep
I WRITE to support your correspondent Melvyn J. Stigle's remarks regarding fares on the North Wales Steam Trains.
He is right  to say that the fares are too high even more so when the fare is the same  whether you join the trains at Crewe or London.
£40 from Crewe to Tywyn and a ride on the Talyllyn is a bit steep.
In a recent edition of your paper a F.S.S. manager attempted to explain away why some trains had been cancelled with other lightly loading.
With these sort of fares what else do they expect.
The Editor welcomes letters from readers subject to the normal editing process.
They should be addressed to  .
A CLASSIC 40
A real picnic for Nene Valley's Teddy Bears
Flying
Furness Flyer loves the new Pilkington Glass stock of coaches across Arnside viaduct.
The 7½ mile Nene Valley Railway celebrated its fifth Diesel Weekend in July.
The line ran several combinations of preserved diesel traction over its tracks during the two-day event.
In action where Gerald Boden's three ‘Teddybears’, ex BR Class 14 loco's originally built at Swindon for local freight trip working anywhere over the BR system.
Pride of place went  to the immaculate English Electric Class 40, D306 (40106) which has been restored to BR green livery with small yellow warning panels.
Everything was down to the last detail  on this loco, including the small ladder which was originally attached to the ‘A’ end of the engine.
Credit must go to Gerald Boden and his crew who turned out this machine.
During the Sunday a demonstration freight train was run in the capable hands of Class 14 with TOPS number 14029 (D9529) which it never carried being withdrawn from BR operating stock in 1968  after just three years  in service and before TOPS renumbering took place in 1972.
Giving sterling service were two ex industrial shunters, Birch Coppice, an ex NCB loco built in 1963, and Doncaster from the Yorkshire Engine Company stable.
They helped bank continental passenger stock between Wansford, Wansford Tunnel and Yarwell Mill.
Train-loco for this working was ex-BR Class 03 shunter D2112 (03112) built at Doncaster and introduced in 1960.
It was withdrawn from BR  in 1987 , its last depot being Gateshead.
It is now privately owned by Malcolm Heugh, the Chairman of the NVR.
The line's volunteer diesel engineer, Dave Harley commenting on the Diesel Weekend said: ‘It went reasonably well with fair loadings over the two days.
All the diesel traction performed well and we had no failures.
The Class 40 was popular with most trains running to capacity.’
The railway runs mixed steam and diesel events on the third Saturday of every month with the Class 40 being the usual diesel traction.
The lines are also running a ‘Enthusiasts Weekend’ over the September 11/12 weekend when more diesel traction will be available.
Complete with continental passenger stock, D9516 double heads the 13.26 departure from Yarwell Jct with D9523 the final destination being Peterborough (Nene Valley).
D306 (40106) leaves Wansford complete with ‘Royal Scot’ headboard on  the 15.20 bound for Peterborough (Nene Valley).
Travelling towards Wansford ‘Teddybear’ 14029 (D9529) is in charge of a demonstration freight train  from Orton Mere.
1964 Swindon built ‘Teddybears’ D9516 and D9523 enter Wansford station with the 11.20 ex-Peterborough.
Sir Berkeley revived
DUNCAN YOUNG meets a ‘new’ veteran loco
THE VINTAGE Carriages Trust's ‘youngest’ locomotive Sir Berkeley has been quietly entertaining the crowds at Scunthorpe Steelwork.
Looking older than her one hundred years, this diminutive locomotive had a working life that would put some main line locomotive to shame.
Built in 1891 by Manning Wardle (works no. 1210) as class L, the 12″ 0 6 0ST spent the first 40 years of her life working for the Doncaster contractors, Logan and Hemingway where she was known as No. 10.
Involved in the construction of the Great Central Railway's ‘London Extension’, one of her claims to fame was her involvement in the building of the long-gone Nottingham Victoria Station.
In 1935 she was sold on to the ironstone industry in the Cranford area and ended her working life at Byfield in 1963 — ironically not very far from the GCR.
It was during this phase of her life that the name ‘Sir Berkeley ’was added.
Purchased for preservation by Roger Crombleholme in 1964, she was moved to the then embryonic Worth Valley Railway and was steamed in February 1968.
Media fame came with her use in the BBC's serialisation of ‘The Railway Children’ in 1969 followed by limited use and ‘retirement’in the mid-seventies.
In the mid-eighties the VCT purchased Sir Berkeley with a view to restoration to eventual working order in the wake of Bellerophens.
Restoration by a small team  led by Terry Sykes started in 1988 and looking at this dainty locomotive now in all her glory, their efforts have been well rewarded.
The KWVR rendered invaluable assistance with the restoration and operation of Sir Berkeley.
Currently hauling a two-car DMU, the aged Manning Wardle 0-6-0T is working on a now rare beast in the UK — a sizeable industrial railway.
In the autumn, Sir Berkeley will return to Ingrow to rejoin Lord Mayor — next in line for restoration — and Bellerophen.
Bellerophen — built like an ironclad — is awaiting its 10-year boiler overhaul.
Finances are the limiting factor in this case but, hopefully, will be found soon to permit this fine locomotive to perform once more.
I am grateful to Mr. Chris Smyth of the VCT for this information.
A feature on the achievements of the VCT will follow later this year.
Sir Berkeley runs round his train during a tour of the Frodingham steel plant in May.
BOOKSHELF
by JOHN HUXLEY
From the footplate: Cambrian Coast Express By Stephen Austin.
NOSTALGIA is good business in the railway world.
The wistful look back to the glorious and not-so-glorious age of steam has ensured that there has been a rush to print off books about the railwayman's experience.
This is an imaginary trip during the summer of 1957 when steam still ruled on British Rail metals.
Author Austin, an active preservationist who has both fired and driven main-line steam locomotives, conducts you on a journey from London's Paddington Station to Aberystwyth and Pwllheli on the Cambrian Coast.
The train leaves London hauled by the preserved Nunney Castle and travels via Banbury, Birmingham and Shrewsbury.
A Manor and Dukedog  take over the train at Birmingham.
The story is told through the eyes of the crews who man the engines and it is an interesting way of conducting you over one of Britain's most interesting and picturesque routes.
The author's writing style carries you through the journey and technical detail with commendable pace and his footplate experience is clearly in evidence.
The whole package is well worthwhile for the enthusiast.
There are numerous black and white illustration, station layout plans, schedules, posters and maps.
The only thing that is missing is the smell of steam and hot oil and that never seems all that far away.
Even allowing for my interest in all things Cambrian it is a well worthwhile volume which would  interest even the least  technically proficient enthusiast.
The Great British Railway: A living history.
By Tony Hall-Patch.
INCREDIBLY for a railway system that has served the nation for more than 150 years there is still a considerable amount of history either still serving or extant.
The development of the railway together with an appreciation of the equipment left behind provides the bedrock on which this lavish production is based.
Maybe it will not provide much new material for the dedicated enthusiast because there are so many other books devoted to the early history of railways.
But what Patch-Hall, the former curator of rail transport at the Science Museum in London, has done is gather together a fascinating collection of explanations about the system, its equipment and legislation.
Superbly illustrated in both colour and black and white it provides a guide about what to see, where to see it and what to do in living railway history.
It would make an ideal present for  a young person whose railway consciousness was just being awoken and, perhaps, light reading for the more railway aware person who still has a hankering to remain in touch with history.
It is certainly the ideal companion when you set out to explore parts of the British Railway system other enthusiasts miss.
A Pictorial Survey of Railway Stations By Gordon Buck
GORDON BUCK C. Eng.
MIEE has a family connection with railway stations.
Both his grandfather and father were stationmasters in Great Eastern Railway territory so it is suitable that he should produce a pictorial survey of British railway stations.
Produced in album style he covers the ground in meticulous style.
The work is divided into logical sections with nineteenth century styles of architecture, early railway architects and company architectural styles.
There is also space for London's main-line stations as well as twentieth century buildings.
For the vast majority of the population their contact with the railway network is through the railway station.
For that reason alone most people will find something on offer.
If there is any criticism of this super volume it is that there are not enough explanatory captions.
The pictures alone, however, make this an important work.
While most attention is usually lavished on the lines and rolling stock ,the stations, perhaps, the most permanent reminder of the system in our cities, towns and villages have been sadly neglected.
But this volume corrects that situation.
This study represents a view of British architecture over the last 150 years.
Stations come in all sizes from cottage-size right through to major civic buildings.
Besides being the ideal reference work Buck's labours will provide many happy winter night hours covering the length and breadth of the British railway system.
 Highly recommended.
Down Memory Line By John Baxter.
THE SEVENTH in an occasional series of books on aspects of the Somerset & Dorset has just been released.
Entitled ‘Down Memory Line’, it concentrates on the life of Stationmaster Norman Down who looked after Binegar from 1944 until the closure of the line in 1966.
Telling first of how Norman started on the S&D at Cole in 1924, it includes a humorous account of what life was like in Control during the war years in London before he returned to his Somerset roots at Binegar.
It shows what was involved in the running of a small yet busy rural station, the variety of incidents that Norman had to deal with as well as the people under his span of control.
In the final sad years of the S&D, it vividly shows how the Western Region inexorably killed off the line and how Norman and his station staff were at the forefront of the fight to save the route.
It is illustrated with, among others, photos from Ivo Peters' albums, some previously unpublished.
Priced £4.95 (£1 package & packing), the book is available from the Somerset & Dorset Trust   
MEETING POINT
Vobster in action
THE two foot gauge Vobster Light Railway, ‘the new railway with a long history’, held its first public event on Sunday, July 19th.
The railway is currently under construction and will be using the trackbed of the long-closed Newbury Railway, previously standard gauge and originally Brunel's broad gauge.
The day started with a number of invited guests who witnessed a ceremonial cake cutting by Mrs Dawn Coles, proprietor of the adjoining Holwell Farm House Restaurant.
This was followed by the cutting of a ribbon across the track by BBC television documentary producer Andrew Johnston.
Andrew remarked that he had been involved with such a ceremony previously, when the opening of the Lynton & Barnstaple Railway had been re-enacted on the Brecon Mountain Railway for one of his programmes.
It was a unique opportunity to now perform such a ceremony for ‘real’!
The rapid progress with the construction of the railway, the past couple of weeks having witnessed the excavation of a cutting and preparation of about 500 feet of track bed, had enabled about 200 feet of track to be ready for the open day.
Therefore it was possible to run a demonstration passenger train using the ex-BR Rushton & Hornsby diesel locomotive, No. 85049 and the newly constructed bogie passenger coach, delivered to the railway only a week before following completion by Overland Railways of Chidham, West Sussex.
From mid-day the general public were admitted to the site for the first time, and although publicity had been kept to a relatively low key, several hundred visitors attended.
The majority were families from the nearby villages but there were also numerous railway enthusiasts from further afield.
The event was also attended by other railway/museum organisations such as the Somerset & Avon Railway, the Dorset Heath Light Railway project and the Radstock, Midsomer Norton & District Museum.
The next open day is proposed to be  in September and will be followed by Santa's visit to the VLR in December.
Further details of the VLR are available from The Hon.
Secretary, VLR, and who shall also be pleased to hear from other railway societies wishing to attend future events with their stands.
Broadcaster Andrew Johnson cuts the ribbon to ‘open’ the Vobster Light Railway.
Gwili Railway's project
THE GWILI RAILWAY has recently taken delivery of a Great Western Railway horse box body, which is to be restored to  its former glory for use on the railway.
The vehicle was built at the Swindon GWR workshops in 1973 as part of lot number 1577.
 Its running number was 654.
The vehicle retains its original groom's compartment, together with gas light, communication card and steam heating valve fittings.
It even has all its original interior transfers.
Following its withdrawal from BR service in the 1950's, it was used as a store at Tanygroes Car Dismantlers, near Aberporth in Dyfed.
Mr Barry Jones donated the vehicle body to the Brynteg Railway Preservation Group in May, and it is now located at Llwyfan Cerrig station where it is on public view.
The Brynteg group are, of course, well known for their  high-quality Taff Vale carriage restoration project.
The horse box is now their next job, and this will take them about four years.
A replacement chassis will need to be found for the vehicle.
After restoration, the horse box will be run on the Gwili Railway.
Charging up the  furness 
Paddy Smith's 8F 48151 powers it way up the Furness mainline.
YOUR MAIN LINE STEAM GUIDE
THE GLOUCESTERSHIRE Warwickshire Railway will be holding its annual Diesel Gala on the weekend of October 3–4.
It is hoped the event will feature double headed Class 14, with D9553 making its debut in service.
Other attractions will include the  railway's recently restored Class 108 two car DMU set also making its debut in service, and Class 03 No. 03 069, the famous Vic Berry shunter.
Saturday will be exclusively diesel, while on Sunday ex GWR Heavy Freight locomotive No. 2857 (on loan from the Severn Valley Railway) will also be hauling trains.
There will be an intensive service of trains all weekend .
FINDING THINGS to do with the children during the long summer holidays can be a real headache for mums and dads.
So to combat the problem Kew Bridge Steam Museum has devised a series of children's trails which will be available free to children visiting during August.
The trails have been designed to be fun to do but with an education purpose leading children around the museum.
‘What's missing?’ puzzles and ‘Finding Out About Engines’trails are just two of those on offer.
For parents there's a free audio tour narrated by Bamber Gascoigne which vividly brings the museum and its collections to life.
A former waterworks, the museum's most impressive exhibit is the Grand Junction 90″ engine which towers 30ft. above visitors!
The museum is open daily ‘in steam’ every weekend.
Over one August Bank Holiday there will also be rides on the museum's 2 foot gauge railway, the only one of  its kind in London.