

WELSH WOE
By JOHN HUXLEY
FLYING SCOTSMAN SERVICES have cancelled their two Welshman services which were planned for this month.
Lack of loadings have forced the two trips on July 15 and July 29 to go to the wall and FSS spokesman John Leech said: ‘The recession still seems to be having an effect on the way people spend their money.’
There are no plans to resurrect the services which were due to be hauled by former BR Standard 2-6-4 tank 80080 from Crewe to Llandudno.
It would appear that the passenger selection process has singled the Welshman out as unattractive as North Wales Coast Express loadings are holding up.
Mr Leech also added that several other services were proving very popular with the travelling public.
He said: ‘The Cambrian Coast Express is all but full while other trains are reporting that the first-class accommodation is full while other facilities are filling up.
‘It would appear that people are taking two trips a year instead of four and that the North Wales  journeys have suffered as a result.’
But one tour operator, Pathfinders, have introduced an extra service on the line on July 26, hauled by Princess Margaret Rose and report good loadings.
Duke of Gloucester's run on the first mid-week North Wales Coast Express was hit by a number of problems none of which were as a result of problems with the locomotive.
The original departure from West Hampstead was delayed because of repairs to fire damage to the signalling systems on the approach to London's St Pancras station and they reached Crewe around 40 minutes late.
Their return from Holyhead was also delayed because of a number of lineside fires.
A spokesman for the Duke of Gloucester Trust said: ‘The locomotive  ran well with thirteen carriages and a good load.’
BRITAIN'S newest narrow gauge railway opens its doors to the public for the first time on Sunday.
This is the two-foot gauge Vobster Light Railway which is being built by a small syndicate of railway enthusiasts and is located at Holwell Farm House, Mells on the Frome to Vobster Cross road inn Somerset.
After an initial few hundred feet across virgin land the railway will join the old trackbed of the long-disused Newbury Railway.
This once serviced collieries and quarries south of the Frome-Radstock line, itself now the subject of a preservation project, the Somerset & Avon Railway.
The Newbury Railway was originally laid to Brunel's broad gauge and then relaid to standard  gauge and is now being revived with a track gauge of two foot.
The Vobster Line is very much in its infancy and although not yet ready for passenger carrying, will nevertheless be of interest to those wishing to see what has been achieved to date and to learn of the plans for the future.
This is intended to be an introduction to the project and therefore there will be no admission charge to the site on this occasion, although a couple of conation boxes will be suitably positioned for those who may wish to assist the project in this way!
Company secretary Peter Nicholson said: ‘We are currently looking out for a suitable steam locomotive but it could not be too big or heavy.
It is a matter of keeping our ears and eyes open for the right locomotive.’
3440 City of Truro with the 3.30 passenger service on the South Devon Railway.
K & E.S.R. stars in TV series
THE THIRD series of Yorkshire Television's highly acclaimed dramatisation of H.E.
Bates' ‘The Darling Buds of May’ will feature Tenterden Town Station, headquarters of the Kent and East Sussex Railway.
A film crew took over the station on Tuesday, June 30 — the last opportunity before the railway's daily running season began to film sequences of the cast alighting from a train and leaving the station in Pop's famous Rolls Royce car.
Among those characters featured are Pop and Ma Larkin, Edith Pilchester and Primrose Larkin.
Tenterden Station was featured in the first television series and although shown over two years ago the railway still receives numerous visitors on ‘Darling Buds Country’ coach tours.
One travel company alone brings in a coach tour from the Midlands every fortnight.
The autumn screening of the third series is expected to provide a welcome fillip to the railway's passenger numbers.
The railway has now entered its busiest two months of the year with steam trains running every day until September 6.
Passengers can travel in the three coaches featured in The Darling Buds of May on most days in this period.
ALL CHANGE ON N.N.R.
New chief at Sheringham
AFTER some 19 years there has been a change of leadership on the North Norfolk Railway.
David Morgan has retired as chairman and is succeeded by Keith Montague who was previously chairman of the supporters society (The Midland & Great Northern Joint Railway Society Limited), and who has been associated with the North Norfolk Railway for over 20 years.
Keith is quite convinced that with the continuing improvement being made, the North Norfolk  Railway's success will carry on growing as times passes on.
The recession has obviously had an adverse effect on attractions throughout the country, not least of all steam railways.
In spite of this, the North Norfolk Railway is on course for another increase in the number of passengers in 1992.
This year sees a big boost in bookings for superb meals served in the newly restored Pullman Cars.
Saturday evenings the East Coast Pullman train runs with a wide choice of delicious food — and on Sundays the ever popular traditional roast Sunday Lunch is served.
Another important event which the North Norfolk company hopes will take place at the end of 1992 is the return of the B12 locomotive which is at present undergoing extensive re-building and overhaul in Germany.
North Norfolk's No. 3809 arrives at Sheringham with the 11.35 from Holt on May 25.
Harrow recalled
THE RAILWAY disaster at Harrow & Wealdstone station occurred on October 8th, 1952 and resulted in 112 dead and countless injured, the second worst accident in the history of British railways.
The 40th anniversary of this event occurs this year on Thursday, October 8th.
To mark the event, a special service is to be held at 7pm at Christ Church, St. Albans Road, North Watford on that day.
Christ Church was closely involved in the aftermath of the disaster since no less than 29 of those who died in the local train, together with countless injured, came form the parish.
The names of those who died are recorded for posterity on a framed scroll on the wall at the back at the church.
A memorial service for the deceased was held in Christ Church on October 19th, 1952.
A collection was started whereby the silver cross and candlesticks used on the high altar could be purchased in memory of those who died.
At the same time the sanctuary was redesigned, replacing the existing reredos with a floral-patterned curtain and extending the altar table.
The refurbished sanctuary was dedicated as a memorial to all the victims of the railway disaster at a service on October 11th, 1953 and is commemorated by an inscription in stained glass in the sanctuary windows.
Christ Church has two other reminders of those who died in the disaster.
The silver processional cross is in memory of three of the deceased who were directly associated with the church and was a gift from their parents.
A brass vase commemorates one of the three and gives the date of the fateful accident.
Further information can be obtained from   or the Vicar Canon Dick Lewis 
Ray's new attraction
VISITORS to Wellington Country Park  near Reading, Berks on Sunday, July 28th will be able to enjoy a special ‘behind the scenes’ look at the Park's most popular attraction the miniature steam railway.
Ray Hammond, who has run the railway for the last eleven years, will be opening up his workshop to show people how the miniature trains are made and maintained.
His latest project ‘The Duchess of Sutherland’, which is a copy of the full size engines and has so far taken him three years to build is just one of the engines which can be seen.
As well as the Park's resident locomotives Ivor and Waldenberg who carry over 32,000 visitors a year other miniature trains will be on show.
These include a Hunslet tank engine complete with two luxury Victorian style coaches from Chingford Model Society Engineers Club plus Midge, a Great Western locomotive measuring only two feet long.
All money taken on the railway on this day will be donated to Saxon Wood Children's Home in Basingstoke.
THREE members of the Midland Railway Centre's Carriage Maintenance team have all recently passed mileposts in blood  donoring .
All three have now given 50 pints of blood each and all three were surprised that they had reached this figure at almost the same time.
YOUR MAIN LINE STEAM GUIDE
TRURO STAR OF SHOW
3440 IN CORNWALL
Pictures: MALCOLM SURL
Bonus for Bodmin
3440 is seen on June 1st upon arrival at Walker Lines Junction, Bodmin, after hauling a commercial freight train for the first time in  her recent if not whole of her 60 year preservation career.
(It was also by far the fastest ever freight run ever operated as the normal power is the 08 or 10!).
After having attracted 6,000 paying guests while in Truro, some had fears that the visit to Bodmin might not attract many people.
The proof was the opposite, with an astonishing 10,000 plus paying either for journey or for platform tickets.
Never before had Bodmin seen so many faces…and so many happy faces all at one time!
The scene at Fitzgerald Lighting's Siding on Wednesday May 27th shortly after arrival of 3440 from Truro.
The tender had arrived an hour or so earlier.
Note the distinctive Gilbert Memorial in the background, and the boxes of NRM leaflets  neatly stacked on the footplate.
The loco was in light steam.
The 105th Birthday of the railway line from Bodmin Road (Parkway) to Bodmin General was celebrated in fine style.
After having cut the birthday cake, National Railway Museum engineer Richard Gibbon posed with three 3400: a kit built 00 scale model is dwarfed by a splendid gauge one scratchbuilt model which in turn is dwarfed by the real thing.
PONTYPOOL PLANNING FOR A BRIGHT FUTURE
AFTER all of the excitement of the last two weekends in June it was time to take a break.
A visit was planned to the Garden Festival at Ebbw Vale in South Wales where, in theory, there were no steam trains.
This proved to be correct although the specially built funicular railway is an interesting example of that kind of engineering.
Wandering around the surrounding countryside soon brought a glimpse of steam and the astonishing view of a collection of large ex Great Western locomotives standing to all intents and purposes outside a locomotive shed in the midst of the wastelands of Blaenavon on the side of Coity Mountain.
PREPARED
We had come across the Pontypool and Blaenavon Railway about to enjoy a ‘Tank Engine’ weekend of some kind.
Two small tank locomotives were being prepared for the  weekend's work amidst a scene of almost dereliction.
Very obvious in this unprotected site was the collection of ex British Railways locomotives.
I was entertained to an extremely competent description of the scene, future plans and prospects divulged by a young enthusiast from the home team.
There are five ex Great Western locomotives on the site all rescued from Barry scrapyards.
One is approaching rehabilitation while the others stand as symbols for the future.
Hopefully Class 42XX 2-8-OT No. 4253 will not take too long to return to full working order.
It will be needed if the railway is to succeed in its plans to extend the line from Blaenavon station up the mountain side to its present terminus at the Whistle Inn or beyond.
The route has a ruling gradient of one in 49 with one section at one in 29.
It will certainly prove to be a photogenic spot once things get rolling.
For now the railway operates a short push and pull service between Furnace Sidings and the Whistle Inn.
ON the return journey home by the Solent a call was made to the East Somerset Railway at Cranmore.
It was an excuse to combine a cup of tea, with a sight of Ex British Railways Standard Class 4MT No 75029 ‘The Green Knight’.
David Shepherd himself was entertaining a group from British Telecom at the unveiling of a preserved telephone box.
This rare kiosk, nearly 65 years old has been returned to perfect working order by former BT district general manager and steam railway enthusiast Mr Andrew Hurley.
He spent 12 months of completing the work using four and a half gallons of paint stripper before repainting.
The ‘ Vermilion Giant’ is one of only 47 ever built.
It boasts a post box, stamp machine as well as an A/B button telephone.
It was unveiled at Cranmore by BT deputy chairman Mr Mike Bett.
Subsequently, guests enjoyed a ride behind ‘The Green Knight’ before detraining at Cranmore West for a guided visit to the workshops headed by David Shepherd.
EVERYONE must be wondering what is happening on the Mid-Hants Railway, the ‘Watercress Line’, having received the startling news from the pages of a contemporary magazine that volunteers have been resigning from the work force in substantial numbers.
Rumours abound and are no help in this kind of situation.
I am most grateful, therefore, to James Freeman, chairman of the PLC who spoke to me on this matter.
OBSERVATION
His first observation was that there had been some difference of opinion among the volunteers at Ropley.
That was in fact now history having happened some four or five weeks ago.
Since then the management structure of the railway had been revised to cover the loss of Ian Dean, the Managing Director who resigned from the end of June.
Now it is operating with a team of four covering Administration, locomotives and Rolling Stock, Operating and Commercial sections.
This team meets every Thursday under the Chairmanship of James Freeman.
As in all situations of change there are those who are able to offer support and those who find it difficult to accept.
James is certain that the railway is now in a more secure position and will go from strength to strength.
He was at great pains to comment that ‘to say that John Bunch (Locomotive Superintendent) has too much power is a travesty’.
He is certain that John is absolutely committed to the Watercress Line and aims only at achieving what is best for the railway.
It is to be hoped that the new management structure will prove to be a winning solution for the railway which has so much potential that  it is a shame to witness the present agony.
IT is strange how things change rapidly in the preservation world.
Only a few weeks ago the Swanage Railway was in some difficulty providing steam locomotives with sufficient power.
Now the M7 has returned and is running superbly, Hunslet 0-6-0ST No 3163 of 1944  named ‘Joseph’ is on loan from the Chatterley Whitfield Mining Museum.
On top of all that the National Railway Museum has agreed that the T9 can be steamed for a limited number of occasions until May next year.
Watch this column for news of events including these locomotives.
IF you are out and about this weekend the Bluebell Railway has a Toy and Trains Collector Fair.
Didcot Steam Centre is open on Sunday and visits will be possible to the Radstock signal box.
‘Teddy Bears’ have migrated to the Cholsey and Wallingford Railway.
There will be a welcome for all who turn up at the Wallingford terminus for bumper picnic on Sunday.
ANDREW BARCLAY and Sons 0-4-0ST No 1680 of 1920 prepares for a  day's work on the Pontypool and Blaenavon Railway.
EX BR Standard Class 4MT No 75029 the Green Knight at Cranmore when a restored telephone box received all the attention!
DAVID SHEPHERD and BT Deputy Chairman Mike Bett join the crew of the Green Knight for a celebration trip along the fine.
CLEAR those clag and rockets from the throat after a day behind regular or lineside with CAMRA…writes RICHARD BEAN.
Sample (some) of almost 80 different brews available at the Sixth Chappel Beer Festival at the East Anglian Railway Museum between September 9 and 12.
It's a delightful, unique location and the Campaign for Real Ale plan to set up two big bars at Chappel and Walkes Colne Station where beer festival entry will allow a browse of the railway memorabilia (during daylight hours).
The event will feature beers from many small East Anglian breweries plus rare beers not normally seen in the area, real ciders, hot and cold food, souvenir glass plus entertainment most evenings.
Entrance fee is £1.30 per day (£1.80 after 5.00pm, Thursday, Friday and Saturday).
Regular trains from Colchester, Marks Tey, Bures and Sudbury with the probability of a special late train to Marks Tey and Colchester to be confirmed.
All the Best to BO'NESS & KINNEIL RAILWAY
TAKE THE LOW ROAD
BO'NESS & KINNEIL RAILWAY — DIAGRAM OF ROUTE
A JOURNEY along the Bo'ness and Kinneil Railway is just over 3.5 miles from Bo'ness to Birkhill, the current limit of passenger train operation.
The first part of the journey is along the ‘foreshore’.
Landscaped in the late 70's and early 80's, it was previously an area of railway sidings and industrial buildings — remnants of Bo'ness' days as an important port.
The line meanders along this stretch: oil pipelines are crossed and the meanders are for sound engineering reasons.
Longannet Power Station and Culross in Fife can be seen across the Forth.
Kinneil platform was the terminus of the line for three seasons (1986–88).
Remnants of the colliery buildings have been left as a reminder of the coal mining industry  —Kinneil colliery closed as recently as 1981.
The train now starts to climb through the woods.
This is the line of the original branch — the rest of the line from Bo'ness to Kinneil was built from scratch by the Bo'ness & Kinneil Railway.
The road overbridge at the start of the climb was built in 1990 to replace a narrow underbridge at Crawyetts a short distance further on which restricted lorry access to the town.
As the train leaves the woods and turns inland it crosses the route of the Roman Antonine Wall — today marked by a very high road overbridge.
A further half mile or so past fields brings the train to Birkhill Station.
This station is new; much excavation had to be done to provide space and a new platform hall.
The station building was moved from Monifieth (by Dundee) and may be recognised by visitors to the 1988 Glasgow Garden Festival when it formed Central Regional Council's ‘Heart of Scotland’ exhibit.
The line was extended to the BR line at Manuel in 1990.
It will be opened to the public in the next few years, once essential maintenance is completed.
Eastern visitor
In July 1991 North Eastern Railway P2 0-6-0 2392 visited the Bo'ness and Kinneil Railway.
Here it arrives at Birkhill Station with a train from Bo'ness.
B & K's top of the Scots pops
Stanier Black Five 44871 runs round a train  at Bo'ness Station with passengers packing the platform area.
The locomotive is attracting special attention with the stock yard beyond.
Bo'ness and Kinneil Railway represents a real success story as far as the British preservation movement is concerned.
Run by the Scottish Railway Preservation Society the five and  a quarter mile line came into being after the search for a branch line home elsewhere in Scotland had failed to bring success.
The society tried to take over the Dunblane to Callendar line, then the Longniddry to Haddington branch and, finally, the Alloa and Dollar line.
Then they secured a base at Bo'ness and are very proud of the fact that they have reconstructed the branch line by themselves without the  aid of massive outside funding.
Maude set for return
FORMER North British Railway 0-6-0 Maude is expected to return to steam on the Bo'ness and Kinneil Railway later this summer.
The locomotive built by Neilsons in 1891 has just undergone a massive overhaul which cost an incredible £70,000.
She was rebuilt into her present form at Cowlairs works in 1915 and served on the continent during the First World War.
The loco was named in honour of General Maude after her return from war service.
Her return to action will prove to be a major attraction at Bo'ness where the SRPS are also investing in a new visitor trail facility.
MEANWHILE, Tanfield No 20 made her debut at the Bo'ness and Kinneil Railway last weekend.
This season's visiting locomotive the NER P3 0-6-0 was the star of the 1991 the 0-6-0 Austerity saddle-tank was delivered to the Scots line last weekend.
It was steamed at the weekend and made an impressive sight when it was double headed with the line's own former NCB No 20.
Not many lines can boast of consecutively numbered locomotives on the same train!
A NEW museum is currently at the planning stage at Bo'ness.
The line wants to use the 1888 Glasgow International Exhibition Machinery Hall building.
Currently the building is dismantled and is stored at Bo'ness awaiting the day when the rebuilding operation can begin.
And in 1993 the construction of a wagon display building will  begin to house one of Britain's largest collections of goods vehicles.
In Mike Fox's picture 673 goes through her paces on the Edinburgh Suburban Line.
Polish pair take rest at Swanwick Junction
A REMARKABLE convoy of heavy transportation vehicles arrived by road at the Midland Railway Centre headquarters at Butterley on  June 10.
These conveyed two 760mm gauge steam locomotives, some of the last survivors of a class of some 800 engines built between 1946 and 1959 for the extensive Polish narrow gauge systems.
Both were constructed at the Chrzanow Locomotive Works in Poland, one in 1954 and work on restoring these, plus regauging them for use on the centre's narrow gauge line will start in the near future.
Also delivered were two freight vehicles, huge by the British narrow gauge standards.
These are a bogie open wagon and a bogie brake van.
The latter has a chequered history and has been altered several times within its life in Poland.
It has an open verandah at one end next to the brake compartment with its very necessary coal fire stove, plus a large open area for goods traffic.
Even more interesting is the addition of electric light plus a small post box in the side…!
Both vehicles are eventually intended for works and storage purposes.
The Polish equipment is currently on view at the Centre's large museum site at Swanwick Junction.
The two Polish narrow gauge locomotives acquired to work on M.R.T.'s system.
ROSE BLOOMS
JOHN GOSLING'S MIDLANDS SCENE
LMS PACIFIC Number 6203, ‘Princess Margaret Rose’ is the largest locomotive based at the Midland Railway Centre at Butterley, near Ripley, Derbyshire.
Due to its sheer weight  it can only be used at the Centre by special permission of the Department of Transport.
Permission was granted, however, for the weekend of June 27/28 when it operated all the advertised service trains on both days.
First  constructed in 1936, the locomotive operated passenger trains between London Euston and Glasgow Central over the West Coast Main Line and it achieved the speed record for its class at over 100mph near Leighton Buzzard!
The engine retired during the mid-1960's and was purchased by Sir Billy Butlin for exhibition at his Pwllheli Holiday Camp.
However, the sea air deteriorated the steel work and it was offered on loan to the MRT where it was cosmetically restored and placed on display.
Later the Butlin Organisation decided to dispose of its steam locomotives and this particular machine was bought by one of the Midland Railway Trust's directors.
A programme of restoration back to full working order followed and over a period of 18 months, it was stripped, restored and rebuilt to its present immaculate condition.
Since then, it has been a very regular performer on the BR main line hauling charter trains in many parts of the country, including meeting its sister engine, 6201 ‘Princess  Elizabeth ’.
A RECENT agreement between the Midland Railway Trust at Butterley — and the Narrow Gauge Railway Association, means that visitors to the Midland Railway Centre are now able to travel on the first stages of the Golden Valley Light Railway at no extra charge.
The narrow gauge line's diesel locomotive and two former man-rider carriages have been operating for almost a year at a small extra charge to visitors.
This has proved so popular that arrangements have been made for this to be included in the admission price to the Centre.
The narrow gauge trains will continue to operate on every Sunday and Bank Holiday Monday until the end of October.
FOLLOWING the success of the Midland Railway Trust Vintage Train Day on Saturday, June 13, a further event will be held on Saturday, September 5.
This will again provide a great opportunity to travel on some of the MRT historic rolling stock.
The train will consist of a unique Lancashire, Derbyshire and East Coast Railway six-wheeled, wooden-bodied coach dating from 1896, originally built by the Ashbury Carriage and Iron Company.
The second vehicle will be a former Midland Railway six-wheeled third class brake coach dating from 1884 and, finally, a remarkable opportunity to sample travel in the groom's compartment of a horse box dating from 1949.
All three vehicles have been the subjects of intensive restoration work over many years and are normally seen on display in the Centre's Matthew Kirtley Museum.
ANOTHER Great Central Railway stalwart has been in the news recently, when Ella Thorpe reached the grand young age of 70 on Friday, July 3.
Ella, who has provided much  sterling work towards the infant GCR, and over many years since, celebrated her birthday on board the 15.00 hours departure from Loughborough Central on Saturday, July 4, along with many of the ‘grass-roots’ of the membership, of Main Line Steam Trust, who had specially provided a cake, complete with candles, and many cards signed by well-wishers of the railway.
Princess Margaret Rose on a rare working day at the Rutland Railway Centre.
STEAM RAILWAY NEWS is proud to announce the winners of two recent competitions.
Darryl Davidson of Gregson Road, Hoghton, Preston wins a VIP day out for a party of four people on the East Lancashire Railway because he was the first entry selected at random with the four correct answers to our quiz based on the North West line.
He gave us the following answers:
The runners up prize of a VIP day out for two on the East Lancashire line has been won by  of .
THE THREE lucky winners of the Videolines quiz have been selected.
First prize of tapes worth £100 goes to  of  while the second prize of £50 worth of tapes is on its way to  of  and the third prize of £25 worth of tapes goes to  of .
The answers were .
Heading for Rothley at the double
DOUBLE-TRACKING on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough at Swithland Sidings is now making progress towards Rothley.
Concrete sleepers and 60-foot rails have been placed constituting several track panels, while the original platform at Swithland has been cleared of much undergrowth, with more sleepers placed in position.
This is the storage site planned presently for the proposed freight and coal wagons of the original GC ‘Windcutters’ of the 1960's.
If enough wagons can be obtained with the necessary finance, this railway may well become the first to run such a train.
Presently, various representatives of the GCR have already visited South Wales with a view to purchase such  examples during late June.
Midland Fox bus company and the Great Central Railway have recently announced the introduction of a regular bus service from the bottom of ‘The Sidings’ road at Leicester North station.
Advertised to operate on Sundays and Bank Holidays, the routing of certain buses is expected to bring extra revenue to both parties, plus the added convenience to passengers alike.
Brocklebank Line moves
PRESENTLY situated at Rothley, on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough, number 35025 ‘Brocklebank Line’ was one of 30 similar engines collectively known as the Merchant Navy class, built for the Southern Region of British Railways.
This particular locomotive was constructed in 1948, the year of nationalisation.
Richard Derry, Chairman of the £35025 Brocklebank Line Association’ explained that some £250,000 is needed to restore the locomotive fully back to working order.
To assist this, the engine is scheduled to be moved shortly to Loughborough shed where restoration on a major scale can be achieved more easily.
This is also in conjunction with GCR Board policy of having all major restoration work concentrated in one area.
The locomotive arrived on the Great Central Railway in February 1986, after being purchased from Messrs Woodham Brothers of Barry, South Wales in November 1985.
After some 20 years from withdrawal by BR in 1964, major components of boiler, frames and wheel-sets were remaining, plus the original tender tank (but not the frames or wheels).
The design of replacement tender frames, is to use a set of Class 40 wheels and axle-boxes already owned by the association.
Restoration to full running order is dictated by finance and available manpower.
The Association is eager to recruit more shareholders and ordinary members to facilitate this.
A sales stand is regularly situated on Rothley station in order to raise funds for the restoration work, Richard Derry will be delighted to hear from you at .
THE FOREMARKE HALL Locomotive Association will stage a ‘Foremarke Fun Day’ at the Blunsdon depot of the Swinton and Cricklade Railway on Sunday, July 26.
The Association, who are rebuilding Modified Hall 7903 Foremarke Hall, are running the day as a fundraising event which will include sideshows, a fun-fair and, of course, steam specials.
All the proceeds will go to rebuilding the former GW locomotive .
FFESTINIOG'S ‘NEW’ STAR
THE FFESTINIOG Railway has recently put into service a new buffet car, to replace a vintage vehicle which has done this duty since the early years of revival.
It is one of three coaches built last year under the INCA (INcreased CApacity) scheme, jointly funded by the European Regional Development Fund, The Wales Tourist Board and the Railway Company.
The steel mainframe was fabricated by McKenzie & Brown of Caernarfon, the all-aluminium body was constructed by Carnforth Railway Restoration and Engineering Services, while the Pattern 88 semi-self steering bogies were made at the railway's Boston Lodge Works, where the fitting out has also been accomplished.
The length of the vehicle is 35ft. 8in. (10.870mm) and the width produced a very much lighter coach than the previous batch of all-steel ones.
The car has thermostatically controlled gas heating for wintertime use in the push-pull set.
In the saloon 17  passengers are at tables with the latest type of well-upholstered seating, the covering material of which features the company's monogram.
There is a serving counter and the whole of the buffet area can be locked off if necessary.
The kitchen area accords with the latest food  hygiene regulations.
There is a stainless steel lining with other easily cleaned surfaces, a gas cool box mainly for storing sandwiches to keep them fresh, whilst no open food is carried.
Other equipment includes an electric hot water drinks dispense, an instant gas water heater which supplies the stainless steel sink, as well as a cold water supply from an electric pump, and lastly there is a new style, secure racking for food storage.
This car has been in use since Easter and has been enthusiastically praised by the people, mainly  volunteers , who have been staffing it.
Ffestiniog's Railway's buffet car No. 114 which incorporates refrigeration equipment and a carriage heating system.
FR Trust: a statement of intent
THE Ffestiniog Railway Trust have issued the following statement regarding the FR's bid to revive the former Welsh Highland Railway.
THE FFESTINIOG Railway wants to see the scenic Welsh Highland Railway (WHR) reopened in its entirely from Porthmadog across Snowdonia to Dinas and with an entirely new section running from there right up to the walls of Caernarfon Castle.
It also wants to work with the WHR '64 Company and Gwynedd County Council, to achieve these aims.
Both the County Council and the '64 Company still  want to rebuild the WHR from Pen-y-Mount, on the edge of Porthmadog, to Pont Creoser, near Beddgelert.
And the County Council wants to own the freehold of the old WHR Company.
The Ffestiniog Railway Trust acting on a High Court judge's  advice is currently applying for an Amending Order from the Ministry of Transport for the transfer of the WHR Company to the Ffestiniog.
Trustee John Routly said: ‘The Trust has, therefore, proposed to the '64 Company that when this Amending Order is made the Ffestiniog would enable the '64 Company to construct the Pen-y-Mount-Pont Creoser section and give them running powers over that section.
‘Profits from this operation would eventually be used to further the line northwards in stages, and in particular pay for a key bridge over the River Glaslyn.
‘Eventually this north bound restoration would join with the construction from Caernarfon, to restore the complete railway.
‘As for the County Council's wish for the WHR freehold, we believe the course suggested by the High Court for the Ffestiniog Trust to seek the Amending Order is the best safeguard for the future of the WHR, and we have made it clear to the Council that we would respect their wishes concerning footpaths, cycle tracks and so on.’
Mr. Routley added: ‘We believe that a charitable trust dedicated to conserving railways is better equipped to revive the WHR than a county council.
‘Indeed, Gwynedd County Council originally opposed the restoration of the Ffestiniog, and has only recently shown any inclination to approve the full restoration of the Welsh Highland Railway.’
LETTING OFF STEAM
The carriage of delight
IT IS always gratifying to receive coverage of the Bala Lake Railway in your paper and it was particularly pleasing to receive so many column-inches in Issue No. 202.
However, I'm afraid Colin James got his wires crossed a bit regarding our catering vehicle, so perhaps I had better set the record straight.
The vehicle depicted at the top of the page eight (and described in the article as being twelve feet long with an end balcony) is not the new catering vehicle, but a bogie brake van built for use on the railway by Peter Briddon (Now better known as the proprietor of Yorkshire Engine.)
Its main use is as a riding/tool/brake vehicle on winter works trains, but it is also doing temporary duty as a tickets/sales vehicle at Bala on busy days in the season.
It is carried on Hudson bogies ex-R.A.F.
Fauld.
The body and underframe were made by Peter Briddon to his own design  and the vehicle is not in any way incomplete.
It carries a plain unlined grey livery because it is a goods vehicle.
The catering vehicle will be based on the underframe and some of the body members of former 42-seat passenger coach No. 3 which has been out of service for a number of years.
It will be about twice as long as the goods brake and, as Colin's article states, it will be carried on No. 5's bogies and used as a mobile shop/ticket office/refreshment car.
When No. 5 is rebuilt, only the underframe will be used.
It is hoped to incorporate bogies of the standard Talyllyn pattern (adapted to 2-foot gauge) and a timber body of traditional narrow gauge design.
In the meantime, the railway's in-service stock is being repainted in a new dark red and ivory livery, mainly by one locally based volunteer and adorned for the first time with the railway's insignia.
Perhaps I may also be permitted to use some of your space to assure your readers that the arrival of Triassic and Lilla for our Summer Gala (June 20th/21st) was not intended to be in any way the last minute and the locomotives arrived just two days before the event, so we preferred not to advertise them in advance so as to avoid disappointment.
We were amazed, however, at the number of people who had found out on the grapevine!
Unfortunately we were unable to get the boilers inspected until the Monday after the event, so we could not steam them.
I am happy to say the inspections were successful and we hope to steam these locomotives in public before too long.
Good friends
AS A MEMBER of the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway's Publicity Department I believe that members of the general public are treated in a friendly and courteous manner when they visit our line.
I also like to give credit where it is due, and would, therefore, like to thank members of the Great Central Railway who were very helpful and friendly when I made a recent visit to Rothley and Loughborough as an ordinary visitor.
This was my first visit to the line and apart from being impressed by the  set-up I felt a genuine warmness from everyone I spoke to.
I would, therefore, definitely recommend a visit to the growing railway (but after visiting Toddington first of course!!)
GWR 0-6-0PT 7760 at Leicester North.
MEETING POINT
IRISH STEAM
by JAMES SCANNELL
Members boost for Irish
THE LONDON IMREX Exhibition at Easter was an outstanding success for the South Donegal Railway Restoration Society with the Society gaining 30 plus new members from the event.
At the end of May the first meeting of the London and South East branch of the S.D.R.R.S. was held in the Camden Irish Centre and it is hoped that this branch and its members will make a valuable contribution to the restoration effort.
Currently available from the Society are copies of a limited edition of 1,000 copies of the famous 1903 Donegal Railways poster ‘The Land of Tyrconnell’ of which nine only original copies are known to exist.
The S.D.R.R.S. hand-printed lithograph, full sized, has been produced from an original owned by the Donegal County Museum.
The poster features scenes from around the county of Donegal and beyond including Donegal Castle, Killybegs, Slieve League, Glencolumbcille as well as the County Donegal Railway Station at Derry and Barnesmore Gap complete with train at night.
Copies, each numbered and complete with certificate of authenticity, are available for £11.50 inc p&p, from the South Donegal Railway Restoration Society,.
Funds raised from the sale of the posters will be applied towards the restoration project being run by the Society and this poster will enhance any railway station scene being created for around the turn of  the century by U.K. based railway societies.
THE NORTH WEST of Ireland Railway Society has reported that work on carriage  underframe No. 30 is well in hand with new extension pieces in place, rust cleaned away and treated against further deterioration, ready for painting.
When the painting is complete it will be married with the Londonderry and Lough Swilly coach body now in store at Pennyburn.
The Londonderry and Lough Swilly coach body was restored by Enterprise Ulster.
THE BOARD of Irish Rail has decided to rebuilt the Carriage Shop at Inchicore Works, Dublin, which was completely destroyed by fire last September.
Quick action by staff resulted in the rescue of a number of carriages before the fire took hold of the entire building.
The historic state coach No 351 which was being restored at that time suffered exterior damage in the fire but it is now intended to restore it as a museum piece.
IT HAS BEEN reported that planners are recommending approval of four  separate planning applications by the Downpatrick and Ardglass Railway to extend its operations.
The extension to Inch Abbey has been approved completely but only part of the Ballyduggan extension has received approval.
There has been 12 letters of objection to the final stretch to Ballyduggan Mill lodged and it is expected that a meeting between all the parties involved will take place to see if there is some way of reconciling the objections.
‘IRISH RAILWAYS in Colour: From Steam to Diesel 1955–1967’ received an excellent review on the recent book programme broadcast on Ireland's RTE Radio 1.
Compiled by Tom Ferris, and published by Gill and McMillan (In Ireland), it has attracted great interest and is reported to be selling well.
COLLECTORS
BACK COPIES of Steam Railway News available at 50p plus postage from 
Main line memories
ABC British Locomotives 1944, Ian Allan, £6.95
AS PART of their 50th anniversary ‘celebrations,’ definitive transport publishers Ian Allan have reprinted their four complete ‘ABC of Locomotives’running during 1944 from the four pre-nationalisation companies.
This time the four definitive  gricers' bibles of the time come in one small, hardbacked (and thus very easily pocketed) volume with many pictures and full shed lists (complete with the names of Loco Superintendents and Chief Mechanical Engineers?) which would have been important information for spotters of the time.
But, beware, because even a cursory flip through will leave thumps in throat at the thought of so much majestic machinery now turned into razor blades.
Time runs out for Douglas's boiler
TALYLLYN RAILWAY No 6 Douglas has been withdrawn pending boiler renewal after the expiry of its boiler certificate on July 3.
The engine ran successfully non-stop from Tywyn to Nant Gwernol with a TRPS members' special before it was taken out of traffic.
Meanwhile Talyllyn Railway No 4 Edward Thomas was due back in traffic in early July following ten-year boiler examination and red-brown livery for the rest of the season.
The Talyllyn Railway's new carriage No 7 for disabled passengers was formally launched on June 28.
Leading members of the British Ex-Services Wheelchair Sports Association travelled as VIP guests in  a ceremony hosted jointly by the railway and Tywyn branch of the Royal British Legion.
The Legion's link-up was chosen because the carriage's volunteer builder John McCanna is a keen Legion member.
Talyllyn Railway No. 6 Douglas about to attempt a successful non-stop run to Nant Gwernol on June 27, a week before the boiler ticket expired.
The headboard roughly translates as ‘I shall not be away for long.’
Battlefield Line extends
THE SHACKERSTONE Railway will open their long-awaited one and three-quarter mile extension on Sunday, August 2.
The new section from Market Bosworth to Shenton will take the length of the operating section to four and a quarter miles and it is opening after ten years of fund-raising.
By moving forward to Shenton it gives the Battlefield Line access to the tourist attraction, the Battle of Bosworth visitor centre.
This season's services will be handled by the line's two six-wheeled Tanks No 3, an RSH 0-6-0 side tank, and Lamport, a Bagnall 0-6-0ST, together with Austerity 0-6-0ST Whiston which has been hired from the Foxfield Railway in  Staffordshire .
TRURO SAVED!
By DICK WOOD
WORLD-FAMOUS former Great Western 4-4-0 City of Truro was saved from disaster by a sharp-eyed West Somerset Railway Signals and Telegraph Engineer.
The famous locomotive was making its inaugural run over WSR metals on July 1 when the engineer working in the Leigh Wood region spotted the obstructions which has been deliberately placed on the running lines.
The train was stopped in plenty of time and a few VIP and press party on board were even aware of the drama outside.
By a curious and strange  coincident , one of the guests on board was actress Dinah Sheridan who starred in the popular film ‘The Railway Children’ which featured a similar but more dramatic near miss!
As a result of this incident, the Police have appealed to any railway enthusiasts or photographer who were in the area on the day to report any strange or unusual activities about the WSR lines.
Anyone with any information is asked to contact WSR Managing Director Mark Smith on  or the police in  Taunton , Williton or Minehead.
The ten day celebrations commemorating the 150th anniversary of railways arriving in Taunton went very well over the final weekend with a feast of motive power seen on the West Somerset Railway.
Earlier in the week, the naming of an InterCity Powercar ‘Country of Somerset’ at Taunton on July 1 — the actual 150th anniversary date was followed by an eventful run of ‘City of Truro’.
Centre-stage of the final weekend's events were two grand locomotive cavalcades each day which combined both steam and diesel traction.
Three late additions for Sunday July 5 came in the form of the pair of NSE's Class 50's D400 and ‘Sir  Edward Elgar’, plus InterCity Class 47 ‘Windsor Castle’.
Rail enthusiasts in their thousands descended on Bishops Lydeard to enjoy the spectacle which included Beamish-based working replica ‘Locomotion’, the NRM's ‘City of Truro’, the WSR's own steam and diesel fleet and a Regional Railways Class 150 sprinter set.
In the end, seventeen different forms of motive power were on display along with a wide range of other railway related attractions.
The Taunton 150 special anniversary ale almost sold out in the first day and most other stallholders enjoyed a brisk trade too!
Doniford Beach Halt will  re-open for passenger traffic on Tuesday July 14 after the construction of a new access path towards the nearby holiday village complex.
THE EAST Somerset Railway will hold its annual Jazz Night on August 1st .
As always the Blue Note Jazz Band will provide an excellent night of music with Roger Bennett of Radio Bristol.
Admission £3.50 — tickets available from .
For further information .
Joy day for Embsay
By RICHARD BEAN
SUNDAY should see Skipton's ‘stable’ of ‘Happy Tank Engines’complete with smiling faces in action under the direction of the Embsay Steam Railway's very own ‘Controller’.
Two trains will be operating throughout the day providing a half-hourly train service departing from Embsay Station and calling at Holywell Halt during their five-mile round trip over the line.
At Embsay Station the ‘Controller’ will greet the line's young and distribute ‘Thomas the Tank Engine’gifts to the children.
In addition there are refreshments and a railway gift shop.
At Holywell Halt passengers can break their journey to enjoy a picnic beside a stream or on a hill above the line with views towards Bolton Abbey, the intended destination of the railway's extension which is now well underway and to which funds raised by ‘Kiddies Day’ will be directed.
Trains depart from Embsay at half-hourly intervals from 10.30 am until 4.00 pm.
For further details ring Embsay Station on  or talking timetable on .
Other attractions for the line include:
Duke's charity ‘haul’
AS PART of the North-West's contribution to the 1992 ITV Telethon marathon fund-raising campaign, up to a dozen teams of 25 people will be attempting to pull Pacific Duke of Gloucester along a 150 yard stretch of track at Crewe Heritage Centre, on Saturday, July 18.
Teams from a wide variety of organisations will be competing throughout the afternoon to do battle with the Duke.
Event organisers, The Ivory Tower, in association with‘Duke of Gloucester’ Steam Locomotive Trust and Crewe Heritage Centre, expect a large number of visitors and supporters to come and cheer them on.
Television coverage is expected, and the first ‘pull’ is expected to start at 11.00, continuing throughout the afternoon, with each team having two attempts.
The Heritage Centre (or, to use its new title, The Railway Age) will be open to all on the day, with a number  of interesting exhibits, including the sole-surviving Advanced Passenger Train, on display.
Admission to the Railway Age is £3 for Adults, £1.00 for Children and £2.00 for OAPs.
A proportion of the day's entrance money will be given to the Telethon appeal.
This special train headboard, made by Belshaw Replicas of  Haslingdon and supplied free-of-charge for the Regional Railways North West Charity Special on July 20th was specially posed on the East Lancs Railways ‘Odney Manor.’