

Steam Railway News…your link with steam
DART'S DOLDRUM
Profits take a dive on D.V.R.
THE DART VALLEY Light Railway Plc has become the latest steam railway to hit the financial skids with a plunge in passengers, income and overall profitability recorded in the 1991 accounts.
In its first year of rail operations based solely on the seven-mile Paignton to Kingswear line, these figures can only be regarded as poor.
The self-styled ‘Supreme in Steam’ line's 1991 results come hot on the heels of the near crash of the cash-starved Mid-Hants Railway.
It seems the recession is still with us and hitting certain vulnerable steam operators hard regardless of their location, past performance or financial position in the market.
Announcing the lower than expected year end results in his preface to the accounts, Company Chairman John Evans has told shareholders that the DVR was ‘pursuing a declared policy of excellence’, but that net profits tumbled nearly £111,000 from £171,077 in 1990 to £60,260 before tax last year!
Although based in a traditionally strong tourist area, the DVT claims passenger figures have dropped by only 4.4% and turnover by 6.1%, yet traffic receipts fell by a dramatic £173,000!
Cafe and cinema figures also dropped by £15,500 and £5,500 respectively.
Somewhat interestingly, no exact passenger figures were detailed in the 1991 DVR report and accounts although this has always been shown in previous years.
From 1985–90, the Torbay line's average annual passenger journeys figure was 281,000 and the Buckfastleigh line 123,000.
The Torbay line has always been run as a large-scale people mover and minimalist operation since the DVR took over the line in 1973, but this stance failed to deliver the desired profitable results in 1991.
After last year's shock announcement of the DVR Company's near total withdrawal from the seven-mile Buckfastleigh line and rescue handover to volunteers of the South Devon Railway Trust, these figures will be cold comfort to many local steam supporters and shareholders of the Dart Valley Railway despite claims by the Company that all is well.
By way of contrast, official 1991 accounts from the South Devon Railway Trust are expected any day, and will show that the largely volunteer run operation at Buckfastleigh has managed a healthy tax-free surplus of around £60,000!
That's the same as the DVR Company achieved in the same period.
And yet when justifying the shedding of the Buckfastleigh line as recently as 1990, the DVR Company's General Manager publicly claimed the original Dart Valley line was uneconomic; losing £100,000 a year, and a financial drain on the Torbay line's profitability!
Steam on the underground.
Black Five 44932 runs round at Amersham on May 16.
Tough trading down in Devon
FROM PAGE ONE
Unlike the Torbay line in 1991, however, the South Devon Railway had to set about purchasing or hiring a whole fleet of locomotives and rolling stock from its cash surplus after a sale price could not be agreed with the DVR General Manager for certain redundant DVR items.
To date, this has included one locomotive and five coaches, and the hire of three ‘foreign’ engines.
Both of the engines hired previously to the Trust by the DVR Plc are now stopped for boiler work.
While the South Devon Railway was clearly given special help by the DVR Board in year one through an advantageous lease and loco hire charges, it now stands alone as an independent commercial undertaking, albeit operating as a non-profit making trust.
With both railways only ten miles apart, however, it makes the SDR figures all the more remarkable because both have been subject to the same local economic situation and relative decline in tourist numbers.
Another interesting fact shown in the DVR accounts is that the average weekly number of employees has been reduced by only five even though the DVR now operates one railway.
The Torbay line's average staff figure for 1991 was 50 employees!
Volunteer workers from the support society clearly had a very limited role.
When one considers that the DVR Company's accounts also show a figure of £81,611 under other operating income from rents and charges largely generated from the Buckfastleigh site, plus over £12,500 from interest, it points to an even worse trading position.
Without these other sources of income, it can be argued that the DVR actually made an operating loss in 1991 of nearly £35,000.
The Dart Valley Railway's AGM, scheduled for 20 May 1992, will no doubt be the forum where many of these concerns are aired.
The DVR Company currently leases the Buckfastleigh line to the South Devon Railway Trust at a peppercorn rent, but has overall control of the revenues from the cafe and bookshop as well as rents from the Butterfly Centre and Otter Sanctuary previously developed by them.
As a result, the Buckfastleigh site continues to play an important role in the DVR's finances, although rumours abound of plans to develop the railway yard area into a business park, out of town hypermarket or other development.
Various attempts by the DVR to establish Buckfastleigh as a theme park in the past failed despite massive investment.
Shareholders of the Dart Valley Railway have seen the value of their shares drop since publication of the accounts.
No dividend will be paid to shareholders this year.
Controversial General Manager Barry Cogar, a known critic of the DVR's previous two-line operation, claimed that the figures were satisfactory in view of the DVR's investments during 1991.
He commented to a local newspaper: ‘Every penny has been ploughed back in.
Our new £250,000 maintenance depot at Churston has been paid for out of revenue as well as footbridge repairs at Churston, a new signalling system and major works at Kingswear station.
‘Now that we only have the one line, we want to catch up on the backlog of maintenance and repairs.
Once that is cleared, the Board will start paying dividends.’
However, with a staggering movement in net liquid funds (working capital) from £175,970 in the black in 1990 to £245,358 in the red in 1991, the workshop investment appears to represent a capital investment paid for out of reserves and not from 1991 revenue!
Clearly, the Dart Valley Railway is now operating as a very large business far removed from the general notions of the line's founding fathers and the spirit of steam railway preservation.
For example, in recent years, interest in Dart Valley Railway Plc shares has come from many quarters, most notably the Australian financial magnate Sir Ron Brierley, who sold his holding recently.
The largest shareholdings currently belong to Darthaven Ltd (10,545); the Employees Superannuation Fund of the Plymouth and South Devon Co-operative Society Ltd (24,751); Sir William McAlpine (12,657) and the Dart Valley Railway Association, now the South Devon Railway Association (12,715).
(Ordinary £1.00 shares are currently worth around £3.40).
However, with called up ordinary shares totalling nearly 274,000 from an authorised figure of 350,000, the vast majority of DVR  shareholders still fall into the category of casual supporters who bought a stake to help the Company succeed in running the original Dart Valley line from Totnes to Ashburton, and the later Torbay acquisition.
With fixed assets close to £1 million and capital and reserves of over £868,000, there can be little doubt as to the commercial nature of the Dart Valley Railway Plc.
The last public challenge to the DVR's policies failed in 1986 when an elected volunteer worker from the Dart Valley Railway Association was blocked from becoming a Director by the Board.
TAKE A RAMBLE ALONG A NORTH WEST RAILWAY
VIRTUALLY all the narrow gauge quarry lines which once wound up and over many of our hills and fells were closed before infamous Dr Beeching even knew how to pronounce his first branch line — never mind think about closing it!
But, ironically enough, pull on your walking boots and dig out an anorak because you can still see far more sleeper-skeletal evidence of their trackbeds today than those standard gauge lines of the lowland travelled by people in recent memory.
HIKER
That's because 90's intensive agriculture and the  developer's bulldozer are rather effective at wiping away the last finger-prints of the all too impermanent way.
Fortunately many of our hill railways and tramways have so far managed to escape the nightmare of the gricer  archaeologists — landscaping and land reclamation — because their earthworks, light though they may be, are hard work even for modern ploughs.
Thankfully  it's proved far easier to leave well alone.
Retired Rossendale headmaster Robin Martin's book although aimed at and from a predominantly ‘hiker and leisure’ publishing company, contains more than enough to demand space on the active light railway  enthusiast's bookshelf.
He describes 18 walks of former industrial aggregate railways stretching from Stoke on Trent to Burnley.
Each is introduced with a clear map reference, distance, again with dummy-proof instructions for motorists on how to locate the start.
Plus, thankfully, and not always the case even with railway books, nearest BR rail connection.
And Martin gives a brief description of the type of terrain and gradients that blistered feet will meet.
My only complaint, and I feel it is an important gripe, is that his hand drawn maps interleaving trackbeds with suggested walking route could well have been made by any millipede unfortunate enough to bathe in an inkwell.
Ex-alignment maps are vital to good railway understanding while on the walk and I really can't understand in these days of easily accomplished and cheap computer graphic why Martin plumped for his own blobbing pen.
Those shown are inadequate and confusing and if mentally accessible to walkers, would I'm sure, prove a barrier to the inexperienced hoofer like myself.
But there's still plenty to commend the book.
Martin's potted history of each railway is certainly sufficiently detailed to  whet the appetite enough to free buttocks from armchair Dralon.
Purists will want more and can seek it elsewhere.
LOCATION
He also includes many old quarry, wharf and loco  photos plus location shots of the old trackbeds.
My personal favourite, probably  born out of nothing more rational than it being a childhood haunt and centre for our canine's aerobics, are the Caldon Low Railways near Leek in Staffordshire.
There can't, after all, be many limestone quarries whose link with a Trent and Mersey feeder canal at Froghall demanded no less than four railways built in succession within a space of just over 70 years and all on different alignments.
Plus another standard  gauge line — now mothballed by BR and currently the subject of the North Staffordshire Railway's Churnet Valley campaigns.
This odd looking engine named Ant ended its days at Hutch Bank Quarry but may also well have been the Ant that worked on the Brooks Quarries lines about Cloughfield.
YOUR MAIN LINE STEAM GUIDE
WELLS AND WALSINGHAM ALMOST A DECADE OLD
WITH thoughts of the summer and holidays in everyone's mind it is perhaps appropriate to dwell a little longer  on the steam opportunities in that popular holiday area, Norfolk.
At first glance there appears to be a preponderance of narrow gauge or what I would call miniature railways.
The Wells and Walsingham Railway professes to be the longest ten and a half inch Narrow Gauge Steam Railway in the world.
It runs from Wells-next-the-Sea to Walsingham capturing the tourist traffic to the famed centre of pilgrimage.
The train travels along four miles of the old Wells and Fakenham Railway trackbed.
It owns one steam locomotive especially designed and built for the project which has successfully managed services since it was delivered in October 1986.
The railway celebrates its 10th anniversary in June.
It is well worth a visit to see this magnificent miniature locomotive in action and a ride through the north Norfolk region is a memorable experience.
Some miles south and east there is another narrow gauge railway.
The Bure Valley Railway promoting itself as the ‘Broadline Line’ is designed to capture the attention of the high number of tourists attracted to that region.
It also runs along an old railway trackbed, in this instance that of the East Norfolk Railway.
It is a 15 inch gauge railway opened in 1990 and connects the two towns of Wroxham and Aylesham over a distance of some nine miles.
It has to be admitted that the railway has passed through a period of financial difficulty but now appears to be settled and operating a successful service of trains.
Finding locomotives of this scale which will operate over such a distance is not easy.
Again a visit will provide an opportunity to experience some extraordinary trains in action.
A further feature is the fact that the old trackbed was halved and a footpath follows the whole route.
Walking that way enables one to photograph the trains in action without violating the railway.
It is perhaps a feature which could be added to many of the existing railways in some way so that the many enthusiastic photographers can enjoy that aspect of our hobbies without some of the restrictions that are presented today?
The Bure Valley Railway is extraordinary in the fact that it is a brand new railway with especially designed buildings, stations and facilities at each end.
These are most attractive and offer first class facilities for the visitor.
I HAVE just received a copy of the new timetable for the Mid-Hants Railway, ‘The Watercress Line’.
It has to be said that it is an austere document which, although well designed and  printed , offers little more than that for which it was intended.
Despite that it has to be commended because it is not possible to sympathise with the  railway's present economic situation if unnecessary sums are spent on throw away publicity material.
It is good to see that the railway is keeping its head above water.
It is to be hoped that all steam enthusiasts will perhaps make an effort to support this railway at some time during the present season to help to ensure that it remains in being into the future.
There is some attraction now for those who enjoy the diesel locomotive because the railway has a growing collection.
In recognition one train a day during certain summer Sundays will be hauled by representatives of the collection.
Full details and a copy of the timetable can be obtained from the railway using 
CRYING out for help but for a different reason the Cholsey and Wallingford Railway are seeking volunteers from among the enthusiast fraternity.
Tim Mackie has explained to me that the organisation has been so successful gathering together items of rolling stock, track and equipment that there are not enough members available to operate trains and work on the infrastructure at the same time.
Since operations are the most important aspect trains will run as programmed.
However, that will take man power away from essential building work and the development of the railway will be delayed.
If you live in the Wallingford area and have a railway interest perhaps you might like to join this enthusiastic group and give them a few hours of your time.
I'm sure you will be welcome wherever you live.
Tim can be contacted on   
Sandy River and Rangeley Lakes Railroad 2-6-2 No. 24 continues to provide headaches for the Bure Valley Railway.
On may 3 it had caused sufficient problems to be pushed home on the last train of the day from Wroxham.
Train engine was 2-4-2 No. 4 ‘Sian’.
The train is seen here leaving Wroxham.
GEM of the East Anglian coast is the only working Garratt locomotive in the British Isles.
Especially built to haul heavily loaded trains up in the 1 in 29 bank to Walsingham, 2-6-0 and 0–6–2 No. 3 ‘Norfolk Hero’ poses at Wells after day's work on May 6.
Thumbs up for Irish video!
CREATING great interest in Irish Railway circles is the video production ‘Irish Railways Volume I’ which has been released by Online Video which is a compilation of 8mm footage taken by Harry Luff, a London Transport employee in the 1950's, 60's and early 70's.
The video will be of particular interest to members of the Railway Preservation Society of Ireland as four of their locomotives are featured working before they were acquired for preservation by the RPSI.
It will also be of interest to members of the South Donegal Railway Restoration Society as one of the items featured is the County Donegal Railways railcar.
There is also footage of steam locomotives in action at Dublin, Dun Laoghaire, Bray and Cork to name just some of the locations featured in this unique video.
General reaction from enthusiasts in Ireland has been a firm ‘Thumbs Up’ and many are looking forward to the release of Volume 2.
The reproduction from original film is in most cases clear and sharp.
Commentary is by Tom Ferris.
Steam in the north west 
GUILD GLORY
Steam in the docks
SOUTHPORT Railway Centre's summer programme got off to a good start at Easter with a ‘Four days of steam’ event.
Steam locomotives in use were RSH 0-4-0ST ‘Agecroft No. 2’ and the large Peckett, 0-6-0ST No. 5.
The May Day Bank Holiday weekend, always a quieter affair, saw the 0-6-0 in service again, with the opportunity to have rides in the Centre's two LMS brakevans, reviving a regular feature from earlier days at the Centre, when the two ‘Queen Marys’ performed as passenger carriers on many steam days.
However the weekend was just more than a low key steam event at the Centre at Derby Road for the Centre was also providing one half of the motive power, the two passenger coaches, and operating staff at Preston Docks in connection with the Steam Fair staged as part of the 1992 Preston Guild Celebrations.
Crew-training runs were undertaken the previous Sunday, April 26th.
RSH 0-40-ST ‘Agecroft No. 2’, from Southport, and Barclay 0-4-0ST and TSO 4486, from Southport provided the passenger accommodation.
Spread over three days from Saturday to Monday, May 2nd to 4th, the trains attracted good loadings.
The Dock railway lines at Preston saw another steam operation over the Spring Bank Holiday weekend, again over three days.
Trains will run at a 40-minute frequency, with ticket prices at £1.50 adult, and £1.00 child/OAP.
More information on the trains and other Preston Guild Events can be had on .
Southport Railway Centre also ran its usual trains, again using the LMS Brakevans, over the Spring Bank Holiday, and thus had the unusual, possibly unique distinction of being the only preservation organisation running trains on its own lines and also on another, privately owned line at the same time.
The East Lancashire Railway has celebrated its receipt of the Steam Heritage Award for their steam crane in the scheme sponsored by the Transport Trust and the ARPS.
The 50 ton capacity Craven Steam Crane was restored to working order following acquisition from British Rail, and it has already proved its worth in moving signals, and a footbridge on the line, and to re-rail a locomotive.
Work has now started on the restoration of Bury South signal box.
Although there are reports of a dispute over the equipping of the signal box.
Currently it contains vintage  Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company equipment and plans to replace it with more modern British Rail standard gear have attracted criticism.
R.H.S. 0-40-ST Agecroft No. 2 crosses a swing bridge in the Port of Preston.
WELSH STEAM '92
A BIG WELCOME IN THE VALE
THE LLANGOLLEN Railway, North Wales' only standard gauge preserved line and arguably the most scenically attractive line outside Scotland is set for its best ever summer of operation.
With a boost in public increase brought about by the opening of the line extension to Glyndyfrdwy the Railway is now clearly in a higher division with a respectable 5½ miles of operating length.
The Glyndyfrdwy Extension, two miles in length opened on Good Friday following a twelve month construction period, costing nearly £200,000, much of which came from a consortium of the Wales Tourist Board, Welsh Development Agency, Clwyd and Glyndwr councils.
This  marks the end of stage one of an ambitious plan to mark on to Carrog by 1993/4 and, finally Corwen by 1995/6.
A recently released  consultant's report commissioned by the local authorities declared that the arrival of the Llangollen Railway in Corwen would be the single most important factor in the economic regeneration of the town which has for so long lived in the shadow of Llangollen, ten miles to the east.
It recommended that every possible assistance and encouragement should be given to the railway in pursuit of its aim.
To further accelerate its growth the society is to launch Llangollen Railway PLC in September which by the sale of shares to the public for the first time will push the line forward fairly quickly to Carrog in readiness for the final leg to Corwen.
Looking further into the future the railway still cherishes the hope of building back to a British Railway connection at Ruabon on the Chester-Shrewsbury line.
However, approval from the relevant authorities has not yet been gained.
Turning to the Summer of 1992 the railway has an extremely full programme of steam operation using four ex BR  mainline engines for the first time.
Recently arrived from the North Yorks Moors Railway is the North Eastern Locomotives Reservation Groups P3 No 2392.
Built by the North Eastern Railway No 2392 will probably be the first locomotive from the LNER constituent companies ever to run on the EX GWR line at Llangollen.
It is due to stay at Llangollen until September.
Llangollen Railway Prairie Tank 4566 near Deeside Halt with the 11.45 from Glyndyfrdwy on April 21.
BALA'S LITTLE GEMS!
SPECIAL EVENTS in any railway's year attract both additional interest and much-needed revenue and later this year the Bala Lake Railway (or Rheilffordd Lyn Tegid, to give it its Welsh name) will be organising not one but three.
The Teddy Bear's weekend on July 18 and 19 will be a favourite with the children while on September 5 and 6 the railway will host the popular Modellers' meet.
But the dates to be noted by the narrow gauge enthusiasts are June 20 and 21 when the Bala Lake is holding its annual summer gala at Llanuwchllyn.
Roy Hardiman, the railway's General Manager outlined the Gala arrangements; ‘Our two Hunslets, Holy War and Maid Marian will be working  the passenger services between Llanuwchllyn and Bala Station and at present we are finalising the visit of two locos from the South of England.
‘These will be used for brake-van rides at Llanuwchllyn and will be free for passengers holding tickets for a full journey.
‘Other attractions will include a fairground organ, a miniature steam railway and  a couple of scale traction engines.
As you can see, the emphasis will be on steam again this year.’
Steam galas are fun, but the more mundane tasks of winter maintenance are every bit as important.
Over the closed season, the track work has been completely re-laid in the running platform at Llangower using jarrah sleepers and 30lb rail.
It is planned to relay about ½ mile of trackwork next winter near the Golf Course Halt with similar sleepers.
The railway's part-time engineer and a local college lecturer, David Black, added, ‘We have fitted new brake gear to Holy War and some minor attention to its motion was needed.
‘Both locos are in first class condition once again, and, in the run-up to our gala, the two Hunslets will have been restored on passenger trains.
‘We have a good team of regular volunteers but there is always room for more either at weekends or during the week.
‘There are over 300 more sleepers to replace, carriages to paint, fencing repairs and lots of  bushwhacking .
We provide volunteer accommodation in our hostel about Llanuwchllyn station and a free hearty lunch is available every day.
We value our volunteers and look after them.
There are interesting jobs for all — equality rules here!’
as if to illustrate his point, the early volunteers on site for the first passenger services of the year on Saturday, April 11, were the ladies.
While some made their way to the more traditional setting of the cafe by choice, two of them in denim overalls and safety boots set about the polishing, cleaning and oiling of duty loco, Maid Marian.
At the sheds, Margaret Murray from Shrewsbury and Sarah Corish of Carrog near Corwen, buffed up the brass and crimson paintwork and then took an active part in the coaling and watering of the engine in the station head-shunt.
‘Both are passed firemen and trainee drivers and shortly after with the expected ‘First train of the season’ devotees aboard, Maid Marian eased the 11.15 away with Sarah wielding her fireman's shovel expertly on the footplate.
Company Engineer, David Black was the driver.
The rakes of coaches include an open toast rack or two which prove very popular with tourists especially if they are able to enjoy the magnificent views across Lyn Tegid without obstruction from billowing smoke or smuts in their eyes.
Both Maid Marian and Holy War are very clean engines and little smoke can be seen even when working hard.
But good Welsh dry steam coal is becoming rarer.
The last delivery from the Royal Oak Colliery in South Wales had amounted to only half the tonnage ordered the rest apparently diverted to fulfil a similar order from another preserved railway.
Careful firing and technical advancements have meant that the two Hunslets perform to their maximum  efficiencies and in recognition, a homemade headboard is sometimes sneaked on to the smoke box  bracked by proud volunteers.
It reads ‘YMLAEN TRWY DECHNOLEG’ or in English ‘Forward through Technology’.
Perhaps it is a spoof based on a recent car advertisement but, as they say, ‘Many a true word…’
Maid Marian and Welsh language headboard at the Bala Lake  water tank
VIDEO VENTURE
THE regular runs by main line steam locomotives between Crewe and Holyhead, at least once a month, throughout the winter, and three or four times a week during the summer, have provided a spectacular subject for a series of videos for ‘steam’ enthusiasts.
With a life-long interest in railways, and steam locomotives in particular, David Sutcliffe never intended to enter the market for videos of steam trains for enthusiasts.
After following ‘Flying Scotsman’ and  ‘Princess Elizabeth’last summer there was a wealth of material, but no outlet for it, and a very few production companies showed any interest.
Full Steam to Holyhead, a one-hour VHS video for enthusiasts, was the result of many days spent watching trains.
This has been followed by a ‘Special Edition’ featuring one locomotive only, 71000, ‘Duke of Gloucester’.
This 30 minute video was mostly shot on one day only, using five Betacam cameras.
CAMBRIAN CHARMER
WHILE the North Wales Coast mainline has been claiming the headlines as far as steam operations have been concerned the other coastal route, the Cambrian, provided some memorable moments as well.
The first day of steam operations on the Great Western line was the subject of yet another superb location video by North Wales-based video company Sutcliffe TV.
Sticking to their tried and tested formula of not using either commentary or  background music they have allowed the trains and the scenery to speak for themselves.
The camera work is superb and I must especially commend to you all the final shots of the film which show a train heading up the Talerddig incline taken from a nearby hillside.
The visual and audio effect is stunning.
Shots and locations are well chosen and this feature fits well into the existing series of title on Welsh lines.
The Sutcliffe Studio prides itself on its broadcast quality camera work and this presents an attractive film of this part of Wales.
UP WITH THE BIRDS
Teifi's rural experience
TAKE a trip on the Teifi Valley and prepare to be charmed by all the romance of an  archetypal country railway with its single track threading between bustling  hedgerows , under bridges and over winking streams.
You don't need Jodrell Bank or binoculars to see Buzzards circling overhead…or Electric blue and green Damsel flies darting for cover.
Sadly, it wasn't always such a pleasant part of the principality.
British Rail, as is their  wont , seemed determined to erase the very fingerprints of this former GWR (Carmarthen and Cardigan) iron road Branch when they signed its death warrant in the Autumn of 1973.
Despite  lobbying to the point of  laryngitis by a  embryonic Preservation Society (the narrow gauge Society proper was constituted in 1978), they rapidly lifted rails with buildings and signals equally enthusiastically  razed to the ground.
The trackbed was purchased eight years later…at least, maps insisted it was a  trackbed .
All the small band of volunteers found were trees now  reaching 30 feet in height and ballast that was impossible to follow on foot.
But it wasn't until 1984 and a Manpower Services project that the Teifi dream began to see reality, with the old station site at Henllan midway between the original Llandsyl Newcastle Emlyn alignment chosen as headquarters.
Rail itself was provided via a ‘guns into ploughshares’ project…with line from Royal Navy Fishguard arms depot.
While sleepers were standard BR issue but sliced in half.
Pontprenshitw, the Welsh colloquial name of the high bridge which spans the gorge, was chosen as terminus (extended  1000 yards to Llandyfriog two years ago).
It means incidentally, ‘bridge wooden shakey’ and would have been a  funny name for a station in the land of King George!
April  9 1986 was a red letter day for all who can pronounce Pontprenshitw without a blush.
It was the day that first passengers were pulled, with Hunslet Tank ‘Alan George’ No 606 of 1894 providing the traction.
She was purchased by a syndicate of members along with 1941 two cylinder diesel shunter ‘Solto’ 325.
‘Alan George’ was one of a batch of locos built to toil at Penrhyn Quarries in North Wales, withdrawn  in 1953 after a 70 year working life.
No bad service for an original £500 investment.
Passengers smell the scented Welsh air through the windows of four coaches…all of which have bodies designed and built at Henllan by Society member John Eden.
The Teifi Railway is open every day from Good Friday until October, hourly departures between 11.00 am and 5.00 pm.
Admission (unlimited travel)
Steam in the valley
ABOVE: Arriving at the railway in 1983, Hunslet 0-4-0 ST No. 606 of 1894, ‘Alan George’ arrives at Forest Hall Halt with the 16.00 departure from Llandyfriog.
BELOW: Guard,, society membership secretary is pictured with the carriages he designed and built for the railway.
THE BRIDGE OF STRENGTH
From the Cambrian Coast to Devils Bridge on the Vale of Rheidol Railway
MODERN TIMBER technology is helping support on one of Wales' most famous narrow gauge lines, the Vale of Rheidol Railway.
The 1902 bridge over the River Rheidol was passed for service last year but it had reached the end of its working life.
During the winter the bridge was completely rebuilt and the line's controlling company Brecon Mountain Railway lashed out for £100,000 to make sure that the bridge was ready for 1992 operations.
BMR official Keith Lewis explained: ‘A company of design  consultants , Lakesmere Marine, were brought in because quite clearly that was a specialist civil engineering job.
‘The bridge has been completely rebuilt with greenheart hardwood and should last the railway for a long time.’
Last season the railway carried just over 40,000 passengers and, although returns are not as encouraging this season, it is too early to predict a trend for a year.
Brecon Mountain took over the Rheidol in March 1989 following the purchase of the two-foot  gauge line from British Rail.
It had remained a far outpost of steam for the nationalised system for the nationalised system following the end of steam on the rest of the system in 1968.
The line operates a four-train system and two of its three locomotives No 8 and No 9 will be working trains this season.
Mr Ellis added: ‘When we took over the line the state of the locomotives was not as we would have wished so we have embarked on a rebuilding process.’
Number Nine ‘Prince of Wales’ was extensively rebuilt and converted from vacuum  braking to air-braking.
Number seven ‘Owain Glyndwr’ is currently undergoing overhaul and No 8 ‘Llewellyn’is the next for treatment when it finishes this season's services.
Air braking has become popular with the Rheidol locomotive crews.
Again Mr Lewis explained: ‘We have converted one locomotives and rake of coaches to air braking and we plan to equip the whole fleet with the system.
‘The crews have reported that they actually prefer the air system because it gives them more control over the trains as they come down the hill.’
The Rheidol line offers some of the most spectacular scenery available on Welsh railways and, as far as railway enthusiasts are concerned, the line still has much to offer even though it is still recovering after being reduced to virtual siding status in the last year's of British Rail management.
Mr Lewis said: ‘When we bought the line there was no passing loop between Aberystwyth and Devil's Bridge which seemed very odd.
‘That meant we had to send two trains up in the morning and bring them back and then two more in the afternoon and bring them back.
It was ridiculous so we restored the passing loop at Aberffrwd that has helped considerably.
‘We still water the locomotive at Nantyronen.’
The Rheidol trains are smart and well cared for while the mix of locomotive liveries has brought some much needed added interest.
The line still represents a real challenge to footplate crews and one of the major attractions as far as enthusiasts are concerned is to hear the engines working under pressure on the slopes of the Rheidol Valley.
‘Air brakes give crews more control over trains’
Vale of Joy
LEFT: Loco No 9, 2-6-2T ‘Prince of Wales’ crosses the Rheidol River bridge with the 11.00 departure from Aberystwyth.
RIGHT: Loco No 7, 2-6-2T ‘Owain Glyndwr’ minus nameplates under repair in Aberystwyth depot.
The heavy repair includes air braking.
The Vale of Rheidol depot is the former BR standard gauge shed and has three roads.
ABOVE RIGHT: An internal view of No 7 showing the boiler area which is under repair.
WHISTLE IT UP!
Now Nigel has become the biggest noise in steam
THE CLASS of a locomotive can often be detected well before it appears on the scene simply by the sound of its whistle.
Black Fives, A4's, Britannians, amongst many, can be identified by their distinctive tones and dimes.
Now, the sound of a specific whistle may readily identify its specialist designer and fabricator!
Nigel Day, a loco driver on the Snowdon Mountain Railway and a self-confessed steam buff, has the unusual, if not unique, hobby of making whistles — not merely single or dual-note varieties but multi-tone ones.
His pastime started when he  acquired drawings of an Australian type of whistle and shortly afterwards a Canadian design was received from a fellow steam enthusiast in the South of England.
After a period of experimenting with designs and acoustics, Nigel has now developed his techniques to a high level such that he can now calculate, and fabricate steam whistles to virtually any specific combination of notes he requires.
The whistles are made from brass tubes and plates the pieces of which are silver-soldered in his home-based workshop near Llanberis.
Usually they take about three weeks to make but a further nine months can elapse before brass-polishing is completed especially if they are to be exhibited before use.
Recently the art and workmanship of one of Nigel's multi-tone whistles was recognised when he was awarded a silver medal in the general engineering section of the Model Engineering Exhibition.
Nigel said, ‘My whistles have been in use on a number of locomotives on different railways.
‘Obviously some of the  locos  at the Snowdon Mountain Railway have been fitted from time to time.
No 4 ‘Snowdon’ sports a five-tone whistle which sounds splendid as it echoes around the valleys on the journey up the mountain.
No 6, ‘Padarn’ carries an early single-tone at present whilst that off ‘Eryi’is now undergoing further development at home.
‘My next project will be an 11-tone whistle which will probably be fitted to Ralph here at Snowdon’.
It will be over 23ins tall and be about 9ins in diameter!
‘The Welsh Highland Railway has one of my units and another may be borrowed for ‘Russell’ in the future but that one is as yet  in the very early planning stages.’
Although the S.M.R. is an ideal test bed, Nigel's whistles travel further afield than Wales.
A second new steam engine being built by the Ravenglass and Eskdale for export to Japan, has already been supplied with a new Llanberis multi-tone.
But, perhaps, Nigel's greatest thrill was seeing and hearing his 12ins model adorn 71000 — Duke of Gloucester, recently.
Enthusiastically Nigel explained.
‘I belong to the Duke of Gloucester Trust and eventually I persuaded the officials to try fitting one of my whistles.
‘I built one specifically to a seven-note design and the loco carried it from Paddington to Sheffield.
‘They're happy with it…it rather pleased me too!’
The distinctive sound and the working success of the whistles will ensure that the results of Nigel Day's hobby are in continued demand from railways and owners near and far for many years to come.
Nigel Day pictured with the latest  creation , a seven-note steam whistle.
The solid brass whistle which gained a silver medal at the Model Engineer New Year exhibition, will take pride of place on Snowdon No. 7.
Nigel is the regular driver of No. 7 although he is not likely to be on the footplate this year as it is being rebuilt.
Sergeant in waiting
Railway restoration experts Winson Engineering have provided the following update of their activities at their Penrhyndeudraeth near Porthmadog.
SERGEANT MURPHY: The complete restoration of this ex Penrhyn Quarry, Kerr-Stewart 0-6-0 ‘Haig’ Class loco is now underway for the Festiniog Railway's General Manager, Gordon Rushton.
Having spent many years in Betws-y-Coed Railway museum, it has now been retired and most of the motion overhaul has now been completed.
The boiler has been stripped and cleaned ready for repair.
Work is on schedule and the locomotive is now expected to be steaming again later this year.
MONARCH: An 0-4-4-0 articulated Meyer type by Bagnall is now owned by the Festiniog Railway.
Currently this locomotive has been completely disassembled and the power bogies removed to our works for evaluation prior to regauging and rebuilding.
HUDSON TYPE TOAST RACK COACH: Work has commenced for the Festiniog Railway, on the construction of a replica 1930s Hudson open coach.
Working from the original drawings a high quality coach true to the original, but complying with modern regulations will result.
STEAM AIR PUMP: A rugged modern air compressor pump has been designed by Winson Engineering to fill an evident gap in the market.
Built from continuous cast iron it is suitable for most common gauges from 15″ to standard.
It has a steam supply pressure of 40–200 psi, giving an ultimate air pressure of 80–85% of steam, on the standard version and 100–110% of steam on the high pressure version.
The pumps are available together with a complete range of new steam and air fittings and control valves.
Reports from users have been very encouraging and enquiry levels very good.
Sergeant Murphy in Winson's works
Lake line comes of age!
THE FUTURE of the diminutive Hunslet quarry locos must have looked bleak when the slate industry at Llanberis finally closed in the 1960's, writes COLIN JAMES.
However at the famous December '69 auction to dispose of the remaining assets, three of the Hunslets were given a new lease of life, virtually on home territory.
They were bought, along with other items of equipment, for a new tourist line which was to be constructed on part of the former 4ft.0ins. gauge Padarm Railway.
The 1ft. 11½ins. gauge Llanberis Lake Railway opened for passengers in the summer of 1971 and this year, it celebrates its 21st birthday on Sunday, June 14, and all are invited!
Bruce Yarborough, the railway's commercial manager (and one of the original Ffestiniog Deviationists) outlined to Steam Railway News the planned events for the day.
‘We will be running a full passenger service together with special demonstration trains featuring rakes of original slate wagons.
‘We hope to have in steam, our own three engines, Elidir, Dolbadarn and Thomas Bach (Wild Aster to the historians), together with their sister loco, Una, owned by our neighbours, the Welsh Slate Museum.
‘We are also trying to arrange a surprise visiting loco but at the moment details have not yet been finalised with its owner.
‘Alongside our station here at Gilback Ddu, the North Wales Automobile Club will be joining our celebrations by hosting a gathering of old and interesting vehicles.
‘A traction engine or two should be in steam and fairground organs will be providing the party music!’
The Railway's passenger season extends from March to October but special winter trains ran quite regularly for CEGB maintenance staff.
The underground cables from the nearby Dinorwig pumped storage power station run next to the line and access to the coding station is by narrow gauge railway only.
The trackwork is in good order and except for minor repairs to boundary fences, the  railway's own winter maintenance concentrated on locos and rolling stock.
Bruce added: ‘Our major task was the retubing of both Thomas Bach and Una which we maintain on behalf of the museum.
‘There was plenty to keep us busy and all is well for our 21st anniversary celebrations.
We look forward to another successful season and the next 21 years.’
Rebuilt Austrian coach in service
AN HISTORIC wooden bodies railway coach B14 has just been completely dismantled and rebuilt as new by AMARC Limited, Birkenhead for the Welshpool and Llanfair Light Railway.
It returned to the line  today the 19th May.
The restored thirty-seater coach is expected to be back in public service for the bank holiday and will be made available for private party hire.
A similar sister coach B16 of the same year and vintage was restored some two years ago by the same Birkenhead company.
These two vehicles were built at the turn of the century for the Zillertalbahn a line in the  Austrian Tyrol, and were donated in 1968 .
No 15, a 2-6-2T loco built in Nivelles, Belgium in 1948 for the Jokioisten Railway in Finland stands stored in Llanfair station yard.
Sir Drefaldwyn an 0-8-0 superheated tank tender engine storms up Golfa Bank just out of Welshpool with the final service of the day the 17.10 to Llanfair.
Ffestiniog picnic
THE 10th anniversary of the restoration of the Ffestiniog Railway back to Blaenau will be celebrated by a barbecue on Saturday, May 30 for those members of stall and volunteers who worked on ‘Project Blaenau’.
Following the opening of the Deviation in 1978, the rebuilding of the old line between Tan y Grisiau and Blaenau became the next major goal for the Railway.
Momentum was gained with the announcement of the building of a new British Rail station in the centre of Blaenau.
Project Blaenau, as the F.R. called it, grew rapidly from the first meeting of the three-man ‘Communications and Action Panel’ in early 1980 and in the two years leading up to the opening, over 70 mini projects were designed and constructed by a combination of volunteers and paid staff.
In addition to the volunteers and paid members of the Civil engineering Group who will be attending, it is hoped that contemporary senior members of staff most closely associated with Project Blaenau will also be present:
The party, which is being organised by the Project's plant foreman, Andy Putnam, will be held among familiar surroundings of the Civil Engineering Depot at Glan-y-Pwll.
Welsh Highland…two plans for future
THE FUTURE of the Welsh Highland Railway in North Wales is still in the melting pot.
The Ffestiniog Railway, who caused a major controversy when they attempted to revive the old 1922 company which ran the 22-miles two foot gauge-line before the Second World War, have proposed a plan to re-open the line from the northern end including building along the track bed of the former LNWR branch from Dinas Junction to Caernarfon.
That plan has been welcomed by the Welsh Highland Railway (1964) Ltd, who are trying to re-open the line from the southern end based at Porthmadog.
But the 1964 company who want to rebuild the line via Beddgelert to Rhyd-ddu have reservations.
A statement from the WHR (1964) Ltd reads:
‘The rebuilding of the Welsh Highland Railway through all the rugged grandeur of Snowdonia is a dream held by many, that now, with goodwill on all sides, could become reality.
The Ffestiniog Railway's proposal to rebuild the Northern end, possibly including a section of the old B.R. trackbed between Caernarfon and Dinas is an imaginative and interesting idea.
The Welsh Highland (1964) Company warmly welcomes the proposal not least since it avoids conflict with our plans to rebuilt Northwards from our existing base in Porthmadog towards Beddgelert and Rhyd-ddu.
Welsh Highland (1964) Company Chairman Alisdair McCol said: ‘The reconstruction of the Welsh Highland is a most challenging task for the railway preservation movement.
‘Its success can only be ensured by a maximum effort from all those willing and able to work to that end.
‘The 1964 Company intends to be well to the fore in providing solutions which encourage the broadest possible support for this most exciting project.’
John Routly, the Ffestiniog Railway chairman, recently told members of the Ffestiniog Railway Society: ‘Discussions are taking place between us the Welsh Highland and Gwynedd County Council, the aim being to create a divisional board representing both the FR and WHR to take over responsibility for the Welsh Highland if the Minister of Transport makes the transfer.
‘But there is a problem for the Welsh Highland 1964 Ltd have set their hearts on starting the railway at Porthmadog towards Pont Croesor and Beddgelert whereas we see a great opportunity to start the railway at the Caernarfon towards this end.’
The way ahead…
Beddgelert Station site
Building back to  Torpantau 
ACCOUNTANTS have never allowed the glory of a dancing beck or the rugged splendour of a mountainside to alter their perception of red ink at the bottom of a balance sheet.
And, so it was that the Burghers of BR came to close possibly the most scenic standard gauge line in Britain in 1964.
Brecon to Newport line boasted continuous gradients of 1:37 for seven miles up to Torpantau Tunnel, which, at 1,313 feet above sea level, is the highest in Great Britain.
And the fabulous Brecon Beacons National Park flows past every single carriage window.
With such tourist pulling potential it was only a matter of time before the line of sections of it would hum again to wheel flange above fishplate…and so it proved in 1972 when a narrow gauge scheme was hatched to open 5.5. miles of trackbed between Pant (Merthyr Tydfil) and Torpantau.
Becoming a steam powered reality in June 1980.
And all are now working to  drive the railhead past the 2.5 mile long Taf Fechan Reservoir and then climb up and through Torpantau Tunnel.
The aforementioned Brecon Beacons National Park were, of course, delighted to support the new railway.
It was a means of providing controlled access to the unspoilt beauty of the Park and keep it that way.
Grants came in from the Welsh Office, Welsh Tourist Board and the local authorities allowing the newly formed Brecon Mountain Railway Company to take on permanent staff for line construction and a stone-faced workshop (in keeping with other buildings in the National Park) built at Pontsticill.
This was followed by Station facilities at Pant with its cafeteria, licensed restaurant shop and toilet facilities plus local workshops.
One of the Railway's biggest tasks was replacing the three bridges removed for legal reasons by BR at closure.
The workshops were also kept busy constructing all the railway's coaches…using the bogies of imported South African Railway freight wagons.
Heaving folks up these fearsome gradients are locos from a pool of eight drawn, quite literally, from all over the world.
And  they include the most powerful steam locomotive ever built for the 1ft 11¾in gauge, the 1928 built German ‘77’(2.6.2 plus 2-6-2) which is capable of hauling 600 tons on the level and 180 tons up a 1-in-33 gradient.
Its articulated design allows it to negotiate sharp curves and it arrived at Brecon in Spring 1986 after its Indian home line closed the year before.
A nearer neighbour is ‘Hunslet Saddle Tank ‘Sybil’ which arrived as scrap from the Pen-yr-Orsedd slate quarry near Caernarvon, plus  vertical boilered 0-4-0 ‘Redstone’which was originally a garden-railway loco built by a foreman fitter at a Welsh quarry for the Boss's son!
‘Graf Schwein-Lowitz’ in charge of the Brecon Mountain Railway, 12.40 train from Pontsticill to Pant drifts through the South Wales countryside near to Pant station, writes PETER HILL.
InterCity's last post for broad gauge
SOUTH WESTERN STEAM
By DICK WOOD
TO THE poignant music of the ‘Last Post’, InterCity made railway history on May 20 by celebrating the centenary of the completion of the GWR's transition from Brunel's seven-foot broad gauge to Stephenson's narrower standard gauge.
At the same time, InterCity Great Western announced the founding of their new ‘flagship passenger business’, one of five new profit centres which include West Coast; East Coast; Midland Cross Country and Anglia & Gatwick.
Each is now directly responsible for its own marketing, planning, operations, engineering and balance sheet.
After the naming of an HST Power Car ‘Great Western at Paddington by Brian Scott, Director InterCity Great Western, and Peter Noble, the Great, Great Grandson of I.K. Brunel, a 140-strong VIP party of press, businesspeople and InterCity staff set off on a special non-stop run to Devon, covering the 193 miles to Newton Abbot in two hours 33.5 minutes — an average speed of 92 miles per hour!
After continuing to Paignton, the party changed platforms for a short steam hauled run over the scenic Paignton & Dartmouth Railway, operated by the Dart Valley Railway Company, and a river cruise up the Dart with a difference.
As a salute to a century of change, the route between London and Paignton was the same taken by the last of the broad gauge trains in 1892.
While the interior of the Dart Valley's converted auto-coach ‘Claire’ was more MFI than the claimed ‘1930's Orient Express style’of the press information, the steam journey was pleasant, offering some stunning views of Torbay and the River Dart.
A tribute to the ‘death of broad gauge’ was the highlight of the day with a special burial at sea of thirteen small profiles of actual broad gauge.
One by one, the small  pieces were dropped overboard with due ceremony by members of the party led, very appropriately, by Peter Noble and Brian Scott.
The debate about whether Brunel was literally ‘sold down the river’ over the broad gauge issue will continue in railway circles, but InterCity chose the number thirteen to speculate that Brunel was unlucky not to get his wider gauge accepted.
Just imagine what a seven foot gauge ‘King’ or ‘Castle’, built out to the full loading gauge, could have achieved or what speeds modern diesel and electric seven foot trains might attain!
It certainly would have straightened out a lot of Brunel's more tortuous routes!
To end on a more comic note, one senior InterCity man was overheard to say: ‘Well, that's a Gresley man  who's finally laid Brunel to rest!’
Truro at home
ON THURSDAY May 14, GWR 4-4-0 No 3440 ‘City of Truro’ returned to her ‘home town’, or rather ‘home city’, for the first time in over thirty years.
This time, however, she came by low loader rather than under her own steam and although it had been laid most expertly by BR staff, the track she was unloaded onto was several hundred yards from the nearest railway line.
It was slap bang in the middle of Truro, at the very foot of the Cathedral steps.
In his welcoming address, the Dean of Truro wittily reiterated the close affinity between the clergy and steam engines — much closer and 3440 would have  actually been inside the cathedral!
He also remarked that the loco was  actually older than some parts of the cathedral: although the foundation stone was laid by the then Duke of Cornwall in May 1880, the nave was not dedicated until 1903, the year 3440 was built, and the tower finished just a matter of weeks before her hectic dash down Wellington Bank in May 1904.
This is the first time that the NRM has loaned a locomotive to a non-railway organisation (Truro Chamber of Commerce) for a town centre display.
Chamber Chairman Nigel Parriss, whose brainchild it all has been, was amazed by the amount of interest that has been generated.
He had feared for the project's viability, particularly after it became more widely known that the old lady was to be put through her paces only a matter of days later and just a few miles down the road on the steeply graded Bodmin & Wenford Railway.
He need not have worried.
By the end of the first full day of the Festival, almost 1500 people had purchased souvenir tickets and visited the footplate.
Mayor's day out!
ON SATURDAY June 6th, at 2pm, the just-elected Lord Mayor of Bradford, Councillor Barry Thorne, will formally open the Vintage Carriages Trust's Ingrow Carriage Museum situated at Ingrow Railway Centre, on the Worth Valley Railway.
‘It is particularly pleasing that Councillor Thorne will be able to carry out this duty’ said Jackie Cope, the Museum's Curator, ‘he is very much associated with tourism issues and the regeneration of Keighley as a whole.’
While at the Ingrow Carriage Museum, the Lord Mayor will be introduced to the Trust's veteran steam locomotive ‘Lord Mayor’ built in Leeds 99 years ago.
It is anticipated that with the Lord Mayor on board‘Lord Mayor’ will be ceremonially pulled out of the Museum building by the winning team of a ‘Sponsored Pull’to be held at the Ingrow Railway Centre a fortnight prior to this opening.
On the same occasion, the Lord Mayor will also formally ‘open’ the new Ingrow Railway Centre Yard, which has very recently been landscaped, setted and paved by the Worth Valley Railway with the assistance of a substantial grant again obtained via Bradford Metropolitan Council.
This now provides an excellent, free car park and will very usefully contribute to reducing traffic congestion in Haworth as a ‘Park and Ride’ facility.
Railways inspector Major Olver has agreed that the Midland Railway Centre can operate their LMS Pacific No 46203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose,’ within their timetabled trains on both Saturday and Sunday, June 27th and 28th.
JOHN GOSLING'S MIDLANDS BEAT
S.V.R.'s GALA BOMB SCAREA
Planning saves the day
THE SEVERN Valley Railway Grand Diesel Extravaganza held over a three day period of May 8–10th was disrupted on the Saturday afternoon by a bomb scare.
A telephone call reported a device had been placed on one of the SVR train-sets.
A suspect package was later found.
The disruption was widespread over a five hour period with all trains terminating at Bewdley and buses being hired at short notice to ferry passengers back to Kidderminster station.
As the BR main line to Birmingham is near Kidderminster Town Station, this was too stopped for some three hours, causing further major disruption.
Trains were either diverted from Worcester to New Street via Bromsgrove, or terminated at Stourbridge Junction.
Buses were again hired to complete the missing connections.
Passengers at the time amounted to several thousands on the SVR Gala, most of whom were at the northern Bridgnorth end of the line, enjoying rides behind 56014 and 59101 which was earlier named ‘Village of Whatley’.
Other locomotives involved included 
The latter operated the parcels between Highley and Kidderminster, making two return trips on the weekend days.
H
This proved to be one of the major highlights of the event, and a first for the SVR.
A set of air-braked Mark II coaches were also  hired from Regional Railways at Derby, to enable the freight locomotives to haul passenger trains.
47402's sorties on the ‘Valley’ were scheduled to be its  last , as  withdrawal was planned on Monday, May 11th.
It should be stated that 99% of the SVR passengers took the disruptions in their stride, especially when locomotives came out of rostered order to the advertised timetable coupled with the tropical downpour all day.
Some locomotives such as the three Class 55's, one example only worked on one day, with the importance being over to the BR hired fleet.
It was an event to be remembered, complete with Fallow Deer on the line north of Highley near one of the farm crossings.
The SVR  be highly congratulated for the way in which the emergency was dealt with.
59101 newly named ‘Village of Whatley’ at Bridgnorth heading down the Severn Valley Railway at the top of Northwood Lane, Bewdley, during the SVR Diesel Gala.
Boscastle set for G.C.R. return
WEST COUNTRY Class locomotive 34039 ‘Boscastle’ on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough, is nearing completion after a near twenty-year restoration programme back into full working order.
The planned inaugural run is scheduled for July 4th, and will bring the ex-Southern Region Pacific's on this preserved line to two.
Not far behind is a second West Country locomotive 34101 ‘Hartland’, which is also fast nearing completion and it is hoped to be in steam by the end of this year.
The Thompson B1 Locomotive Trust 671264 (1264) also inside Loughborough shed, is making steady progress with the main framework and driving wheel sets being liveried in apple green colours.
Meantime, the 38F shed shop, to the rear of the establishment has raised some considerable sums over several past years towards the completion of the locomotive.
Funds however, are still in desperate need.
The boiler for 1264 is presently away for major overhaul with present plans of having the motion, pistons and brake gear assembly in position by the end of 1992.
A full set of boiler fittings etc, has now been obtained.
The tender for Stanier Class 8F, 48305 is now almost complete outside the rear of Loughborough shed, painted in black livery.
This is not the original tender, the frames being of a Fowler design, with new fabricated panels, while the locomotive is ex LMS built in 1943.
The boiler is now almost complete from overhaul, and will be re-tubed later this year.
Present plans are aimed towards a 1993 steaming date on the GCR metals.
The N2 tank 69523 which has been out of commission for several years now, is slowly making headway towards full restoration, with the lining-up of the axles boxes, re-wheeling.
Work on the overhaul of the boiler has not yet commenced.
9303 on way back
AS HAS already been reported, the Severn Valley Railway's loco fleet has been enhanced for the  early season trains by two ‘star’ visitors LNER A4 No. 60009 Union of South Africa and SR Battle of Britain No 34072 257 Squadron.
The former has now left the SVR and the latter is due to do so in early June, the last chance to sample the flavour of an unrebuilt Bulleid Pacific on ‘the Valley’ is expected to be this weekend.
Next locomotive to be outshopped from Bridgnorth works is likely to be GWR 2-6-0 No. 9303. this former Barry inmate is nearing the end of its restoration and is expected to move again under its own steam this summer.
Work is also well advanced on the overhaul of LMS Jinty No. 47383.
The work has consisted mainly of boiler repairs and the fabrication of new water tanks.
The mechanical condition of the engine is such that little attention is required at this stage.
The new tender tank bunker for LMS class five No 45110 vacated the boiler shop some months ago and currently resides on a wagon in the main shed.
New tyres for both engine and tender have arrived from Belgium but are going off site for machining and fitting to the wheels.
There remains overhaul and it is far  to early in the proceedings to make any  forecasts as to completion dates.
A second water column was brought into use at Kidderminster during early April servicing the engine release road for platform two.
The water tank at the south end of Bewdley's island platform has been temporarily removed for repairs.
There is visible evidence in Kidderminster yard of the installation of a turntable at the end near the footbridge which divides the yard from the station.
David's delight!
David Hoyle (pictured left with Talyllyn Railway's Edward Thomas) is helping stage a major Railway Enthusiasts weekend at Steamtown Railway Centre on August 15 and 16.
Through his company, Exhibitions and Promotions (Lancaster) David is planning a whole host of railway attractions and full details will be included in next week's Steam Railway News.
MEETING POINT
A little steam in Radstock
STEAM, even if a little smaller than is hoped will run on the line, could once again be seen at Radstock.
The Somerset and Avon Railway, which is working towards reopening the railway between Radstock and Frome, holds its sponsored walk and fun day at its headquarters in the sidings in Radstock.
West Wilts Model Engineers gave rides to both young and old and as well as the many other sale and sales stands the association opened its broad gauge engine shed to the public with an exhibition about the line and the progress being made.
S.A.R.A.
also had one of its diesel locos on show and the many people that took part in the sponsored walk along the tracks to Mells Road, three miles towards Frome, were able to see the other two locos and the site of where the association will have its engineering base.
The walk was started by T.V. star Fred Wedlock who is himself a railway enthusiast.
The day, after a raining start, was a great success, both for raising funds and being able to show the public the progress that is being made with the project.
The present steam engine rides which were on offer at Radstock on the Somerset and Avon Railway.