

ARRANGING YOUR AFFAIRS AND MAKING A WILL
A GUIDE FOR PEOPLE WITH AIDS OR HIV INFECTION
The Terrence Higgins Trust
Why should you make a will?
If you die without making a will (sometimes called ‘dying intestate’), strict rules govern who will inherit your property, including money and personal possessions:
Only a husband or wife, children and blood relatives are entitled to your property and money.
The law decides who is to get what, whatever your wishes might have been — even a husband or wife may not automatically inherit everything.
There is more about the way the rules of intestacy work at the end of this leaflet.
Gay men and lesbians, unmarried partners, lovers and friends have no right to inherit anything, even though a relationship may have been longstanding and your true wishes generally known.
You cannot choose who will arrange your funeral and take care of your affairs after you have died.
Making a will is the only way to ensure your wishes are respected.
You decide what will happen to everything that belongs to you.
You can make sure that your partner, friends or charities receive exactly what you wish.
You decide who will look after your affairs and take care of all the arrangements after your death.
If you have children under 18 you may be able to appoint someone to care for them after your death (known as a guardian).
You can express any particular wishes you may have about your funeral (for example, you might have a preference for cremation or burial).
It is especially important to make a will if you are gay or unmarried and have a partner you wish to provide for.
If you do not make a will, your partner has no right to look after your affairs or to inherit anything of yours.
But remember that you cannot usually make a will unless you are over 18.
Why it is important not to delay
Your will is something you need to think about calmly, while you are free of other pressures.
Although a will can be prepared very quickly in an emergency, it is much better to take ample time to consider carefully what it should say and to make sure that you are happy with the arrangements you have made.
There is also the possibility that you might become incapable of managing your affairs.
If that happens you cannot make a will.
Making a will now means that you have the comfort of knowing that your wishes are recorded.
You could at the same time consider making an enduring power of attorney — to appoint someone you trust to manage your affairs if you become incapable of doing so.
There is no reason to be superstitious.
It is never too early to make a will or an enduring power of attorney.
How do you go about making a will?
It is best not to use ‘do-it-yourself’ will forms sold by stationers.
They may seem inexpensive, but a will is a legal document and should be drawn up carefully and signed and witnessed in a particular way.
If you write it yourself it may turn out to be invalid, or there may be legal ambiguities in what you thought were clear requests.
It is much better to seek professional advice.
Having a will professionally drawn up is not a terrible ordeal and it need not take long to explain your wishes.
You can get advice from The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre, the Immunity Legal Centre or from a private solicitor.
The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre will arrange for a lawyer to draw up reasonably straightforward wills for people in the London area who are infected with HIV or AIDS.
The service is free and confidential.
If you wish to use a private solicitor or if your affairs are complicated, the Trust can provide you with details of sympathetic solicitors in most parts of England and Wales.
Things you should consider before making your will
Your choice of executor
Your executor is the person who looks after your affairs after your death and is responsible for carrying out the wishes in your will, including arranging your funeral.
In some cases (for example if children may inherit) you should choose two executors, not just one.
An executor should be someone you trust and who is responsible enough to handle your affairs.
Many people appoint the person who is to receive most of their money and property, but you may choose to appoint a close relative or friend whether or not they are to inherit anything.
It is a good idea to check with your chosen executor(s) that they are willing to undertake the task.
What you own
Work out roughly what you own and what debts you have.
Remember to include money in the bank or building society, and your home if you own it.
You do not need to list everything you own, but it will help if you know what sorts of things you have.
Do you, for example, have any shares or National Savings Certificates, or any particularly valuable personal belongings, or life insurance?
If you own any property in another country, it may be necessary to make a separate will in that country dealing with that property.
This is something on which you will need legal advice, from a lawyer familiar with the law in that country.
Some things cannot be given away by will
If you own anything jointly with another person, including a house or flat, bank accounts or personal possessions, your share of that property may pass directly to the other joint owner on your death regardless of the terms of your will, or the intestacy rules.
It is always necessary to check the legal ownership of any joint property and you should seek legal advice about your particular circumstances, especially if a house or flat is involved.
Benefits such as‘death in service’ benefits and discretionary payments from personal schemes payable by your employer cannot be left by will.
If you have formally nominated someone to receive the benefit it will go to that person.
If no nomination was made, or that person has died, the employer will usually decide who should receive the benefit.
You should check with your employer that you have made a nomination and that it is up to date.
Who do you wish to leave your property and money to?
If you have someone who is dependent on you and needs to be provided for, think of them first if you don't plan to leave them everything, decide what they will need and what personal belongings you wish to leave them.
After that, decide whether there are any personal belongings, property, money or other assets you wish to leave to other people.
You might also want to consider a gift to charity.
In some circumstances a spouse or former spouse, children or anyone you have maintained may have a claim against your estate whether or not you have provided for them in your will.
A lawyer will be able to advise you about this.
Guardians
The law about appointing guardians to care for your children is quite complicated and you should always seek legal advice on your proposed arrangements.
To summarise:
If you are a single mother you can in most circumstances appoint a guardian in your will to care for your children on your death.
However, if you are married or divorced , the other parent will usually be legally responsible for the children when you die and your right to appoint a guardian is therefore more restricted.
If you are a single father , you have no automatic right to appoint a guardian, but should seek legal advice on your situation.
Changing your will
Your will can be changed at any time, so do not put off making one because you think you might change your mind.
But NEVER try to change your will yourself.
It can only be altered by a separate legal document called a ‘codicil’.
Do not try to prepare a codicil without professional legal advice.
Alternatively, you can have a new will drawn up and revoke the old one.
If you get married any existing will becomes invalid unless it specifically refers to the proposed marriage.
You should make a new will as soon as you marry.
Divorce also affects your will and you should consider making a new will if you get divorced.
Keeping your will safe
It is important that your will should be easily found on your death.
You can keep it at home with other important papers, or give it to your executor, your professional adviser, or your bank to look after.
Make sure that those close to you — and especially your executor(s) — know where it is.
If you make a copy, you could write on the copy where the original is.
NEVER write on the will itself, or attach anything to it (even with a paper clip) as this could affect its validity in the future.
Enduring Powers of Attorney
This is a special type of power of attorney which allows the person you have appointed as your attorney to deal with your property and financial affairs.
It remains valid even if you become mentally incapable.
It is important to appoint someone reliable and who understands your wishes.
An Enduring Power of Attorney has to be made on a special form and you should seek legal advice before making one.
The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre can help you with this.
Living Wills
A living will is a record of your wishes regarding medical treatment at the end of life.
It means that medical staff and others around you will know your wishes should you become unable to communicate with them directly.
A Living Will is quite different from the ordinary will described earlier in this leaflet.
Further information and advice on making a living will is available from the Trust's Advice Centre or Immunity.
Intestacy Rules
These rules set out the order in which your relatives will inherit your property if you die without leaving a will.
This is a summary only.
The rules themselves are very complicated .
If you have no husband or wife
but you have children — all to them
no children, but parents (even if divorced)— all to them
no children or parents — all to:
(i)
brothers and sisters or their children; if none
(ii)
half-brothers and half-sisters; if none
(iii)
grandparents; if none
(iv)
uncles and aunts; if none
(v)
half-uncles and half-aunts
IF NONE OF THE ABOVE SURVIVE YOU — ALL TO THE STATE OR CROWN.
If you have a husband or wife
but no children and no parents — all to spouse
if children — part to spouse, part to children
if no children but parents, brothers and their children — part to spouse, part to relations
IF NONE OF THE ABOVE SURVIVE YOU — ALL TO THE STATE OR CROWN.
HELPLIST
The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre provides confidential help and advice on legal, welfare benefits and housing problems.
The service is free and available to anyone affected by AIDS or HIV infection.
The Advice Centre consists of three welfare rights advisors, a housing worker, a solicitor and an administrator.
There are also over 40 volunteer lawyers and welfare rights advisors.
Access to the Advice Centre
Telephone Advice is available from 10am–5pm on .
You should also use this number if you wish to make an appointment to see one of the legal, welfare or housing advisors.
Home and hospital visits can be arranged if needed.
The Legal Line operates on Wednesday evenings from 7pm–10pm when volunteer lawyers provide telephone advice on legal matters.
The Terrence Higgins Trust,
In addition to the services listed above, The Terrence Higgins Trust offers a wide range of services which are open to everyone.
For people with HIV, practical help is offered by our Helper Cell Service and befriending by our Buddy Service.
Support for present and ex-drug users concerned about HIV and AIDS, as well as people in prison living with HIV or AIDS, is also provided.
To access any of these services, please telephone us on .
Other Helpful Organisations
National AIDS Helpline: 24 hours a day
All calls are free from anywhere in the UK
Help is also available in the following community languages:
A Minicom is available for the hearing impaired:.
The Terrence Higgins Trust is a registered charity which provides practical support, help, counselling and advice for anyone with or concerned about AIDS and HIV infection.
The work of the Trust is mainly supported by voluntary donations.
If you feel this booklet has been helpful, you may care to send a donation to:
UNDERSTANDING AIDS
This booklet is one of a series developed by The Terrence Higgins Trust and The Wellcome Foundation Ltd.
The Terrence Higgins Trust is the UK's foremost AIDS Service Organisation.
Founded in 1982, the Trust was the first organisation to produce popular leaflets about AIDS.
The Wellcome Foundation is a pharmaceutical company with over 40 years' experience of the development of antiviral drugs.
The Company developed and produces zidovudine (AZT)— the first drug shown to be effective against HIV, and a number of other medicines used in the management of HIV infection.
The co-production of these booklets is part of Wellcome's Positive Action Initiative — an international programme of HIV Education, Care and Community Support.
The titles in the series are:
1.
Understanding AIDS — an introduction to AIDS and HIV.
2.
HIV: How to protect yourself and others — practical advice on how to avoid infection.
3.
HIV: Testing and beyond — issues surrounding an HIV test and dealing with a positive result.
4.
HIV infection and its treatment — more detailed information on the virus and the available treatment.
This leaflet is for anyone who wants information about HIV and AIDS
WHAT IS AIDS?
WHAT CAUSES AIDS?
OTHER THEORIES ABOUT CAUSES OF AIDS
HOW IS HIV TRANSMITTED?
PREVENTING TRANSMISSION
SOME MYTHS DISPELLED
WHERE DID AIDS COME FROM?
SOME BASIC FACTS ABOUT HIV AND AIDS
THE COURSE OF THE INFECTION
HIV AND AIDS WORLDWIDE
HIV AND AIDS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
SOCIAL EFFECTS
HUMAN RIGHTS
THE NEED FOR EDUCATION
WHAT IS AIDS?
AIDS stands for Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome.
Acquired:
it is a condition that can be acquired, to distinguish it from some similar conditions that some people are born with.
Immunodeficiency:
concerns damage to the human body's defence mechanism — the immune system.
Syndrome:
is a set of symptoms or signs of illness.
AIDS is therefore a condition in which progressive damage to the immune system makes people more vulnerable to developing certain illnesses.
AIDS first came to light in the USA in 1981 when the Centers for Disease Control, which monitor health data from local health departments, noticed a marked increase in a number of unusual infections, particularly amongst gay men.
Until then these infections had only really been seen in people whose natural defences had been damaged by cancer or by drugs which suppress the immune system.
Doctors soon discovered that these men did indeed have an underlying deficiency of their immune system, but they had no idea what was causing it.
The condition was named Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome and, as more cases emerged from the USA, Europe and Africa, it became apparent that it was not confined to gay men.
AIDS was first noted in San Francisco in 1981.
HIV, the virus which causes it, was identified over a year later.
WHAT CAUSES AIDS?
In 1983, more than a year after AIDS had been defined, a breakthrough was made in understanding its cause and the virus that leads to AIDS was identified.
This virus is known as HIV (the human immunodeficiency virus) and its action in the body is still being researched.
It attacks the very cells in the body whose job it is to fight off infection — the cells of the immune system.
In particular, HIV attacks a type of white blood cell known as the T-helper (or CD4) cell.
These have a key role in the body's defence mechanisms by mobilising the elements of the immune system which attack and destroy germs (foreign bodies such as bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa).
HIV also infects other types of cell, including other blood cells and cells of the central nervous system.
OTHER THEORIES ABOUT CAUSES OF AIDS
It is believed by a small number of scientists and others that HIV does not cause immune suppression and AIDS by itself, but that other factors such as another virus may be involved.
Quite distinct from this view is the belief that HIV does not cause AIDS at all, but that the immune suppression which leads to AIDS is caused by sexual or drug lifestyle, poor diet or blood transfusions.
This is a decidedly minority view and goes against the overwhelming majority of scientific evidence.
HOW IS HIV TRANSMITTED?
When AIDS was first identified in the USA, all those affected seemed to be gay or bisexual men.
But it soon became apparent that other people were also affected including injecting drug users, people with haemophilia, people who had received blood transfusions as well as heterosexuals who came into none of these categories.
Furthermore, it was discovered that while anyone can become infected with HIV, the ways in which this can happen are limited and the transfer of infected body fluids is always involved.
HIV is found in the blood and semen or vaginal fluid or a person with HIV or AIDS in sufficient quantity to infect another person, but only if the virus within these body fluids enters the bloodstream of the other person.
This can happen in certain ways:
Unprotected sex — Where the penis enters the vagina or anus without a condom being used.
Penetrative sex without a condom between men and women or men and men can lead to transmission of HIV.
The presence of other sexually transmitted diseases, such as genital ulcers, may increase the possibility of transmission.
Oral sex has a far lower risk of transmission.
Infected blood and blood products — HIV transmission via this route has now been virtually eliminated in developed countries through routine screening (testing) of donated blood.
Most developing countries are now also improving their screening of blood for HIV.
Re-use of needles or syringes can lead to the exchange of small quantities of blood, leading to transmission of the virus from one person to the next.
Injecting drug users who share ‘works’ can transmit the virus in this way.
Re-using needles in a medical setting, which still occurs in some developing countries, could also lead to transmission.
From mother to child (perinatal transmission)— Estimates are that in developed parts of the world such as Europe, around 15% of children born to mothers with HIV will themselves be infected.
However, in other parts of the world this can rise to 35–50%.
There is also a small possibility of infection via breast milk, and in the developed world doctors recommend that women with HIV do not breast feed.
HIV can infect anybody but only if virus enters the bloodstream.
The ways this can happen are limited.
PREVENTING TRANSMISSION
Booklet 2 in this series describes safer sex and safer drug use.
Briefly, they are:
Safer sex: adapting sex so that it is still enjoyable while transmission risk is kept to a minimum.
Safer drug use: never sharing drug-injecting equipment.
In healthcare settings and when giving first aid there are various routine hygiene precautions which should always be followed.
These prevent the transmission of HIV (and other more infectious viruses).
SOME MYTHS DISPELLED
Can I contract HIV from meeting an infected person?
That depends entirely on what you do together after you meet her or him.
Having a friend, acquaintance, work colleague or partner with HIV is perfectly safe, unless you have certain types of sex with them (as described above) or share drug-injecting equipment with them.
Ten years into the epidemic, there is no evidence to suggest that the virus can pass between two people in any other way.
If it could live in or travel through air like cold or flu viruses, a completely different pattern of infection would have emerged.
Can HIV be transmitted by sharing a cup or glass with someone who is infected?
No.
The Centers for Disease Control in the USA have looked at the families of HIV positive people who were sharing facilities such as toilets, baths, beds, crockery and cutlery.
Apart from sexual partners and children born to infected mothers, not one person out of more than 12,000 people studied became infected.
Can mosquitoes spread HIV?
Mosquitoes cannot transmit HIV to people (and the same applies to lice, fleas, ticks and bed bugs).
This is clear from the pattern of infection in countries with high numbers of mosquitoes.
In Africa, for example, it was recognised early on that infected people were either sexually active adults or babies born to adults with the virus.
Can HIV live in swimming pools?
No, the standard water treatment is sufficient to kill HIV.
Also, the water would dilute the virus to such an extent that even if it was not killed, there would be no risk of anyone becoming infected.
HIV cannot be transmitted in this way.
Can HIV live on damp towels or lavatory seats?
HIV is a very weak virus and can only survive for a very short time when it is exposed to air outside the human body.
HIV cannot be transmitted in this way.
What is the risk of HIV transmission while giving first aid to an accident casualty?
The risk is very small.
It is always sensible to avoid contact with blood spillages as much as possible when giving first aid to anyone.
There is a theoretical risk of transmission of HIV or other blood-borne infections if the casualty is bleeding and the first aider gets blood on a graze, in an eye or in their mouth.
No cases of HIV infection have occurred as a result of mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
Is there any risk from giving blood?
In developed countries and any country where needles are not re-used, there is absolutely no possibility of becoming infected with HIV by being a blood donor.
Furthermore, all donated blood is tested for antibodies to HIV and other blood-borne infections before it is used.
WHERE DID AIDS COME FROM?
Many theories have been put forward as to the origin of AIDS but there is no scientific agreement.
HIV may have been present for centuries in a relatively harmless form and only recently evolved into a more damaging one.
Origins remain of scientific interest but the important thing is:
AIDS is likely to be part of our world for several decades — even if a cure or vaccine can be developed.
There are positive steps — personal, social, national and international — which can and must be taken to prevent further spread of the virus.
SOME BASIC FACTS ABOUT HIV AND AIDS
HIV has become the most studied virus in history.
A blood test can be used to find out whether a person's blood contains antibodies to the virus.
People can find out if they have HIV through a blood test that determines whether they have developed antibodies to HIV.
Antibodies are part of the body's natural defences against germs such as viruses.
Those who have antibodies for HIV are described as HIV antibody positive — or more simply, HIV positive.
People may not be aware that they are infected.
The reported number of people known to have HIV only includes those who have taken a blood test, and is therefore only likely to be a small proportion of the total number infected.
Most people with HIV remain perfectly healthy for several years.
The latest estimate is that most people with HIV will go on to develop an HIV-related illness within 10–12 years of infection.
Once infected, people remain infectious all their lives and can pass the virus on to others.
HIV is not contagious — it cannot be passed on by ordinary social contact in the same way as colds and flu are.
It is not even as infectious as some other blood-borne viruses such as hepatitis B.
In a short time, HIV has become the most studied virus in history.
Groups of scientists and clinicians are working to find out how it operates and to develop vaccines and a cure.
No vaccine is yet available.
Although much research is underway throughout the world, it is unlikely that any effective vaccine will be widely available for another 10 years at the earliest.
HIV changes its structure very easily and different strains can be found in one individual, making vaccine development difficult.
Although there is no cure for HIV, doctors are becoming increasingly skilled at preventing and treating the various infections to which a person with a damaged immune system is vulnerable.
Having AIDS does not necessarily mean constant sickness.
The course of HIV infection varies considerably between individuals so many people with AIDS continue to fight disease and live full lives.
THE COURSE OF THE INFECTION
Being HIV positive is not the same as having AIDS.
Initial infection with HIV may be accompanied by mild, flu-like symptoms.
It is then followed by a ‘latent’ period during which time the virus appears to be relatively inactive.
This period can last many years.
During this stage, the infected person usually feels quite well.
But as the virus multiplies, the number of T-helper cells declines and there is increased impairment of the immune system.
The body become vulnerable to infections and conditions that do not normally trouble those with a healthy immune system, and the person may experience fever and night sweats, for example.
The term ‘AIDS’ is used if a person with HIV develops one or more serious infections or conditions from a list compiled by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the USA.
An example is PCP,Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, which would normally cause no trouble to those with a healthy immune function.
A person with HIV might fall ill with an infection or condition not on the CDC list, and they might be very ill indeed, but they would not necessarily have AIDS.
The term ‘AIDS-related complex’ or ARC is still used by some doctors for HIV-related illness which does not meet the AIDS definition.
Now many people prefer to use the term ‘HIV disease’ when a person with HIV has any illness, because this avoids the impression of a ‘hierarchy of illness’or inevitable decline.
Whatever it is called, the course of illness in people infected with HIV is variable, unpredictable and dependent on many factors, including the psychological state and previous health of the individual.
Being HIV positive is not the same as having AIDS.
HIV impairs the immune system leaving the body vulnerable to infections.
HIV AND AIDS WORLDWIDE
The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimates that 10–12 million people, including children, have become infected with HIV worldwide since the beginning of the epidemic.
About 2 million of these have developed AIDS.
This is four times the number of cases of AIDS actually reported to the WHO (501,272 to April 1992).
One million children are estimated to have become infected since the beginning of the epidemic, including 500,000 who have developed AIDS.
Over a million people worldwide were newly infected with HIV between February 1991 and February 1992.
Nine-tenths of these new infections were in adults and one-tenth in children born to HIV-infected mothers.
Over 90% of all new infections are in the developing world.
In sub-Saharan Africa alone, over 3 million women have become infected since the start of the epidemic, and the majority of paediatric infections are in this area.
Worldwide, well over 90% of the newly infected adults acquired their infection from heterosexual sexual intercourse.
The WHO estimates that 30–40 million people throughout the world will have become infected with HIV by the year 2000, of which 12–18 million may have developed symptoms.
The overall world picture shows:
The basic modes of transmission have not changed.
There is a highly variable distribution of HIV infection.
The epidemic is dynamic, unstable and continuing to spread rapidly.
HIV AND AIDS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
In the UK, 2462 new HIV infections were reported during the twelve months to 30 June 1992, bringing the cumulative total to 17,868.
This represents perhaps a quarter of the true figure.
HIV infection in men who have sex with men has predominated throughout the epidemic in the UK: 62% of new reports in the twelve months to 30 June 1992, 66% since figures were first recorded.
In the year to 30 June 1992, heterosexual men and women accounted for 38% of new reports, compared with 34% since figures were first recorded.
There were 243 new reports of infection in people who inject drugs in the twelve months to 30 June 1992, bringing the cumulative total to 2,449.
THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSE
AIDS has challenged the notion that medical science can conquer all disease.
The achievements of modern medicine — transplants, cancer therapies, test-tube babies — pale before this new worldwide threat to human health.
In the absence of a vaccine or cure, only preventative and educational measures will halt the spread of HIV.
Although the WHO has called for a worldwide effort to stop AIDS, responses to the epidemic have varied considerably from country to country.
As the former Director of WHO Global Programme on AIDS has said: ‘Denial at personal, social, national and international level has been a constant problem and remains today a grave threat to public health.’
Because AIDS was initially seen to be confined to particular groups, some countries which associated drug-taking and homosexuality with deviant or criminal behaviour took punitive measures.
Several countries refuse entry to people who are HIV positive or who have AIDS.
The USA, for example, imposes restrictions on visitors with HIV.
Others, such as Bulgaria and Cuba, have tested all their citizens for HIV.
Cuba has isolated people who turned out to be HIV positive.
Apart from the ethical questions, the costs of these measures are disproportionate to any public health benefits.
Results have shown very low levels of infection amongst the general population, as was to be expected.
The World Health Organisation has recommended that there is no ethical or public health basis for mass testing.
This is a view endorsed by most countries.
WHO has recommended that there is no ethical or public health basis for mass testing, a view endorsed by most countries.
SOCIAL EFFECTS
AIDS has spawned widespread fear and uncertainty.
In part, this is a fear of deep rooted taboos — sex, sexuality, sexually transmitted diseases, illegal drugs and death and dying.
It also highlights the stereotype of the ‘undesirables’ in our society, together with the tendency to blame those infected (‘if you get AIDS, it's your own fault’).
Such reactions have been at best unhelpful and at worst extremely damaging.
At first, few people knew anyone affected by HIV or AIDS, but attitudes are changing as AIDS become more visible and understanding grows.
HUMAN RIGHTS
HIV and AIDS have highlighted fundamental questions of human rights — the right to travel, to seek employment and to be free of discrimination.
It has shown up deficiencies in common law where protection does not exist or can be waived for people with HIV.
People with HIV and AIDS have been victimised and abused at work — some have lost their jobs, some have had their homes attacked, others have been refused insurance and mortgages.
Children with HIV infection or the children of people with HIV or AIDS have been refused admission at some schools.
All this causes great distress through ignorance of the nature of the disease and the way it is transmitted.
Fortunately, in most countries these incidents are becoming less frequent.
However, we must not become complacent.
Protecting the rights and dignity of people with HIV is vital to successful AIDS prevention and care.
Ignorance and fear must be eliminated.
THE NEED FOR EDUCATION
If education is the weapon to prevent further spread of the epidemic, it is also the weapon to fight prejudice, ignorance and discrimination.
A society which is well-informed about AIDS is also more likely to be a compassionate one.
AIDS education is needed for everyone.
This can be a difficult task in countries where sex isn't talked about or where sex education for young people, including gay teenagers, is not generally available.
Women are especially vulnerable to HIV in societies where they have little or no control over their sex lives.
The response in many developed countries has been multi-faceted, with press and TV advertising backed up by continuous work at local level.
Although HIV has brought about a greater degree of openness in sexual matters, more research is still needed on sexual behaviour to help target prevention messages and identify who is at risk.
A concerted, unified response at local, national and international level is required to avert this major threat to human health.
Everybody needs to be educated about HIV.
A global concerted effort is required to avert a global health crisis.
HELPLIST
The Terrence Higgins Trust 
The Terrence Higgins Trust offers a wide range of services which are open to everyone.
For people with HIV, help on welfare rights, housing and legal matters is available from the Advice Centre; practical help is offered by our Helper Cell Project and befriending by our Buddy Service.
A number of different counselling and support services are provided by trained and experienced counsellors, which are free of charge and strictly confidential.
The Family Support Network provides support nationally to the families of people with HIV and AIDS through monthly meetings, telephone support and home visits.
Support for present and ex-drug users concerned about HIV and AIDS (including those in prison) is also provided.
To access any of these services, please telephone us on .
Other organisations
AIDS Helpline (Northern Ireland)
Provides a wide range of services throughout Northern Ireland.
Black HIV/AIDS Network (BHAN)
Provides home and community care services for black people living with HIV/AIDS, support for carers, families and friends.
A multilingual counselling service (English, Bengali, Cantonese, Gujarati, Hindi, Punjabi, Swahili, Urdu and Vietnamese) based in London is available.
BHAN works closely with organisations in Birmingham, Cardiff, Leicester, Manchester, Oxford, Sheffield and Swindon.
Blackliners  
A counselling, care and support service for people of African, Caribbean or Asian descent who are affected by HIV/AIDS.
It provides a range of services in the London area.
Body Positive  
The original self-help group for people who are HIV positive which offers a wide and developing range of services and self-help.
A National Network Co-ordinator can provide information about Body Positive Groups around the country.
Cardiff AIDS Helpline  
Provides a wide range of services throughout South Wales.
Haemophilia Society  
Offers further information for people with Haemophilia.
more over page
Mainliners   
Has support groups and provides advice for people with HIV/AIDS who are, or have been, drug users.
National AIDS Helpline 
All calls are free from anywhere in the UK.
Help is available in the following community languages:
A Minicom is available for the hearing impaired 
Positively Women  
Holds weekly support groups and individual counselling for women with HIV/AIDS.
Scottish AIDS Monitor  
Provides a wide range of services throughout Scotland.
HIV: HOW TO PROTECT YOURSELF AND OTHERS
This leaflet discusses sex and drug use and how to make them safer.
FACTS ABOUT HIV
RISK BEHAVIOUR
SAFER SEX
COMMUNICATION
RELATIONSHIPS
DRUG USE
BLOOD AND BLOOD PRODUCTS
MOTHER TO CHILD
HEALTHCARE WORKERS
OTHER ROUTES OF INFECTION
STAYING INFORMED
FACTS ABOUT HIV AND AIDS
AIDS is caused by a virus, HIV.
HIV is very fragile and soon dies outside the body.
Consequently, it is not contagious (it cannot be passed on by ordinary social contact) and is transmitted in four main ways:
Through unprotected penetrative sex — that is when the penis enters the vagina or anus without a condom (the risk from oral sex is very much lower).
Through infected blood and blood products entering the bloodstream.
Through sharing needles or syringes, for example, when injecting drugs.
From mother to child before and during birth.
RISK BEHAVIOUR
AIDS was initially reported in certain groups of people, for example gay men, injecting drug users and Haitians.
This  led to some people identifying the disease solely with these people and the idea of ‘risk groups’ for HIV and AIDS developed.
When this idea became established in the public mind, a lot of people saw HIV and AIDS as someone else's problem and therefore not something they need to think about for themselves.
Thinking in terms of‘risk behaviour’ is much more useful.
You are not a risk because you belong to a particular group, but you could put yourself at risk if you behave in ways which allow HIV transmission.
It's not who you are — it's what you do.
However, this does not mean that everyone is equally at risk.
There are populations and communities in which the virus is more prevalent and which should therefore receive more attention in terms of information, education and service provision.
There are no ‘risk groups’, there are only ‘risk behaviours’.
But there is a higher prevalence of HIV in some communities.
HIV can only be transmitted if virus from infected body fluids — blood, semen, vaginal secretions — enters the blood of another person.
The ways this might happen are limited and most involve specific types of behaviour.
SAFER SEX
Worldwide the major route of transmission of HIV is sexual.
Once infected with HIV, a person remains infectious for the rest of their life and can potentially pass the virus on to others.
While not every act of sexual intercourse will transmit HIV from an infected to an uninfected person, there is a genuine risk of transmission if no barrier (such as a condom) is used.
Safer sex is a way of adapting your sex life to minimise the risk of giving or getting HIV infection.
It embraces the whole range of sexual activities, making the minimum changes necessary to make them safer.
It is called ‘safer’ rather than‘safe’as it involves greatly reducing risk, rather than completely eliminating it.
Unprotected penetrative sex, whether vaginal or anal, is the major route of transmission of HIV.
Unprotected anal intercourse, whether between two men or a man and a woman, is the highest risk activity.
The rectum has a less robust lining than the vagina and is more easily damaged.
This can provide a route into the body for HIV from infected semen — and out of the body from the rectum into the penis via infected blood (blood can enter the penis through the hole in the end).
There is evidence to suggest that unprotected vaginal intercourse with an infected woman is particularly risky for the man during the woman's period, though transmission can and does occur at other times.
Transmission from man to woman is about twice as likely as from woman to man.
Safer sex is a way of adapting your sex life to minimise the risk of giving or getting HIV.
Research has shown that HIV is more easily passed on if either partner has a sexually transmitted disease (STD).
Such infections may leave people more vulnerable to the risk of infection by weakening their immune system.
The sores and ulcers that may occur as a result of STDs offer a ready route of entry for the virus.
If you have an STD, such as genital herpes, syphilis or gonorrhoea, or indeed any STD, make sure that you get properly treated.
USING CONDOMS
Condoms are sheaths of thin rubber that are worn over the penis and research has confirmed that, used properly, they are an effective barrier against HIV when used in anal and vaginal sex.
Failure of condoms is almost invariably related to misuse.
If used properly, they are a cheap and reliable means of protection against HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases:
Always buy a reputable or approved brand.
In the UK, look for the ‘Kitemark’.
Check the sell-by date.
For anal intercourse use an ‘Extra Strong’ or ‘Super Strong’condom.
Read and follow the instructions on the packet.
Don't open the packet with your teeth and be careful not to snag the rubber with rings or finger-nails.
If the condom has a teat, squeeze it to get rid of trapped air immediately before putting the condom on.
Pull the foreskin back before rolling the condom on.
Some people like to put a small dab of water-based lubricant on the tip of their penis before putting on the condom, to increase sensitivity.
Unroll fully onto the erect penis.
During intercourse, check that the condom hasn't broken or slipped off.
After ejaculation, withdraw carefully, before the penis becomes soft, so that the condom does not slip off.
Dispose of it carefully (preferably not down the toilet!) so as not to spill any semen.
Never re-use condoms.
One recent development has been the ‘Femidom’ or female condom.
It is available in some countries including the UK.
Used properly they are an effective barrier against HIV.
However time will tell how easy and/or pleasant they are to use.
Water-based lubricants, such as‘KY’ or ‘Foreplay’, should always be used for anal intercourse and for vaginal intercourse when necessary.
Never use oil-based ones such as‘Vaseline’, ‘Nivea’ or massage oil, as they can rot the rubber.
If you have used any oil in foreplay, make sure these are cleaned off before intercourse.
Spermicides such as nonoxynol-9 have been shown in laboratory tests to kill HIV, though on their own spermicides are not sufficient to prevent the transmission of HIV — a condom is necessary.
Spermicides can cause an inflammation in some people and you should avoid their use if you do experience a reaction.
Some condoms are lubricated with nonoxynol-9 so if you have a reaction change brands.
Condoms are available free from STD and Family Planning clinics and needle exchanges, and can be bought from chemists, supermarkets and vending machines.
A range of different colours, shapes, thicknesses and varieties of condoms are available — try a few and find out what suits you best.
ORAL SEX
This has a very much lower risk of HIV transmission than anal or vaginal intercourse.
Transmission is theoretically possible when semen, vaginal fluid or menstrual blood comes into contact with the mouth, particularly if there are bleeding gums, ulcers or infections in the mouth, and there have been some anecdotal reports of this.
Not getting semen or menstrual blood in the mouth is an obvious way of reducing this risk even more (by stopping before ejaculation, or not having oral sex during the woman's period).
If you want to be really safe, a condom or, to avoid vaginal or menstrual fluids, a dental dam (a square of latex that can be placed over the vulva) can be used.
Flavoured varieties are available!
NON-PENETRATIVE SEX
There is no evidence of transmission of HIV through kissing, licking, body rubbing and mutual masturbation.
Sex toys (e.g. dildos and vibrators) should not be shared.
Use a new condom for each person, or wash the toy between uses with detergent.
The threat of HIV should make all of us examine our sexual behaviour and, if necessary, modify it.
It does not mean the end of sex.
Indeed, HIV could provide a means of encouraging people to broaden their sexual horizons, by not just relying on penetration as the goal of sexual pleasure.
The Terrence Higgins Trust publishes more explicit and detailed information about safer sex for gay men, lesbians, drug users, women and young people.
These are available from the address at the back of this booklet.
COMMUNICATION
The key to safer sex in the age of AIDS is good communication.
You may be the kind of person who finds it easier to have sex than to talk about it, whether with new or regular partners.
The important thing is to be able to let your partner know what sort of sex you want and that you want safer sex.
Choosing the right time and place to bring up the subject of safer sex is important.
You are more likely to have a useful conversation about safer sex if you don't leave it until you are sexually aroused, drunk, or very tired.
For some people the best way to introduce the subject might be by talking about a TV programme or article.
For others the best way might be talking dirty about safer sex, or just by making it clear what you want by your actions.
The most important thing is that you do it — don't wait for your partner to bring the subject up, it may never happen!
The responsibility in safer sex is both to yourself and to your partner.
Remember, at the same time as you are looking after yourself, you are protecting them.
Sex with an uninfected person is obviously safe; however there is no way of telling from someone's appearance, character or ‘knowing someone well’ that a potential sexual partner is free of HIV infection.
Many people with HIV are unaware that they have the virus and may be unaware that they have taken risks.
It is foolish to rely on hunches, intuitions or feelings when considering so serious a matter as AIDS.
Unless you both know your HIV status through having a test, you cannot be 100% sure.
You may find yourself with a partner who doesn't want to use a condom.
Some men complain that condoms reduce sensitivity, are too small or that putting one on interrupts love-making.
These are just excuses.
Point out that reduced sensitivity means longer and therefore more sex, that condoms can be stretched to fit over someone's hand and that perhaps you putting a condom on him would be really sexy.
There are now many types of condom available and they allow more sensitivity than they used to.
Try out different ones until you find which is right for you.
Talk about safer sex with your partner, or make it clear that it is safer sex you want by your actions.
Men can practise putting them on and feeling comfortable with them on their own so that they feel less awkward with someone else.
Some women think that carrying condoms makes sex look pre-planned and them look ‘easy’.
This is an old sexual double standard.
If a woman decides to be sexually active with a man, carrying a condom is only sensible.
You may feel that insisting on using a condom has the implication that you or your partner may have HIV.
For the sexually active, this is an unfortunate fact of life.
If your partner is opposed to condoms, uncooperative or not interested, sexual intercourse may not be such a good idea.
RELATIONSHIPS
The same advice on safer sex applies whether you have one sexual partner or many.
However the type of relationships you have may affect how you view safer sex.
Sex is safe if you and your partner are uninfected with HIV and stay strictly monogamous.
But if either you or your partner have had previous sexual partners, even in a long-term relationship, you should discuss and  practise safer sex.
Given the long dormancy of the virus, some people now in monogamous relationships of several years standing could have become HIV positive before they met their present partner, and be completely unaware of this fact.
Also, it can be difficult to be completely honest about previous sexual partners or drug-taking.
In this case the only way to be sure is to go through the procedure of HIV testing.
This is not a step to be undertaken lightly for it can have serious implications, even if the test result is negative.
Seek advice from one of the Helplines listed at the back of the booklet, or a local STD clinic, and also read book three in this series before taking this step.
Abstaining from sex is a sure way of avoiding this route of HIV infection.
You are not obliged to have sex, if you don't want to.
You should not feel pressurised by anyone — whether friends or partners — into having sex, or types of sex you don't want.
The decision is yours and only yours.
Reducing the number of sexual partners you have is not safer sex.
The only way of effectively cutting out the risks of HIV transmission is by having safer sex with all your partners.
DRUG USE
If you have ever shared or are sharing works there is a risk of HIV transmission to your sexual partner(s).
So  practise safer sex.
The spread of HIV among injecting drug users is growing.
Drug use is a major route of HIV infection in Scotland, for example, and the majority of people with AIDS in Italy and Spain were infected through sharing injecting equipment.
The risk comes from sharing contaminated needles, syringes and filters (known as ‘works’).
Sharing works may be part of the ‘culture’ of the drug-using community, but it is still a risk even if it is with close friends or a partner.
Always avoid sharing works if at all possible — keep your own set of works.
It is best to use a new needle and syringe for every injection.
New needles and syringes can be bought from many chemists and are available free from needle exchanges and chemists which are in an exchange scheme.
If new works are not available, make sure you clean them.
This will lower but not eliminate the risk of infection.
If you inject drugs, it is best to keep your own set of works and never share.
The way to do this is:
2 × rinse with clean cold water
2 × rinse with diluted household bleach (or as a last resort washing-up liquid).
Bleach can be bought ready diluted.
Or, concentrated bleach can be diluted with cold water in the proportion one part bleach to ten parts water, to make it thin enough to draw up the needle into the syringe.
2 × rinse with clean cold water
Never rinse with hot water as this makes blood harder to remove.
At the very least, if nothing else is available, works should be rinsed with lots of cold water.
BLOOD AND BLOOD PRODUCTS
The probability of contracting HIV through receiving blood in developed countries is now practically zero as all blood is screened in these areas.
People who may be at risk of having HIV are asked not to donate blood.
There is no risk through donating blood.
Some countries in Eastern Europe and the developing world lack rigorous systems to ensure uncontaminated blood and sterile medical equipment.
Under certain circumstances, there could be a risk of HIV infection from transfusions or injections in these countries.
Travellers to such countries may be advised to carry their own kit of syringes, needles and swabs.
Ask your doctor or travel agent, as this may have legal implications.
MOTHER TO CHILD
HIV can be transmitted from an infected mother to her child before, during or after birth.
All children born to HIV positive mothers carry HIV antibodies from the mother in their blood.
These take up to eighteen months to disappear.
Only then will an HIV antibody test show whether the baby is in fact HIV positive.
In developed countries e.g. in Europe, there is around a 15% chance of a baby born to an HIV positive mother being infected, however in other parts of the world this can rise to 35–40%.
Becoming pregnant or going ahead with a pregnancy has to be a personal choice for each individual HIV positive woman.
It is a decision that should be made in the light of medical advice and counselling.
Women who feel they may have put themselves at risk, but are unsure of their HIV status, may also wish to take such advice.
Pregnancy itself is no longer believed to further weaken the immune system and increase the chances of a woman with HIV developing AIDS, although it may be less advisable for a woman who has already developed AIDS.
There may be a small risk of infection through breast milk.
Current advice for HIV positive mothers in developed countries is not to breastfeed their child.
To start or continue a pregnancy is a personal decision for an HIV positive woman.
HEALTHCARE WORKERS
These people are often cited as being at particular risk of HIV, either from sprays or spillage of contaminated blood or injuries from needles.
In practice, very few people have been shown to have contracted HIV in these ways.
These are the basic safety procedures:
Wear gloves when mopping-up blood and giving injections.
Do not resheath needles after use.
Do not leave needles lying around.
Dispose of used needles carefully in sharps containers and incinerate.
OTHER ROUTES OF INFECTION
There are other ways in which there is a slight risk of HIV transmission, though there have been no recorded cases:
Any procedure in which unsterilised piercing equipment is used carries a small risk of HIV and other blood-borne infections being transmitted e.g. tattooing, ear-piercing and acupuncture.
Always go to a respectable and accredited practitioner who uses disposable needles.
HIV could theoretically be transmitted by sharing toothbrushes and razors.
Follow the basic rules of hygiene — such personal items should never be shared anyway.
Keep your own brush and razor separate and identifiable.
STAYING INFORMED
Despite scare stories in some parts of the media, the basic modes of HIV transmission have not changed since the beginning of the epidemic.
However, HIV and AIDS continue to inspire a vast amount of medical and social research, especially in sexual and drug-taking behaviour, and advice can be modified in the light of this.
In the absence of a vaccine or cure, information and education are the only weapons to fight the spread of HIV.
It is vital that people receive the information and resources they need to stay healthy.
A good sex education for all teenagers is essential.
This is particularly so for young gay men who may become sexually active in a community disproportionately affected by HIV.
Similarly drug users need information and education, but more practically, access to clean equipment.
For more information, contact The Terrence Higgins Trust Helpline or the agencies on our Helplist.
(See overleaf)
HIV AND AIDS
INFORMATION FOR WOMEN
What is AIDS?
Page 6
How is HIV transmitted?
How is HIV transmitted through sex?
Page 7
What about women who have sex with women?
How is HIV transmitted through drug use?
So what is safer sex?
Page 9
Checking it out
Staying safe with condoms and latex barriers
How reliable are condoms?
Page 10
What is the safest way to use a condom during sex?
Where to buy condoms
Other barrier methods for safer sex Page 11
Other points to consider
How to ask for safer sex Page 12–14
If I discuss safer sex my partner will leave me for someone else
Sexual negotiation — some guidelines
What if I decide to take the test?
Page 15
How is HIV transmitted through pregnancy
DI — Donor Insemination
Transmission through blood transfusion Page 16
Rape or sexual assault
Positive women
Children with HIV infection or AIDS Page 17
Women as carers
Conclusion Page 18–19
HELPLIST: Terrence Higgins Trust
Other Telephone Helplines
AIDS Service Organisations
Services for women
Services for Black and Asian Communities
Services for people with Haemophilia 
AIDS can affect anyone, but until recently, women have been largely ignored in debates about HIV and AIDS.
Women often feel that they are not at risk because they do not feel themselves to be associated with any of the so called‘high risk groups’ and, although we are encouraged to have safer sex, AIDS does not really seem to be an issue for us.
However, HIV and AIDS are already affecting some women, whether as people with the virus, carers, mothers, partners, or health educators.
It is unwise to blame people or countries for the origins of the virus.
The origins of HIV are uncertain yet one thing we do know is that HIV has the potential to affect everybody worldwide.
This booklet has been produced by women for women to provide accurate and up to date information about AIDS and the issues and problems it raises for women.
What is AIDS?
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome) is the name given to a series of cancers and infections which can occur as a late consequence of HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) infection.
If the virus gets into the bloodstream of a person, it begins to attack the white blood cells (T4 Cells).
These cells form part of the immune system and help to prevent the body from getting diseases.
HIV enters the T4 cells and makes them produce more of the virus which eventually kills the T4 cells.
Eventually there are not enough T4 cells to protect the body from infection.
The majority of people with HIV infection show no signs of illness and will look and feel well and healthy.
Some people may experience symptoms shortly after infection.
These may include night sweats, swollen glands, weight loss or a persistent cough.
These symptoms are very similar to those associated with the common cold or flu.
Other people may go on to develop further symptoms of their HIV infection including persistent swelling of the lymph glands in the neck, armpits and groin, continuous tiredness, unexplained weight loss, continuous dry cough not related to smoking, diarrhoea, thrush, unexplained bleeding, shortness of breath, cold sores, night sweats and fevers.
More serious HIV-related illnesses that affect women particularly are gynaecological complications such as persistent vaginal thrush, pelvic inflammatory disease, cervical abnormalities and chronic menstrual irregularities.
The development of these symptoms are signs that the immune system is not working properly.
However, a number of people infected with HIV will go on to develop AIDS.
This is the term given to more serious illnesses associated with HIV infection, for example PCP (Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia), fevers, coughs, night sweats or some rare forms of cancers like lymphoma and KS (Kaposi's Sarcoma) although the latter is very rare in women.
How is HIV transmitted?
There are three major routes of transmission of HIV:
through unprotected penetrative sex
through sharing works (needles and syringes)
from mother to unborn child
How is HIV transmitted through sex?
HIV is present in all of the body fluids of an infected person.
However it is only present in large enough quantities to be infectious in blood, semen and vaginal fluids.
That's why, for example, ‘deep’ kissing with an infected person is not considered risky for HIV because saliva is not a transmission route for the virus.
HIV may be passed on during sex when blood, semen (spunk or cum) or vaginal fluids from an infected person enter the bloodstream of her or his partner.
Any sexual activity which allows this to happen is unsafe.
Unprotected penetrative sex is risky for a woman because if her partner has HIV, infected semen from his penis can enter her vagina or anus and the virus may be absorbed into her bloodstream that way.
Women with HIV can also infect their male partners through unprotected penetrative sex, if infected vaginal juices get into his body through tiny cuts or tears on the skin of his penis or through his urethra.
Using a condom can help prevent both men and women getting infected by their partners in penetrative sex, because it prevents vaginal fluids or semen from getting into the other person's body.
There is more information about using condoms as part of the information on safer sex later in this leaflet.
What about women who have sex with women?
Until recently, people assumed that women who have sex with women are not at risk from HIV infection.
There have been few studies looking at the sexual risk of HIV infection for women who have sex with women and so there are few reported cases of women infected in this way.
Despite this, it is definitely untrue to say that lesbians are not at risk from HIV infection.
Bisexual women (who have sex with both women and men) may be putting themselves at risk if they have unsafe sex with male partners.
Lesbians may also occasionally have unsafe sex with men.
Although the sexual risks between female partners are far lower than between a male/female couple (because infected semen does not enter the woman's body), they cannot be completely ignored.
For example, cunnilingus (licking a woman's vulva or clitoris) may be risky with a woman with HIV if it is her period, because infected blood may enter her partner's bloodstream if she has cuts or sores in her mouth.
There is also a risk of infected vaginal fluids entering a woman's bloodstream through her vaginal walls if she shares a vibrator or other sex toys with a partner with HIV, or if infected blood or vaginal fluids are able to get into an open cut during sex.
The other thing to remember is that women who have sex with women may be at risk of HIV infection if they share needles or syringes to inject drugs, or use semen that has not been tested for HIV if they want to get pregnant through self-insemination.
How is HIV transmitted through drug use?
Women who inject drugs and who share needles and syringes are at risk of contracting HIV.
Small amounts of blood remain in the syringe which could be infected — if you share works then you could inject this into your bloodstream.
If you inject any drugs always try to get your own set of works and make sure that you use these every time you inject (see the back of this booklet for information on syringe exchanges).
Try and make sure that no-one else uses your works and dispose of used works safely or through your syringe exchange.
If you have to share, clean the used equipment immediately it was last used, separate the needle, barrel and plunger and clean them in hot tap water and washing up liquid, remove all traces of blood, rinse the works thoroughly with clean water and do the same with any spoons etc.
When you have finished with the works clean them in exactly the same way.
It is also important that you always have safer sex!
So what is safer sex?
Any sex which does not allow infected blood, semen or vaginal fluids to be passed from one partner to the other is safer sex.
Fortunately, there are lots of ways to make sex fun, enjoyable and safe.
Some of these are listed below, together with a list of activities that are definitely unsafe.
Unless you are absolutely sure that both you and your partner do not have HIV, and neither of you are having a sexual relationship with anyone else, the wisest thing is to avoid having unsafe sex.
Remember that you cannot be sure whether you or someone else has the virus just by guessing or by appearances.
Checking it out
The basic rule about safer sex is that infected body fluids from your partner should not be able to get into your body (or from you or your partner's body) through open, uncovered cuts or wounds, through ulcers or sores in your mouth or through the inside of the vagina or anus.
It is important to keep sexual fluids and blood away from  each other 's genitals.
Don't forget that the skin on your body is a good barrier to the virus, unless it is broken or cut.
If you do have cuts or wounds on your body, keep them covered with sticking plaster or bandage, as you would normally.
If you bear this in mind when you look at the list below, you'll find that there are a large range of activities that can play a part in your safer sex life.
Masturbation on your own (stroking your clitoris and vulva).
Masturbation with your partner (stroking your partner's genitals).
Talking about sex and sharing fantasies.
Kissing, licking, rubbing and stroking each other 's bodies.
Massage, hugging and cuddling.
Showering together
Sucking nipples, fingers, toes, earlobes.
Kissing inner thighs, armpits, backs, behind the knees etc.
Deep kissing (snogging or French kissing)
Patting and spanking (but not so hard you draw blood)
Vaginal penetration (screwing, fucking or bonking), but only if he has a condom on his penis.
See condom section for more detail.
Anal penetration (going up the arse) but only if he has a condom on his penis.
See condom section for more details.
Oral sex — Cunnilingus (kissing, licking and sucking a woman's clitoris and vulva) is risky during a woman's period if the active partner has mouth sores or sore/bleeding gums.
Fellatio (kissing, licking or sucking a man's penis) is risky if semen or pre-cum (a light fluid which is secreted before a man ejaculates) gets into cuts or sores in the mouth.
To make fellatio safer in these circumstances, use a latex barrier or condom (see the next section).
If semen, pre-cum or vaginal fluids are swallowed, it is very likely that stomach juices will kill the virus.
Sex toys — it is preferable not to share sex toys.
If sharing a toy, make sure you clean it between each use in warm soapy water, or use a condom as protection.
If you swallow semen or pre-cum it is very likely that your stomach juices will kill the virus.
It is possible to make fellatio much safer if the man has a condom on his penis (see condom section below).
Staying safe with condoms and latex barriers
A condom (rubber, sheath, johnnie, French letter) is a thin rubber sheath which fits over the man's penis so that semen does not penetrate the woman's vagina or anus during penetrative sex.
Condoms have been used for years to prevent unwanted pregnancy but are also an effective barrier against sexually transmitted diseases including HIV.
A new female condom (called a ‘Femidom’) will be available from late summer 1992.
It is a thin, lubricated sheath made of  polyurethane which is inserted into the vagina in a similar way to a diaphragm.
A flexible ring on the open end stays outside the body and covers the labia.
The ‘Femidom’ will offer a reliable alternative method of contraception and protection against sexually transmitted diseases including HIV.
Another way of reducing the risk of infection from HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases is to use a latex barrier.
How reliable are condoms?
If used carefully and correctly, condoms are likely to provide you with an effective barrier against HIV infection during penetrative sex (they are 98% reliable).
Using a condom is certainly much safer than having penetrative sex without one.
They are also very good news for women because, unlike the contraceptive pill or coil (intra-uterine device), they do not present any health risks.
What is the safest way to use a condom during sex?
Putting a condom on your partner's penis needn't be a distraction or interruption during sex.
You can even make it fun, part of your sexual activity.
It's easiest if you keep a supply to hand in your bedroom or wherever else you have sex.
That way, you know where to find them and don't risk a lengthy search at the last minute, which may be boring and off-putting for both of you.
Tear the packet open and take the condom out, taking care not to damage the rubber with fingernails or jewellery.
Do not unroll the condom when you take it out of the packet, or you'll never get it on his penis.
Squeeze the tip of the condom between your thumb and forefinger to get rid of trapped air (most condoms have a visible teat which holds the sperm when the man has come).
If you dab some water-based lubricant inside the tip of the condom, this will help keep the air out.
If the condom doesn't have a teat, leave about half an inch free at the tip to hold the semen.
Hold the rolled up condom at the tip of his erect penis squeezing the teat as before.
With your other hand, unroll it down the length of his penis to the base.
Make sure that the vagina is well lubricated (if it is dry the condom may tear or come off).
Use a water based lubricant — put some on the outside of the condom as well.
Avoid oil-based lubricants like ‘Vaseline’ as they damage the rubber.
If it feels like the penis is getting soft during sex, try holding on to the base of the condom.
This not only keeps it in place, but it also feels nice for your partner and means you can stroke yourself at the same time.
After sex the man should withdraw his penis before it gets limp, as otherwise the rubber may come off.
As he does this, holding on to the condom around the base avoids spilling semen or losing the condom inside the vagina or anus.
Once the man has withdrawn, you or he can roll the condom off the penis (taking care not to spill the contents) and dispose of it carefully.
Always use a new condom each time you have penetrative sex.
Where to buy condoms
You can buy condoms in supermarkets, garages and chemists, from slot machines in toilets and by mail order.
They are also available free, whether you are male or female, from family planning clinics.
‘Femidoms’ will also be available from chemists and family planning clinics from late summer 1992.
Condoms are now available in an enormous variety of shapes, thicknesses, colours and flavours.
You have to make your own decision about the type of condoms you want, thinking about factors such as the way they smell and taste (if you want to use a condom in oral sex), how easy they are to put on and how they feel during sex, what they feel like, how much they cost and so on.
Try a number of different brands until you find one that you are happy with.
Here are a number of other things to consider when buying and using condoms.
Lubricated condoms do not break as easily as non-lubricated ones.
However, some condoms are lubricated with the spermicide Nonoxynol 9 which is thought to offer some protection against HIV, but may irritate the inside of the vagina or anus.
If this happens, try a different brand.
In anal sex, there is a greater danger of the condom breaking or coming off because the walls of the anus tend to be drier and tighter than those of the vagina.
If you have anal sex, use plenty of water-based lubricant such as‘KY’ jelly.
Keep condoms away from strong heat and sunlight which may cause the rubber to deteriorate.
Look for the British Standard Kitemark on the packet — this means that the condom has passed tests for strength and reliability.
However, it should be noted that use of the Kitemark guarantees condoms for vaginal sex only, not anal sex.
Some manufacturers now make thicker condoms that may be better for anal sex, but the very thick varieties are ‘too thick’ to pass the British Standard and are therefore not Kitemarked.
Check the use-by date on the packet because some condoms break or tear because they are too old for use.
Using two condoms instead of one does not make sex safer.
Putting a condom on your partner may be fiddly and awkward at first, but you can practise the technique!
Try rolling a condom on a cucumber, carrot or sex toy such as a vibrator.
Men can practise putting on a condom too, when they're masturbating.
The more you practise, the easier condoms are to use.
Other barrier methods for safer sex
Latex barriers were originally developed for use in dental surgery (hence their other name ‘dental dams’) and are sheets of thin rubber around five inches square.
Like condoms, they come in many different colours, sizes and flavours.
They make oral sex safer because if placed over the vulva, they prevent HIV transmission through infected vaginal juices or menstrual blood getting into a partner's mouth — particularly if your partner has bleeding gums, mouth ulcers or cuts.
Some women enjoy having the area around their anus stimulated with their partner's mouth and tongue, a technique called ‘anulingus’ or ‘rimming’.
Their partners may enjoy having this done too.
Rimming is much safer if a latex barrier is placed over the anal opening and surrounding area, because there is a risk to the active partner not just from HIV (because faeces may contain infected blood in a person with HIV) but also from germs living inside the anus, which can lead to hepatitis and other illnesses.
Washing carefully around the anus is helpful and hygienic but it doesn't remove the health risks completely.
A latex barrier will do so, if held in place properly.
They can be bought from surgical and dental supply companies and some mail order firms sell them as well.
They are more difficult to obtain than condoms, so you may find cutting a condom in half a useful alternative.
Remember to use non-lubricated or flavoured condoms.
Other points to consider
If you use latex barriers, remember to rinse them first in case they have been treated with talc, which could irritate the vulva.
Water based lubricants smeared on the barrier, next to the vulva, will increase sensation.
There are other ways to enjoy using dental dams during safer sex.
How about stretching one over your partner's nipples or clitoris and sucking through a bubble of rubber?
How to ask for safer sex
We may lack confidence when it comes to discussing, or having sex.
Knowing all about how to have safer sex is of no use if we feel unable to bring it up with a partner.
There are lots of reasons we may feel worried about this.
Women are often brought up to feel that their pleasure is less important than their partner's or that we do not have the right to ask for what we want.
Of course we do have the right to say how we feel and how we would like to have sex.
One way to overcome difficulties with lack of confidence is to try to be honest about how you feel.
That my mean risking your partner disliking what you have to say, but it is important that he or she knows your feelings.
You may find that you have to be very determined and repeat your message several times.
It isn't easy to be assertive in sexual relationships but it does get easier as you practise.
It's important to take time to get to know how we feel about sex, and what gives us pleasure.
One very good way to do this is by exploring our bodies on our own.
Masturbation (stroking the vulva and clitoris) is a great way of relaxing, giving ourselves pleasure and finding out what turns us on.
Like anything else though, learning how to explore our bodies takes time.
Don't worry if you find that it doesn't lead to orgasm straight away, if you've never tried it before.
There's plenty of time to find out what you like.
Responsibility for having safer sex should lie with both partners.
It is not just up to women to negotiate safer sex, any more  than it is just up to men.
It takes two people to have safer sex in a relationship.
Women are, however, very often left with the responsibility because, in the same way that they have had to worry about contraception over the years, men often don't see it as an issue for them, or are reluctant and afraid to discuss it.
Don't wait for your partner to bring it up; it may never happen!
The responsibility in safer sex is above all to yourself — looking after your health.
You can't always rely on a partner to do that for you.
Safer sex can also protect you from other sexually transmitted diseases such as pelvic inflammatory disease, cervical cancer, herpes and chlamydia, and of course unwanted pregnancy, so it does have other advantages for us in terms of our sexual health and future well being.
If I discuss safer sex my partner will leave me for someone else
What and how much you feel able to say to your lover about safer sex depends on the degree of control you have over your relationship.
For example, if you are economically dependent upon your partner, or afraid of being left for someone else, then safer sex will be more difficult for you to raise.
Some women are afraid of physical violence or abuse from their partners, if they try to make changes in their relationship.
These are serious problems and reading this leaflet cannot solve them.
Assertiveness training may help but again cannot change the problem, only perhaps make it a little easier to deal with.
Social inequalities are involved with women's ability to feel safe in their relationship — such as lack of recognition in both social and work settings.
At the back of this leaflet there is a list of organisations which can offer you help and advice, if you are in a relationship where there is a threat of violence or other types of abuse.
Sexual negotiation — some helpful guidelines
Negotiating safer sex with your partner needn't be difficult — although it may be embarrassing to start with, it gets easier with practice!
It could also lead to a closer and more pleasurable sexual relationship for both of you.
You may be surprised that your partner had also wanted to raise it with you, but wasn't sure how.
Some of the points below could be helpful to you.
Language for discussing this area is important.
You may find some words too  clinical (like vagina or penis) or vague (like intercourse), or possibly offensive (like cunt or fuck).
If you're both not comfortable with the words used, neither of you will get very far.
One easy way of finding an acceptable language is for both of you to separately say or write down words you are happy with and words you don't like.
Then you can sort out which you are prepared to use.
Using positive phrases, such as‘I really like…,’ rather than negative lines like ‘you don't do it the way that I like…,’will improve your chance of having a productive dialogue.
Ultimately this will make sex safer for you both, with both you and your partner having the kind of sex you enjoy.
You may have worries about bringing up the subject of safer sex in case your partner thinks you are ‘easy’ or that you have ‘slept around’.
Just remember the double standards that lie behind this attitude.
Men get approval for being ‘experienced’, while women risk being called a ‘slag’.
Not wanting to cause friction with your partner is understandable, but it is worth bearing a few things in mind.
Not all men are defensive or get upset if you raise this subject; keeping silent about your concerns may put both your health and well-being at risk and won't help your relationship in the long term.
Choosing the right time and place can make all the difference.
You are more likely to have a productive and relaxed discussion if you are not sexually aroused, or drunk, tired or angry with each other.
It may be a good idea to pick a more ‘neutral’ place than your bedroom to discuss safer sex.
You may want your partner to know that there is something important you want to discuss, so that you can both make time in advance.
It is often worth introducing the subject in a general way, by referring to a television programme or article you may have seen on AIDS.
This will give you a good chance to find out what your partner thinks and will allow the conversation to move into personal issues more gently.
Admitting to feeling awkward or embarrassed — if you are — can help take the pressure off you.
Some women may find it hard to talk about safer sex with new partners, simply because they don't know them very well.
Other women find it more difficult to broach the subject with a long-term partner as that person is used to having sex in a certain (possibly unsafe) way.
One solution with new partners is to make it clear you use condoms for contraceptive purposes (if you do), mentioning that they can also protect against sexually transmitted diseases.
With a long-term partner it is sometimes too easy to take things for granted.
Keeping a relationship alive needs an open and honest dialogue.
Introducing the subject of safer sex can be part of this process.
Explain that, as you know more about HIV, you no longer want to risk unsafe sex and that you see safer sex as a way of taking care of each other.
One thing to remember: there is a lot more to safer sex than putting a condom on a penis.
There are countless alternatives to penetrative sex such as massage, nibbling, fingering, rubbing, sharing fantasies, cuddling, stroking and licking.
Safer sex is not boring.
Using your imagination will make it enjoyable, fun, playful and sexy!
So if your partner sees safer sex as imposing a set of restrictions rather than possibilities, you can set him or her straight!
If you enjoy penetrative sex and would like your partner to use a condom, his response might range from ‘it interrupts making love’, ‘it reduces my sensitivity’, or ‘it is unnecessary as we trust each other’.
The facts are these: condoms needn't disrupt sex if you keep them handy and putting one on is made part of the pleasure of sex.
There are many different types available and if you experiment with the different brands and types, you will find one which suits you both.
If you use a condom with a dollop of water-based lubricant (like ‘KY’) just inside the teat, sensitivity may be further increased.
Finally, trust is not enough.
It is impossible to tell whether or not your partner has HIV from his or her appearance — so why take the risk with one another 's lives?
What if I decide to take the test?
If you are thinking about having a test for HIV then it is extremely important that you follow these guidelines:
Make sure that you get professional advice before you take the test.
You can get this advice from Health Advisors based in Special Clinics (at most major hospitals) and some drug centres —(see the back of this booklet for details).
You can get telephone advice from The Terrence Higgins Trust on   and from the National AIDS Helpline on  (24 hours).
Do not allow anyone to force you into having a test for HIV.
It is not an emergency procedure and needs careful consideration.
It may help you to write down the reasons why you want the test.
Put this list away for a while and then look at it again a few days later — are your reasons still the same?
If you require any advice on your legal position (for example, how having had the test may affect your life insurance prospects or what to do about disclosing the result), then contact The Terrence Higgins Trust Legal Line on ..
If you decide not to have a test for HIV then you should still follow the guidelines for safer sex and safer drugs use.
This will help you stay healthy, HIV positive or not.
For more detailed information on taking the test, you may like to consult the ‘HIV and AIDS Medical Briefing’, available from The Terrence Higgins Trust (see contacts).
How is HIV transmitted through pregnancy?
If you or your partner are infected with HIV and you are thinking of having a baby there is no right or wrong decision.
The decision has to be made according to your circumstances, how healthy you are and what you feel is best for you and your partner.
There are many differing opinions but we do know the following:
Since all babies inherit their mother's antibodies, it is only logical that if a mother has positive antibodies to HIV, then her baby will be born with them too.
After approximately 18 months, maternal antibodies in the baby disappear and up to 87% of babies born to HIV positive women WILL NOT carry the virus.
This means that there is a 13% risk of the child having HIV infection.
The most commonly known way of a baby becoming infected with HIV is through the womb.
There is very little medical information to suggest that the virus is transmitted at the time of birth or through breast-feeding.
If you are HIV negative and your partner is HIV positive, then there is a risk that you may become infected whilst trying to conceive.
You could consider donor insemination (see below).
If you are HIV positive and your partner is HIV negative, you may infect him.
Again, donor insemination should be considered.
If you are keeping very healthy and do become pregnant, the pregnancy will not necessarily make you more ill or encourage sickness.
However, if you are quite unwell at the point of conception and during the pregnancy and/or you are injecting drugs, the pregnancy could lead to HIV-related illness.
DI — Donor Insemination
Donor insemination is a method that some women use to have children.
A man can donate his sperm to a clinic or to a woman privately.
Currently in Britain, all donors in clinics whether NHS or private, have to be tested for HIV antibodies before they can give sperm.
All sperm is tested twice to ensure that there has not been an error in the initial testing.
The sperm is stored and frozen until the second negative test result is confirmed.
The man donating the sperm and the woman wanting the insemination, are supposed to have safer sex through the time lag.
There are some clinics which will choose not to offer single women or lesbians their service.
Given this, if a woman chooses to make private arrangements, she should check with the donor about his medical and sexual history.
This may be done by asking him to have an HIV antibody test.
Whatever you decide about pregnancy, it is advisable to seek support from the sources that will allow you to come to your own decision, in your own time, and not force you to make a decision that is based on their belief and judgment rather than yours.
Transmission through blood transfusion
A small number of people in the UK have been infected with HIV from blood transfusions.
However, all donated blood is now tested and any blood showing traces of HIV is discarded.
It is therefore highly unlikely that HIV would be transmitted in this way.
Blood products for people with haemophilia are now heat treated (heat kills the virus) and are also perfectly safe.
Giving blood is perfectly safe.
All equipment is sterile, used once and thrown away.
Rape or sexual assault
If a woman is raped or sexually assaulted and this involved penetration, the violence and force often involved may cause injuries to the genital area and other parts of the body which will often draw blood, and therefore pose some risk of HIV infection.
This is also possible in children who have been sexually abused.
If a woman has been raped, she should contact the Rape Crisis Centre for information, support and advice (see contacts).
A woman who has been raped may wish to take a test for HIV; however the test will not show a conclusive result until at least three months after the assault.
Positive women
It can be very hard to deal with the emotions that are raised by your positive result.
The sense of grief and loss that you might feel over your freedom and lifestyle or your potential to have children may be very difficult to cope with.
Give yourself time to adjust.
Other positive women may be able to give you help, support or advice about how to adjust to living with HIV.
(See contacts)
It is important to keep in mind that being HIV positive does not necessarily mean that you will develop AIDS, or that you will die immediately.
It is still not known how many women (or men) who are HIV antibody positive will go on to show symptoms of AIDS.
Many women (and men) live positively with HIV and AIDS and lead a happy, full life.
If you use drugs, you will need to consider that drugs can deplete your immune system and so speed up the progression of the illness.
Remember that you are under no obligation to tell anyone about your positive result; not even your employer or your G.P. Your decisions about who to tell should be very carefully thought through.
Having support of close friends, family and workmates can be really important, but you may have to consider negative reactions.
Telling potential sexual partners or partners in a long term relationship will be particularly difficult.
It is advisable to try to think this through in advance.
The emotional shock of getting a positive result can itself cause symptoms that may seem like symptoms of HIV-related illness.
Talk to your doctor about these — they may be the result of anxiety and stress.
The medical treatments for some of the illnesses you may experience are improving all the time.
You have the right to be informed as to what is available.
Don't be frightened to use the services that are available for people affected by HIV and AIDS.
Many provide excellent help and advice.
If you want a female doctor or counsellor you can ask for them.
Even if there is not a female specialist available, the more you  ask, the more the services are likely to consider change.
It is important to try and eat a properly balanced diet; get enough rest and sleep and if possible, cut down on stress.
Complementary therapies, such as vitamin supplements, meditation etc. and other natural therapies are often found to be helpful.
Children with HIV infection or AIDS
If you are HIV positive, it is very unlikely that you will pass the virus onto your baby during birth.
So you can deliver your baby just like anyone else and should not be treated any differently.
Children who are HIV antibody positive can remain completely well and grow up like other children.
It is very difficult to make generalisations about how HIV infection develops in children and so it is best to keep in close contact with your own doctor about the child's progress.
It is particularly important to check about vaccinations because many of them contain live virus.
Whether your child is with or without symptoms, they should receive normal immunisations and it is safe to use the following vaccines:
LIVE VACCINES
INACTIVATED (DEAD) VACCINES 
It is advisable for children to be given inactivated polio vaccine as the live vaccine contains polio virus which may be shed for several months after being taken.
This may cause complications to other family members who are HIV positive and previously unvaccinated.
HIV positive children with or without symptoms should not receive the yellow fever vaccine.
There is at present no consensus about the BCG (tuberculosis) vaccine.
The World Health Organisation recommends that the vaccine can be given to children without symptoms, while the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation in the UK recommends that children should not receive the vaccine — whether they are with or without symptoms.
We therefore suggest that you consult your family doctor for further advice.
Children who have HIV or AIDS can attend day care facilities or schools freely without putting other children at risk.
You may wish to inform the Head Teacher or Nursery of your child's HIV status to ensure that the necessary precautions are taken in case of an accident.
It is imperative to gain the Head's assurance that confidentiality shall not be broken and to insist that the child shall not be discriminated against.
A decision to inform the Head Teacher must be carefully thought through; you are under no obligation to inform him or her.
You may prefer not to do so because of the risk of breach of confidence or discrimination.
If a child with HIV has an accident, these normal precautions should be followed:
When cleaning up faeces, urine or vomit, whether or not they contain blood, all open wounds or cuts should be covered with waterproof plasters and you should wear disposable gloves.
Dispose of dirty nappies by flushing them down the toilet, or put them in a sealed plastic bag.
If you use terry nappies, wash them on the hottest cycle of the washing machine.
Children with HIV need and deserve as many hugs, cuddles and kisses as everyone else.
It is impossible to infect someone this way.
Women as carers
Caring for a partner, family member or friend at home or at work can be emotionally and physically exhausting.
You may feel that you have to hide your own feelings to protect them.
Or you may be grieving for your partner or client.
Caring for someone with HIV or AIDS can be very difficult, therefore it is important to recognise your own needs and seek support for yourself.
(See contacts)
Conclusion
There is still much that we need to know about HIV and AIDS, and we are all learning all of the time.
This often makes it very hard for us to confront some of the feelings we have about HIV and AIDS — sex, drugs use, illness and sexuality.
We hope that this booklet provides you with useful information to be used as a starting point — to start thinking about the issues that HIV and AIDS may raise for us in our lives and to start talking with and listening to our lovers, families, friends and colleagues in an informed, non-judgmental way.
HELPLIST
The Terrence Higgins Trust 
The Terrence Higgins Trust offers a wide range of services which are open to all women.
For women with HIV, help on welfare rights, housing and legal matters is available from the Advice Centre; practical help is offered by our Helper Cell Service and befriending by our Buddy Service.
Women counsellors, buddies and Helpline volunteers are available upon request.
Specialist support for present and ex-drug users concerned about HIV and AIDS as well as people in prison living with HIV or AIDS, is also provided.
To access any of these services, please telephone us on  
Other Telephone Helplines
National AIDS Helpline
24 hours a day
All calls are free from anywhere in the UK; a list of needle exchanges is available upon request.
ChildLine
Phone free 24 hours  a day or write (no stamp needed) to:
You can talk with ChildLine about anything you want to including HIV and AIDS — it's completely confidential.
AIDS Service Organisations
The majority of these organisations are London based.
However, they should be able to put you in contact with a group in your area.
London Lighthouse
(residential and support centre for people affected by AIDS)
Mildmay Mission Hospital
(an independent Christian charity providing health care for people with AIDS)
Positive Options
(part of Barnardo's providing support for HIV positive parents who want to make plans for the future care of their children)
Scottish AIDS Monitor
(SAM will be able to put you in touch with National Office services in your area of Scotland)
Services for Women
Rape Crisis Centre
(will be able to put you in touch with local groups in your area)
AIDS IN THE FAMILY
Information for Parents and Carers of Children
INTRODUCTION
This booklet has been produced jointly by Barnardo's and the Terrence Higgins Trust to give information about HIV and AIDS to family groups and households with children.
We hope that it will be especially helpful if you, your child or another member of your family group have HIV or AIDS, but that people who are less directly affected by the virus will also find it useful.
There is a list of organisations offering advice, support and practical help at the back of the booklet.
What is HIV?
How is HIV transmitted?
Confidentiality — who to tell?
If you have HIV/AIDS
If your child has HIV/AIDS
Going into hospital
Planning for the future
Emotional support and telling adults and children in the family
Spiritual support
Consenting to an HIV test
Legal and practical information
Managing at home
Safer sex
Pregnancy — the choices
Appendix: Organisations to contact for further help 
WHAT IS HIV?
HIV (Human Immunodeficiency Virus) is the name of a virus that can damage the body's immune system.
The immune system fights off illness, and if the body's defences are severely weakened this can lead to AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome).
AIDS is the name for a collection of different diseases which can cause serious illness or death in both adults and children.
In adults, a test for HIV antibodies will not produce a positive result until at least 3 months after infection and this is called the ‘window’ period.
It is important to remember that even though a test result would be ‘negative’ during the ‘window’period, a person would be infectious at this stage, if they have HIV.
It can take as many as 10–15 years for HIV to destroy the body's immune system.
During this time a person may be quite well.
It is important for people with HIV to try and keep as healthy as possible as it is known that a balanced diet, rest and relaxation can help to strengthen the immune system.
Someone who has had an AIDS related illness may well be able to maintain a reasonably normal life, particularly if their immune system is still moderately good.
However, if the immune system has broken down, there is a risk of further infection.
More information is becoming known about HIV, and some diseases can be prevented with treatment before symptoms develop.
it is important to keep as healthy as possible.
HOW IS HIV TRANSMITTED
HIV is very fragile, and it is not easily transmitted.
For example, it cannot survive in very hot water, in bleach or detergent.
HIV is transmitted in three ways:
through unprotected vaginal or anal intercourse
by infected blood entering the blood stream
from a woman with HIV to her baby either during pregnancy, or during delivery
There is no evidence to show that HIV can be caught from social contact.
Hugging, touching and kissing, as well as being close to people, presents no risk of infection.
HIV cannot be transmitted through
coughing
sneezing
sharing a toilet seat
sharing a drinking fountain
mosquitoes and other insects
eating food prepared by someone who has HIV
showers and swimming pools
sweat, tears and saliva
animals and pets
HIV cannot be transmitted through sharing a toilet seat
Confidentiality — who to tell?
If you or your child have HIV, you will be concerned about confidentiality.
It is not possible to make hard and fast rules about whom to tell, but:
try not to rush into a decision you may later regret
before making a decision, talk it through with someone you trust
ask yourself if you are ready to cope with the possible reaction of the person you tell
remember there is no obligation to tell anyone; but you may decide that you need to do so in order to obtain their support, or access to certain facilities.
There are special legal rules to protect the confidentiality of information held by Sexually Transmitted Disease clinics.
Some social services departments have specific policies on HIV, stressing the need for confidentiality.
Whether or not a policy exists, social services staff have a legal duty to keep confidential all information which is given to them.
All health care professionals have a similar duty.
However, standards of confidentiality do vary and, if you are having to deal with either a statutory or voluntary agency regarding your own or your child's status, you should ask them how your information will be recorded and who else will be told.
Your details should not be passed on without your permission.
If you have HIV/AIDS
If you have HIV and are well, the only change which may be necessary is a regular visit to the clinic or hospital for a health check.
There are many parents in this position who are working, and living their usual lives despite the uncertainty of the future.
If you feel tired and unwell, it is a good idea to discuss this with your doctor so that you can receive any necessary treatment as early as possible.
In the longer term, if you become unwell, you will be concerned about what will happen to the children.
This will depend on many things, for example:
their age
their health
how much help and support is available from family, friends and anyone else who is involved
If your child has HIV/AIDS?
If you have just been told that your child has HIV, and if this was unexpected news, the shock will be overwhelming at first.
It is important that you are able to ask as many questions as you want, and to get as much information and support as you need.
If you already know that your child has HIV, it will be important for him or her to be seen regularly by a doctor who understands HIV in children and for the doctor to be kept informed about any changes in your child's condition.
Immunisations
If your child has HIV, it is best to consult your hospital doctor about the vaccinations he or she should be given.
Diseases such as chickenpox and measles can pose a particular risk for children with HIV, and you should be told if there are any outbreaks at your child's school.
Contact with other children
Your child poses no risk to other children and is able to go to nursery, playgroup or school and enjoy growing up with other children as much as his or her health allows.
You are not obliged to tell anyone at school of your child's HIV status, but you may choose to do so if you feel it is best for your child to have a trusted adult who knows the situation.
If your child has any of the following symptoms it is advisable to let your doctor know:
swollen glands
weight loss
breathing problems
thrush
diarrhoea
fevers
skin rashes or sores
or any infection such as ear-ache, or a cough, etc.
Going into hospital
If you become ill and have to go into hospital, you will probably be concerned about keeping in touch with your children.
It is very natural for you to miss each other, and it is important for you to know where they are and to be able to make contact with them whenever you want to.
There are units in some parts of the UK where you and your child can be cared for together when one or both of you are unwell.
If your child is in hospital you should be allowed access to him or her at all times, wherever possible.
Raise any problems with the ward staff or doctor.
Planning for the future
Everyone knows that talking about AIDS and the future is very difficult.
To be able to make the right decisions you need
to talk with people who can be trusted
to have all the information you require
to feel in control of the situation
to ask as many questions as you want to
to find about the local organisations that may offer help
to explain your anxieties and feelings as much as you want to
If it is too difficult to talk to people you know, you could contact a helpline first.
‘AIDS and Babies’ An American poster for Spanish speakers.
Remember:
It may be easier to plan for the future in stages and to adapt to one change at a time.
try not to put things off too much as plans may take far longer to arrange and involve more red tape than you might think.
try to look at all the options before making a decision.
when you feel clear about the right plan, check out any legal or practical implications and make sure your family and friends know what your wishes are.
Questions to ask yourself:
is it easier to keep the children at home and get lots of help in for them?
is it easier for the children to stay with friends or relatives, for a while, or indefinitely?
can the children go to foster parents for a few hours, a longer period, or indefinitely?(see page 14)
is it easier for you to be cared for at home or in hospital?
do you know what sort of help is available from social services and local voluntary organisations?
Most of these plans can be altered, if and when the situation changes.
A drawback is that you might find many different professionals gradually becoming involved with you and your family, which can be confusing.
Try and choose one person with whom you have confidence.
Planning for the future care of your children can be particularly stressful if you are someone who wants to have  as little as possible to do with social services and other authorities, or if you have had a bad experience with them in the past.
It might help to talk about how you feel with someone you trust and who knows how the system works, for example, someone from a self-help group or an individual health visitor or advisor.
Barnardo's has a new scheme called ‘Positive Options’ to help families affected by HIV with child care plans.
They may be able to help you negotiate with the authorities — see the Helplist at the end of this leaflet for more information.
Emotional support and telling adults and children in the family
Telling other members of the family
Breaking bad news is always painful and difficult.
There is no right or wrong way to do it and the timing is never easy or ideal.
You might find it helpful to plan what you will say in advance and to talk it over first with someone you trust and who already knows the situation.
The decision when and whether to tell should be yours and yours alone.
you might decide not to tell family members until the immediate shock for you has begun to subside.
if time allows, it might be easier to tell them whilst you are well and able to continue with your every day routine.
it may be helpful to ‘test the water’ by indirectly checking out their attitudes and feelings about HIV.
Some people have been surprised and relieved to discover that HIV has been suspected by friends and relatives who have been anxious to help, yet afraid to ask.
Support for adults in the family
You may want emotional support at any stage of HIV infection, and it will be important for you to find someone you trust who will give the support you need.
It may be very hard for you to talk about yourself and your feelings to others in your immediate circle.
You could find someone outside the family to help you cope, perhaps by suggesting ways to relax or manage stress, or by sorting out practical problems.
it is important for you to find someone you trust.
After the initial shock and disbelief of hearing that you have HIV, you may be left with a mixture of emotions.
Living with uncertainty is distressing and it is very easy for people to feel:
Guilty —
is it my fault?
Angry —
with ourselves and others
will I lose control?
Frightened —
of death, of illness and pain
of losing someone I love,
of rejection if others find out.
These are all normal feelings for people who are having to cope in an abnormal situation.
Emotional support can be found from:
a counsellor (who gives one-to-one support)
talking with others in a similar situation
a trusted friend
joining a support group
It may be helpful to remember how you have lived through bad times before and how you have coped with crises.
It is also important to retain control of your support system.
You may want to refuse help when you feel it is unnecessary.
This is OK and remember there is no ‘right’ way to feel, or to find support.
Organisations which can offer your support, including The Terrence Higgins Trust Family Support Network, are listed in the Helplist at the end of this leaflet.
Talking with children
Children react in different and sometimes unexpected ways.
Their ideas about HIV and AIDS will differ depending on their age and understanding.
If you are considering talking to your child about HIV, think about:
the age of your child; it may be wise to check out first of all what they already know about HIV and AIDS
why he or she needs to be told
exactly what you need to tell them
who the child may talk to
how much support you and the child may need
Many parents dread being asked about death because it is such a painful and difficult subject.
Approach it gently and carefully, again checking out what the child already knows and understands.
There a number of organisations and individuals who have experience in talking to children about loss and death.
There are also some helpful storybooks which you could use with your child — see the Helplist at the end of this leaflet.
Your child may need to know because you or someone else in the family is ill, or because he or she has HIV or AIDS.
Bear in mind that once your child has this information, he or she will also need to understand exactly who they can safely talk to about it.
Sometimes young children want to tell others and you lose control of ‘who knows’.
Whatever information you give will depend on the situation, but it should be kept simple and honest.
it's OK to say ‘I don't know’ or ‘We'll try and find out’
talking to children openly and truthfully giving small amounts of information at a time will make the task easier
being available and sensitive in listening to their spoken and unspoken questions is important
children can react in different and sometimes unexpected ways.
Letting Go
It may help your child to hold on to memories of the past and to begin to think about changes in the future by painting pictures, making a tape recording or keeping a scrapbook of family events.
If you are ill you may want to write a letter than can be read and re-read in the future.
These actions can all be part of letting go of a painful stage of life, and will help the children and family remember happy times which may otherwise be forgotten.
It may be very hard to do so, but sharing feelings is important and helps us to communicate and understand one another.
For families who are distressed and sad, talking and being listened to will help.
Try to find someone who feels right for you and your children.
Support for Children
Children cope in different ways and it may be that the only support they need is from you.
However, some may change their behaviour, some may want to talk and others won't.
Younger children may express their feelings through playing.
If there is anxiety about your child being unable to express painful thoughts and feelings, it could be helpful to do this with a professional person, such as a therapist or psychologist.
Children often want to protect other people and for this reason they may be reluctant to ask questions.
Some parents find it easier for everyone concerned to talk to someone outside the immediate family.
Spiritual Support
Most people affected by HIV have an inner need to make sense of the experience of living and dying and to do so with hope and creativity.
You may find yourself searching for meaning in life itself whatever your faith or if you have no specific faith.
At present resources are limited, but there are courses and retreats which offer the opportunity to focus on the spiritual and emotional aspects of HIV in the safety of a non-judgmental and totally confidential environment.
You will find details of organisations which offer this form of support at the end of this booklet and a list of sympathetic ministers of different faiths can  be obtained from CARA, The Terrence Higgins Trust Family Support Network and London Lighthouse Community Services.
Consenting to an HIV test
There is no legal obligation for adults to have an HIV test and you should not be tested without your consent, except in cases of extreme medical emergency.
If your child is over 16, he or she cannot be tested for HIV without his or her permission.
If your child is under 16, he or she still has the right to consent to or refuse an HIV test if the doctor feels he or she has sufficient maturity and understanding.
In any other case, and for younger children, consent may be given by:
a parent or guardian
any other person who has parental responsibility for the child
a local authority if the child is in care under a care order
Adoptive parents cannot have a child who is placed with them for adoption tested for HIV until after a formal adoption order is made.
you may find yourself searching for meaning in life itself.
Legal and Practical Information
Your local social services department should provide various services for people who are sick or disabled through HIV; exactly what is available varies widely from one area to another, but may include providing special equipment, adaptations, telephones and travel concessions.
You may also be eligible for a range of services if your child is considered to be ‘in need’; a technical phrase which is likely to include many children with HIV, or children living in a household where an adult has HIV.
Your local social services department has wide powers to provide you with whatever they think appropriate, for example, day care for your child or help in the home.
Again, the exact nature of what is on offer will depend very much on the priorities and resources of your local social services department.
Practical help is also available in most areas through the local health authority AIDS co-ordinator, and from local and national voluntary organisations (see appendix for a list of useful AIDS organisations).
The law relating to children has recently been brought together in the Children Act.
This came into force in October 1991 and introduces to the law important new principles about children's rights and choices, parental responsibility, and the role of the education and welfare system.
We do not yet know how it will work in practice, and if you have a problem making arrangements for your children, it is important to take legal advice from one of the organisations listed in the Helplist at the end of this leaflet.
Fostering
If you cannot manage on your own or with family and friends, or if you prefer not to involve them, you can ask for your child to be looked after by local authority foster parents for a short or longer period.
This does not involve going to Court and you remain free to remove your child at any time (although it is best to do this by arrangement).
Social services have to consider your views and take into consideration any racial, linguistic/cultural factors when they arrange the placement and make any decisions about your child.
Depending on your child's age, he or she will also be consulted.
You should be allowed regular contact with your child while he or she is away.
If your child has HIV, the foster parents should be specially trained to care for him or her.
Wills and Guardians
It is always advisable to make a Will, especially if you have young children in order to make clear who will look after them if you die.
if you are a single mother you can, in most cases, appoint a Guardian for your children by Will
if you are married or divorced, the other parent will usually be legally responsible for them when you die and your right to appoint a guardian is more restricted
if you are a single father, you have no automatic right to appoint a guardian and will need legal advice on your situation
In any of these cases, you should take legal advice when you are ready to make a Will; it is not a good idea to try and do this on your own.
You can get advice from The Terrence Higgins Trust and other organisations listed in the appendix.
If you have not appointed a guardian and there is no one legally responsible for your child when you die, someone such as a friend or relation can be appointed by the Court.
Adoption
Adoption involves the legal transfer of responsibility for a child from its natural parents.
Some parents with HIV choose to make arrangements for their child to be adopted and they and their children have the opportunity of selecting and getting to know the adoptive parents.
Barnardo's ‘Positive Options’ or a social worker from the home finding unit of your local social services department can give you more information about how this might work.
children can get to know adoptive parents.
Legal Disputes
If you have a dispute with the child's other parent or carer, which you cannot resolve between you, you can ask the Court to make a decision.
The Court can also make Orders about where the child is to live and who is to see him or her in the event of a relationship breakdown.
Other members of the family or friends with an interest in the child's welfare can also apply to the Court.
If you are in a violent relationship you can get additional legal protection.
Social services departments have the power to take legal action if they are concerned about your child's welfare.
This should not happen solely because you or your child have HIV.
In order to remove a child against your wishes, they must establish certain legal grounds and obtain a Court Order.
This should only happen as a last resort in exceptional circumstances and if it does, you should take legal advice as soon as possible.
Financial Help
You may be able to claim a range of cash benefits if you are finding it difficult to manage financially.
If you are:
in low-paid work
unemployed
too sick to work
unable to work through child-care commitments
then you should look into what help is available.
The Social Security system is complicated and it is best to take advice to make sure you get all that you are entitled to.
If you have recently arrived in this country special rules apply and it is even more important to get good advice before claiming benefits.
You can get advice from The Terrence Higgins Trust and other organisations listed in the Helplist.
Housing
If you are homeless you may have a legal right to housing from a local authority.
You can obtain advice on housing problems from The Terrence Higgins Trust and other organisations listed in the appendix.
Managing at home
Being HIV positive or having AIDS does not mean that there have to be any major changes to the home environment.
Normal everyday standards of good hygiene are quite sufficient.
First Aid and minor accidents
Cuts and grazes:
clean under running water and cover with waterproof plasters until the wound can be left open to heal 
Spilt blood or body fluid:
pour bleach or disinfectant on to the spillage and cover the area with paper towels, or thick tissues
wearing household (rubber) gloves, clear up the soiled paper, place in a polythene bag and clean the surface with detergent
seal the bag and dispose of either by burning (incineration) or, if there is no special waste collection service, in the rubbish bin
Hygiene
wearing gloves is only necessary when dealing with blood and blood-stained fluids or if changing nappies that are soiled with diarrhoea; it is unnecessary to wear gloves when feeding, holding or bathing a baby
do not share razors, toothbrushes or towels
Food and Eating
HIV cannot be caught from food prepared by someone who has the virus.
Cups, crockery, cutlery and glasses can all be washed in hot soapy water in the usual way.
Babies' feeding equipment can also be cleaned and sterilised as usual.
It is important for anyone with HIV/AIDS to have a healthy diet.
You should be able to obtain advice from a dietitian at the hospital on diet and food supplements.
If someone with HIV has a sore mouth, or has difficulty swallowing or eating, the hospital/clinic may offer special advice.
Mouth washes may help and liquid food may be more easily swallowed.
Sometimes it is helpful to give an ice cold drink a few minutes before a meal to relive the difficulty of chewing or swallowing.
Safer sex
Safer sex is any kind of sex which reduces or eliminates the risk of blood, semen or vaginal juices getting from one person into the  other's body.
Some examples of safer sex are hugging, kissing and masturbation.
Penetration of the vagina or anus by the penis is risky unless the man uses a condom.
There are different opinions about the exact risk involved in oral sex, but it is generally understood to be much less risky than penetrative sex.
Using a dental dam (latex rubber square) or using a condom will further reduce any risk.
You are usually advised to have safer sex even if both partners have HIV, to avoid the risk of getting other sexually transmitted diseases, or different strains of HIV, which might harm your health.
When buying condoms, look for the sell-by date and the BSI standard Kitemark.
Use a water-based lubricant such as‘KY’ jelly, as an oil-based lubricant like ‘Vaseline’will make the condom disintegrate.
Additional protection is necessary for contraception.
Knowing the facts is the easy part.
You might find that the most difficult thing about safer sex is knowing how to negotiate for it with your partner.
This can be especially true if you are a woman who is unused to making sexual demands, or if you are already in a long-term relationship when you begin to ask for safer sex.
It may take time and courage to decide what you want and find the confidence to carry it through.
An Israeli poster promoting condoms and World AIDS Day.
Pregnancy — the choices
It can be very difficult for people infected or at risk of HIV infection to decide whether or not to have a child because in some cases the HIV virus can be passed on.
Prospective parents can find themselves having to weight the joys and fulfillment of bringing a new child into the world with the responsibilities and risks.
There are no easy answers, but it will help to get as much information as you can and to talk to a sympathetic doctor of midwife before making a decision.
Some of the following points may help you decide:
if a man has HIV, trying to conceive involves a risk of HIV passing to the woman and baby
the risk of a baby being infected by a mother with HIV varies from 49% in some parts of the world, to about 13% in the UK
a child does not lose its mother's antibodies until about 18 months after birth, so the child of an HIV positive mother may automatically test positive for HIV antibodies until that age, but later on may prove not to have the virus
it can be very difficult to decide whether to have a child.
HELPLIST
Specialist support for present and ex-drug users concerned about HIV and AIDS (including those in prison) is also provided.
Barnardo's
Barnardo's is a voluntary child care organisation working with families, children and young people in different parts of the UK.
Many of its projects provide services which could be helpful to families who are living with HIV or AIDS — for example, day care, fostering, adoption and community support schemes.
In some areas, new work is being developed specifically aimed at helping families and children cope with the impact of HIV on their lives.
One example is ‘Barnardo's Positive Options’ which provides confidential and independent information and practical help for parents who want to make plans for the future care of their children.
Barnardo's also has workers focussing on the particular needs of families facing both haemophilia and HIV.
For further information about ‘Positive Options’ and Barnardo's services for families facing AIDS which may be available in your area, write to:
Other helpful organisations
Organisations working with ethnic and cultural communities
Organisations providing residential care
Bethany  
A house of rest and respite for people with HIV/AIDS, their families, carers and friends.
It offers short-term care up to a maximum of 6 weeks, a befriending service as well as bereavement counselling, transport and massage.
London Lighthouse  
London Lighthouse is a major residential and support centre for people affected by AIDS which provides an integrated range of services.
Mildmay Mission Hospital  
An independent charitable hospital which cares for anyone affected by AIDS.
It has a special family unit where whole families can be admitted.
Milestone House  
A purpose built hospice and respite care centre for people with AIDS.
Organisations offering Spiritual Support
CARA (Care and Resources for people affected by HIV/AIDS 
Provides practical and pastoral care, educational training and theological reflection for all affected by HIV/AIDS.
Catholic AIDS Link 
Offers spiritual, emotional, practical and financial support to those affected by HIV/AIDS.
Jewish AIDS Trust 
Offers support, education, counselling and practical help to all affected by HIV/AIDS in the Jewish Community.
London Churches HIV/AIDS Unit  
Brings together representatives from the Baptist Union, Church Army, Church of England, Jewish Community, Methodist Church, National Federation of Black Churches, Roman Catholic Church, Salvation Army, Society of Friends and United Reform Church.
Br.
Collin Wilfred SSF, the HIV/AIDS advisor, may be able to put you in touch with a sympathetic religious advisor from your Church or religious community.
Salvation Army  
Have projects in Wandsworth and Lothian offering emotional and practical support and recreational facilities.
Sympathetic Ministers   
Reaching Out: A listening and counselling service.
counselling and support with a practical approach, and spiritual healing
(Co-ordinator of ‘AIDS in Doncaster Advisory Service’)
Books your child may find helpful
Your child may also be interested in another leaflet we have produced called ‘What can I do about AIDS’
The Terrence Higgins Trust is a registered charity which provides practical support, help, counselling and advice for anyone with or concerned about AIDS or HIV infection.
Barnardo's is a registered charity which is Britain's best known and largest child care organisation offering carefully targeted services across the UK.
HIV & AIDS
MEDICAL BRIEFING
CONTENTS
The Epidemic
What is AIDS?
History of the epidemic
What causes AIDS?
How widespread is HIV infection?
UK statistics
Transmission of HIV
How is HIV transmitted?
Who can get HIV infection?
Risk activities and preventing HIV infection:
(a)
Sex
(b)
Injecting drugs
(c)
Blood products and blood transfusion
(d)
Organ and sperm donation
(e)
Women and pregnancy
(f)
Social contact with people who have HIV infection or AIDS
Detecting HIV infection
Tests for HIV infection
The meaning of a ‘positive’ test
The meaning of a ‘negative’ test
To test or not to test?
Who should know the result?
Where is the antibody test available?
Further help from The Terrence Higgins Trust.
HIV disease and AIDS
What can happen during HIV infection?
Late HIV infection
(a)
AIDS-Related Complex (ARC)
(b)
AIDS
(c)
HIV effects on the brain and nervous system
(d)
Other possible HIV effects
(e)
HIV effects on other diseases
(f)
HIV infection in infants and children
Living with AIDS
Treating HIV infection
(a)
Zidovudine (AZT, Retrovir)
(b)
Interferons
(c)
Soluble CD4
(d)
Pentamidine
(e)
Acyclovir (Zovirax)
Vaccines
Social and personal consequences of HIV infection and AIDS
What are the chances of developing AIDS?
The Future
UK statistics in this leaflet cover the period to 31 January 1991 and are sourced from the PHLS Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre and the Communicable Disease (Scotland) Unit.
THE EPIDEMIC
What is AIDS?
AIDS stands for Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
‘Acquired’ refers to any condition which is not present at birth.
‘Immune Deficiency’ means that the body's immune system, which fights off illnesses, is not working efficiently.
AIDS is not a single disease: it is a ‘Syndrome’— or group — of specific infections and cancers, which occur because the body's immune system has been compromised.
This ‘immune deficiency’ is a late consequence of infection by a Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).
History of the epidemic
The condition that we now recognise as AIDS was first reported in the USA in 1981.
Between June and November of that year, 159 reports of people with AIDS were received.
Three quarters of them came from three major US cities and 95% were gay men.
The first reports of AIDS in the UK were received in London in December 1981.
There were, undoubtedly, people with AIDS before 1981, but careful retrospective studies have shown that it was rare and affected few people compared to the numbers now involved.
AIDS must have been exceedingly rare before the mid-1970s anywhere in the world.
AIDS now occurs in most countries.
The number of people with AIDS varies enormously between countries, but most of them come from large towns rather than rural areas.
Records in developing countries are less complete.
For example, it was not clear until 1983 that there were people with AIDS in central Africa.
Worldwide, most people with AIDS are heterosexual men and women.
However, in the developed countries, AIDS has first affected gay men, haemophiliacs and injecting drug users.
By December 1990, the World Health Organisation (WHO) had received reports of over 305,000 people with AIDS from 179 countries, but they estimate that the true number of cases is likely to be  more than 800,000, with between 8–10 million infected with HIV.
What causes AIDS?
The infections and cancers which characterise AIDS are a late consequence of damage to the immune system.
This damage is caused by a Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) which infects human cells, especially, but not exclusively, those within the immune system.
There are two known sub-types of HIV: HIV 1 was discovered in 1983 and is responsible for infection world-wide.
A second virus, HIV 2, was discovered in 1986 and is mainly found in West Africa.
HIV 2 may not have as great a potential to cause illness as HIV 1.
The spectrum of illnesses caused by both viruses is similar and is known as HIV-related disease.
How widespread is HIV infection?
The majority of people with HIV infection do not have AIDS, so HIV infection is more common than AIDS.
WHO estimates that 60% of all global HIV infections have resulted from heterosexual intercourse.
The number of people in the UK infected with HIV has been estimated to be up to 100,000, of whom AIDS had been officially reported in 4228, by January 1991.
In the UK, the proportion of people infected with HIV differs between regions and between different groups of people.
44% of people with haemophilia (who are usually male) were infected by 1985, before the contamination of donated blood was controlled.
This is known to involve approximately 1,200 people.
People who have injected drugs have rates of infection from under 2% in some regions to 70%, with the highest proportion found in Edinburgh.
Gay men attending sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinics have rates of infection from less than 2% to 25%, depending on the clinic.
Gay men attending STD clinics tend to be more sexually active than gay men in general, so these rates of infection do not apply to all gay men.
Other heterosexual people with HIV infection have been infected abroad.
Heterosexual spread of HIV also occurs among injecting drug users and their sexual partners, but they are classified by drug-using behaviour alone.
In the UK, the great majority of people known to be infected with HIV are gay and bisexual men and haemophiliacs.
However, this trend is changing.
Injecting drug-users and heterosexual men and women represent an increasing percentage of those with HIV infection.
UK statistics
In the UK, reports of people with AIDS are collected by the Communicable Disease Surveillance Centre for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and by the Communicable Diseases (Scotland) Unit.
Figures are not collected for people with AIDS Related Complex (ARC), which can be an equally disturbing disease (see Section 4).
It is worth noting that there is a delay between diagnosis and reporting of cases of AIDS and that there is usually a long interval between infection with HIV and the development of AIDS, so the published statistics do not accurately reflect the spread of HIV infection.
The current statistics underestimate the number of people with AIDS.
The AIDS epidemic in the UK is increasing.
The size of the epidemic in five or ten years time has not been estimated with confidence; the epidemic will be determined by the number of people with HIV infection who develop AIDS over time.
TRANSMISSION OF HIV
How is HIV transmitted?
HIV is not easily passed from person to person.
The virus is not ‘caught’ in the same way as diseases like chicken-pox or 'flu.
It is transmitted through:
(i)
Sexual contact, especially anal and vaginal intercourse.
However, not all sexual activities are risky.
(ii)
Shared use of needles and syringes may transmit HIV.
This includes sharing ‘works’ to inject a drug, repeated use of medical injection equipment for more than one patient, and re-use of acupuncture, tattooing, or body piercing needles without proper sterilization.
Very rarely, accidental injury with contaminated needles has transmitted HIV to a health worker.
(iii)
In the past, from blood transfusion and products made from blood used to treat haemophilia.
(iv)
From mother to baby, before (and perhaps during) birth.
After birth, HIV may rarely be transmitted by breastfeeding.
Certain sexual activities or drug-using activities that are able to transmit HIV from one person to another are called ‘high risk activities’.
Even then, it must be remembered that for exposure to occur, one person must already be infected by HIV.
HIV is not transmitted by insect bites, nor through coughing or sneezing, as insufficient amounts of virus are present.
Who can get HIV infection?
Although, in theory, anyone could become infected by HIV, some people will be more at risk than others.
An opportunity for passing HIV must take place, such as a high risk activity during sex.
However, exposure to HIV does not always result in transmission of the virus.
The chance of an exposure transmitting infection varies both between the different ways it can be transmitted and, for reasons yet undetermined, between different people engaging in the same activity.
(i) Men who have sex with other men.
In the UK, 80% of all people with AIDS and 58% of all known people with HIV infection, are men who have had sex with other men.
The majority in both groups are resident in London.
Men who engage in high risk sexual activity in closed institutions (such as prisons) are more at risk because of the lack of condoms and health education.
(ii) People who share injecting equipment
People are at risk when they share needles, syringes and other equipment used to inject drugs.
14% of all known people with HIV infections and 5% of all known people with AIDS in the UK have been infected by this route.
1.5% of people with AIDS in the UK are gay men who have injected drugs.
The number of injecting drug users becoming infected with HIV is growing steadily and is reflected in the latest statistics.
Injecting drug-users could also be exposed to — or expose a partner to — HIV, during sex.
Again, people in closed institutions such as prisons are at risk because they are more likely to have to share ‘works’.
(iii) Haemophiliacs who received blood products
People with haemophilia were at risk of HIV infection before October 1985, because they regularly received injections of contaminated blood products which help their blood to clot (Factor VIII and cryoprecipitate).
6% of all people with AIDS and 8% of all known people with HIV infection in the UK have haemophilia.
All Factor VIII now supplied in the UK has been heat-treated to kill the virus.
(iv) People who have had a blood transfusion
The risk from blood transfusion in the UK has always been very small.
Any risk has now been virtually eliminated by testing donors for HIV infection and blood found to be infected is never used.
A small number of people have been infected through transfusions in the past but there has never been a risk in donating blood or having a blood sample taken.
(v) People who have sex with the opposite sex
There is a small, but increasing risk of HIV infection in heterosexuals unless they have been in a mutually monogamous relationship for a number of years.
The chance that partner has HIV infection is increased if they have engaged in any other high risk activity, such as injecting drugs, or if the man is bisexual.
A person, or their partner, is at increased risk if they have had high risk sex in regions of the world where the prevalence of HIV infection is greater than that in the UK.
These areas are notably large urban areas in parts of the Americas and central Africa.
(vi) Babies born to women with HIV infection
Babies can be affected in the womb and perhaps during birth or breastfeeding.
Babies born to women with HIV infection have a 20% chance of being affected.
Assessment cannot be made at birth because antibodies to HIV from the mother cross the placenta, and though these would be detected in an HIV antibody test, it would not show whether the baby itself was infected.
Very rarely HIV may have been transmitted in breastmilk and women in the UK who are HIV antibody positive are advised not to breastfeed.
Breast milk from milk banks is safe as it has been pasteurized.
Risk activities and preventing HIV infection
(a) Sex
Certain forms of sexual activity carry a higher risk of transmitting HIV infection than others.
Risk of exposure to HIV infection is determined by the type of sexual behaviour practised.
Protection can be achieved by adopting ‘safer sex’ activities.
Sexual activities can be ranked according to estimated risk.
‘No risk’activity is safe as no infectious body fluids (for example blood, semen, vaginal secretions) can be transferred from one person to another.
‘Very low risk’activity is not known to be a risk but could occasionally result in transfer of these body fluids to another person.
‘Low risk’activity could transfer body fluids that are known to be infectious.
However, little or no evidence shows that a risk exists.
‘High risk’activity involves transfer of fluid that can be infectious to another person, to a site where infection has been known to occur.
Removal of natural protective secretions (e.g. by douching) and injury increase the chance that exposure will result in transmission of HIV.
Saliva, tears and urine are not known to be infectious.
‘SAFER SEX’ involves adopting safer sexual activities and excluding practices with a higher risk for transmission of HIV.
No risk activity (no transfer of body fluids):
Masturbation on your own.
Touching and massaging away from the genital area.
Sex toys (dildo, vibrator etc.) when reserved for your exclusive use and not used before or after vaginal or anal intercourse.
Enemas or douches done by yourself and not done before or after vaginal or anal intercourse.
Bondage, beating, whipping and spanking.
Breaking the skin increases the risk.
Kissing away from the genital area.
Very low risk activity (possible transfer of body fluids):
Mutual or group masturbation.
Sex toys when used with a partner, as long as they are not shared.
Penis or vagina to body contact.
Urination (‘water sports’, ‘golden showers’).
Low risk activity (transfer of body fluids with little or no evidence of HIV transmission):
Sharing sex toys.
Fingering (putting one or more fingers into the vagina or anus).
Cunnilingus (a man or woman  tonguing a woman's vagina).
This is more risky during a period.
Fellatio (‘cock sucking’, i.e.  tonguing or sucking a penis).
Coming inside the mouth could increase the risk.
Anilingus (‘rimming’, a man or woman  tonguing someone's anal area).
The person who is  tonguing could catch other infections from this activity, such as gonorrhoea.
Fisting or fist fucking (putting a hand, fist or forearm into the rectum), provided it is not done before or after anal intercourse.
High risk activity (transfer of body fluids with evidence of HIV transmission):
Vaginal or anal intercourse (fucking, screwing), particularly without a condom.
Withdrawal before coming is unlikely to be an adequate safeguard as some secretions will still be exchanged.
Any sexual activity which draws blood from the genital area or that pierces the skin.
Fist fucking, before or after anal intercourse.
Putting a fist, or other object, into the rectum may result in injury to the lining of this area and therefore can increase the risk of HIV transmission.
Condoms, contraception and lubricants: In vaginal or anal intercourse, condoms (rubbers, sheaths), when used correctly, may offer worthwhile protection against transmission of HIV.
Condoms were designed for vaginal sex to prevent pregnancy.
The Family Planning Association recommends that for reliable contraception, the additional protection of a spermicide should be used, or an alternative method such as the diaphragm (cap) with spermicide, or a coil, or the ‘pill’ can be considered.
The possible prevention of transmission of HIV and other sexually-transmitted diseases is an additional benefit of condoms.
However, in anal sex condoms may tear or fall off more often, and protection is lost.
Withdrawal before ejaculation is a useful additional safeguard, but it is not safe when attempted without a condom.
Spermicides such as nonoxinol 9 have chemical activity against viruses (including HIV) and are an additional safeguard when used with a condom in vaginal sex.
Such spermicide preparations include ‘Duragel’, ‘Orthocreme’ and ‘Delfen cream’.
Nonoxinol-9 may be an irritant to the lining of the rectum and is not recommended for anal sex.
If lubricants are used they should be water-based such as‘KY’ and ‘1-2-1’.
Oil-based lubricants such as‘Vaseline’ and baby oil damage the rubber of a condom so that reliable protection is lost.
(b) Injecting drugs
People who inject drugs are not only at risk of HIV infection from sexual contact, but also from the sharing of infected injecting equipment.
Users of injecting drugs can protect themselves by looking at a range of options for drug use other than injecting.
There is a growing range of agencies which can provide help and advice on changing their pattern of drug use.
Drug users who continue to inject drugs can protect themselves by never sharing equipment (e.g. needles, syringes or spoons).
Sterile equipment is available from needle exchange schemes and from a growing number of high street pharmacies (these exchange schemes are supported by the Government).
Injecting with sterile works or a set kept strictly for use by one person offers the best protection for those who continue to inject.
If equipment is not shared, it cannot spread HIV.
However, if sterile or individual equipment is not available, the next best thing is to clean equipment using disinfectant.
This may offer some protection, although it is difficult to disinfect plastic and is no substitute for sterile works.
Washing equipment in water is not sufficient.
Sexual partners of drug injectors, who do not themselves inject, risk infection through unsafe sexual activities with their drug injecting partners.
More information about cleaning, and about drug us and HIV, can be found in The Terrence Higgins Trust leaflet ‘Sex, Drugs & HIV — Healthy Options for Drug Users’.
(c) Blood products and Blood Transfusion
Contamination of blood and its products for medical use has been virtually eliminated by the testing of blood for antibodies to HIV, by heating blood products to kill HIV and by voluntary withdrawal from blood donation by people who know, or think, they have been at risk of HIV infection.
All donated blood has been tested in the UK since October 1985 and blood transfusion is now very safe.
Vaccines made from blood and gammaglobulin are not know to be a risk.
(d) Organ and semen donation
Donated organs such as kidneys, and semen or ova for insemination, are suitable if the donor has had a recent negative HIV antibody test.
Semen can be frozen or stored to be made available after 3 months if the donor has another negative HIV antibody test.
Women receiving donated semen are recommended to have the HIV antibody test by the Dept. of Health.
(e) Women and pregnancy
An uninfected woman whose partner has HIV infection cannot become pregnant without putting herself at risk of acquiring HIV.
Similarly, there is no known way of preventing a woman with HIV infection from passing the virus to her unborn child during pregnancy.
It is not clear why some babies do not become infected, but transmission is more likely in women with AIDS.
At present it seems that babies born to mothers with HIV infection have a 20% chance of being infected.
Pregnancy itself does not appear to be harmful to women with HIV infection.
Any potential parent who thinks they may be at risk of HIV infection should consider being counselled and tested before conceiving.
Counselling about termination of pregnancy is offered where one or both parents are known to be infected.
The decision about whether to continue with a pregnancy is the choice of the woman.
(f) Social contact with people with HIV infection or AIDS
HIV is not easily transmitted from person to person except by ‘high risk’ activity.
There is no evidence that HIV has ever been passed by sharing cutlery, plates or cups, or by toilet seats, touching skin, kissing or swimming pools.
A few precautions are advisable to eliminate any risk that may exist in a domestic situation.
Blood, sexual and body fluids from a person with HIV infection are infectious when they enter another person's body.
However, some fluids such as saliva, sweat, tears and urine have not been shown to be infectious.
Normal everyday hygiene precautions are adequate.
The following are simple everyday guidelines:
Spilt blood and other body fluids should be cleaned up with household bleach diluted one part in ten parts of water.
Gloves should be worn.
Blood and other body fluids in contact with the skin should be washed off with soap and water.
Do not use bleach on the skin.
Cuts and grazes on the skin should be covered with a waterproof dressing until a scab forms.
Be careful with sharp objects that could carry blood or other body fluids in case they puncture the skin.
Clothing and sheets soiled with blood and other body fluids should be washed in a machine at a high temperature setting.
Rubber gloves should be worn when handling soiled articles.
Do not share razors and toothbrushes.
Crockery and eating utensils should be washed in hot water and detergent.
With regard to social contact, it is the person with AIDS who may be in danger.
They may catch other infections such as measles or chicken-pox, with serious consequences due to their deficient immune system.
DETECTING HIV INFECTION
Tests for HIV Infection
When someone is infected with HIV, the virus is present in body fluids and inside some of the body's cells.
Using standard laboratory techniques, the virus itself is very difficult and expensive to detect.
Such tests are currently used only for research and very specialised purposes, although tests for the virus itself are being developed for commercial use.
However, it is possible to detect HIV infection by looking for specific antibodies.
Antibodies are made by the body's immune system when it comes into contact with organisms (‘germs’) such as a virus.
Specific antibodies are made against each germ, and these become markers for that infection.
Following the discovery of HIV, tests were developed to look for specific HIV antibodies.
Therefore the presence of antibodies to HIV means that the person has become infected with HIV at some time in the past.
This HIV antibody test is done on a blood sample taken from, usually, the arm.
Results of laboratory tests are generally available in one to four weeks, although same-day testing is now available in certain areas.
A positive test result means that in the sample of blood taken, antibodies to HIV were found.
A test performed at a reputable clinic — and found to be positive — is checked by doing further test on the same sample using different methods to detect HIV  antibodies .
The results from these tests together are very accurate.
A positive result does not give an indication of when the infection by HIV occurred.
It is not a test for AIDS, nor will it show whether or when a person will become ill.
For reasons which are still unclear, antibodies made against HIV are not effective at killing the virus.
It must be assumed that people who test antibody positive, still have HIV infection, are infectious and could pass the virus on to others.
The meaning of a ‘negative’ test
A negative test result means that antibodies to HIV were not found.
This usually means that infection by HIV has not occurred.
However, it is important to know that after infection by HIV, it can take up to three months — or sometimes even longer — for antibodies to appear.
Therefore a person can be recently infected by HIV and have a negative result.
This is not a fault of the test itself, but is due to the delay between infection and the production of antibodies.
To test or not to test?
This is a major decision requiring careful consideration.
A person should be aware of the advantages and disadvantages of knowing if he or she has HIV infection, and make the decision depending on their personality and circumstances.
The importance of pre- and post-test counselling cannot be underestimated.
Ultimately, whether or not to take the test must be the decision of the individual.
Some people find it easier to  practise ‘safer sex’ once they know their test result, either to protect themselves or others.
A negative result can greatly relieve the anxiety of anyone worried about HIV infection.
Someone receiving a  negative test result should still modify their behaviour to include safer sex and safer drug using practices.
Even if the result is positive, there may be advantages in this knowledge.
The course of infection can be modified by doctors so that early intervention to counter any deterioration can be made.
A positive result may also lead to a great consciousness of the need to lead a healthier life and to seek medical advice where there is any indication of illness.
On the other hand, a positive test result can be very distressing, and many people have found it difficult to cope with.
It is important not to be rushed into taking a test merely because of a request to do so by some other person or organisation.
For example, a person who applies for life assurance will be asked whether they have already had the HIV antibody test.
If they have, this may prejudice the application even where the test was negative.
Anyone who is antibody positive will find it impossible to get life assurance, should they apply for it.
A person who has applied for life assurance, but who does not wish to have the test after being asked to do so, should write withdrawing their life assurance application at once, because otherwise it will be refused.
Similarly, people have also suffered discrimination at work and have lost jobs because their employer or colleagues knew (or suspected) they were antibody positive.
Some employers require applicants for jobs to have an HIV antibody test and will not accept any applicant who is antibody positive.
A person who is asked to take the test in circumstances such as these should pause and consider whether they are willing to do so, or whether they would instead prefer not to proceed with their life assurance or employment application.
Before having the HIV antibody test, a person should consider the implications of telling other people about the test and its result.
Telling someone about the decision to take the test will mean that they will probably ask about the result.
Is that person someone who needs to know the result?
Will they be supportive?
It is important to have someone trustworthy to talk to, but if anyone is told control of the information may be lost.
In almost all cases testing may only be done with the fully informed consent of the person being tested.
This includes testing during pregnancy, before surgery, or for other medical reasons.
The aim of the test must be to benefit the person concerned and not, for example, to protect the doctor.
A person who decides not to be tested need not make this decision known to their doctor, but if the question arises of having a blood test for any purpose, they should ask specifically what the purpose of the blood test is.
If an HIV antibody test is not mentioned in reply to that question, the person whose blood sample is being taken need not refuse consent expressly for an HIV antibody test, but should ask for the purpose of the blood test to be entered in their medical records.
If the person taking the blood sample is asked for what purpose it is being taken and replies that it is for an HIV antibody test, a person who does not wish an HIV antibody test to be done should expressly say so, and should also ask for this refusal to be entered in their medical records.
Who should know the result?
It is usually recommended that a person should tell their sexual partners that they have HIV infection.
Future sexual activity should be chosen at a risk level decided on by the couple after understanding the risks involved.
Persons who are unsure whether their sexual partner has HIV infection should in any event take steps to protect themselves and their partner against possible transmission of the virus.
It is not advisable for a person to tell their employer or work colleagues that they have had the test, or its result.
There is no need to do so.
There is the risk of discrimination and the information may not remain confidential.
There is also no need for a person who has had the HIV antibody test to tell their GP that they have done so, especially if the result was negative.
If a person does tell their GP, the fact that they have had the test will be noted on their medical records.
If the person consents to their doctor giving a medical report on them, the doctor will be at liberty to disclose information which otherwise would be confidential.
For the same reasons, a person who has HIV infection should inform their GP of this only if it becomes relevant for diagnosis or treatment.
Clearly, in this case it is not possible to offer precise advice as to exactly when the time comes for the GP to be informed.
There may come a point when a person with HIV infection who is ill should tell the GP treating them otherwise there may be a dangerous delay in making an accurate diagnosis.
But this problem can be, to a certain extent, avoided if a person who has HIV infection goes first to a Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD) clinic for treatment.
GPs cannot refuse to treat a person with HIV infection, but dentists can.
The Community Dental Service is required to provide clinical dental care for those patients refused dental treatment by a general dental practitioner.
Complaints against National Health Service GPs and dentists should be made to the local Family Practitioner Committee (FPC).
Help in making a complaint is available from the local Community Health Council.
The addresses of these organisations will be in the telephone directory.
Where is the antibody test available?
Although GPs can arrange for the test to be done, it is almost always preferable to go to a STD clinic.
There are two reasons for this.
Firstly the doctors who work there have most experience in counselling people about HIV.
Secondly, although all medical records are confidential and their contents may not be  disclosed to third parties without the consent of the patient, there are special laws about confidentiality which apply to STD clinics.
These specifically make it clear that the clinic may not disclose that someone has had the test, or its result, without that person's consent, except to a doctor, or a doctor's assistant (and even then only in connection with, and for the purpose of the treatment or prevention of spread of HIV infection).
A person who is tested at a STD clinic may also expressly say that they do not wish their GP to know about it, which may be important later if the GP is ever asked to write a medical report about that person.
People who are at risk from HIV by having ‘unsafe sex’, should have a check-up for other sexually transmitted diseases whether or not an HIV antibody test is requested.
Further help from The Terrence Higgins Trust
This section has mentioned a number of issues which raise questions about what a person's legal rights are.
In particular, these issues include confidentiality, discrimination, testing and consent, medical reports, and applications for jobs, life insurance and mortgages.
The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre can offer advice and assistance with all these questions and has also published a leaflet containing advice about life insurance and mortgages.
The Terrence Higgins Trust also offers further information and counselling on taking the test (see the helplist at the end of this leaflet).
HIV AND DISEASE
What could happen during HIV infection?
HIV is probably a life-long infection which can manifest itself in a number of ways, from causing no symptoms at all to severe damage to the immune system.
In May 1986, the Center for Disease Control, in Atlanta USA, classified the stages of HIV infection.
(See appendix II).
Group 1 Acute infection
A short illness occurs in about a quarter of the people infected by HIV around the time that antibodies begin to be made.
It consists of fever, headache, rash and joint and muscle pains and clears in two to four weeks.
Group 2 Asymptomatic infection
This includes the majority of people with HIV infection.
There are no symptoms or signs of illness, but the person is infectious.
This stage lasts for a number of years.
Group 3 Persistent Generalised Lymphadenopathy (PGL).
This is the enlargement of many lymph nodes (lymphadenopathy) in the neck, armpits and at other sites in the body, and is usually painless.
Slightly enlarged glands are very common and cannot be definitely linked to HIV infection.
PGL is not, in itself, an illness and is not thought to be a sign of impending illness.
It can persist for many years.
Group 4 Other Diseases
This includes illnesses which show that there is damage to the immune system and includes those which  were formally known as AIDS-Related Complex (ARC) as well as the specific conditions which are diagnostic of AIDS.
These are discussed in more detail below.
Late HIV Infection (Group 4 as above).
A large number of possible diseases can occur singly or in combination.
These can be grouped into:
(a)
AIDS-Related Complex (ARC).
(b)
AIDS.
(c)
HIV effects on the brain and nervous system.
(d)
Other possible HIV effects.
(e)
HIV effects on other diseases.
(a) AIDS-Related Complex (ARC)
ARC is a term commonly used to describe one or more illnesses that occur during HIV infection which are not formally regarded to be AIDS.
Most often, a combination or succession of problems occur, but these are non-specific symptoms which occur in many illnesses.
One group of problems is not specific to any organ system.
These are involuntary weight-loss, fever, night-sweats and fatigue .
Very severe weight loss is called the HIV wasting syndrome (also known as ‘slim disease’ in Africa) and is severe enough to be included as a form of AIDS in revised definitions of that syndrome.
The other group of problems are specific manifestations of immune defects caused by HIV infection.
They are also not formally regarded to be AIDS.
A person who has or may have HIV infection should see a doctor (or dentist) if they have skin, chest or oral (dental) problems.
Such problems include:
Skin infections or conditions such as acne, boils, tinea, warts, molluscum contagiosum, frequent attacks of genital herpes, shingles (herpes zoster) and seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Dry, itchy skin is common.
Bacterial infections of the chest are  common and should be treated with appropriate antibiotics.
Candida (thrush) occurs inside the mouth and may be treated by drops, lozenges or tablets of anti-fungal drugs, eg ‘Nystatin’ or ‘Fluconazole’.
‘Hairy leukoplakia’ is a viral infection on the borders of the tongue or inside of the cheek.
Dental caries and gum ( periodontal ) infections.
All the above problems which can be features of ARC can continue to be problems when a person has AIDS.
(b) AIDS — Manifestations of severe immune deficiency.
Certain organisms can exist in healthy people without causing symptoms but can life-threatening infections when the immune system is suppressed, such as late HIV infection.
These are known as ‘opportunistic infections’.
There are fifteen such infections, and two types of cancer which are diagnostic of AIDS (See appendix I).
Fortunately some can be successfully treated or controlled by particular therapies.
A person in whom a diagnosis of AIDS has been made continues to have an immune deficiency, so that the same or other manifestations of AIDS can occur later.
Anti-viral drugs against HIV can prolong life in a person with AIDS (PWA).
Common infections in AIDS:
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP).
This lung infection is the most common infection in people with AIDS.
Illness develops slowly over several weeks (or more) and treatment is more successful in the early stages, so it is essential not to put off seeing a doctor.
Symptoms of PCP are:
Shortness of breath, first on exertion, then worsening over days or months.
Fevers, sweats and feeling unwell.
An irritating cough producing very little phlegm and becoming worse when taking a deep breath.
Treatment is with an antibiotic, usually Septrin, given into a vein at first, then in tablet form for up to three weeks.
Pentamidine is another antibiotic used to treat PCP.
It can be given in an aerosolised form to prevent recurrence.
When treated early, most people recover.
Cryptosporidiosis.
This protozoal gut infection often causes diarrhoea.
No treatment will eliminate the organisms, but some therapies or the natural course of the infection can be associated with improvements in symptoms.
Cryptococcal meningitis.
This is a fungal infection of the brain.
Treatment is usually with the drugs amphotericin B and flucytosine, intensively for several weeks, and then fluconazole for life.
Cerebral toxoplasmosis.
This is a protozoal infection causing brain abscesses.
It is also first treated intensively and then for life, usually with the drugs sulphadiazine and pyrimethamine.
Herpes Viruses.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a virus which causes major problems in AIDS.
Most seriously infected are the eyes, bowel, lungs and brain.
New drugs, such as gancyclovir, injected into a vein, can be effective but the problem often recurs.
Herpes simplex infection and shingles can be severe and are treated with acyclovir.
Common cancers in AIDS:
Kaposi's Sarcoma (KS).
KS is the only common type of cancer in AIDS.
It is the second commonest  condition seen in gay men (after PCP) and, of all people with AIDS, is ten times more likely to occur in gay men.
This difference has never been adequately explained.
KS usually affects the skin, causing purplish marks which may be flat or raised; treatment on the skin for cosmetic reasons can be by radiation therapy, surgery or anti-cancer drugs (chemotherapy).
If hidden by clothing, KS is often best left alone.
KS lesions on the face can be distressing, but can be covered with special make-up formulated for people with disfiguring birth-marks.
KS can also affect internal organs, and may be treated by chemotherapy.
Lymphoma.
Certain cancers of the lymph nodes (lymphomas) occur more often in people with HIV infection and immune deficiency.
(c) HIV effects on the brain and nervous system
As well as affecting the body's immune system responses, HIV is thought to attack certain cells in the brain and nervous system.
Damage to the spinal cord or nerves may manifest as leg weaknesses, loss of sensation or pain.
In the brain, HIV may be a direct cause of meningitis with headache and fever; it can also cause progressive impairment of thinking, learning and memory which is known as ‘AIDS encephalopathy’, ‘AIDS encephalitis’ or ‘AIDS dementia’.
AIDS dementia:
Mild defects only shown up on sophisticated psychological testing are common in people with AIDS, or who are unwell as a result of HIV infection.
Also progressive mental impairment severe enough to be called dementia sometimes occurs in a small number of those with AIDS, usually in the latter stages of the syndrome.
Aids dementia is more common in those who have had AIDS for a long time, and in some instances the dementia is probably due to other organisms attacking the brain.
Concern has been expressed that mental impairment might also occur in otherwise healthy people with HIV infection.
However, a WHO conference in March 1988 concluded that there was, as yet, no significant evidence of this.
There is some evidence that anti-HIV drugs can modify the effect of HIV on the nervous system.
Other mental disorders associated with HIV infection.
In a very few cases, serious mental disorders similar to schizophrenia or mania have been reported that may be due to a direct effect of HIV on the brain.
Much more common are the adjustment reactions to the knowledge that one has AIDS or is HIV antibody positive.
These are rather like the process of bereavement, with shock, denial, guilt and unhappiness, acceptance and resignation.
A few people develop severe anxiety and depression in response to this stress, and may require treatment.
(d) Other possible HIV effects
HIV may have effects on the skin, bowel and muscles.
The reason for this is not known but is thought to be due to infection by the virus itself.
(e) HIV effects on other diseases
The diseases well known to be part of ARC or AIDS have been mentioned, but other infections or conditions can also behave differently in HIV infection.
Some infections may be seen more commonly due to defective immunity and exposure to infections in a community.
An example of this is  tuberculosis of the lung (pulmonary TB).
Untreated, pulmonary TB can be a serious disease.
Another example is shingles, which recurs due to impaired immunity.
Some cancers, such as Hodgkin's disease, may not necessarily be more common, but their growth is more aggressive in HIV infection.
Other  conditions may become more common, such as abnormalities of the cervix in women, which may progress more rapidly.
Some conditions already thought to have a basis in disturbances in the immune system may be more common, such as psoriasis.
(f) HIV infection in infants and children
In the UK, by January 1991, 38 cases of AIDS in children have been reported, most of whom were infected before birth.
A total of 201 cases of children with HIV infection have been reported.
Diagnosis of HIV infection in new-born infants is difficult because of the presence of the mothers' antibodies in the babies' blood.
It is these antibodies which will be detected in standard antibody tests.
Therefore, in children under 15 months, a combination of symptoms and signs of illness, together with culture of the virus itself, are a better guide to whether the child has been infected.
Most symptoms in infants and children are not specific for HIV infection.
They include poor growth, recurrent chest infections, chronic diarrhoea and skin infections.
A particular type of chest disease known as lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis has been associated with HIV infection, although PCP can also occur.
Delay in development and signs of HIV infection in the brain are common, but Kaposi's Sarcoma and other cancers are extremely rare in children infected with HIV.
Management of HIV infection in children is by treating specific infections and supplementing the immune system with immunoglobulin.
Zidovudine (AZT) is currently being assessed.
Children with HIV should receive vaccines against childhood diseases as normal.
It is safe to use the following vaccines:
It is advisable for children to be given inactivated polio vaccine as the live vaccine contains the polio virus which may be shed for several months after being taken.
This may cause complications to other family members who are HIV positive and previously unvaccinated.
HIV positive children with or without symptoms should not receive the yellow fever vaccine.
There is at present no  consensus about the BCG (tuberculosis) vaccine.
The World Health Organisation recommends that the vaccine can be given to children without symptoms, while the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation in the U.K. recommends that children should not receive the vaccine — whether they are with or without symptoms.
We therefore suggest that you consult your family doctor for further advice.
Survival:
The average survival of children with AIDS is approximately nine months.
Older children have a better prognosis because their immune system is better developed.
Much less is known about children with only mild illness.
It may be that many children will live for years with only episodes of severe illness.
Children who are HIV positive, but remain well, are able to lead a normal life.
However, there is a great deal of stigma attached to HIV infection, with resulting discrimination and prejudice at school.
This should decrease with increasing evidence that HIV is not transmitted by casual contact.
Living with AIDS
If the definition of AIDS is extended to include HIV dementia and HIV wasting syndrome, this includes almost all causes of death in people with HIV infection.
Survival depends on the particular disease and conditions that a person is found to have.
No-one can predict how long a person will live.
In the USA, it has been found that the life-expectancy of people with AIDS is reduced in drug-users, women, black and Hispanic people, and those who are older at the time of diagnosis.
This is probably due to other facts, such as lifestyle, poverty and provision of health care.
Average survival after treatment of PCP is often more than 2 years and is increasing.
Survival following a diagnosis of KS is much better, as up to 80% of people with KS are alive one year later, and to be living five years later is not uncommon.
More than 50% of people with AIDS are now surviving longer than one year.
Use of drugs against HIV is expected to prolong survival still further.
Children with AIDS have a shorter life expectancy than adults.
Treating HIV infection
HIV is susceptible to drugs at some stages of its life-cycle.
The ideal drug for treating HIV infection would be non-toxic, cheap and taken in tablet form.
No such drug is currently available, but many are being evaluated.
(a) Zidovudine (AZT, ‘Retrovir’)
Zidovudine is a drug which blocks one of the enzymes which HIV requires for reproduction.
It is now widely used in developed countries to treat people with AIDS or other serious HIV-related illness.
Zidovudine given to people who have recovered from PCP or have a ‘wasting syndrome’ with other features of ARC, has resulted in a four-to six-fold reduction in expected mortality after nine months.
The main side-effects of zidovudine are related to toxicity to bone marrow (which makes blood cells), which may necessitate regular blood transfusions, reducing the dose or even stopping the drug.
People with less advanced HIV-related illness may tolerate zidovudine better than people with AIDS, so treatment should be started earlier rather than later.
Research concluded in the USA in August 1989 suggested that some people who are infected with HIV, and are well, have a smaller chance of developing illnesses with at least one  year's treatment with zidovudine.
(b) Interferons
These have been used in the treatment of Kaposi's Sarcoma, but have serious side-effects.
However, a combination of zidovudine with interferon alpha may have increased beneficial effects in KS.
(c) Soluble CD4
CR4 is a protein on the surface of some human T lymphocytes (white blood cells), to which HIV binds.
A soluble form of this protein could bind to the virus and prevent it from binding to human T cells.
It has yet to be of proven value, but studies are currently in progress.
(d) Pentamidine
This is a drug which can be used to treat PCP and will prevent its recurrence.
It is currently being tested for use in an aerosolised form which delivers a lower total dose of the drug directly to the lungs, in order to reduce the risk of side effects.
(e) Acyclovir (Zovirax)
This is a drug which is active against herpes viruses.
Herpes simplex and shingles can be fatal in people with AIDS.
Acyclovir may be given on a long term basis to people with HIV who have had an attack of shingles, or have frequent attacks of herpes simplex.
Vaccines
The development of a vaccine to HIV could prevent people from becoming infected with the virus.
However, the  complex life cycle and the effects of the virus on the immune system make this a very difficult task.
Traditionally vaccines use living or killed forms of an organism to stimulate the production of antibodies which protect the person from infection.
Because HIV attacks the immune system, such a vaccine may itself cause an AIDS-like syndrome by suppressing the cells of the immune system.
Vaccines which consist of a small part of the virus, such as the envelope or core proteins, are being tested in animals and humans but may not be as effective as the whole virus.
Other forms of vaccines which mimic HIV may be more successful.
Social and personal consequences of HIV infection and AIDS
Chronic diseases and fear of premature death cause great distress to the person, her and his partners, friends and family.
Stigma is attached to AIDS because of strong social disapproval of the ‘risk activities’ by which HIV is passed from person to person and because of ignorance and fear.
A diagnosis of AIDS may cause a crisis if it reveals hidden sexuality or drug-using behaviours.
Partners and friends will have to deal with possible HIV infection if they have had ‘unsafe sex’, or shared equipment used for injecting drugs, with a person who has HIV infection.
Other problems are the actual or perceived prejudice of people, including those in private or official organisations.
The challenge of AIDS demands tolerance, sensitivity and new approaches to change the attitudes of many people.
Several organisations provide counselling for partners, friends or families.
Ask The Terrence Higgins Trust for guidance.
What are the chances of developing AIDS?
The epidemics of HIV infection and AIDS are new events over the last decade.
Medical observation only started in 1981, becoming more meaningful in 1983 when the virus was discovered.
As no previous epidemic exists to give information, estimates of the natural progression of HIV infection to states of illness are constantly being updated.
It is known that it is unusual for a person with HIV infection to become ill within three years of acquiring the virus, except for newborn babies infected before they were born.
There does not seem to be a constant period before illness develops, and in some people, infection estimated to have lasted for more than eight years has not resulted in illness.
However, new evidence suggests that HIV infection is progressive in the majority of people and that there is deterioration in measurements of cells in the blood and increase in activity of HIV, even before a person becomes ill.
There is little evidence that there is any difference in the chances of a HIV infected homosexual man, a heterosexual person, someone who has injected drugs or a haemophiliac, developing illness over time.
People who (rarely) were infected by a blood transfusion and newborn children may have a faster progression to illness.
The most recent evidence suggests that within 10 years, up to 50% of people with HIV infection will progress to AIDS, and a further 20–30% will have some HIV-related illness, if no treatment against HIV is given (CDSC June 1989).
It is not understood how HIV infection can cause illness over such variable periods, when one person is compared to another.
No factor which would offer an opportunity to change the cause of HIV infection has been identified.
However, anti-viral drugs, such as zidovudine, do benefit people with AIDS, and the use of this and other therapies could influence the course of HIV infection before a person develops AIDS.
THE FUTURE
There is no cure for AIDS and, despite significant progress in understanding HIV infection, a very large number of people will develop AIDS in years to come.
The scale of this epidemic is daunting and it will increase.
In practice, HIV is a preventable infection and many people are already avoiding HIV infection.
A vaccine will be the most effective way of stopping new infections, but development is slow and may take years to achieve.
People with AIDS or HIV infection can expect progress in therapy against HIV and the conditions found in AIDS — anti-viral drugs like Zidovudine are in use.
It is not yet possible to expect any therapy to eliminate HIV from the body and anti-viral therapies will have to be taken for long periods, maybe for life.
Attempts to restore the immune system are more likely to succeed if anti-viral therapy is used at the same time.
For many years to come, experimental therapies will have to be evaluated in controlled trials.
Blind faith in a medical solution to AIDS obscures the far more important role that health education can play in preventing HIV infection.
Health education will have to revolve around the adoption of safer practices.
The changes in behaviour which are needed are not unrealistic, but they are more likely to be adopted if large scale health education programmes take account of the diversity of human nature.
Appendix I
The full definition of AIDS
Communicable Disease Center, Atlanta GA, 1987
A case of AIDS is defined as an illness characterized by one or more of the following ‘indicator’ diseases, depending on the status of laboratory evidence for HIV infection:
I. Without laboratory evidence regarding HIV infection:
If laboratory tests for HIV were not performed or gave indeterminate results, any of the conditions in the list below would indicate AIDS if it was diagnosed by a definitive method and the patient had none of the other causes of immunodeficiency listed below that could explain the occurrence of the indicator disease:
1
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
2
Toxoplasmosis of the brain in a patient > 1 month of age.
3
Cryptosporidiosis with diarrhoea persisting for > 1 month.
4
Candidiasis of the  oesophagus , trachea, bronchi or lungs.
5
Extrapulmonary cryptococcosis.
6
Mycobacterium avium complex or M. kansaii disease at a site other than lungs or lymph nodes.
7
Cytomegalovirus infection of an internal organ other than liver in a patient > 1 month of age.
8
Herpex simplex virus infection causing a mucocutaneous ulcer that persists for more than 1 month, or bronchitis, pneumonitis, or oesophagitis for any duration in a patient > 1 month of age.
9
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy.
10
Primary lymphoma of the brain in a patient < 60 years of age.
11
Kaposi's sarcoma in a patient < 60 years of age.
12
PLH/LIP complex (pulmonary lymphoid hyperplasia and/or lymphoid interstitial pneumonia) in a child < 13 years of age.
Causes of immunodeficiency that disqualify diseases as indicators of AIDS in the absence of antibody evidence for HIV infection:
a.
High-dose or long-term systemic corticosterioid therapy or other immunosuppressive/cytotoxic therapy within three months before the onset of the indicator disease.
b.
Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (other than primary brain lymphoma), lymphocytic leukaemia, multiple myeloma, or another cancer of lymphoreticular or histiocytic tissue, or angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy, diagnosed before or within three months after diagnosis of the indicator disease.
c.
A genetic (congenital) immunodeficiency syndrome or an acquired immunodeficiency syndrome atypical of HIV infection, such as one involving hypogammaglobulinaemia.
II.
With laboratory evidence for HIV infection:
In the presence of antibody evidence for HIV infection:
Any of the conditions listed above or below indicated AIDS regardless of the presence of other causes of immunodeficiency:
13
 Isosporiasis with diarrhoea persisting > 1 month.
14
Extrapulmonary or disseminated histoplasmosis.
15
Extrapulmonary or disseminated coccidioidomycosis.
16
Extrapulmonary or disseminated tuberculosis.
17
Any noncutaneous extrapulmonary or disseminated mycobacterial infection other than tuberculosis or leprosy.
18
Recurrent non-typhoid Salmonella septicaemia.
19
Multiple or recurrent bacterial infections (any combination of > 2 within a two year period) of the following types in a child < 13 years of age: septicaemia, pneumonia, meningitis, bone or joint infection, or abscess of an internal organ or body cavity (excluding otitis media or superficial skin or mucosal abscesses), caused by Haemophilus ,Streptococcus (including pneumococcus), or other pyogenic bacteria.
20
Kaposi's sarcoma at any age.
21
Primary lymphoma of the brain at any age.
22
Other non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of B-cell immunologic phenotype: small noncleaved lymphoma (Burkitt's tumour or Burkitt-like lymphoma) or immunoblastic sarcoma (large cell lymphoma, diffuse histiocytic lymphoma, diffuse undifferentiated lymphoma, reticulum cell sarcoma, or high-grade  lymphoma ).
Note: Lymphomas are not included if they are of T-cell immunological phenotype or are described as ‘lymphocytic’, ‘lymphoblastic’, ‘small cleaved’ or ‘plasmacytoid lymphocytic’.
23
HIV encephalopathy (‘AIDS demential complex’).
24
HIV wasting syndrome (‘slim disease’).
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Toxoplasmosis of the brain in a patient > 1 month of age.
Oesophageal candidiasis.
Extrapulmonary or disseminated mycobacterial infection (acid-fast bacilli of undetermined species).
Kaposi's sarcoma.
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis (LIP/PLH complex) in a child < 13 years of age.
A. Diseases diagnosed definitively
B. Diseases diagnosed presumptively
HIV  encephalopathy :
Clinical findings of disabling cognitive and/or motor dysfunction interfering with occupation or activities of daily living, or loss of behavioural developmental milestones in a child, progressing over weeks to months, in the absence of a concurrent illness or condition other than HIV infection that could explain the findings.
Methods to rule out such concurrent illnesses and conditions must include cerebrospinal fluid examination and either brain imaging (computed tomography or magnetic resonance) or autopsy.
HIV wasting syndrome:
Findings profound involuntary weight loss (more than 10% of baseline body weight) plus other chronic diarrhoea (lasting > 1 month) in the absence of a concurrent illness or condition other than HIV infection that could explain the findings (e.g. cancer, tuberculosis, cryptosporidiosis or other specific enteritis).
III.
With evidence against HIV infection:
With laboratory test results negative for HIV infection, AIDS is ruled out for surveillance purposes unless the patient has had:
1.
Either of the following:
Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia diagnosed by a definitive method, or
a. any of the other diseases indicative of AIDS listed above in Section 1 diagnosed by a definitive method, and b. a T-helper (T4) lymphocyte count < 400 per mm 3 .
2.
None of the other causes of immunodeficiency listed above in Section 1.
Appendix II
CDC classification of HIV infection (1986)
CDC Group I — Acute HIV infection
CDC Group II — Asymptomatic infection
CDC Group III — Persistent generalised lymphadenopathy
CDC Group IV — HIV with disease:
IV A — HIV wasting syndrome
IV B — Neurological disease, including peripheral neuropathy (weakness and/or numbness of the limbs) and HIV dementia
IV C1 — Infections recognised as AIDS
IV C2 — Infections not recognised as AIDS, e.g. thrush of the mouth, TB of the lungs and oral leukoplakia
IV D — Malignancies recognised as AIDS
IV E — Miscellaneous other infections e.g. Weakness/fever/diarrhoea not as severe as HIV wasting syndrome Suborrhoeic dermatitis and other skin problems Other malignancies Thrombocytopenia
QUESTIONS About HIV Antibody Testing
What is this leaflet about?
Introduction
How is the test done
What does the test show?
How reliable is the test?
Where is the best place to get tested?
Can I be tested without my consent?
What does a negative test mean?
What if the test is positive?
1.
Will I become ill?
2.
Am I still infectious?
3.
What about insurance?
How do I decide?
Some Practical Advice
Helplist 
WHAT IS THIS LEAFLET ABOUT?
This leaflet answers questions you may have about whether, or when , you should have an HIV antibody test.
You may be aware that there is a blood test which can tell if you have been infected with HIV, the virus that can cause AIDS.
However, you need also to know that in a very few cases, you can get a negative result even though you are infected.
There are arguments both for and against having a test:
for testing:
you may be relieved of worries and uncertainties
if you test positive, you will gain access to drugs and therapies that can keep you healthier longer
you may gain a sense of control over the ways in which HIV could affect you, your partner and your family
against testing:
testing positive can result in prejudice and discrimination
you may believe that you are unable to control your life
there may be disruption to your friendships and relationships
Each of these are covered in this leaflet as each may affect you personally when deciding whether to take the HIV antibody test.
Keep in mind that safer sex is important for everyone, whether you have HIV or not, so that if you are uninfected you stay uninfected, and if you are positive you avoid infecting other people.
INTRODUCTION
As you are reading this leaflet, you are probably considering whether to have an HIV antibody test, as this is the only way for most people to find out whether or not they are infected with the virus that can cause AIDS.
Although the test has been available since 1985, the question most of us still face is when is the right time to get tested.
There have recently been encouraging medical advances in treating people with HIV who show no signs of being ill.
This means that for the first time doctors may be able to tell if an infected person who feels well is in danger of becoming ill, so that they can try to do something to prevent this.
Of course, this can only happen if you have been tested.
The question of testing is not just a medical issue, it also involves serious personal issues.
What follows are some of the questions we think you should consider in deciding when to test.
Only you can know what is right for you — so only you can make the final decision.
HOW IS THE TEST DONE?
The test is done on a small sample of blood taken from a vein in the arm in the standard way.
The results can take from a few hours to over a week, depending on where you go to be tested.
WHAT DOES THE TEST SHOW?
The body reacts to infection with HIV by producing, after approximately three months, chemicals called antibodies.
The test looks for the presence of these antibodies.
A positive test result means that antibodies have been found and means that HIV has been present in the body.
HOW RELIABLE IS THE TEST?
The test methods used in laboratories are very sensitive and  reliable.
Positive test results are usually double checked in different ways to make absolutely sure, and can be relied on.
However a few people who tested antibody negative have gone on to develop AIDS, and some scientists now believe that — extremely rarely — someone with HIV may never produce antibodies.
WHERE IS THE BEST PLACE TO BE TESTED?
An STD clinic or department of genito-urinary medicine is the best place to have the test done, as they have the best safeguards for protecting your confidentiality.
You can find your nearest clinic by looking in the telephone directory under ‘Venereal Diseases’.
Make sure your testing centre will provide thorough counselling both before the test, to help you decide that you really want it, and afterwards, to talk through the consequences, whether the result is positive or negative.
Pre- and post-test counselling is also available from The Terrence Higgins Trust face-to-face counsellors and Helpline.
If you still have concerns about confidentiality, you can take the test using a false name — this is perfectly legal.
CAN I BE TESTED WITHOUT MY CONSENT?
Except in extreme cases of medical emergency, no-one can test a sample of your blood for HIV antibodies without your consent.
That means that both the nature and the significance of the test must be explained to you beforehand, in a way which you can understand.
WHAT DOES A NEGATIVE TEST MEAN?
This means that your body has not produced antibodies to HIV, so you probably have not been infected by the virus.
However, it can take up to three months from the time of infection — and sometimes even longer — for your body to produce antibodies.
So, whilst your antibody test may be negative during this period, you could be infected and therefore infectious to other people.
You can be more confident that a negative test result means that you are not infected if you don't put yourself at risk of infection through unsafe sex or by sharing injecting equipment in the three months before taking the test.
Be sure that you receive post-test counselling even if the result is negative.
It is important to remember that you still need to have safer sex and to avoid sharing injecting equipment so that you don't get infected in the future.
WHAT IF THE TEST IS POSITIVE?
1.
Will I become ill?
We don't know for sure.
Many people with HIV stay well for many years.
However, the longer you are infected and the weaker your immune system becomes, the more likely it is that you may become ill.
2.
Am I still infectious?
Yes.
Any infected person can pass the virus to others.
This can happen if the blood, semen (cum, sperm) or vaginal juices of an infected person get into the bloodstream of someone else.
You can minimise the risk of this happening by only having safer sex — by using a condom for anal or vaginal sex — and by not sharing drug injecting equipment.
Even if your partner is also positive, it is still best to have safer sex to avoid getting reinfected with different HIV strains or picking up other sexually transmitted diseases.
Some studies suggest that either of these might increase your risk of becoming ill.
3.
What about insurance?
An insurance company can choose whether or not to insure anyone, and all companies now refuse insurance to people with HIV.
Many also refuse people they consider to be at ‘high risk’ of infection and people who refuse a medical examination.
We recommend that you read The Terrence Higgins Trust leaflet ‘Mortgages and Life Insurance’ for more information.
If you decide to take the test because an insurance company asks you, don't give any information without first seeking advice — for example, from the Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre (see Helplist).
HOW DO I DECIDE?
Different people will be thinking about having the test for different reasons.
It is impossible to give hard-and-fast rules, but here are some points to consider:
If you are ill and a doctor feels that this could be due to HIV, being tested will be an important part of finding out what's wrong.
Don't use the test simply to try and find out whether you should have safer sex.
Safer sex is important for everyone, so that if you are uninfected you stay uninfected, and if you are positive you avoid infecting other people.
If you are in a relationship, discuss with your partner how getting tested might affect you both.
In the past, some relationships have been destroyed by the knowledge that one person is positive and the other negative.
Being tested may help if worries about being infected are affecting the quality of your life.
But think about whether you would be able to cope with a positive result, and would a negative result really stop you worrying?
It may make sense to be tested if you are or intend to become pregnant, as about 13% of babies born to HIV positive mothers are themselves infected.
If you wish to become pregnant, or are in the early stages of pregnancy, there may be considerable pressure for you to have an HIV antibody test.
Careful pre-test counselling is essential so that you understand all the advantages and disadvantages of knowing if you have HIV, and can make your own informed decisions about whether to continue with your pregnancy.
Telephone our Helpline for more information.
You may speak to a woman volunteer if you wish.
And finally, there is still ignorant and cruel prejudice against people with HIV, and against people who are misguidedly seen as being at ‘high risk’ of having HIV:
People with HIV are not allowed to enter certain countries.
Some employees have been sacked just for being HIV positive.
Some people with HIV have lost their homes, or faced difficulty getting accommodation.
Having the test can have serious implications for insurance and mortgage applications.
SOME PRACTICAL ADVICE?
Think through your decision carefully before going to be tested and don't be pressurised into having a test unless you have had enough time to decide whether it is the best thing for you.
Seek advice from a Helpline like that of The Terrence Higgins Trust, or a specific support organisation like Positively Women or the Black HIV/AIDS Network, before going for the test  (see Helplist).
Consider taking a friend or relative with you for support.
Remember that the test is there for your benefit alone, not for anything or anyone else.
It can take as long as two weeks after you give your blood sample before you get your result, which can be a difficult and stressful time.
So do get support from your partner and trustworthy friends, or from an HIV organisation.
Get advice from your clinic about early intervention treatment options and support for people who have positive results.
Recent advances in medical treatment of HIV mean that some doctors now think that it is worth knowing if you have an HIV infection.
For example, it is possible for doctors to monitor how well you are, so that if your health deteriorates to a point at which you may be at risk from infections like PCP (a virulent pneumonia), drugs can be prescribed which prevent or significantly delay their onset.
If your doctor knows that you are at risk from such conditions, he/she will be prepared to diagnose and treat any infection more promptly.
Some healthy people with HIV who have HIV-induced damage to their immune systems may benefit from anti-viral drugs like AZT.
However, others who only discover that they are HIV positive when they get ill do not have the option of early treatment.
Organisations like Body Positive (see Helplist) have detailed information about the latest drugs as well as holistic and alternative therapies for people living with HIV or AIDS.
Find out as much as possible about current treatments for HIV and the associated infections and discuss those that interest you with your doctor.
Now you've read this leaflet, The Terrence Higgins Trust hopes that your questions about HIV antibody testing have been answered.
We have tried to make it as ‘user-friendly’ as possible.
Do ring our Helpline with any further questions you may have.
And remember, always practise and ENJOY safer sex to protect yourself and your partner/s from HIV and other STD's.
WHAT CAN I DO ABOUT AIDS??
CAN YOU CATCH AIDS FROM A MOSQUITO BITE?
Introduction
This booklet is written for secondary school children and young people who want to understand something about AIDS or who know someone with AIDS — possibly a friend at school or someone in their close family.
This leaflet will answer some of your questions and at the end there is a list of places where you can get more information.
No one knows where HIV started, but we do know that it is spreading fast and nearly every country in the world has people with HIV or AIDS.
It is important that everyone helps stop more and more people getting infected.
Many things about AIDS are uncertain but the more you know about it, the less you will be afraid — and you could become a very good friend to people who have to live with this problem.
THIS LOOKS INTERESTING
THIS WAY FOR SOME USEFUL INFORMATION
What is AIDS?
Before you can understand about AIDS, you need to know something about how the human body works to keep us healthy.
Different parts of our body work together to stop people getting ill.
This is called the immune system .
An important part of this system is blood.
Blood is made up millions of cells .
They are so small that they can only be seen with a microscope.
Most cells are red (which is why blood looks red).
About one per cent of blood cells are white and these are the cells in the immune system.
They defend us against illnesses.
Normally white blood cells fight off and kill infections.
A particularly important type of white cell is called the ‘T-helper cell’.
There are many different germs which cause diseases.
The very smallest germs are called viruses.
These are so small that millions can fit on the tip of a pencil.
There are lots of viruses; for example, one kind causes chickenpox, another mumps and other colds.
When someone gets a virus and becomes ill, the helper cells kill off the virus and usually they get better.
In 1983, scientists discovered a very unusual virus which is called HIV.
These initials stand for the H uman I mmuno-deficiency V irus.
This virus attacks different cells in the body.
In particular it attacks the T-helper cells where it lives and hides.
Sometimes the virus stays there quietly for a long time and the person stays well.
However, in some people, HIV grows inside the T-helper cells, killing the cell.
If this happens and other germs get into the body, there aren't enough T-helper cells to fight the other germs and the person becomes ill.
Someone who is ill in this way, because the helper cells don't work, is said to have AIDS.
These initials stand for:
A is for Acquired — This means it is not in the body to start with.
I is for Immune — This means the body's defence against infection.
D is for Deficiency — This means there isn't enough of something (in this case the immune system, which has been weakened).
S is for Syndrome — This means a collection of illnesses.
Doctors are working hard, but so far a cure for HIV and AIDS has not been found.
How do people get HIV?
So you see the trouble starts when people get HIV — but how do you get this virus?
Sometimes a mother who has HIV can pass it on to her baby whilst it is growing inside her.
Some people need blood transfusions as part of ordinary medical treatment for all kinds of illnesses.
Some years ago, some of these people were accidentally given blood which had been infected with HIV and so the virus got into their bloodstream.
Now there are ways of making sure that infected blood isn't used in transfusions.
Some people use drugs illegally.
They may use hypodermic syringes to inject the drug into their bloodstream.
They may share their syringes and if one of them has HIV, the needle will become infected and the virus could be passed on to the other person.
This is why people should never share their syringes.
It is also dangerous to pick up needles or syringes that you see lying around.
Remember that using illegal drugs is always dangerous.
Don't be worried if you have to have an injection at the clinic or at the  doctor's , because the syringes they use are sterilised and used only once.
It is absolutely safe.
People have to be very careful when they have sex together (sexual intercourse).
If one of these people has HIV, it may be passed  on to the other person.
An important thing to remember is that it is very hard to get HIV.
You can't get it through your skin — so you can't get it from touching someone with HIV.
You can't get infected by standing close to someone with HIV because the virus doesn't travel through air.
It's not like the virus that gives you a cold.
On this page are lots of ways that you can't get HIV infection (like cups, knives, forks, toilet seats, towels, musical instruments, shaking hands, hugs, swimming pools, insect bites and dogs and cats).
What happens to people who get HIV?
Many people with HIV stay well for a long time and you would never know they had the virus.
They can carry on a normal life like going to school or work and having fun with their family and friends, but they will be infectious to other people for the rest of their lives.
After some years, some people with HIV may become seriously ill and this is when they have AIDS.
With good medical care they often get better for a while.
However, some people don't get better and they will die.
Who can I tell?
Unfortunately there are many people who don't understand much about AIDS and they are frightened.
They can be ignorant and aggressive to people with HIV and AIDS.
Because of this, it is very important not to talk to other people about anyone you know who has HIV or AIDS — unless that person has said it is alright for other people to know.
People who have HIV or AIDS are not a danger to others and they do not need to tell people at school, at work or people that they meet every day.
If you know someone who has AIDS, or if you are worried or have questions about the illness, try to find someone you can trust to talk to about it — maybe your parents or a teacher or some other adult you feel close to.
If you can't find the right person to talk to, you could phone one of the numbers at the end of this leaflet.
Looking after people with HIV or AIDS
Even if people have HIV they may be quite healthy.
Like everyone else they should eat well, be active and give themselves time to rest and relax.
People who know they have HIV should visit their doctor regularly, to help them keep as healthy as possible.
But when someone has AIDS, he or she may be unwell from a number of illnesses because the body's defence or immune system is not working properly and cannot fight infections.
People with AIDS may become quite ill.
But with good medical treatment they will often get nearly back to normal health.
We can all help people with HIV and AIDS by being thoughtful and considerate.
If you know someone with HIV or AIDS, it is important to try to be a good friend to them.
Remember, don't make too much of a fuss.
Act normally, as you would with someone else, but remember that sometimes they may be feeling a bit sad or tired.
You will need to be extra considerate and remember that everyone finds their own way of living with HIV.
Don't forget that it is safe for you to talk and play with someone with HIV or AIDS.
You can go out with them, share food and drink with them…you can still be their friend.
Sometimes parents have HIV or AIDS
If parents become ill with AIDS, it will be a worrying time for all the family.
But, even when people have had spells of very bad illness, they may still live for many years and there will be time for them to make good plans for their children.
some families have grandparents or older brothers or sisters who can take care of younger children
in other families there may be a close friend who will help out and look after younger children
the social worker at the hospital or at the Social Services Department will help the family make plans if necessary
If this is a worry for you, it is important to find someone you can trust to talk to.
Most likely there will be someone in the close family or a reliable friend.
If a social worker comes to see your family, you can ask what is being planned for your future.
If there is no-one close to home to talk to, or if you want to talk to an independent person about your worries, you could telephone ChildLine or Barnardo's.
The numbers are listed at the end of this leaflet.
HIV STORY
MAZZ USED TO ENJOY COMING TO SCHOOL UNTIL SOME OF THE KIDS FOUND OUT THAT HER SISTER HAS THE HIV VIRUS…
HER  SISTER'S A JUNKIE…
YEH, A SLAG…
DON'T TALK TO HER YOU'LL GET AIDS!
CHEER UP MAZZ — THEY'RE REALLY STUPID!
HOW IS YOUR SISTER ANYWAY?
SHE'S OK…
BUT SHE'S STARTED TAKING THESE NEW TABLETS STILL IF IT MAKES HER FEEL BETTER I DON'T MIND.
HOW DID SHE…?
I MEAN SHE DOESN'T TAKE DRUGS DOES SHE?
NO.
SHE MET THIS BLOKE ON HOLIDAY IN SPAIN — HER FIRST BOYFRIEND.
SHE DIDN'T KNOW THEN ABOUT SAFER SEX.
THAT DANNY IS TOTALLY GORGEOUS.
YEH, PUKKA HAIRCUT.
WHY DON'T YOU ASK HIM TO THE CLUB?
OH YEH, HE'S GOING TO LOVE GOING OUT WITH SOMEONE EVERYONE THINKS HAS GOT HIV INFECTION.
ON THEIR WAY HOME MAZZ AND SAM SEE A NOTICE OUTSIDE THE YOUTH CLUB I THINK YOU SHOULD ASK DANNY TO THE TALK.
MAYBE IT WILL HELP THEM UNDERSTAND…
YES I WILL!
LATER AT MAZZ'S HOUSE THE GIRLS ARE PRETENDING TO DO THEIR HOMEWORK.
HI, SAM HOW ARE YOU DOING?
I'M OK ARE YOU ALRIGHT?
I HAD TO GO TO THE CLINIC FOR A CHECK UP AFTER WORK, BUT I'M OK.
DAD BROUGHT ME HOME.
DOES YOUR DAD KNOW THEN!
OF COURSE HE DOES — HE'S BEEN REALLY GREAT!
YEH, MUM TOO.
WE'VE GOT SOMEONE COMING TO THE CLUB TOMORROW TO TALK ABOUT AIDS.
THAT'S GREAT I WISH SOMEONE HAD TOLD ME ABOUT IT…
GOODNIGHT KIDS.
TUESDAY EVENING AND TINA FROM THE TERRENCE HIGGINS TRUST TALKS TO THE YOUTH CLUB ABOUT HIV AND AIDS.
SO YOU SEE YOU CAN'T GET HIV, THE VIRUS THAT LEADS TO AIDS, FROM SHARING CUPS, KNIVES, FORKS, TOILET SEATS, TOWELS, SHAKING HANDS, HUGGING, SWIMMING POOLS, INSECT BITES, ANIMALS…
YOU TOLD ME YOU COULD GET IT FROM TOILET SEATS.
YEH, WELL I WAS WRONG.
SO WHAT?
ANY QUESTIONS ANYONE?
WELL, YEH I HAVE.
MY SISTER'S HIV POSITIVE AND I'M GOING TO DO A SPONSORED WALK TO RAISE MONEY FOR A NEW AIDS CENTRE.
WILL ANYONE SPONSOR ME?
YEH I'LL GIVE YOU SOME MONEY.
COUNT ME IN!
AND ME MAZZ I'D REALLY LIKE TO DO THE WALK WITH YOU.
GREAT.
HELLO, IS THAT THE AIDS HELP LINE?
I WONDER IF YOU COULD SEND ME SOME INFORMATION?
THANK YOU TO OUR MODELS.
If you would like to find out more about HIV and AIDS, here are some books which will help.
You may also be interested in another leaflet we have produced called ‘AIDS in the Family’.
You can get more information from
The Terrence Higgins Trust 
The Terrence Higgins Trust offers a wide range of services which are open to everyone.
To find out more, please telephone us on  
Barnardo's 
Barnardo's helps families and children who have serious problems and it has a new service called ‘Positive Options’ which helps children, young people and families where someone has AIDS.
You can telephone for more information any weekday on 
ChildLine
Phone free 24 hours a day or write (no stamp needed) to:
You can talk with ChildLine about anything you want to including HIV and AIDS — it's completely confidential.
WHAT ABOUT SWIMMING?
WHAT ABOUT LOVE?
WHAT ABOUT TOILET SEATS?
CAN YOU CATCH IT FROM KISSES?
HIV & AIDS INFORMATION FOR LESBIANS
Introduction
Lesbians and HIV prevention have been given little attention in the overall response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic.
This was partly due to there being very few known cases of lesbians with HIV/AIDS combined with little research or knowledge about woman to woman transmission.
In this leaflet we want to explain the low risks that lesbians face from HIV and how to keep it that way by practising safer sex and safer drug use.
Although our sexual practices are considered to be a low risk for HIV transmission, being a lesbian does not provide immunity from HIV.
For each of us, keeping our risks to a minimum is dependent on what we do and not how we identify ourselves.
Lesbians can get HIV through sharing drug injecting equipment and unsafe sex.
We may also have been exposed to the virus in the past through blood transfusion or donor inseminations.
It is often hard to talk about the details of what we do in bed.
It is time we take an honest look at what we do, how we do it and who we do it with, and learn to minimise the risks we take.
When we do discuss sex, we aren't always entirely truthful for fear of being criticised or rejected.
We can no longer afford to allow silence to put our health at risk.
It is important that we help each other tell the truth about who we are and what we've done.
Not making judgments about the lifestyles and sexual practices of others will go a long way towards encouraging honesty and trust.
HIV is not easily transmitted.
You can't get it from ordinary social contact like sharing food, towels, toilets or hugs.
How can HIV be passed on?
HIV can only be transmitted in certain ways.
You are at risk if the blood (including menstrual blood), semen or vaginal fluids of an infected person enters your bloodstream.
If you inject drugs, don't lend or borrow injecting equipment (works).
Make good use of your local needle exchange or chemist and  stock up on new works.
If you have to share equipment, clean used works carefully and thoroughly.
You do this by flushing the needle and syringe twice with cold water, twice with bleach and then twice with cold water again.
Bleach is best, but you can also use washing-up liquid or, as a last resort, cold water on its own.
If you want to get pregnant by donor insemination, all sperm donated to the major clinics is tested for HIV.
If you plan to self-inseminate using your own donor or by heterosexual intercourse, you run a risk of HIV infection.
You can reduce this risk by ensuring that the man practises safer sex for the 6 months prior to insemination, and then has an HIV test.
It is important that you negotiate with a man you trust as he has to agree to  practise safer sex from test to pregnancy — which may take a considerable time.
If you have sex with men for a living, it is crucial to have safer sex — either by using a condom for penetrative intercourse or by providing services that do not risk his blood or semen getting into your vagina or rectum e.g. masturbation and fantasy sex.
If you have sex with men for other reasons, it is important that the man wears a condom (for vaginal and anal intercourse) or that you only have non-penetrative sex.
For further information on heterosexual safer sex read The Terrence Higgins Trust leaflet ‘HIV & AIDS — INFORMATION FOR WOMEN’.
If you are sexually assaulted in any way, the Rape Crisis Centre (see Helplist) will offer confidential support, regardless of whether you want to report the attack or not.
Remember that many women have been sexually active with men before realising that they were lesbians.
So if none of the above applies to you now, it does not rule out risks you or your partner may have taken in the past.
There are a few reported cases of lesbians who have been infected with HIV through sex with other women.
It is clear that no other means of transmission could be identified in these cases.
There is a high concentration of the virus in both blood (including menstrual blood) and vaginal fluids to cause infection.
Enjoying safer sex will help to avoid such transmissions.
Lesbian sex and HIV transmission
If the sex you have with women avoids blood or vaginal fluid getting into your bloodstream, or vice versa, then you will already be practising safer sex.
This means that you can carry on kissing her all over, or using your fingers inside her vagina or anus (but do cover cuts, sores, grazes or skin conditions such as eczema on your fingers and hands with plasters or latex gloves).
There is still very little evidence to show that oral sex is risky for HIV transmission.
Going down on your partner is safe as long as you do not have bad cuts or sores in the mouth, or bleeding gums.
This is particularly important if your girlfriend is having her period or bleeding in any way.
Forget dental dams for oral sex — unless they turn you on!
Sex toys such as vibrators and dildos are safe if they are not shared.
If you want to share them, put a new condom on them for each user or wash them thoroughly in hot water (as long as the toy is not electrical!).
Remember that you may cause internal bleeding if you introduce large things (like fists or some sex toys) inside your own or your partner's vagina or anus.
Always use lots of water-based lubricant like ‘KY’.
If you practise S&M sex, anything goes as long as you don't exchange blood.
You know the rules!
What if you think you have been at risk?
It is understandable to be worried and scared if you think you might have been exposed to HIV.
However, it is worth taking a calm and realistic look at the risks you might have taken and putting them into perspective.
Phoning an HIV/AIDS helpline (see Helplist) may sort out your doubts, as well as making clear what you need to do to avoid HIV in the future.
If you think you might want to take an HIV antibody test to find out if you are infected, it is important to know what the test can and cannot tell you.
There are both negative and positive implications in having the test that vary from individual to individual.
You will need support from a trained counsellor at either a voluntary organisation like The Terrence Higgins Trust or a sexually transmitted disease clinic, in order to make a good informed decision.
Do keep in mind that testing positive does not necessarily mean you will develop AIDS, or that you will inevitably become ill.
Many women with HIV lead full and active lives.
There are also many organisations who provide a variety of services to people with HIV/AIDS.
Do use them.
Even if you decide you have not been at risk in the past, you seriously need to consider safer sex to protect yourself and your partners in the future from HIV.
Safer sex aids
Latex Gloves are available from Douglas Pharmacy  
Condoms and water-based lubricants such as‘KY’ can be bought in any chemist.
Dental dams can be ordered in bulk (36 sheets per box) through Health & Co.
Telephone The Terrence Higgins Trust for more information about suppliers of these products.
Conclusion
Fortunately for lesbians, what we do in bed with each other poses very little risk of HIV being passed on.
What is more important is that we have to confront our fears and prejudices which may prevent open and supportive discussions about this new health problem.
It is vital that we create a climate of trust where lesbians with HIV can feel safe.
For lesbians who share works or have sex with men occasionally, there is a greater risk involved.
Practise safer sex and drug use to reduce these risks.
For further information on these and other issues like negotiating safer sex, dealing with a positive result and caring for children with HIV see The Terrence Higgins Trust leaflet ‘HIV & AIDS — INFORMATION FOR WOMEN’.
Helplist
Helplines
London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard
24 hours a day
Staffed by lesbians and gay volunteers who are trained to answer enquiries about HIV/AIDS and safer sex.
You can ask to speak to a lesbian if you prefer.
Support Groups
Positively Women
Positively Women holds weekly support group sessions and individual counselling for women with HIV/AIDS.
Local support groups are being set up in different areas in London and they have good leaflets on various HIV related topics for women.
The Landmark
Holds open women's evenings every Wednesday.
Drugs Help
Mainliners
Has support groups and provides advice for people with HIV/AIDS who are, or have been, drug users.
Angel Project
The Angel Project provides free dental dams as well as offering advice and information for people with drug related problems.
They also operate a syringe exchange.
Women's sessions are held on Wednesdays from 2pm–5pm and women workers are available.
Insemination and Pregnancy
Women's Health
Information and resource centre about women's health issues, providing lists of clinics offering donor insemination services.
Leaflets on HIV/AIDS, donor insemination and other topics are available.
Other Helpful Organisations
Black Lesbian and Gay Centre
Information and advice on all topics relevant to black lesbians and gay men, including HIV/AIDS.
London Lighthouse
Runs a wide range of services for people with HIV/AIDS and those who care for them, including activities for women affected by HIV.
Pace
Offers training courses and individual counselling to lesbians and gay men on a range of issues, including HIV/AIDS.
Rape Crisis Centre
National network of helplines offering support, counselling and help to women/girls who have been raped or sexually assaulted.
safer sex for gay men
HOT SEX NOW
Why have safer sex?
You can't tell who's got HIV, the virus that can lead to AIDS.
Anyone can have HIV: young or old, hunky or thin, black or white, on the scene or off the scene.
There are many men with HIV who look and feel completely well.
We've got no way of knowing which of our sexual partners may have HIV infection.
So the answer is not to ‘choose your sexual partners carefully’.
The answer is simple.
Stick to safer sex with everyone .
It doesn't matter if either of you has HIV.
Safer sex will protect you both.
In the past, when we knew less than we do now, our advice used to be extra cautious.
But in fact all we need to remember is this:
Basically …
HIV can only be transmitted between men through blood and cum.
Fortunately, it can't get through ordinary, healthy, undamaged skin.
You may be worried about other body fluids like spit or piss, but HIV is only ever found in these in very small amounts which aren't enough to be infectious.
Studies of many thousands of people have shown that no-one has ever been infected through kissing.
So the important thing is that HIV is only transmitted when blood or cum goes from one body into another.
Bearing this in mind, safer sex is quite straightforward.
Fucking
The main risk of transmitting HIV is through fucking or being fucked.
This is because the virus can easily get into your body through the sensitive linings of your arse or your dick.
You can really cut down the risk in fucking by using condoms as long as they're good quality and used properly.
Remember:
Open the packet carefully, not with your teeth.
Unroll the condom all the way down the cock.
Whilst fucking have a look from time to time to make sure it's still in one piece.
When you withdraw make sure you hold the condom tight to the base of your dick as you pull it out.
Although condom manufacturers still don't make condoms specifically for anal sex, it's safest it you choose a thicker or stronger condom with the British Standard ‘Kitemark’.
You can make sure that the condoms aren't ‘old stock’ by checking the sell-by date, and store them away from hot or damp places.
Buy plenty at a time — or get them free from clinics — to avoid running out at an inconvenient moment…
Many men find they can get the same sort of pleasure by using sex toys like dildos or butt plugs up the bum.
There's no risk of transmitting HIV with these unless you share toys that go inside you.
Sharing needles or blades
Anything that can pierce the skin can transmit HIV by transferring blood from one person to another.
So never share anything that can pierce the skin such as:
needles or other injecting equipment
razors or blades
tattooing needles or inks
piercing equipment
sex toys that could get blood on them
Sucking
No-one can be absolutely sure that virus in cum or pre-cum can't get through the linings of the mouth or throat.
A small number of people think they have been infected through sucking.
However, when the sexual behaviour of thousands of gay men has been studied over a number of years, sucking hasn't shown up as a risk.
So if there is a risk, it's very small.
But the risk may be higher if your mouth is sore or bleeding.
You might choose to use condoms and avoid getting any cum or pre-cum in the mouth.
Some men get just as turned on by nuzzling and licking the cock and balls without taking them in the mouth.
Rimming
Licking arse is safe unless there is any blood in or around the arse.
However there are some risks to your health from rimming from other types of infection, e.g. hepatitis, salmonella, and some parasites.
If you have HIV, these can be very serious.
Remember that you can get vaccinated against hepatitis B.
Everything else…
You can still do almost everything else that turns you on, safely…
You could suck, kiss, lick, touch, fondle, bite, nibble and squeeze all over his body — his nipples, arse, calves, toes, neck, ears, thighs, nose, crotch, balls, armpits, fingers…
You could give him a soft sensual massage or get tougher with wrestling, rough and tumble or spanking…
You could wank each other off — dry or using lots of lube — or press, rub and slap your dick against his dick, buns, face, chest, thighs…
You could have sex in front of mirrors; take Polaroids and videos; or watch each other jerking off…
You could dress up or strip down to sports gear, lycra, leather, rubber, jock-straps, uniforms, work gear, torn jeans, boots, socks…
You could use cock-rings, nipple clamps and other sex toys, or play with mud, piss, oil or beer…
You could play with his arse — finger him, put dildos or butt plugs up him…
You could talk dirty, and tell him about your wildest fantasies…
You could get into role play and domination fantasies; taking orders; binding, roping and restraining; or cross-dressing…
The only precautions you need to take are commonsense ones: avoid cutting the skin, and if you do, avoid getting blood or cum into the wound.
And don't share sex toys that go inside the body.
HELPLIST
This leaflet is just a brief guide to safer sex.
It may raise new questions for you; or you may have questions about things we haven't covered, like fisting, scat or S/M.
Also, you may have questions about testing, living with a positive diagnosis, or other issues to do with HIV and AIDS.
You may also want to know about free condoms and clean needles etc.
There are a number of helplines and organisations which can offer advice on all these matters:
The Terrence Higgins Trust
The Terrence Higgins Trust also offers a wide range of other services which are open to all gay men.
For gay men with HIV, help on welfare rights, housing and legal matters is available from the Advice Centre; practical help is offered by our Helper Cell Project and befriending by our Buddy Service.
Gay male counsellors, buddies and helpline volunteers are available upon request.
Support for drug users (including those in prison) is also provided.
To access any of these services, please telephone us on 
Other helpful organisations
London Lesbian & Gay Switchboard
Staffed by lesbian and gay volunteers who are trained to answer enquiries about HIV/AIDS and safer sex.
You may ask to speak to a gay man if you prefer.
REDUCING THE RISKS
A leaflet for people who use drugs
Drug use can put us at risk of getting or passing on HIV through unsafe sex and through sharing works
WHAT IS SAFER SEX?
Safer sex is anything which does not allow blood, semen or vaginal fluids to pass from one person into the body of another.
Safer sex includes wanking, fingering, body rubbing, massage, oral sex and fucking with a condom and can be great fun as well as erotic.
There are many ways to get into sex more safely — experiment and see what you can come up with!
ORAL SEX
There is only a small risk of HIV transmission through oral sex (licking or sucking a man or woman's genitals or anus), although other sexually transmitted diseases, like syphilis and gonorrhoea, are easy to get this way.
If you have sores or ulcers in your mouth or bleeding gums, this will increase the risk of infection.
You can make oral sex safer by using a condom or dental dam.
If you cannot get hold of dental dams, you can cut open a condom instead (use the non-lubricated or flavoured varieties)!
PENETRATIVE SEX — Fucking
The only way to make penetrative sex safer is to use a condom.
Condoms may seem awkward at first, but the more you practise the easier using them becomes.
You can get them free from most Needle Exchanges and Family Planning Clinics.
For anal sex it is a good idea to use ‘extra strong’ or ‘super strong’condoms.
For vaginal sex, the female condom (‘Femidom’) will be available from late summer 1992.
We will have to wait and see whether women find them easy and/or pleasant to use.
In the meantime, here are some tips for using our old friend the male condom.
Some Condom Tips
Do not use oil based lubricants like ‘Vaseline’ or cooking/baby oil as these will damage the condom.
Use water based lubricants like ‘KY’ or ‘1-2-1’.
You can also get these free from most Needle Exchanges and Family Planning Clinics.
Check the expiry date on the packet.
Make sure the condom is the right way up.
A drop of lubricant in the tip of the condom will increase sensation for the wearer.
When pulling out, hold the condom tight to the base of the cock to prevent semen leaking out.
Keep condoms handy, so you don't have to go tearing around looking for them at that crucial moment.
Being drunk or stoned can make anyone forget to use condoms, but if the condoms are easy to see or find there is a better chance that you'll remember to use them.
Practise makes perfect, so use them when you're wanking or try them out on a vibrator, dildo or anything that's about the right shape.
SEX FOR MONEY
Sex for money carries the same risks as any other kind of sex.
However, if you have a lot of sex, you are more likely to get cystitis, thrush and swollen genitals, anus and mouth.
If you have any infection, your immune system won't be working as well and it will be easier for you to get other infections including HIV.
Unfortunately, some punters still offer more money for sex without a condom.
Try not to get pushed into this — your health is worth more than a few extra quid.
With a bit of  practice , you can learn to put a condom on without the punter knowing you've done it!
YOU DO HAVE A CONDOM, DON'T YOU RODNEY?
SAFER DRUG USE
In order to keep from getting — or passing on — HIV through drug use, don't share your works — this includes the spoon and filter as well as the needle and syringe.
Don't share with anyone — not even your best mate or your partner.
You can buy new needles and syringes from a lot of chemists and you can also get them free from needle exchanges and chemists which are in an exchange scheme.
It is best to use a new set of works every time.
If you can't do this, make sure you clean them.
Bacteria can grow in dirty works and the next time you use them, you can give yourself a nasty infection or blood poisoning.
Cleaning
This is a last resort.
If you have to re-use your own works, or need to share with someone, cleaning will lower the risk of infection.
But remember it is lower risk — not no risk.
Bleach: This is the best way to clean your works, because bleach kills HIV and other bacteria.
Draw cold water up into the syringe through the needle, flush out the water and repeat.
Now do the same thing using thin (e.g. diluted) household bleach.
Now rinse twice with cold water.
The easy way to remember it is:
2 × 2 × 2: 2 × cold water
2 × bleach
2 × cold water
Washing-up Liquid: If you can't get hold of bleach you can use diluted washing-up liquid instead.
Washing-up liquid doesn't kill HIV, but it will help to draw blood and bacteria out of your works.
Water: If you have nothing else, at least use cold water to rinse out your works.
The reason for using cold water is that hot water will make the blood congeal and make it harder to get out of the needle and syringe.
Water on its own isn't brilliant, but it is better than doing nothing.
ALTERNATIVES
If your drug use is causing you problems it is helpful to consider your choices.
You may want to continue using drugs, but receive regular support or counselling.
You may want to stop using, or go on to substitute drugs.
The best thing to do is find someone to talk to about your options.
Some places to go for help are: Street Agencies, Needle Exchanges, Drug Dependency Units, Community Drug Teams and Narcotics Anonymous (NA).
Many AIDS organisations have workers who are experienced in working with drug issues as well as HIV.
If you are concerned about HIV, you can contact one of these organisations — they can refer you to a drug agency if necessary.
LOOKING AFTER YOUR HEALTH
Whether you are HIV positive or negative, it is important to look after your health.
Drug use can have a damaging effect on your teeth.
Dental problems are painful and unsightly so try to see a dentist regularly.
If you are on a low income, you may be able to get dental treatment for free or at a reduced cost.
Your local drug project may be able to put you in touch with an understanding dentist or specialist dental clinic.
Most illnesses and infections are easier to treat if they are diagnosed early.
This is why it is better to see a doctor when you first feel unwell rather than wait until it is so bad that you have to go to hospital.
Everyone should have a GP, but it can be difficult to find one if you use drugs.
Drug projects can help you find a GP.
Some projects also run Well Person's clinics where you can see a doctor for a health check and Family Planning services.
If you are HIV positive it is a good idea to have regular health checks.
This is usually done at a clinic or hospital.
Many illnesses and infections associated with HIV can be prevented or treated with medication.
Your local drug agency should be able to tell you more about available HIV services in your area.
Part of looking after your health is learning to be good to your body.
You can do this by eating well, getting enough rest and relaxing.
FINALLY
Making changes in the way we use drugs, have sex or look after ourselves can be difficult.
Try to find someone you can trust to talk to.
This could be a good friend, partner, drug worker, HIV worker or helpline worker.
HELPLIST
Turning Point
Has an extensive range of counselling, advice and support centres throughout Britain for drug users.
Contact the head office for information about your local services.
SCODA
The co-ordinating body for non-statutory services in the drugs field.
Release
Advice and information on legal and drug related problems.
WHAT'S A LIVING WILL?
How to state your wishes about Medical Care
The Terrence Higgins Trust, in co-operation with the Centre of Medical Law and Ethics, King's College, London have produced a LIVING WILL form for use by people with HIV or AIDS.
The form has been developed following consultation with people with HIV and AIDS, other AIDS Service Organisations, doctors and counsellors.
WHAT IS A LIVING WILL?
A LIVING WILL is a written statement of your wishes regarding medical treatment at the end of life.
It means that medical staff and others around you will know your wishes should you become unable to communicate them directly.
The Terrence Higgins Trust/King's College LIVING WILL form is accompanied by detailed instructions to help you complete it, and will enable you to:
Record your wishes about medical treatment if you become terminally ill or incapacitated, including any wishes about specific medical procedures or investigations (these are known as ‘Advance Directives’)
Name a person whom you would wish to be contacted if you are seriously ill and close to death
Appoint a friend or relative to take part in medical decisions on your behalf if you become incapable of doing so yourself (known as a ‘Health Care Proxy’)
WHY MAKE ONE?
Whether or not you make a LIVING WILL is entirely up to you.
It is not intended to be a substitute for discussion with medical staff and we recommend that where possible you also talk to your doctor about your treatment wishes.
However, it does mean that if you develop a life-threatening condition, you will have the reassurance of knowing that your wishes are recorded in written form if you become unable to express them.
FURTHER INFORMATION AND ADVICE
We suggest you discuss your wishes with those close to you, or perhaps a nurse, counsellor, religious advisor or AIDS helpline.
You do not need to see a lawyer to complete the form, but advice on any aspect of your LIVING WILL can be obtained from The Terrence Higgins Trust Advice Centre and Legal Line or the Immunity Legal Centre.
WHERE TO OBTAIN A COPY
Individual copies may be obtained free of charge from The Terrence Higgins Trust.
HELPLIST