

Part One — Encounters at the Moebius Strip
‘Nabe?’ said the port inspector.
‘Jute,’ she told him.
‘Giv'd nabe?’
‘Tabitha.’
‘Status?’
‘Owner operator.’
‘Shib?’
‘The Alice Liddell ,’ said Tabitha.
He lifted his close-shaven muzzle and looked at her hard over the monitor of his reader.
‘Tybe and registratiod ob shib,’ he said.
‘Oh, right,’ said Tabitha.
‘Bergen Kobold.
BGK zero —’
She shot her cuff and checked her wrist monitor.
She could never remember the Alice 's registration number without looking it up, though she saw it twenty times a day.
‘Zero-nine-zero-five-nine.’
‘Burbose ob bisit?’
‘I've got to see a man about a job,’ she said.
‘Look, could you hurry it up, do you think?’
But he was an Eladeldi, he was entering everything with his paw stylus and checking her record.
His tongue was hanging out.
Tabitha sighed in annoyance and drummed her fingers on the desktop.
She looked around the hall.
All the other queues were moving right along.
Locals simply had to slot a tag and step through the gate.
Just her luck to get an Eladeldi.
She knew what he was going to say next as soon as he opened his little purple mouth.
‘Records show registratiod ob debectib axis lock crystal,’ he said.
‘Two budths ago.’
‘Yes,’ said Tabitha.
‘Not yet reblaced,’ he observed.‘
‘No,’ she said.
‘That's why I've got to see a man about a job.’
But he still had to print out yet another copy of the Capellan regulations about acceptable levels of degradation on axis lock crystals before he let her through the gate.
She stuffed the printout into her bag, where — somewhere — three other copies were already lurking, and looked at the time.
‘Shit,’ she said.
The commercial terminal was closed for some kind of police operation.
Tabitha found herself being diverted down a long underground tunnel to the civil concourse.
It was swarming with people.
Spacers in livery jostled with porters, human and drone.
Eager evangelists pressed prophecies of the imminent Total Merge into the paws, fans and hands of glazed-looking tourists.
Holos for local businesses, net stations and archaeological attractions competed for attention, whooping and gyrating on their daises.
The hubbub was even more deafening than usual.
Of course: it was carnival.
Tabitha's headset suddenly locked into an ambient channel and began to tinkle with tinny salsa.
Irritated, she snatched out the earpiece and let the set dangle round her neck.
She had to get a move on if she was going to make it to the city before noon.
Hoisting her bag, she sidestepped a cargo float, waded through a crowd of squabbling Perks and elbowed between two Alteceans and a city guide they were trying to haggle.
Stepping high in the light gravity and brandishing the bag before her, she ploughed her way out into the open air.
Outside, it was dusty and cold.
Grit whirled in the biting desert winds.
Half-naked children with slit eyes and matchstick limbs worked the emerging crowd with grim efficiency.
Tabitha Jute pulled up the collar of her old foil jacket and strode off past the concession stalls, looking for transport.
The queues for air taxis would be impossible.
She took the slidewalk to the canal.
The queues there were just as bad.
Fortunately most of the tourists were after a robot hover, which she couldn't afford anyway.
Then — a stroke of luck — she cut in front of a white family still cooing over the colour of the water, and managed to sling her bag into an arriving boat.
‘The Moebius Strip,’ she called.
The cries of the annoyed sightseers dying away behind them, they left the wharf and slid off downstream.
Tabitha sat in the stern and watched the olive groves and sponge gardens on either bank swiftly give way to shipyards, silica refineries and air plants.
In the distance for a moment the complicated towers of Schiaparelli rose.
Then coral pink walls of rock closed about them as they took the deep cut into Wells.
‘Here for carnival?’ the driver asked Tabitha, in tones of boredom and resentment which didn't lessen when Tabitha said no.
She was a Vespan, brooding with hostile humility, like all of them.
The atmosphere had mottled her long cheeks with brown blotches.
She complained about the cold.
‘It was better before they knock the dome down,’ she said.
‘Was you ever here when we had the dome?’
‘Before my time,’ said Tabitha.
‘We had good warm then,’ said the driver.
‘Then they knock the dome down.
They say they gone put up solar.’
Her mobile features squeezed themselves around sulkily.
‘They never.
They still argue, argue, who gone pay.’
She lifted her elbows.
She looked like a bundle of spoiled green peppers in a brown felt overcoat.
Her glossy lobes were withered and shrunken, the soft pouches of her face sagging in permanent despair.
Tabitha wondered how long the woman had been scratching a living on the waterways, complaining to uncaring passengers, never quite summoning up the cash or the strength to take the long haul home.
They swept along the crimson canal into the purlieus of the new city.
There the cries of the watersellers and the buzz of taxis came wafting on the wind, strident and echoing across the dirty water.
A team of Palernian prostitutes, their wool in frizzy perms, sat smoking and dangling their legs in the sunlight on the steps below the Malibu Arcade.
They hooted and waved at the boats as they whizzed by.
Tabitha's driver started to complain about them.
Tabitha shifted forward along the cracked red bench.
‘I've got some calls to make,’ she said.
She ducked into the phone hood, unreeled the plug from her headset and plugged in.
The scratched little screen played her a little tune and showed a phone company logo.
Then there were ads, more than ever for the sake of the season.
In a window in the bottom left hand corner of the screen Tabitha watched her credit flickering merrily away.
She tried the Moebius Strip, but all she got was an answering routine.
She tried another number.
She waited.
They passed a sulphur felucca with a crew of children.
They were towing a desert manta on a long black line.
It dipped and fluttered in the chilly air, its wings drab and flaky.
At last Tabitha got through.
On the phone an oily face cracked a smile as she identified herself.
‘In for the carnival?’
‘No, business,’ she said.
‘Carlos, how much is an axis lock crystal these days?’
‘What you got?’
‘A Kobold.’
‘Still driving that old thing?
She's gonna fall apart on you one of these days.’
‘That's what she keeps telling me,’ said Tabitha.
‘Come on, Carlos, I'm in a hurry, how much?’
He told her.
She swore.
He shrugged.
‘That's what you get for flying antiques,’ he said unsympathetically.
‘Can't get the parts.’
He scratched his ear.
‘I could do you a great deal on a Navajo Scorpion.’
‘Piss off, Carlos.’
She thought of the Alteceans, back at the port, snuffling over their bags and parcels.
‘Look, have you seen Captain Frank lately?’
‘A crystal for a Kobold, yeah, that's about ol' Frank's speed,’ he grinned.
‘Try the flea market.’
‘Thanks very much, Carlos.’
‘Cheer up, Tabitha,’ he bade her.
‘It's carnival!’
Carnival in Schiaparelli.
The canals are thronged with tour buses, the bridges festooned with banners.
Balloons escape and fireworks fly.
The city seethes in the smoky red light.
Though officers of the Eladeldi can be seen patrolling everywhere, pleasure is the only master.
Shall we go to the Ruby Pool?
To watch the glider duels over the al-Kazara?
Or to the old city, where the cavernous  ancient silos throb with the latest raga, and the wine of Astarte quickens the veins of the young and beautiful?
A thousand smells, of sausages and sweat, phosphorus and patchouli, mingle promiscuously in the arcades.
Glasses clash and cutlery clatters in the all-night cantinas where drunken revellers confuse the robot waiters and flee along the colonnades, their bills unpaid, their breath steaming in the thin and wintry air.
Reflected off the oily water, a thousand coloured lights flicker and glow on the scoured faces of the buildings.
A thousand noises batter the attendant ear, calliopes and stridulators, cannonades and sirens, all mingling with the babble and slur of happy voices.
Even the screeching rasp of a police hover forcing its slow way upstream can scarcely cut the din.
The cop, a human, leans on his screamer, twice, and stalls.
In the shiny black carapace of his servo-armour he looks stiff and offended, like a gigantic beetle beset by ants.
They pulled in at Mustique Boulevard, below the skate bowl.
Grubby urchins stood on the wall, sucking steaming mossballs and shouting abuse at each other.
‘This isn't the Moebius Strip,’ said Tabitha.
The morose boatwoman jerked an elbow.
‘Close as I can, sister.
Grand's closed for the procession.’
Annoyed, Tabitha paid her and leapt easily to the landing stage.
Her jacket flashed and sparkled with sodium light, her boots crunched on the sandy boards.
Picture her, Tabitha Jute: not as the net media show her, heroine of hyperspace, capable, canny and cosmetically enhanced, smiling confidently as she reaches with one hand for the spangled mist of the Milky Way; but a small, weary young woman in a cracked foil jacket and oil-stained trousers, determinedly elbowing herself through an exuberant Schiaparelli crowd.
She stands 162 in her socks, broad in the shoulder and the hip, and  weighs about 60k at 1g, which she very rarely is.
Her hair is darkest ginger, cut in a conservative spacer's square crop.
Her skin is an ordinary milky coffee, and freckles easily, which she hates.
Here she was, in after a stiff haul back from Chateaubriand, spacelagged and frazzled, needing a shower.
There were dark olive bags under her hazel eyes.
You wouldn't have given her a second glance that evening, amid the florid, the fancy and the flash.
Not that there was much of that around here.
This was definitely the scrag end of the festivities.
She ducked beneath the concrete walkway and strode along an avenue of makeshift stalls lashed together from pipes and planking, weaving a path between the strolling browsers.
Overhead, lines of biofluorescents snaked from pole to pole, tied on with string.
Tabitha had come to the flea market after all.
Some of the stallholders had made an effort for the carnival.
There were masks and bunting decorating their displays of scuffed cassettes and second-hand knitting.
Here were bright clothes: everything from aluminium shoes to cheap and garish movie shirts of winking kittens and prancing unicorns and swivelling strippers.
Collectors rummaged in boxes of sunglasses, discussed the merits of filched scraps of cruiseliner trim.
Two scrawny women in tiny dresses sat behind a table of china animals, painting each other 's faces by the warmth of a dilapidated reactor stove.
One of them whistled at Tabitha as she squeezed by.
A decommissioned shop robot leaned from under its canopy and fired a burst of sublim at her, filling her head with sun-dappled pools, the smell of honeysuckle, desire.
A yellow child tried to interest her in a jar of dead flies.
Round the corner were the Alteceans in their cardigans, their conical caps of brown felt, presiding over accumulations of human refuse.
On high stools they  squatted, hunched in their habitual dolour, their snouts inflamed and dripping in the irritant air.
They snuffled and sighed to each other, beckoning Tabitha, knowing a haulier when they saw one.
‘Axis lock crystal?’ she shouted.
‘For a Bergen Kobold?’
The Alteceans wheezed moistly at her, waving their paws at their mounds of surplus respirators and dismantled heat-exchangers as if these treasures were all one could possibly require in life.
Tabitha spent a valuable minute dragging out from under a heap something that looked promising but proved to be a caustic diffraction coil.
She threw it back.
She was wasting time.
Dodging a band of spacers in Shenandoah colours braying drunkenly out of a bar and shoving one another about, Tabitha pushed ahead into the crowd that lined the banks of the Grand Canal.
She circumvented fat tourists in fancy dress, civic marshals in baggy overalls, then a personal camera drone, its head swivelling back and forth as it scanned the canal for its owner at home.
A sailing ship was passing, its mylar sails flapping in the gusty wind.
Behind it crawled a hoverbus of MivvyCorp employees having a party.
Through the rigging of the schooner a five of Palernians could be seen, making a nuisance of themselves on a flimsy raft.
They were hooting and flapping their great woolly arms as they tried to climb on to a private jetty.
A tall woman leaned from a balcony and emptied a bucket of water over them.
Hanging over parapets and out of windows, clustering in the streets and on the rooftops, the crowd whistled and applauded.
As Tabitha was trying to get past a couple of coked-up Thrants in expensive shakos and boiled leather, one of the Palernians turned a clumsy somersault, and one of  the others pushed her into the canal.
They yoicked and whooped.
A spark-boat sputtered by, filling the air with the smell of ozone.
In it a couple in electric suits were arcing and fizzing to the hefty thump of a jumpbox.
The Palernians bounded up and down in excitement, flooding the raft and endangering their coolers.
As a cop arrived, his cyclops helmet protruding above the heads of the crowd, the woman was lowering her bucket at the end of a rope, shouting to a gaggle of little painted boys for a refill.
Tabitha leaned out over the railing.
She could see the Moebius Strip.
It was only another hundred metres: there, just beyond the float full of oversized Capellans, dummies, their huge bald heads bobbing with grave benevolence as if conferring blessings on the excited crowd.
Carnival in Schiaparelli.
Cold, dusty city, full of holidaymakers and noise and smells and dirt.
Wherever you go, now, you will meet people who will tell you that Schiaparelli was a fateful city for Tabitha Jute.
It was in Schiaparelli that she met Tricarico, who brought her aboard the Resplendent Trogon , which led her into the presence of Balthazar Plum — and if it hadn't been for all that, she would never have acquired the Alice in the first place.
Likewise, here she was now, years later, in Schiaparelli, heading for a fateful encounter which would completely and utterly change her life, my life, all our lives.
She was at the top of the steps leading down to the front door of the Moebius Strip.
She could see the lights inside, the drinkers and gamblers.
And then the Perks came, scurrying up the steps on all fours like rats out of a cellar.
Tabitha made a mistake.
She made the mistake of trying to go forward, down the steps, through the upcoming Perks.
‘Hey, woman!
Woman watch it!’
An oily-pelted male with piercing green eyes reared up under her feet, knocking her sprawling on her bottom.
At once they were all around her, perching up on their hindlegs like scrawny otters in black leather and chrome earbands.
Not about to argue, Tabitha started to get her feet under her.
They grabbed her.
Twenty thorny little paws caught hold of her jacket, her trousers, her arms.
They scrabbled at her bag.
‘Hey!
Get off !’
They pulled her down on her back again.
She wallowed in the flimsy gravity.
As she scraped her heels against the steps, trying for purchase, the alpha male jumped up on to her hip, then down between her legs.
He stood there in her crotch, weaving sinuously from side to side, hunching his shoulders, his flat little head squealing down into her face.
‘Cheeeeeeee!’
Tabitha sat up fast, jerking her hips back from the snarling Perk.
Several of his cousins and brothers went flying.
She hauled her arm from the grip of two more and jabbed a finger at the little alien.
‘Get out of my way!’
‘In our way, woman.’
‘Cheee!’ they all went.
‘Cheeeeee!’
The feathers were all bristling up the backs of their heads, on the tiny muscular shins that protruded from  the legs of their breeches.
They flexed their claws on their medallions, up and down the zips of their jerkins.
The ones she had just knocked down were on their feet again, hopping on the steps around her.
Some of them were clutching tubes of beer, bottles of chianti.
The men had exaggerated their black eye-sockets with kohl and mascara.
They sneered at her, baring their tiny incisors.
Their breath smelled of stale fish.
‘Whass'n hurry, woman?’ said the Perk between her legs, taunting her.
‘Missa parade!’
Tabitha realized he was drunk stupid.
She cooled a degree or two.
She hadn't time for a fight.
Clutching her bag, she tried to get up again, but they were hanging on her shoulders.
‘Get off me!’
‘Whassa fire, woman?
Whassa party, woman?’
He made a lunge at her.
She threw up an arm, fending him off.
Another one, older, the barbs of his feathers going soft and ashy, burrowed under her raised arm.
‘You tread on us!
You'n knock us down!’
‘Okay, I'm sorry!
All right?
I'm sorry!
Now just let go of me, all right?’
She tried again to stand up.
When the wiry little creatures obstructed her again, she hauled them off their feet.
They all squealed, ‘Cheee!
Cheee!’
A couple came out of the Moebius Strip, a yellow woman in video shades and a black one in a tubecoat, basilisk teeth plaited into her hair.
They glanced at Tabitha encumbered with Perks, forcing their claws from her arms, standing on one foot trying to shake one that was hanging on to her leg.
The women glanced at the fracas and stepped delicately aside on the steps as they passed by.
The yellow one muttered a remark to her companion, who laughed and sucked on a cigarette.
A tall man in a cloth cap came after, hurrying to catch them up.
Tabitha heard his bootheels tap up the steps behind her.
She winced as long black claws met in the flesh above her elbow.
It was like being wrapped in barbed wire by a gang of fox terriers.
She heard something rip.
The Perks come from the third planet of a G class system in the region of Betelgeuse, where they live in warrens, underground, which is perhaps why they took so readily to the tunnels of Plenty.
There may be something endemic to the more ferocious subterranean dweller about suspicion, aggression, an unquestioning pack instinct backed up by heedless hostility to all outsiders.
Leaving the deep hearth for whatever reason, hunger, duty, sexual imperatives, you trot along the lightless, complicated corridors of the buried labyrinth, their ambient odour a composite of you and all your kin.
Suddenly you hear the scrabble of claws coming in the opposite direction.
Friend, foe, relative, rival?
Behind you lie your siblings, perhaps your own offspring, curled and mewing, tender in the warm dark.
What option have you in that moment of social uncertainty but to bare your teeth, to ready your claws?
At any rate, it seems to be so for the Perks.
There is nothing Perks like so much as a good fight.
When the time came for civilization on the planet of the Perks, they built war-trains, undermining engines, mole bombs.
It is unclear what motivated Capella to bestow the space drive on the little rodents.
In all possibility the Perks merely infested their own elusive craft, following their urge to burrow into whatever comes along.
Tabitha lost all patience with them.
She could see her goal ahead of her, so close she was practically inside.
She had struggled halfway across Schiaparelli to get there.
She was not about to stop and engage in a scrap on the very doorstep of the bar.
Nor was she about to lose her jacket  to a gaggle of overdressed hooligans.
With a yell she thrust herself at their leader.
The neck of the Perk is very long.
It accounts for the curious, rather comical way they have of standing perfectly upright and perfectly still while surveying their surroundings with a quick 240° swivel, like a furry periscope.
Tabitha seized her chief aggressor by the neck with both hands.
She swept him off his feet as the forward momentum of her lunge carried her upright, shedding Perks left and right with a shake of her shoulders.
All might still have gone well.
Or ill, depending on your view of all that happened in consequence.
But Tabitha's blood was up.
She flung the choking, clawing creature from her.
She flung him into the Grand Canal.
‘Cheeeeeee —!’
Instinctively drawing in his limbs and curling his long back, the Perk sailed out of her grasp and over the edge of the steps like a furry stone in a leather jerkin.
Horrorstruck for the instant, his cronies stood and squawled with outrage.
Spectators and bystanders on the canal bank turned and stared, not knowing what it was that had flashed past them, hurtling towards the water.
The filthy, carmine, oily water.
The water he never actually hit.
For at that moment, directly below the steps that led down to the Moebius Strip, the float of dummy Capellans was purring serenely by.
Tabitha watched in diminishing triumph and mounting dismay as the Perk fell through the smoky air and struck one of the huge statues directly on the head.
With a crack audible above the gasp of the crowd, the impact smashed a large hole in the fabric of the great white dome.
Knocked from its invisible supporting cradle of needle-thin tractor beams, the effigy swayed.
It bowed its ruined head to its chest as if to inspect the squealing assailant now hanging from its buckled shoulder with frantic claws.
It swayed, and  continued to sway.
Its arm fell off, clattering to the deck with the Perk still clinging to it.
Its benevolently smiling head fell off and bounced with a sickening crunch from the beam projector into another of the statues, knocking it off the deck of the float and into the canal.
Meanwhile, breaking apart like a toppling chimneystack, its body collapsed and felled another, which threw up an arm as it went down, as if thinking to save itself by grabbing hold of one of its remaining upright companions.
There was no hope it could save itself; nor any for Tabitha either.
Standing staring appalled at the devastation she had caused, she became aware that the Perks had not instantly attacked her in retaliation for their leader's ignominious defeat.
Indeed, they had melted away into the crowd.
The hand that fell upon her arm was a paw; but not a tiny black-clawed paw, a hefty one with silky blue fur protruding from the sleeve of a night-black uniform.
It was the cops.
I can't stand it in there.
Alice.
WHAT HAVE YOU DONE.
CAPTAIN?
I don't want to talk about it.
Why do I do these things, Alice?
Why do I get myself into things like this?
INSUFFICIENT DATA
Is that an answer?
NO, CAPTAIN, I SIMPLY MEANT THAT IF YOU DON'T TELL ME WHAT YOU'VE DONE I CAN'T
MANUAL OVERRIDE
Sorry, Alice.
HELLO, CAPTAIN.
WHY ARE YOU APOLOGIZING TO ME?
Oh, nothing, Alice.
Don't worry about me.
I'm just in a foul mood.
I just wanted some company,
THAT SEEMS TO BE ABUNDANT INSIDE AT PRESENT, CAPTAIN.
That's why I'm out here.
DO YOU WANT TO TELL ME ABOUT IT?
No.
TELL ME A STORY, THEN.
A story?
I don't know any stories.
I'm from the Moon.
WE'VE NEVER BEEN TO THE MOON, HAVE WE?
It's boring.
Nothing happens there.
Nothing happened to me until I got off the Moon.
BUT YOU WERE BORN ON THE MOON.
WHAT WAS THAT LIKE, BEING BORN?
I don't know!
I don't remember.
THAT'S A PITY.
There's nothing to remember.
It's a pit, the Moon.
A dead end.
A black hole.
THIS IS LUNA WE'RE SPEAKING OF, ISN'T IT.
Yes.
THOSE ARE METAPHORS, THEN.
Of course they're bloody metaphors.
YOU ARE IN A FOUL MOOD.
Well, when you tell people you come from the Moon they always say, Really?
And I say, Somebody has to be.
And they say, Well, yes, I suppose so.
The next thing is, especially if they're Terrans, they say, I've been to the Moon.
And I say, Everybody's been there, but they don't have to live there.
And they say, Well, yes, and they sort of smile.
They think, She's got a chip on her shoulder.
You can see them thinking it.
I haven't got a chip on my shoulder.
It's them, always saying the same thing.
The other thing they say, if they're Terrans, or actually, especially if they're not, is, Well, you must have spent a good deal of time on Good Old Mother Earth.
And we didn't.
We went down twice, to see grandma and grandpa.
We hated it, Angie and me.
We didn't like grandma and grandpa, and we didn't like their gravity either.
I fell out of a tree.
We reckoned Earth was horrible and backward.
They didn't even have network, where grandma and grandpa lived.
DID YOU NETWORK WITH ANGIE?
Oh, yes, we all did, a lot, though nobody ever talked about it.
Everybody had a secret identity, so you could say what you liked and nobody knew who you really were.
Networking was encouraged.
It was supposed to be educational.
It was, as long as you skipped all the educational stuff.
What was good was the gossip and the lies.
Angie was a Capellan princess in exile.
ARE THERE PRINCESSES ON CAPELLA?
I DIDN'T KNOW THAT.
I don't know, Alice.
I don't suppose anyone does.
But that's what you need on the Moon.
To be a Capellan princess in exile, I mean.
Otherwise it's all just civics classes, vacuum drill, t'ai chi, monthly medicals, cleaning and maintenance rosters and not being able to go outside.
Not that there's anywhere to go.
I had one place I used to go sometimes, when Angie was off with her friends.
I'd take a bike and head out from Posidon across the Lake of Dreams.
If you went all the way across the Lake of Dreams you'd end up in the Lake of Death.
I always thought that was about right.
Five minutes out of Posidon there was no sign of humans, no sign anyone had been there ever.
Just boring brown rock and shadows black as the sky.
You didn't go in the shadows.
It was too cold.
I'd put a tape on and turn the radio off.
You weren't supposed to turn the radio off, but I used to so they couldn't hear me singing along with the tape.
YOU DON'T SING MUCH THESE DAYS, DO YOU, CAPTAIN?
Be grateful.
I talk to myself instead.
YOU TALK TO ME.
Same thing.
YOU CAN BE TERRIBLY RUDE SOMETIMES.
I DON'T WONDER ANGIE DIDN'T WANT TO PLAY WITH YOU.
I didn't hang around with her much anyway.
The only thing we ever did together was network.
And sometimes dad used to take us down to Serenity, to see the ships.
It was at Serenity we lost Angie, a few years later.
We liked it there, when we were kids, though I suppose it wasn't that brilliant, looking back.
The Rush Years were well over.
Nobody put in there unless they had to.
The starships passed us by.
It was all just small stuff, tenders and shuttles.
No offence, Alice.
On the Moon, everyone's into austerity and teamwork.
Or like my mum and dad, who were as keen as anyone to get off Earth, but hadn't the gumption or the connections to get a work permit on an orbital.
We used to, watch them arrive, looking dazed and disappointed.
Nervous tourists who couldn't afford or probably couldn't bear to go out any further, or bottom-rate passengers on a stopover.
Fat couples in vacation plaids, bouncing about like toddlers in the low g and cooing over the moondirt souvenir jewellery.
Bureaucrats with grey skin and grey denims.
They were always arguing schedules with the clerks and crowding the phone stations.
My dad would say, Stay well away from them, he was always afraid they were after him for all the taxes he hadn't paid.
Engineers with goggles on their headsets and drones hovering at their heels.
Netball teams from the Church of the Star Shepherd, all perfect bodies and gleaming white teeth.
Then you'd get a bunch of compulsory emigrants, once in a while, Indians or Chinese, all wearing identical pyjamas and shuffling along in a crowd.
There weren't even any interesting aliens.
There were only Alteceans dragging black plastic bags everywhere, and Perks, and Eladeldi, looking like big dogs dressed up in uniforms.
I wanted a dog, when I was a little girl.
DID YOU, CAPTAIN?
THEY'RE MESSY CREATURES, AREN'T THEY, DOGS?
You'd go down very well on the Moon, Alice.
The only dog I ever saw there was very clean, and very small, only about ten centimetres high.
It was a holo.
There was one with a monkey in too, crammed in this little shell with the side cut away so you could see in.
There was only room for the monkey.
Its mouth was open, I didn't like that, I thought it was screaming.
The dog didn't look very happy either.
It was white, with black spots.
I'M NOT SURE I FOLLOW THIS PART, CAPTAIN.
It was at the museum.
The Museum of the Big Step.
My mum used to take me when I was really little.
I always went straight to the dog and the monkey.
They were with all the boring stuff at the beginning, the primitive stuff all the other kids used to run past to get to the Frasque fighter.
It was a display, a what do you call it, diorama, showing the cruelties of Pre-Capellan flight.
Then they had the first ‘aided’ flights — that was what they called them then; the first skips; some of the disasters, the ships that disappeared.
There was the fighter, a crashed one they'd rebuilt, and some stirring stuff about how ‘we’ helped Capella beat the Frasque.
And in the middle there was an area open to space, just a circle of bare surface with a window all the way round it, and a sign on the window that said it was the site of the Capellan arrival in the solar system.
There was another diorama there, in front of the window.
It had a man with a big bald head, wearing a sheet and shiny sandals, saying hello to a couple of stupid-looking ‘astronauts’, they called them, in clumsy old Gore-Tex suits.
The Capellan was floating above the ground, standing on nothing, smiling.
There was something funny about it, as if it had a deliberate mistake you were supposed to spot or something.
CAPELLANS DON'T MAKE MISTAKES, CAPTAIN.
That's what dad used to say.
Dad said, Keep away from Eladeldi. because everything they see goes straight back to the Capellans.
He said stay away from Perks too.
I should have listened to him.
WHY DOES YOUR FATHER DISLIKE THEM?
Oh, dad isn't fond of any kind of aliens, really.
Dad didn't even like the Capellan at the museum, the one in the diorama, and he had a smile like a great big teddy bear.
He looked as if he was going to pat the astronauts on the head.
They just looked startled.
Dad was happy enough on the Moon, really.
It was the rest of us that were so bored.
WHAT HAPPENED TO YOUR SISTER?
One day she was at Serenity and she met a boy from the Holy Sepulchre of the Expanded Neurosphere, and he told her she didn't have to be an imaginary princess any more.
She could be a little bit of God instead.
I didn't know about God, but that was when I knew it was serious, when she told him her secret identity.
Mum and dad argued, but it was no good.
Angie was into it all the way.
The Great  Network in the Sky.
Sockets, wetware, the lot.
She was only on the Moon in transit after all, like everybody else.
So that was Angie's way out.
It was a few more years before I found mine.
Tabitha flung herself at the hard bunk with an angry sigh.
She looked around the cell.
Four porous dirty pink walls, concrete.
Matt steel door, flush-fitted, shielded lock, no handle.
No windows.
A grille in the door and another above, the glint of a camera lens behind it.
Dirty pink concrete ceiling, biofluorescent ring, not working.
Dirty pink concrete floor.
The bunk was a solid platform against one wall.
Some kind of chemical toilet, scuffed white, was already stinking in the corner.
There was no room for anything else.
The Eladeldi had dragged her from the steps into an alley, shoved her against a wall and searched her.
Then, deciding she was no political, just another stroppy trucker, they'd handed her over to the locals, which was a big relief.
They could sometimes turn very nasty where the Capellans were concerned.
In the Mirabeau Precinct she'd only get pushed around and ignored.
In Eladeldi custody, people tended to disappear.
The cop who'd collected her had been a crowd control unit, the full cyborg.
His grey visor flickered with readouts, obscuring the implants.
‘Jute, Tabitha, Captain,’ he intoned, as his cyclops lens scanned and recorded her.
He was very tall and shiny.
His augmented hand whirred out to take her arm.
She tried to get him to let her check in the bar first.
‘I've got to tell my employer!
He's in there.
I was going to report to him when those bloody vermin tripped me up.’
It was no use, of course.
The Eladeldi watched as the cop marched her to the end of the alley, where his double was waiting in the hover.
They sat her between them.
The traffic was plentiful and sluggish.
All the way downtown the cops' disfigured faces glittered with electronic traceries of red and blue data, analysis, file reports, yellow nets, video idents, updates on other cases.
When they cut the engine, Tabitha could hear tiny voices whispering to them.
They didn't speak to each other, or to her.
At the precinct a stolid desk sergeant ran all Tabitha's ID through a reader and took it away.
Her arresting officer stood behind her like a statue, his brain off-line.
He made a macabre figure standing there with wires up his nose and the whites of his uprolled eyes showing through his empty faceplate.
Electronic man attending to the high singing voices from another star that compliment him, soothe him, accept his duty.
The sergeant tipped out the contents of Tabitha's bag on the counter between them.
She stirred it all around and poked it about.
‘Been in trouble before, have we, Tabitha?’ she murmured, ritually.
Tabitha didn't answer.
Damn and blast them.
They were all the same, when it came down to it.
Cops and Perks and Eladeldi and the bloody Capellans out on Charon for all she knew.
Life was hard enough without all that.
Rules and regulations and protocol.
Tribal stuff.
These days it was hard enough trying to hold everything together without all that.
Antagonism got you nowhere.
That never seemed to stop her trying.
She leaned both arms on the counter, watching the sergeant with sarcastic fascination.
‘I bet you love your job,’ said Tabitha.
The sergeant focused her mild eyes on her.
‘Were you thinking of applying?’ she asked.
‘I'd like to see you try.
All of you.
I'd like to see you try.
Do you a power of good.’
There was loathing in her voice, loathing restrained by laziness and boredom.
Tabitha was just another cowboy at the carnival.
They knew she'd been drinking on the way in.
They only had to look at the floor of her cockpit to prove that.
‘I'd rather shovel shit,’ said Tabitha.
The sergeant nodded.
‘We'll arrange it.’
‘I bet you see the whole rich pageant of sapient life,’ said Tabitha, ‘going through people's bags.’
The sergeant held up a dogeared copy of a disreputable magazine.
She raised an eyebrow.
Tabitha ignored her.
‘I'm just going to make a phone call, all right?’
‘No you're not.’
‘I've just got to make a phone call.’
‘No you haven't.’
‘Look,’ said Tabitha.
‘You're going to fine me, right?
And I haven't got any money, have I?
You've read my data.’
‘You haven't been charged yet,’ said the woman.
She had a huge square jaw and a look of iron self-satisfaction that kept the boredom and loathing intact and extended them to as many other people as possible.
‘It was self-defence,’ said Tabitha.
‘I told him.’
She swung around and tapped the arresting officer on the breastplate.
‘They don't like aliens picking fights,’ the sergeant said.
She meant the Eladeldi.
‘It was a bloody Perk,’ Tabitha said.
‘Come on.’
She knew she was lost now, when she started to plead.
‘Haven't you ever wanted to chuck one of them in the canal?
I bet you have.
I bet you've done a lot worse than chuck a Perk in a canal.’
She leaned across the desk.
‘Well, mine was self-defence!’ she said.
‘I bet you think you're a right hero, don't you,’ said the sergeant.
‘Throwing little Perks about.’
She shoved Tabitha's belongings back into her arms, buzzed a restraint drone and sent her downstairs.
Now Tabitha sat on the bunk, trying to stuff everything back into the bag.
There were sheaves of yellowed printout and mislaid documentation; tubes of Shigenaga beer empty and full; an assortment of abused rayons and grey underwear; a grimy pair of zero-g's; a squashed box with two organic tampons in it; a circuit tester; an inertial screwdriver; a bag of ageing fruitdrops; and a broken-backed paperback book, its pages creased, its cover fused and inert.
‘Why do I carry all this junk everywhere?’
The Eladeldi had been so quick arriving she hadn't even seen what had happened to the Capellan float.
She thought about the one with the smashed head crumpling up.
She had a little laugh about that.
She wondered how the Perk was feeling.
It wasn't the end of the world.
How much might they fine her?
It wouldn't be that much.
Maybe she could trade some haulage klicks for the crystal and take along a couple of pods on the open market, legit, for the fine.
She was pissed off at missing Triste at the bar, but there would be other jobs.
There would have to be.
Tabitha was soon bored.
There was nothing to do.
She thought about playing her harmonica, but that seemed to  be the one thing that wasn't in her bag.
She remembered detention on Integrity 2.
At least the cells there had muzak.
Though they also put stuff in the air that made you passive.
In-cell slot video, that would be a good idea, she didn't know why someone hadn't come up with it already.
The captive audience.
Tabitha yawned.
She curled up facing the wall and shut her eyes.
Time passed.
She was dead tired, but she couldn't fall asleep.
Once in a while she heard footsteps and obscured voices, the hum of drones.
Once there was a yell, and a violent clattering of metal.
Another noise, a continuous whistle, very faint and high, she couldn't decide was in the walls or in her ears.
She found herself tracing with her finger a pale, silvery track where graffiti had been erased from the wall.
She didn't know how long she'd been lying there.
Time stopped here, as it did in space.
The concrete walls shut it out like walls of stars.
Suddenly the door opened.
She leaned up on her elbow.
It was a cop.
She couldn't tell whether it was the first cop or a different one.
‘Jute, Tabitha, Captain,’ he said.
Data scrolled across his faceplate, reconfigured, froze.
‘Get up,’ he said.
Not in any great hurry to accompany the cop, she did.
The desk sergeant was listening to her headset.
She'd become very formal all of a sudden.
Obviously someone was now listening to her.
‘Jute, Tabitha, Captain.
Current address a ship docked at Schiaparelli Port, Bergen Kobold registration BGK009059.’
‘Yes,’ Tabitha said, although it wasn't a question.
‘Aggravated assault, breach of the peace, causing a public nuisance, degrading interspecies harmony, ditto civic ditto, grievous damage, treasonous damage, reckless  behaviour.
Two hundred and fifty scutari,’ said the desk sergeant, with a broad smile.
‘How much?’
It was three times what she'd been expecting.
‘You have twenty-four hours to return here with the money or phone it in.’
‘Yeah, yeah.’
‘Or forfeit your ship.’
The Moebius Strip stands on the southern bank of the Grand Canal about a kilometre along from the Baratha Arcade, between the Church of the Directed Panspermia and a crustacean restaurant.
Now past its notorious heyday, it has become a favourite attraction for Schiaparelli's less sophisticated visitors, who fondly imagine they have located a corner of the city that retains the historic charm of frontier days.
In fact, the fibreglass decor was artificially aged by being exposed in the desert for a week before fitting, by the first owners, emigrants from Europe who had reason to foresee the nostalgia boom.
That evening, when Tabitha Jute finally set her hand on the battered aluminium doorknob, it was still a cheerfully disreputable establishment, catering to the social needs of those who felt more comfortable doing business in an environment with a degree of sleaze to it.
Whores of all sexes, augmented and non-, came here at the start and end of their shift to meet pimps, pushers, and ‘privileged’ clients.
Superannuated net scribes maintained a bleary outpost at one end of the bar, from which to garner the  increasingly hermetic gossip which was all they had left to peddle.
At the other end was a low stage, where failing acts established the poise with which they were about to endure their professional decline.
When you fell off the bottom of the bill at the Nash Pavilion, you came straight to the stage of the Moebius Strip.
There was a man there now, a short tubby man, quite good-looking, Tabitha thought, checking him automatically as she entered.
He had a parrot on his shoulder.
It looked like a real one.
He was playing music of some kind, it was hard to hear for the din.
She went up to the bar.
Heidi was on.
‘I'm looking for a man called Triste,’ Tabitha said.
‘He left,’ said Heidi.
Tabitha grunted.
She had expected no less.
‘Where can I get hold of him, Heidi, do you know?’
‘Callisto,’ said Heidi, wiping the bar.
‘Shit,’ said Tabitha, with a degree of warmth.
‘He had a job ad on the net, do you know anything about that?’
Heidi shook her head.
Her eyes flickered to the cabaret.
The man had his arms stretched out to either side.
The parrot was scuttling along from arm to arm across his shoulders.
‘Not bad, is he?’ said Heidi.
‘I can't hear,’ Tabitha said.
‘I wasn't talking about the music,’ Heidi said.
Tabitha gave her a wintry smile.
But she checked him out anyway.
He was playing a glove, she could see that now, through the smoke and hi-tech gloom.
He was singing, or somebody was.
She couldn't see him moving his lips.
They were nice lips, beautifully curved, and his eyes were brown and very round.
All the while she eyed him, somewhere in the back of her mind Tabitha was thinking, Twenty-four hours.
Bastards.
She said, ‘Know anyone else who needs a barge?’
They'd never done that to her before, never threatened to take her ship away.
She didn't like to think of the Alice falling into cop hands.
‘Anyone that's not a Perk,’ she added.
Taking her eyes from the man onstage, she gave the punters a swift once-over.
In the front window, some sort of complicated tile game was going on, thick wads of soft old cash changing hands at a brisk clip.
A poison courier was sharing a jar with a waterman.
Two coltish three-year-old Thrants in cream leather were posing by the antiquated music generator, wearing sunglasses and toying with liquorice liqueurs.
‘Nobody's working now,’ Heidi said.
‘It's carnival.
Can I get you a drink?’
Tabitha sighed.
‘Beer,’ she said.
Heidi listed seven varieties in one breath.
‘Whatever's nearest,’ said Tabitha.
Carlos would know someone.
She went to the phone, which was on the basement stairs, below the stage.
As she passed by, she realized it was the bird that was singing.
It looked like a parrot, but it didn't sound like one.
It could sing.
It sang in a sweet trembling voice about a yellow bird up high in a banana tree.
Carlos was out.
She left a message, said she'd call him later, but she thought she probably wouldn't.
She might as well cut her losses and take off for Phobos or Longevity, see if there was anything there, see if there was anyone that hadn't flown down for carnival.
She drank up, watching the gloveman.
She could quite fancy him.
He was tanned and sleek, with glossy black hair.
He was wearing a natty scarlet and white pinstripe blouse, pseude trousers and espadrilles.
He seemed to have talent too, though the neural induction gauntlet was a bit old-fashioned now, even in Schiaparelli where things hang  on for ever.
The sound was deep, electronically slick and fluid, but feathered with a tremolo so fine you could only just distinguish the individual notes.
The melody swooped and split into two, harmonizing with itself.
People clapped.
The man smiled.
The bird perched on his shoulder, nestling against his cheek with his eyes closed, and sang along now in an eerie, wordless croon.
Heidi wiped the bar by Tabitha's elbow.
‘Another drink?’ she said.
‘Okay,’ said Tabitha, draining her glass.
One more drink, try Carlos again, and then take off.
‘I'll be back, Heidi,’ she said, and went back to the phone.
Carlos was still out.
His smiling photo asked her to leave her name and number.
She hit the wall.
‘You're at a party somewhere, aren't you, Carlos?
I hope you're having fun, 'cause I'm certainly not.’
‘Wrong number?’ asked a voice above her.
She looked up.
It was the gloveman and his bird, descending the stairs.
They'd finished their show and were coming back down to the damp and squalid cellar the management refused to redecorate because of its ‘classic atmosphere’.
‘Right number, wrong planet,’ she said.
He came down to the half-landing and stood behind her, peering over her shoulder at Carlos's face on the little phone.
She could smell his bird.
It smelled like a parrot too.
‘This guy stand you up?’ asked the musician.
‘He didn't take you to the party?
That's what you just said, wasn't it?
I mean, pardon me, it's not my habit, you understand, to pick up on other people's phone conversations, I was just coming down the stairs here, I couldn't —‘
The bird stretched its neck and made a sudden loud trilling noise like a fire alarm.
Tabitha winced.
She pulled her plug from the phone.
‘Shut up Tal!
Tal, shut up!
Will you shut up?
Hey, Tal?’ the musician shouted, swatting at the bird with his glove.
It fell silent as suddenly as it had begun.
‘This is Tal,’ said the gloveman.
‘I have to apologize.
Artistic temperament.
Very very sensitive.
How do you do, I'm Marco, Marco Metz.
What?’ he said, though she hadn't spoken, ‘What?
You've heard of me?’
‘No,’ said Tabitha.
Close up his eyes were even more luscious than they'd looked on stage.
‘You're pretty good,’ she said.
‘I am,’ he said.
‘I'm really very good.
I mean, as it happens.
Yes, I am, very good.
In fact.
But why should you know that?
You're a busy woman, I'm a busy man, it's a big system…’
All the while he was burbling inanities, his eyes were roving up and down her body.
She hadn't got time for this.
But still.
‘Tal?’ she said, gesturing to the parrot.
‘That's right, yes.’
‘Can I stroke him?’ she suggested.
He shrugged lightly.
‘They're your fingers,’ he said.
‘No, no, I'm only kidding.
Sure.
Like this.
See?’
He took her hand lightly in his own.
His touch was warm and dry.
He lifted her fingers to the head of his parrot and stroked them down along its back.
Tal wriggled.
‘Where's it from?’ she asked.
‘This?
A long way away.
You couldn't even pronounce it.
Look at him, he can't even pronounce it.
Hey,’ he said, bringing his face close to the bird's, ‘she wants to know where you're from, see, even he can't pronounce it.’
‘Shoe polish!’ fluted the bird suddenly.
‘Intrigue in the corps de ballet!
Intrigue in shoes!’
Surprised, they both laughed.
‘He's a little excited,’ said Marco.
Tabitha stroked the bird's head again.
‘Does he drink?’
‘Tal?
No.’
‘Do you?’
‘Sure.’
‘I'll be at the bar,’ she said.
‘So,’ he said, when he joined her three minutes later without the bird, ‘you in town for carnival?’
‘No, I'm looking for work.
I just got in from Chateaubriand.’
‘In the Belt?’
He looked at her with new respect, the way they always did when she said something like that.
‘What sort of work was that?’ he wanted to know.
‘Just a delivery run for a drug house.
Carboys of vacuum barnacle serum, mostly.
Nothing interesting.’
‘You're a driver, then?’
‘I'm a driver.’
‘You always work for this drug house?’
‘I'll work for anyone,’ she said, ‘if the money's right.’
‘What, you have your own ship?’
‘I have my own ship,’ said Tabitha.
He was impressed, you could see.
After all these years she still couldn't resist a feeling of pride when she said that to a total stranger.
She knew she would feel a good deal less proud when she told Alice about the penalty clause.
She hoped she wouldn't have to.
She looked at Marco.
She wished she could take him back with her.
She wanted to take him to her cabin and tear all his smart clothes off.
‘I'd ask you aboard,’ she said, ‘but I'm not staying around.’
‘That's too bad,’ he said.
‘That would be fascinating.
What have you got?’
Tabitha stared at him.
She suddenly realized he really was interested in the ship.
She felt vaguely insulted.
‘Just an old crate,’ she said.
‘Scouter?’
‘No, a barge.’
He looked thoroughly animated, as if he was bursting with a gleeful secret.
‘And it's yours?
There's nobody else?’
‘No,’ she said, nettled.
‘You want to take me to Plenty?’
‘You're going to Plenty?’
‘Yes.’
‘Tonight?’
‘No, no.
First thing tomorrow.’
Tabitha gaped at him.
‘Well, yes!’ she said.
Then she remembered the axis lock crystal.
‘Well, no,’ she said, ‘I mean, I'd love to, but I need more than that.’
He chuckled.
‘Oh, there's more,’ he said.
‘Plenty more!
What do you need?’
She sucked her teeth.
‘Two hundred and fifty,’ she said.
‘Up front.
And then, hell, I don't know, I have to get a repair.’
‘No problem,’ he said.
‘I don't believe this,’ said Tabitha.
‘You're serious.’
‘Sometimes I am.’
He ran his hand lightly down her arm.
He had a gentle touch, a musician's touch.
He said, ‘Do you want to go to a party?’
They went out together into the cold and dusty night.
Though the parade had long gone by, the water was still crowded.
There were kids tussling on rafts of planks and plastic drums; couples in rowing boats; powerboats  limping, out of charge.
On the landing-stage below the Moebius Strip a dozen people were standing, sitting, lounging, arguing, drinking.
There was a small speedboat moored to a red and white pole.
The green bird flew straight down to it, its shadow confused and doubled by the moons.
The moons shone down, on desert and steppe; on the polar settlements and the canyonlands where the somnolent canals flow deep and wide.
They painted the deserts, swept the pampas, glinted on the glass farms, glistened on the algae lakes of the intertwining towns.
They floodlit the arena at Barsoom and silvered the lawns of suburban Bradbury.
Without discrimination they illuminated the sombre, monolithic blocks of the old city and the arrogant, hectic jumble of the new, observing without comment how it sprawled and spilled beyond the circumference of the dismantled dome.
Tabitha sat back in the boat, amazed and astonished by her own luck, as they nosed out across the filthy water, under the acid glare of a video wall.
Mars, she herself would later remark, had all been parcelled up; the smart money had moved on.
It was only a few years since Schiaparelli had been a living pan-cultural matrix, a cosmopolitan crossroads of the solar system, where all the client races of Capella could co-exist in noisy harmony, or pass through, haggling, to the caravanserais of the south.
These days, the tourist buses were shouldering the caiques and drays off the al-Kazara; imported souvenirs filling the shelves of the pawnshops where hungover spacers had once come shuffling in clutching their tapers and accordions.
Tabitha liked it well enough as it was, though she remembered better days, not so many years ago, when the jazz bands in the bodegas had been almost loud enough to drown the furious rattle of the old spice prospectors playing mah-jongg.
You could sleep anywhere that was  warm enough and even the cops wouldn't move you on.
When you woke, at first light, you'd find an untended llama nosing in your pocket and a party of Thrant flake traders setting up their market all around your bed.
Pulling on your boots, you blinked and stumbled across the souk, stealing a chapati from the old women, and wove your way along the arcade, following the smell of roasting coffee.
People leaned from upstairs windows to chat with their neighbours passing on the canal.
Across the hundred and ninety-nine little backwaters, their colourful washing hung rigid in the bitter morning air.
As you crossed the Copper Bridge, the sun brimmed over the rooftops, bright as butter in a cinnamon sky.
Robot tenders puttered briskly through the water, humming to themselves.
Beyond, in the Hamishawari Gardens, the fountains came on.
To those humans who, given mastery of space, preferred to vault across it than to linger in orbit and build there, Mars and its hurtling moons had been the first great benefit of the gift.
Capellan hands directed the operations, Capellan machinery accomplished the construction, but it was by and for the humans of Earth, her nearest neighbour, that the great work of habilitating Mars was undertaken.
One can understand their zeal.
Suddenly, a whole new planet was accessible; and not only accessible but available, unoccupied, deserted.
Abandoned.
It is difficult to imagine, now that the Red Planet is knee-deep in silicite replicas and sentimental re-creations of the ‘Ancients’ owing more to fancy than to archaeology, but at the time of the Big Step the only vestiges of that once proud race of architects and engineers were the great canals.
For all their impressive size, they were in a sorry state: their courses choked with silt, their beds cracked and their banks decayed by centuries of long, hard Martian winters.
Where they disappeared amid the crazed valleys and  jumbled boulders of the dusty scablands, the first explorers drew back in defeat, unable to decipher the wild terrain.
Only the expert eye of their Capellan adviser could tell where, in all that wilderness of basalt and shale, might lie hidden a clue to the world that had been lost.
Following her pointing finger, they went out into the raw desert, and dug in the sand.
Then and only then it was that the vast seamless blocks and slabs of the buried city came back to light.
They built a dome over it to keep the duststorms out and the new air in.
They called it Schiaparelli, in honour of a hero of the art of astronomy.
Elsewhere, they were scaling the volcanoes of Tharsis, draining the Argyre Basin, and hacking down whole forests of the Red Weed.
Here was a gravity you could argue with; here was a horizon close enough to reach out and grasp hold of.
With the primitive microclimate generators just beginning to emerge from the orbital factories of Domino Valparaiso, they woke the slumbering ecology and shook it rudely.
Stunted saguaro sprouted from the rusty dunes.
Prospectors trailed back into town babbling of grassy oases, trailed out again into the desert, discovered Martian frostbite.
The years were long, the company was colourful, and if the air was raw, well, didn't that lend a zest of danger to the enterprise?
The presence of Capellan directors and Eladeldi police did not seem so oppressively dispiriting when you stood a good chance of killing yourself, if you pushed it.
That so much of the Rio Maas was opened out by sandschooner instead of by plane and caterpillar truck was probably exactly for that reason: because it was a distinctly more perilous way of going about it.
Sailors who chanced on a sudden sand blizzard or capsized in the Neck of Mithridates were rarely rescued.
The directors advised against it.
‘They knew the risks,’ they said, sorrowfully shaking their huge heads.
A popular contemporary poster  for recruiting emigrants shows a grinning human infant wearing an enormous pair of grown-up boots caked with red sand.
Sentimental it may be, but the image clearly captured that exhilarating feeling humanity had of striding into something too big to manage — yet.
But the Martians, that vanished race of titans, what can we say of them?
Little more, even today, than the architecture of old Schiaparelli so eloquently declares.
Titans they were, to judge by their buildings, which take full advantage of the undemanding gravity.
They were large, and strong, and had grand and far-reaching plans.
They worked in stone and iron and brick.
Though natural light was obviously not an amenity they thought much of, there are traces of glazing in a few of those infrequent and shapeless holes that howl in the wind; elsewhere, of a primitive and not altogether unsuccessful stab at ferrocrete.
What those buildings actually were is still doubtful.
Certainly they are not very domestic.
Scoured as they have been by the turbulent and freezing sands that eroded every trace of fittings and furnishings whatsoever, their walls and ceilings do bear signs: remnants of incised and sometimes inlaid strings of rectangular shapes that numerous experts have confidently identified as writing, though no truly plausible translation has ever been constructed.
The Martians were, if we may venture a fanciful interpretation of their character from the gantries, the dry vats, oubliettes and occluded vaults, the forthright aspect of their stairways, gutters and conduits, as of the famous canals themselves, a serious and resolute people, thorough in their undertakings, not given to digression or frivolity.
Further than this it would be frivolous of us to speculate.
The sixty-seven ruins on the Plain of Barsoom commonly called ‘temples’ may have been just that; or equally well may have been army barracks, isolated quarters for the  mentally disturbed or victims of plague, or holiday camps for Martian urbanites.
There is not a shred of evidence that fearsome beasts were ritually slaughtered in the arena or lissome slave-girls routinely sacrificed on the altars of scowling deities.
What happened to the Martians?
Where did they go?
If the Capellan directors had any idea, they never said.
Resentful souls on Earth, tethered there by obligation or obstinacy, muttered that Capella knew from the first what would be found on Mars and why.
Some, perhaps not without malice, averred that Capella was what did for Mars in the first place, god knows how many aeons ago.
Still as a great dumb necropolis at the heart of the teeming city, the ancient empty bunkers and barren silos shuffle their enormous overlapping shadows across the stone streets and the slick canals.
Tenebrous, sepulchral, their interiors speak mutely of their absent architects.
The archaeologists camped uncomfortably inside them for a while, then moved out into the townships that had mushroomed around the site.
The old city was abandoned a second time, given over to romantics, theorists, transients and dogs.
Teenagers began to go there and drive their buggies round the docklands, round and round and round.
When they grew up, it became fashionable to return to the warehouses and hold huge parties there.
Tabitha looked up at the colossal walls of seamless pink stone rising hundreds of metres overhead, disappearing up into the dark.
Between them girders and gantries of black iron ran like gigantic roadways spanning gulfs of empty air.
She could have set the Alice Liddell down comfortably on any of them, with room to spare.
The speedboat moved steadily past the empty wharves of the giant, gaunt buildings.
Lights shone out here and there.
Music and voices came gusting from moored pleasure  boats across the plum-red water.
The coarse whine of the engine took on a dead, flat echo.
They tied up in a backwater under a sky black as old blood, and walked along a pontoon to the apron of an enormous dock.
In the gloom, the basin looked like a dim pool of deep red wine with Deimos like a giant pearl sunk in it.
People were gathered on the dock, spilling from a warehouse full of food and drink and fresh air, and thunderous with moth raga.
READY
Hello, Alice.
HELLO, CAPTAIN.
HAVE YOU COME TO TALK TO ME AGAIN?
It's like a madhouse in there.
SO I SEE.
I HOPE THEY WON'T DAMAGE ANYTHING.
They're damaging me.
SURELY NOT, CAPTAIN.
It's like having a permanent party in your own home.
YOU LIKE PARTIES.
I like going to parties.
Other people's parties.
I don't like throwing them.
And I definitely don't like having them thrown at me.
Actually I did have a good party once.
On Ucopia Plat.
When I got you.
I had a big party to celebrate.
It was a real success, that party.
Everybody came: Sam, May Lee, Muni Vega.
Fritz Juventi from the Valenzuela Perseverance , looking not a day older in his tricorn and spats.
Some of the girls from HiBrazil were teasing him, but Fritz always pretends to be charmed.
Butter wouldn't melt in his mouth.
Some of them had come quite a way, from Phobos, even, people I knew when I was still hustling for my white card.
I saw Dodger Gillespie, flashing her sockets and cadging a smoke off an awestruck spaceline stewardess.
‘Dodger!’
I said, hugging her.
‘I thought you were in the Belt.’
‘I was,’ she growled.
‘Passed up a couple of total certs to come to your bloody bun-fight,’ she complained, though she was looking at the poor child all the time, with her eyes half-closed and tossing her head so the sockets would catch the light.
The stewardess was dutifully holding out a packet of cigarettes.
Dodger deigned to take one off her.
‘Thank you, darling,’ she said and punched me vigorously on the arm to tell me to get lost, though it was half a joke, it's always half a joke with Dodger.
So I decided to stay there, just to get up her nose
I asked her victim, ‘Are you having a good time?‘
‘Oh yes.’
she said.
She looked at Dodger inquiringly and back at me, but Dodger was just staring at me with her head on one side and drop dead in her eyes She wasn't doing introductions.
‘I'm Tabitha,’ I said.
smiling ingratiatingly.
‘Tabitha Jute.’
‘Oh, then this is your party!’ squeaked Dodger's stewardess
‘That's right,’ I said.
Dodger sighed and blew smoke all over us
‘So you're going solo now,’ said the victim, fumbling for her smokes again.
I let her get them out and offer me one before I shook my head.
It's being around Dodger She has a bad effect on me.
‘Sorry,’ the stewardess gulped.
‘I'm Moira.
How do you do.’
‘Delighted,’ rumbled Dodger.
Moira looked at her, confused.
But it was me she wanted to talk to now.
‘I wish I had a boat,’ she sighed ‘I'd love to fly.’
‘Well, you fly,’ I pointed out.
She flashed me a glance that made it clear there was some backbone in there, it was just the training that made her act like a dipstick.
'I help old ladies in and out of webs, you mean,’ she said, caustically.
‘I serve cocktails and smile.’
‘Well, I used to do that,’ I admitted.
After that, there was no stopping her.
To think you could go from herding tourists to owning your own boat!
I couldn't tell her mine wasn't a route she'd stand much chance of following.
She'd have thought I was just being snotty.
I ended up leaving her looking disappointed and Dodger sardonically grateful.
‘Enjoy yourselves,’ I told them.
I went off to circulate.
I had no idea I'd invited so many people.
There was even a freedrone or two, I don't know how they got in, and everyone from the hiring hall, it looked like.
I was showing off because I didn't have to go there any more.
No more contract flying, being treated like dirt by all the owner-drivers.
No more wanted boards, no more hiring hall!
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN, CAPTAIN?
Well, when you first come to a station you don't know anybody, so you're stuck with the official net, the boards for incoming business, the hall for the locals.
You don't do that long before you realize it's a waste of time.
The Eladeldi supervise everything, and anyway the jobs worth having all go on word of mouth.
But by the time you've found that out, you've met a few people, and you don't need to hang around the hall any more.
What you do is stake out a corner of one of the canteens, the zero-gyms.
Somewhere news flows through.
Some of the old hands have got themselves in at the cop stations and traffic control rooms.
But if you've got your own boat and you're not allergic to work, you can pick and choose.
WE DON'T ALWAYS FIND IT THAT EASY, THOUGH, DO WE?
No.
We don't.
We make stupid mistakes and end up with rotten little capers like this one.
I'M SORRY, CAPTAIN, I DIDN'T MEAN TO FIND FAULT.
GO ON ABOUT YOUR PARTY.
YOUR REAL SUCCESS.
It was a success too There wasn't a dull bit or a wrong note in the whole evening.
The only time things went a bit quiet was when a couple of Eladeldi came in and sniffed around, on patrol, because all gatherings on the plat are at their sufferance, public or private.
I offered them drinks and they just bared their teeth, being civil.
I spotted an Altecean burrowing under the tablecloth.
I wondered if he was trying to hide from the Eladeldi, but he was just nosing for something somebody else had dropped.
I was thinking of Captain Frank, you see.
I wish I hadn't lost touch with him.
I lose touch with so many people, Alice.
PEOPLE COME AND GO.
I'll tell you who I did see that night I wished I hadn't.
One of the HiBrazil lot, Vera Shawe, with her head shaved, toga, sandals, the lot.
‘Hello, Tabitha,’ she said.
‘I hear congratulations are in order.‘
She made it sound as if I was having a baby.
‘I should get her registered as soon as possible if I were you.’
she said.
‘Make sure the log's all in order.’
‘She hasn't worked for seven years,’ I said
‘She was with Sanczau.
She's clean.’
Vera put her hand on my arm' Even so, Tabitha,’ she said.
‘You'll want to let the Eladeldi give her the once over ‘
‘No,’ I said What a wanker.
honestly.
‘They'd shed all over the plumbing,’ I said.
She gave me a prissy look.
‘You are naughty, Tabitha,’ she said.
‘You know you're supposed to let them check her.’
I stared at her.
‘I forgot,’ I said blankly.
She would have been rude back, but she was drinking my booze.
I patted her silken-shoulder.
‘Have a good time, Vera,’ I said.
I was trying to get away, but she started telling me everything she knew about Kobolds, everything that had happened when she'd flown one, everything  that had happened when somebody she knew had flown one, everything that had happened whenever anyone had flown one.
whether she knew them or not.
I WISH I COULD HAVE HEARD THAT.
I'D LIKE TO MEET VERA SHAWE, SHE SOUNDS FASCINATING.
She isn't She's a nerd.
I hate people like Vera.
All right, so we owe everything to Capella.
That doesn't mean we have to go around in a great lather of gratitude all the time.
I wouldn't even want that, if I were a Capellan.
WHAT DO YOU SUPPOSE YOU WOULD WANT, IF YOU WERE?
If I were a Capellan, I'd have everything I want, wouldn't I ?
SURELY THEY EXPECT SOMETHING.
Maybe not.
Maybe it was a mistake.
CAPELLANS DON'T MAKE MISTAKES.
You said that before.
It was a mistake them giving the drive to the Frasque, wasn't it?
THE FRASQUE HAD THEIR OWN DRIVE, CAPTAIN.
Did they?
How do you know that?
I SUPPOSE I PICKED IT UP SOMEWHERE
Well, it didn't do them much good May Lee came and rescued me In fact she seized me by the arm ‘Well?’ she said
‘Well what?’
I said 
‘Hello, Vera,’ she said, flashing a steely smile over my shoulder.
and then, before Vera could reply, she went on: ‘When are you going to take us to see the ship ?
Everybody's just dying to see her’
‘Is it true she's a Sanczau Kobold?’
Molly asked ‘One of the Sanczau Kobolds?’
I was going to ask her what she meant, but May interrupted.
She was rounding up a party to come and inspect the property.
and everybody wanted my attention.
May Lee and Molly Jane.
I wonder what happened to those two.
May Lee is probably still there.
Probably running a repair shop by now Or somebody's fleet.
Do you remember May Lee, Alice?
She insisted on checking you over there and then
I REMEMBER MAY LEE.
SHE HAD WONDERFUL HANDS.
You're not going to tell me you could feel her hands.
OF COURSE NOT.
BUT I DID NOTICE THEM SHE WAS VERY DEFT.
SHE MADE ME FEEL LIKE A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT.
All right.
PERFECTLY TUNED.
All right!
SORRY, CAPTAIN, I WAS REMINISCING.
YOU KNOW I WOULDN'T DREAM OF COMPLAINING ABOUT YOUR OWN STYLE OF MAINTENANCE.
I'M QUITE USED TO IT BY NOW.
Will you shut up?
SORRY.
Alice.
I promise you, the minute we're out of this, whatever it is — the minute I get paid, I promise  you a proper overhaul, rebore, decontam, the works.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS THE AXIS LOCK.
Everything!
You can have everything As soon as I get paid
I HOPE IT'S QUITE SOON, CAPTAIN.
I'D HATE TO LET YOU DOWN.
White fire blossomed suddenly in the sky, chrysanthemums on velvet, turning the crimson black.
Blue magnesium flares went spiralling up into the chilly night.
Staccato tracers splashed scarlet light across a scene of jollity and confusion.
Tiny figures with wands of fire were milling about the canalside, hopping from boat to boat, their shadows leaping up the faces of the buildings on the other bank as the fleeting light caught them and threw them about.
Through the glass the sound of horns and drunken cheering came faintly up from below.
Tabitha Jute stood, swaying slightly, at the window of Marco Metz's penthouse flat, looking down at the determined remnants of the Schiaparelli carnival.
Would they never go home to bed?
She prodded the force field that kept the cold out.
It bit her finger with dull teeth.
The window was floor-to-ceiling, the field generators invisible and silent.
There was music playing.
She tried to lean on the field.
‘Don't do that,’ said Marco.
‘You only just got here.’
He came up behind her, put one hand over her shoulder and one around her waist.
He nuzzled her neck.
Tabitha turned, into his arms.
She kissed his muscular lips, pressed herself against his compact little body.
He kissed her cheek, murmured in her ear.
‘Maybe you should take your coat off.’
‘Maybe,’ she said.
She was perfectly smashed.
Everything seemed to be moving in fast forward, yet she was darting lightly between the moments like a Rigelian sylph.
Everything was glossy, filmed with silver.
She scattered stardust from her feet.
She reached for her gorgeous man, but he was being practical, taking her bag, her bag!
‘I'll just put it here,’ he said, taking it to a table which was just a long low slab of something transparent.
‘What have you got in here anyway, you lift weights?’
‘I pick things up,’ she said.
‘On my travels.
I pick up some strange things,’ she said, looking at him.
He was very close up, hard to focus on.
She started to undo the buttons of his blouse.
He had a thermal undershirt on, she got impatient, rucked it up with her hands, bent her head to kiss his broad brown chest.
‘I don't believe you,’ she said.
She felt him tense.
‘What's that?’ he said.
‘What do you mean?’
‘I drive a barge,’ said Tabitha.
‘I meet a lot of men.
I meet a lot of women.
But you, you, you're an interplanetary artiste —’ She said this very carefully, it was getting hard to speak properly, her tongue kept getting in the way.
‘You,’ she said, running her fingers through the rug of hair on his chest, ‘you, this place — and you're going to hire me!’
He relaxed.
‘You,’ he said, kissing her lightly, ‘are very smashed.’
‘Perfectly smashed,’ she said.
‘It's perfect.
Did you get any of that?’
‘Any of what?’
‘Whatever it was,’ she said.
‘At the party.’
He chuckled.
‘Whatever it was,’ he repeated.
‘Whatever it was, I think I got some of it.’
‘It was crystal,’ she said.
‘Good stuff.’
She blinked at him.
‘Really.’
Perhaps he didn't believe her.
She reached for him.
Her arm went through the mercury suspension like the Alice going into warp, sleek and cool and shimmering all along its length.
He had his undershirt off now.
She took hold of his belt.
The buckle was modern and complicated, but it melted in her hands.
Beyond him, she caught sight of something standing in the corner.
It was tall and slender and silvery.
Tabitha thought it was some kind of antenna; then she realized it was an empty perch.
‘Where's your little friend?’ she said.
‘Tal?
He's around.
I think he thought we should be alone together.’
For some reason this struck her as extraordinarily funny.
A tactful parrot!
She laughed and laughed.
When she laughed, the laugh came out of her mouth like mirror bubbles of liquid oxygen and spattered the iridescent walls, the scintillating ceiling, the miraculous man, his wonderful glossy chestnut eyes.
She was showering him in pleasure, did he understand?
She thought it was important to tell him.
‘When I saw you,’ she said, ‘I was so pissed off Do you know what they said?’
‘What did they say?’
‘They called it degrading interspish —’ Her tongue was in the way again.
'— interspecies harmony,’ she said.
Talking was not as easy as laughing.
It seemed important to tell him this too.
‘Talking,’ she said, squatting gracefully as she slipped down his trousers, real pseude trousers, ‘is not as easy  as laughing.’
She thought about it as she said it.
‘Only sometimes,’ she added, ‘it's easier.’
She started puzzling over his shoes.
He came down to join her on the floor.
She smiled.
She was blissful.
She caressed his luminous face.
‘But now everything's all right,’ she said.
The music soared and swayed.
‘Everything's fucking wonderful,’ he said.
He growled it like a bear, and grinned like a shark.
He was a miracle, truly, truly a miracle!
He took off her jacket, her grimy shirt.
He kissed her nipples through the fabric of her T-shirt, opened her shoes, took them off.
She sat on the floor and watched him take away her shoes and his shoes.
He scuttled across the rich thick carpet like a toddler, making her laugh.
He was naked.
He was going to give her a job.
Her jaw hurt with smiling.
He came back and hugged her for a while.
He was warm and supple, flesh like golden leather amidst the rippling silver air.
They coped with her jeans.
There was a jump.
She was standing up in just her T-shirt, pants and socks.
He was sitting cross-legged at her feet.
She felt distressed, she didn't know why.
Tabitha, Tabitha, she thought, sternly.
And she remembered.
‘I've got to get my device,’ she said.
He held out a hand, stroked her shin.
‘We can —‘
‘No,’ she said.
‘I must.
I must be sensible.
Sensible!’
She lurched lightly over to her bag, opened the zip, delved inside.
She pulled something out.
It was a matt black plastic box.
A cassette.
She didn't remember it.
All the rest of the stuff in there looked pretty much familiar, but not this.
‘What's this?’
‘Looks like a tape,’ he said, equably.
She looked at him, the tape in her hand.
‘I don't remember it.’
The man was grinning again.
‘You're not in much of a state to remember anything right now, are you, sweetie?’
‘But I don't remember it at all ,’ she said solemnly.
While she spoke he got to his feet, turned away from her, and strolled briskly across the room to straighten a shelf of magazines.
‘Probably it's one of the strange things you pick up,’ he said, quoting her.
‘Why don't you go and fit your scrambler before you forget what that is?’
He was right.
He was right.
He was miraculous.
She put the tape on the table.
‘Bathroom,’ she said.
‘Second on the left.’
Tabitha pranced slowly along the hallway.
The music followed her into the bathroom.
There were mirrors all over the place.
She sat and addressed her reflection silently and strictly.
You're breaking the rules, aren't you, Tabitha? she said.
Yes, she admitted.
She didn't really care, though.
He was so beautiful.
She had a beautiful place to sleep tonight, and a beautiful man to sleep with, and in the morning he was going to pay her fine.
And buy the Alice a new crystal.
These were the rules.
She never went off with anyone, especially a man, except on her own terms.
She never went to anyone else's place without checking it first.
And she never entrusted herself to anyone else,especially a man, when she was out of her head.
AU these rules she had already broken tonight.
But tonight was not a normal night.
Marco was not a normal man, not her usual standard.
For one thing, the men she went with didn't usually have bathrooms with bidets, or loo seats in real Earth wood.
How could he afford a place like this if he was playing dives like the Moebius Strip?
He must be on the way down.
As long as the money held out for her, that was enough.
She had lost him for a while, at the party, but she'd already been too drunk to worry.
She'd danced with a five of Palernians, all of them at once.
They gave her some astonishing Ophir crystal that made her feel three metres tall and very sharp.
That was when the world had turned to silver.
There was a generator blowing bubble holos all around the room, snatches of old movies, adverts, random faces, alien landscapes.
It was like rummaging through someone else's dreams.
She laughed and jumped about with the Palernians, trying to burst the bubbles.
Then Marco came back.
She kissed him.
There was no pushbutton by the loo.
Tabitha looked around in vain for a few minutes.
When she stepped back from it, it hummed and emptied itself.
She shrugged, went over to the bidet, washed herself and inserted her tiny scrambler.
She could hear a tiny voice somewhere, talking and pausing, as if somebody's radio was interfering with the music, but by the time she left the room it had stopped.
The light turned itself out.
‘Tabitha,’ called the voice of her beautiful man.
The walls of the hallway dipped and rippled.
She was starting to come down.
‘Where are you?’ she said.
‘In here.’
Disorientated, she tried to locate his voice.
The music wandered around her as she searched.
At last she found him.
He was standing in the dark, in front of a picture window, fireworks exploding silently behind him.
She went in and kissed him all over.
There was a bed.
It was a bedroom.
On a table by the bed was a flask of something, gin, tequila, wine, she hardly knew the difference any more.
They drank from the flask.
He drank from her mouth.
Then they took off her T-shirt.
It was a very involved and complicated process.
The light of the fireworks strobed around the room.
Metallic circles spread like ripples across the walls.
Tabitha said, ‘You are going to fix everything, in the morning?’
The lovely man was kissing her navel, running his lips along the top edge of her panties.
E–e started kissing her crotch, very gently, his lips barely touching the fabric.
E–e said, ‘Of course I'm going to fix everything.
How could I pass up a chance of hiring the most beautiful bargee in the solar system?’
He took off her panties with his teeth.
Apparently he was something of an acrobat as well.
She caressed his perineum with her tongue.
The fireworks seemed to pulse with the music, her skin seemed to melt and re-form from moment to moment.
She was no longer sure where he ended and she began.
When Tabitha Jute woke up, she immediately wished she hadn't.
She discovered she'd been sleeping on her back.
Her head felt as if it had been hit with a bag of cement, or replaced with one.
Her sinuses were all gummed together in a lump between her eyes.
‘Kgn,’ she said faintly.
She was in a strange bed, in a strange room.
It was something approaching day.
Limp orange light was leaking in around the edges of a grey blind.
In the corner by the window was a stringy plant straggling desperately out of a blurry brown pot, as if in search of water.
Tabitha knew how it felt.
She blinked and tried to focus.
On the wall behind the plant she could just make out irregular painted spirals of pale gold.
Next to it stood an empty tubular blue clothes rack, a tubular blue chair, a tubular blue AV rig.
She shut her eyes again.
The bed was warm, and extraordinarily comfortable.
Tabitha turned over on her side, and saw the man.
He was fast asleep with his back to her, snoring very quietly.
He was wrapped in so much of the duvet all she could see was the top of his head.
She remembered everything at once then, in one big bright colourful blurt of sound and light and music and immensely accelerated action.
‘Ngk,’ she said.
It was a sound of guilt and astonishment and relief, all at once.
She moved her mouth about a bit to see if she could find her tongue.
It seemed to have become stuck somewhere back there during the night.
She urgently needed a piss.
Tentatively, she sat up.
Marco didn't stir.
After a moment, when her head had settled, muddily, Tabitha slowly turned back the duvet.
She noticed she still had her socks on.
And she smelled just terrible.
Marco Metz snored on.
Tabitha swung her feet to the floor.
Her eyesight was vague and muzzy, her mouth felt like the bottom of a sandpit.
She wondered, not for the first time, how it was that her body could be desperate for liquid at one end while bursting to get rid of it at the other.
In the bathroom she confronted her reflection again.
Even with the blinds down, she could see the dark shadows under her eyes.
Slut, she told herself.
It was a word her father had used frequently.
Slut, she thought again, comfortably.
Tabitha took a pee and a shower, with real water.
Soaped and rinsed, the world looked rather better.
She went to the window and, carefully, raised the blind.
It was still very early.
The sun was a tangerine blob in a swirling blackcurrant sky.
Below, dim curds of refuse lay clotted about the glass pillars of the Maserati Mall.
Across the rooftops, a lone cop prowler was the only thing moving on the cold expanse of the Grand Canal.
Wrapped in a big green towel, Tabitha left the bathroom.
She looked in the bedroom.
The hump in the duvet had not moved.
She padded around until she located the kitchen.
It was large and very, very white.
Tabitha wondered if there was any fruit juice in the fridge.
Grapefruit, she thought.
She willed there to be grapefruit juice in the fridge.
But it was empty.
Or as good as.
There was a transparent sachet of something brown and thick, chocolate paste or miso; one dried-up anchovy in an open tin, its coat of salt dried to a hard crust; and a smear of something on a saucer that might once have been pesto sauce.
Or parrot vomit, she thought, grumpily.
Tal was in the living room, on his futuristic perch.
‘Good evening,’ he said.
‘Morning, Tal,’ murmured Tabitha.
‘Good evening,’ he said.
He sounded like a perky little old man.
There were clothes strewn around on the floor.
Some of them were hers.
She picked out the ones that were and put them on.
Solemnly, the parrot watched her dress.
‘Stop looking at me, Tal.’
But he didn't.
She found it slightly uncomfortable, being scrutinized by a bird.
Next she looked for her bag, and found it on a long low table.
She thought her toothbrush was in there somewhere, and rummaged for it.
She didn't find it, but buried right down at the bottom she did find a tape cassette in a box.
She pulled it out and looked at it.
She vaguely remembered taking it out of the bag last night.
She didn't remember putting it back in.
Whatever it was, she still had no recollection of it at all.
It was plain black: no label, not even a brand name.
She wondered where she'd picked it up, and who was missing it.
There was a reader in the dusty rig next to the tapeshelves.
Tabitha went over and turned it on.
‘Grievous tale in all forlorn!’ whooped Tal suddenly.
Tabitha nearly jumped out of her skin.
‘Christ, bird, don't do that,’ she muttered.
He was beginning to get on her nerves.
She slotted the anonymous tape.
But she was none the wiser for what came out of the speakers: a soft sea of hiss, a hint of ultrasonics, and a persistent, repetitive creaking noise.
It was so nearly nothing she wondered if she hadn't loaded it properly.
She crouched down to make sure it was turning, and check the settings on the amps.
Marco reached over her shoulder and pressed stop, twice.
The tape ejected.
He put his hands under her arms and raised her up, turning her about, away from the AV.
He was unshaven and wearing a shabby towelling bathrobe with threads hanging off it.
His big brown eyes were dull, unexpressive.
He smelled of warmth and sleep.
She stepped into his arms and kissed him.
‘There's nothing on it,’ she said.
Reaching past her again, he took the tape out of the reader and slipped it back into its case.
‘You want music, I'll find you some music,’ he said rapidly, looking away from her.
He plucked a tape from the shelf and put it on.
It started in the middle of something, something hollow and highly polished that fed into itself in ever-increasing rounds.
It was quiet and quite pleasant.
‘Is this you?’ asked Tabitha.
‘This?’ said Marco, glancing at the tape he'd just slotted.
‘Yeah,’ he said.
He threw the mystery tape on the table beside her bag.
‘Good morning, Tal,’ he said.
He went and fondled the bird, which chirped and squeaked and nibbled his finger.
‘I feel terrible,’ Tabitha said.
‘Don't you?’
‘Sure,’ he said, non-committally.
‘You want some coffee?
I'll get it.’
He did.
He also shaved and dressed, in a blockneck and yesterday's trousers.
‘I need to go to Plenty,’ he said, ‘pick up the rest of the band and all our gear.’
He was sitting on the couch facing her, his arm stretched out along the back.
‘We play there tonight.
Then you can take us on to our next engagement.’
‘Where's your next engagement?’ she asked.
‘Titan,’ he said.
He drank his coffee.
‘How many of you are there?’
‘Me.
Tal.
A couple of others.
Say five altogether.
Say four, maybe, Tal doesn't count.’
The parrot, hearing his name, gave a loud hoot.
‘It's funny,’ Tabitha said, ‘he looks just like a parrot.’
‘Well, he is a parrot, a kind of parrot.
He's from Altecea, a planet there somewhere.
I won him in a poker game, taught him to sing.
Do tricks.
He doesn't like space, do you, guy?’
‘Banana tree!’ chirped Tal.
‘Sriti naogar demestica!
In Mongu Town, where I was born, there lived a merry maid, up high in banana tree!’
‘Shut up, Tal!’
Marco shouted loudly.
The bird subsided, twittering.
‘He hates being on the road,’ said Marco.
‘He has a box he has to ride in.
It's around here somewhere.’
He looked around, negligently.
‘So,’ he said.
‘Are you up for all this?’
Tabitha nodded.
‘But we need a new axis lock crystal,’ she told him.
‘We?
Who's this we, I thought there was just you?’
‘I mean Alice does.’
‘Who's Alice?’
‘The ship.
She has to have a new crystal.’
‘We'll pick one up.
On Plenty.’
Tabitha considered it.
She didn't like the idea of it.
Plenty was bad news.
And Titan was way off her patch, there wasn't much chance of a return load.
But Titan was a long way off.
And Marco was here.
And he had the money.
She cleared her throat.
‘Well, we'll have to take our chance on Plenty.
But I need the two-fifty in advance.’
She looked at the clock.
‘To pay the fine.’
Marco became very still.
‘What fine?’ he said.
‘Didn't I tell you about that?’
She told him.
He laughed.
He laughed and laughed.
‘It's not that funny.’
‘Sure it is!
That little feller sailing through the air…‘
Tabitha drank some more coffee.
‘Expensive joke,’ she said.
‘Well, let's see.
Two-fifty.’
‘Three with the port tax and stuff.
Three-seventy-five with fuel.’
‘Hell, we can cover that.
We can do that for you.’
Tabitha was relieved.
She hated bargaining.
She never seemed to be in a very good position to bargain from, somehow.
‘So how much is this crystal?’
Tabitha told Marco what Carlos had told her.
He didn't even blink.
She wondered if she was wrong about what you got playing the Moebius Strip.
Marco said, ‘Let's say we pay the fine and the crystal and you take us to Titan.’
‘Have you got that much?’
‘Sure.
Sure we have.
Well, Hannah has.’
‘Who's Hannah?’
Tabitha asked, hearing an edge on her voice and not liking it.
‘Our manager,’ he said.
‘This is her apartment.’
‘Does she live here?’
She couldn't believe it.
For all the furniture and appliances, the tapes on the shelves, the place had a desolate air.
Everything seemed like stuff abandoned, or in transit.
There was no resident personality holding it together.
‘No.
No, I'll take you to meet her.
You'll like Hannah.’
‘Does she live on Titan?’
‘On Titan?
No.’
‘Oh, she lives on Plenty.’
‘She doesn't exactly live there, no,’ he said.
‘She kind of— operates from there.’
He could be bloody evasive sometimes.
She supposed it was the effect of being famous — or having been famous — being wary of your privacy.
Well, she wasn't famous at all, and she was wary of her privacy.
She didn't mind taking him to Plenty, that was no distance.
It could even be fun.
She wasn't at all sure she could cope with him and a band of strangers, all the way to Titan, through the depths of hyperspace where there's no escape from your companions.
She gave it up.
Maybe she could renegotiate when they got to Plenty and she had her crystal.
She got to her feet and went and picked up the phone.
‘Who are you calling?’ he asked.
‘The cops,’ she said.
‘So we can pay the two-fifty and get on the road.’
‘Oh,’ he said.
He sounded unenthusiastic.
Tabitha paused, the phone in her hand.
‘Is that okay?’
‘Sure,’ he said.
‘Sure.
Sure.’
READY
Have I ever told you about Rella, Alice?
NO, CAPTAIN.
NOT THAT I REMEMBER.
She was quite important, in her way.
She was in her fifties, I suppose.
She was about my height, but chunky.
Hefty.
She had awful teeth.
with black fillings, and long ratty hair that always seemed to be just coming out of a perm.
She had lots of rings, on both hands, and she always wore overalls.
She said they didn't notice you if you wore overalls.
Rella lived in a store room under Posidon transport station.
Sometimes, I mean.
That was her base.
That's where I see her when I think  of her, though she didn't take me there at first.
The first time I met her was up on the platform.
I was twelve or thirteen.
I was coming back from the labs at Menelaus, after some work detail or other.
Rella was going through the bins.
She stopped as soon as she saw me.
She said, ‘What are you staring at?’
She hated anyone to watch her when she was going through the bins.
It was something she'd never admit doing, though she was always doing it.
That's not fair.
Rella could hold down jobs, when she wanted to.
She was a cleaner, more than once, and she worked in the hydroponics, and in kitchens.
But she could never keep her mind on the job.
Sooner or later she'd end up drifting innocently around the bins.
‘What are you staring at?’ she said She had a pathetic, ruined, smoky kind of voice that used to go right through me.
I don't know why she spoke to me, what was special about me, why she didn't ignore me the way she ignored everyone else.
There was a whole transport of people in the station coming home from early shift.
I suppose I was the only one dawdling to look at her instead of going by as if she didn't exist.
I went on by, that first time.
I was embarrassed.
She called after me, ‘Cat got your tongue?’
I hadn't the first idea what she meant.
THERE WEREN'T CATS ON THE MOON, SURELY, ANY MORE THAN THERE WERE DOGS?
I never saw one.
But after that I was always seeing her, all over the place.
She kept moving around; she kept them guessing.
They all had to.
If they'd caught her, they'd have stuck her in Imbrium or somewhere, some institution She'd been in places like that before That was like  death to her There must have been a lot of them caught like that, at the end,
Whenever I saw her, she always smiled at me, It was as if she'd got me confused with someone else, someone important Once I had half an hour to wait for a transport.
She came waddling up to me.
She was drunk.
‘I've got papers,’ she assured me.
‘I'll show you.‘
I really didn't want to know.
‘I don't carry them around,’ she said.
‘You never know who's looking.
Bastards.’
The thing was, she really did have papers, a resident's card, a work category check, that sort of thing.
Half of them didn't, they were up illegally in the first place, working the under-side of the system, the jobs nobody wants.
But Rella was a Lunar citizen.
She did show me her papers, later on.
She had them hidden in a box, in the store room.
She made me promise to destroy them, ‘if anything ever happens to me’, she said.
Other times she made me promise to keep them for ever, to remember her by, and say a prayer She was a bit vague who it was I was to pray to.
She had a lot of time for religion, prophecy, looking for her star.
She took everything to heart.
I don't know if she understood any of it.
‘I'm misplaced,’ was a thing she'd often say.
She didn't just mean like a misplaced person, floating loose in society.
LIKE DATA MISPLACED IN A FILE.
She was certainly that, But she meant on a larger scale, A cosmic scale, We were all lost; but one day we'd be saved.
One day we'd all rise up together into the sun.
‘Everyone will be there,’ she told me.
‘You will.
You're one of us.
You don't know it, but you are.’
But other times she'd say: ‘You wouldn't understand.’
And she'd give me that look, like  at first, half wary, half defiant, as if she had a secret to defend from me.
God knows she'd told me her secret enough times.
‘This isn't my home,’ she'd say.
‘Not here, not Earth either.
One day I go home.
The ship will come for me.’
I can see her now, sitting on her shelf in the store room, surrounded by bottles of detergent, pointing at her box
‘That's not me,’ she said ‘The woman in those papers,’It was confusing, sometimes, when she'd go on about her papers, Sometimes she meant the ones that proved she was a citizen, sometimes the others, the ones that proved she wasn't So she believed.
She had these maps One of them was drawn on an old envelope, a paper one I don't know how she came by it Maybe she drew it herself, when she was young, and forgot.
Maybe it was something she found in one of her bins It was just six dots, anyway, and some lines joining them up Five of the dots had names, Sometimes she said they were stars, sometimes they were the names of cities.
They certainly weren't anywhere on the Moon, or anywhere else I've ever heard of, before or since.
Rella would point to the sixth dot and say solemnly: ‘This is here,’ and she'd point at the floor, to make sure I understood.
‘The prison planet,’ she said.
‘Babylon Maya ‘
But she was always changing her mind about that too Sometimes the sixth dot was her star, the one she was going home to, when the ship came for her.
And one day she had this other map, and I don't know where she got that either, or what happened to it She only showed it me the once, and after that whenever I mentioned it she didn't know what I was talking about It was made of  something absolutely rigid but incredibly thin.
Edge on, you couldn't see it at all.
I mean it.
I've never seen anything like it anywhere.
So it was transparent, with these little black circles in it that seemed to jump backwards and forwards at you.
If you concentrated you could make them all line up, in 3-D; and then it would all just collapse and be jiggling spots again.
And it had lots of tiny writing at the top in some alien alphabet.
Rella said it was a map.
It might have been some sort of optician's test thing, for all I could say, or a kids’ puzzle.
‘Don't put it down,’ Rella warned me.
‘You won't be able to pick it up again.’
She laughed.
She was in a good mood that day.
She told me I was the only person she could trust, though I often saw her around with other people, misplaced people, I suppose.
Most often with a woman, a real whitey, in dark glasses.
She was about twice my age, about half Rella's.
Rella pretended she didn't know me when they were together.
She looked straight through me.
Rella used to tell me stories, about places she'd been, only sometimes I thought she meant herself and it turned out it was her mother she was talking about.
Sometimes it was her grand mother.
WHAT DID THEY DO?
Oh, roamed about all over Earth, as far as I could make out, travelled on foot across huge mountain ranges and vast great deserts where nothing lived.
I can't remember any of it now, but I used to sit on a crate and listen to her, and think about freedom, stupid things you think when you're a kid, you know.
NOT REALLY, NO.
Well, you do.
We do.
I thought she was marvellous.
Sometimes I'd bring her food and things.
Steal little bits of money so she could buy drink.
I thought I was doing something important, helping Rella along.
One day I had to go to the clinic and I lied about the time of the appointment so I could skip a suit inspection, so I had an hour to waste.
I didn't want anyone to see me, so I went to see Rella, but she wasn't there.
I wandered back up to the station concourse.
I went over to the screens to see if there was a movie on anywhere.
There were these two men there, talking, and one was saying there was trouble at Serenity, some problem about a ship trying to come down without an Eladeldi registration.
‘A kit job,’ he said.
‘Bits and pieces from I don't know where.
All held together with string and faith, by the look of it.’
I was only listening because I was bored.
I was thinking about something else.
I'd found a movie to go to, at an off-centre commons.
When the transport pulled in, I got on.
Then, just as the doors were closing, I dived back out to the platform.
Everyone stared at me, but I didn't care.
I ran to the stairs, and down to the basement, to the empty store room.
I went straight to Rella's box.
It was empty.
I never saw her again.
I never saw the other woman either.
And when I got to the clinic everyone was in a mess because half the domestic staff had disappeared, walked out without a word.
Tabitha Jute and Marco Metz took the lift to street level.
They went out into the bloodshot Schiaparelli day.
No one was about.
A Scarab Minor dawdled along, dusting and watering the gutter.
Tabitha's boots crunched on the sandy pavement.
The chill in the air began to clear her head.
She'd let herself go, last night — but she was none the worse for it, was she?
No.
Which was the spirit of carnival, wasn't it?
Loosen up, she told herself.
Stop worrying.
She took them by a short cut to the Weinbaum Canal.
Brown barges puttered slowly through the turbid water.
At waterside tables mustachioed wharfingers sucked soup ponderously from steaming bowls.
Altecean street cleaners were piling the litter with their long rakes.
Everyone looked hung over.
The sky had turned streaky, the atmosphere raw, too much sulphur in it.
They caught a flier out to the port, out of Schiaparelli on the Graben Road, past the Devil's Fingers, those soaring pinnacles of rock, vermilion and cerise.
In some lights they seem to glisten, as if they were red hot, molten.
Under Deimos at full they look like gigantic pink fungi, or worse.
T his morning, looming through a yellow haze, they might have been the eroded spires of a lost city of cathedrals, buried beneath the omnipresent sand.
At least, so Marco said, and expatiated freely on the idea of a performance he had always thought of mounting there, a mood piece, a son et lumière .
‘Tell me about your band,’ she said.
‘Oh, you'll meet them,’ he said.
She pressed him.
‘Who are they?’
He shifted in his seat, rubbing the window with the knuckle of his index finger.
‘You'll get along,’ he promised her.
He would say no more.
Tabitha didn't like being told no, told nothing.
She bit back on her irritation.
He was obviously used to having his own way.
Well, she could put up with that until they  got on board.
Then things would be different.
He did take things for granted, though.
She had not been pleased when it turned out the credit chip he needed to pay her fine was with the rest of his stuff on Plenty.
‘See, I like to travel light,’ he said.
‘It's no problem.
We'll phone it through when we get there,’ he said.
‘First thing.
Promise.’
He had kissed her and fondled her breasts.
Then he pulled on a well-worn jacket of aerated leather and strolled out of the flat, with Tal in a box on one shoulder and a duffel over the other.
She hoped this wasn't going to turn out to be a mistake.
Especially having people on her ship.
Not that there was anything delicate or vulnerable about the Alice Liddell .
She was a working ship, like all the ships of her line.
She had quirks, of course: her drive was a Capellan one, like everyone else's, and nobody understood them.
Only the ship's personae, through some elusive twist of code deep in the programming, were enabled to master the Capellan drive.
This was quite as true when Tabitha Jute met Marco Metz in Schiaparelli as it had been in the days of the Big Step, years before she was born.
Nobody had really made any significant progress in discovering how they worked, these engines Capella handed out so liberally.
The Capellans didn't prohibit research, not in so many words; they simply assured humankind that for them, with their small brains, the mechanics of hyperspatial foreshortening would be incomprehensible.
Those who persisted discovered the drives' disconcerting tendency to implode or deliquesce at the merest touch of a screwdriver.
If you did manage to open one, it would turn out to be full of dead leaves.
Humans are inquisitive creatures by nature.
Not everyone was content to remain an unenlightened beneficiary  of a superior technology.
But even those who tried to think their way in were obliged to retreat, baffled.
Ace hackers on clandestine projects for ruthless outfits like Frewin Maisang Tobermory were taken away at midnight in unmarked ambulances after collapsing with mysterious new conceptual diseases and cognitive dysfunctions.
Some ingrates and irresponsible rumour-mongers tried to implicate the Eladeldi in these abrupt disappearances, which made no sense at all.
The Eladeldi were never known to involve themselves in medical matters.
In the absence of understanding, superstitions proliferated.
Oh, how they proliferated.
How many times had Tabitha heard, in casual conversation in some dorm, some station bar, from pilots who had found their craft taking a route they had never intended, never charted?
A route which none the less delivered them to their destinations safely and on time, and proved, on later inquiry, to have avoided an entirely unforeseeable hazard or delay?
How many ships suddenly developed strange ghost personae; mechanical poltergeists in the engine room; voices where they had none before?
And how many times, on re-entering occupied space, did the phenomena depart as suddenly as they came?
‘It's as true as I'm sitting here telling you,’ insisted Dodger Gillespie, never one to be subject to fancies or unsought hallucinations.
‘Electric blue caterpillar long as my arm, coiled up around the reactor!
Then, when I come back with the welding torch, no sign of the bastard.
Only a trail of blue sticky stuff all on the gratings.
True as I'm sitting here,’ she said, draining her pint.
‘True as the fact it's your round, gel.’
The seeds of this new mythology of space had been sown, back in the days of the Big Step, by so many alien races appearing suddenly in the system, in vessels as various in shape and size as their owners.
Nowadays we are used to these things — the spinning jewelled diadems of  Rigel; the quasi-organic models of the Frasque, that echo the shapes of the hives and cocoons built by insects; the Palernian Brisk, which looks nothing like its name, more like a bundle of sausages.
But think how they marvelled then, the first time they glimpsed the grandiose space architecture of the Eladeldi, or the shining needle, a kilometre long, of the Vespa Omicron.
There were theories about all of these, some of them frankly theological.
The Witnesses of the Total Merge catalogued all those ships believed to belong to other client species of the Capellans.
Allocating them to niches of higher or lower favour on a cabbalistic tree, they claimed to detect some principle of metamorphosis.
Human craft too, they prophesied, would pass through all these forms on their way to the ultimate, transcendental spaceship.
On the day of its perfection, eons hence, the arcana of the Capellan engine would finally be comprehended, and the invisible barrier around the orbit of Pluto would silently dissolve.
On that day, argued one heresy, humans too would complete their evolution, and become Capellans.
The prophecy of the Total Merge would be fulfilled, and aliens be aliens no more.
How much truth there was in all these myths you now know as well as I. Certainly the Witnesses hit early on the fact that, rippling in and out of hyperspace, even ships as basic as the Bergen Kobold change slightly every time.
The abused particles that constitute them never reintegrate quite exactly.
That would be rather too much to ask of the laws of conservation.
Sometimes their pilots notice these aberrations, and sometimes they don't; because, after all, their particles have been transubstantiated too.
About the evolution of the human being I know nothing that is not obvious just by looking at me.
But I did know the Alice Liddell — who better?— and I remember her well.
I remember her intimately from the beginning, from  the third year of the Big Step, when she was built and christened.
For she was old when Tabitha Jute first set eyes upon her, when she dragged the tarpaulins from her in the long grass of that neglected vineyard.
Her bronze was bruised and discoloured from the raw cold burn of space.
Her pile was spent, her hydraulics dry and full of spiders' webs.
She had done sterling service already, and was as inert as a ship can well be — which is actually, as we have already speculated, not quite inert after all.
People used to believe (permit me this, one last one) that once you activated the Capellan drive it could never be entirely deactivated again, not until it suffered ruin or physical destruction.
And I, where was I, during those years when chipmunks scampered through the undercarriage of the battered little Kobold?
I was asleep.
The ship that bore the name of Liddell was, frankly, primitive.
She was low and she was lumpy.
I remember her as cramped.
Her cockpit seated two, a pilot and a co-pilot, each in a standard zero-g web.
Aft she had two small single cabins with modest personal storage, a minute galley and ablute.
She measured a shade under twenty-one metres from nose to tail, and a shade over half that across, from wingtip to stubby wingtip.
Her number BGK009059 said that she was one of the first of the Bergen K line, the Kobolds that plied the spaceways of the solar system, taking this here and that there, for nearly fifty years.
She was built to labour, and built to last.
Her middle could hold loose goods to 250 cubic metres or be replaced with any one of seventeen styles of container.
Her four loading extensors and four cargo drones stowed themselves, during flight, in the double wall of the hull.
She bore sixteen directional plasma jets, four for each axis, and three huge fixed ‘roundmouths’.
She had scanners all over her, more than the Bergen yards supplied as standard.
Her solar had also been much improved, as if her commissioner had expected more of her than her designers.
Any trouble she gave her last pilot was more to do with adverse conditions and those middle years of neglect than any flaw in her constitution.
Also, Tabitha never quite got around to doing as much maintenance as she meant to.
Call it whimsy if you will, but I have always thought, privately, there was something very similar about the two of them, the Alice Liddell and her captain Tabitha Jute.
Both were small, stocky and strong.
Neither came of anything but the most commonplace, workaday material; yet each hid an adventurous spirit and surprising resources beneath her utilitarian exterior.
Or perhaps this is just the wisdom of hindsight, a rosy blur of sentiment cast by nostalgia over the scene.
Picture them, Tabitha Jute and Marco Metz, as they walk out across the spaceport tarmac this chilly Schiaparelli evening, to climb aboard the not-quite-redeemed Alice and take off into the Martian sky, bound on a journey that will take them to Plenty — and far, far beyond.
Part Two — Lost in the Caverns of Plenty
‘You can have this cabin,’ she said, sliding the door open.
‘I'll clear all this stuff out.’
Anyone would think he'd never seen a Kobold before.
‘This is terrific!
Absolutely terrific!
What a ship!’
Now he hugged her from behind.
‘I want to ride up the front with you.’
‘No,’ said Tabitha.
‘I never have anyone in the cockpit.’
She looked into his big brown eyes.
‘I'm sorry!’
‘What's this,’ he said, ‘safety regulations now?’
‘Well, yes,’ she said.
‘I don't believe this,’ he said, holding her tight and leaning back to look at her.
‘You're telling me a woman like you actually obeys that stuff?’
Tabitha turned and shoved at the passenger cabin door, which was stuck halfway.
‘I don't like having anyone else in the cockpit while I'm driving,’ she said, ‘that's all.’
He seemed to be mollified.
‘Well, okay,’ he said.
His hands roved around her body.
He nuzzled her ear.
‘I'm going to miss you,’ he said.
‘All the way to Plenty…what's that, three, four hours subjective?’
‘Five,’ she said, extricating herself.
‘I'm not skipping.
Not with that crystal.
Not with a passenger.’
‘Five hours!’ he said.
‘What am I supposed to do all that time without you?’
She was irritated, amused.
‘I don't know!
Practise your glove.
Talk to Tal,’ she said.
‘He's out,’ he said.
Tal lay behind him in the passageway, in his white porcelite travelling case.
In customs, the Eladeldi had drawn back their lips at the sedated parrot, but all the processing was in order, and Marco had hustled them through.
‘He'll sleep a while now.
He hates flying.’
Marco's hands found their way back to Tabitha's hips.
He looked over her shoulder.
‘That's a lot of stuff in there,’ he commented.
Tabitha leaned on the door.
It wouldn't budge.
‘It's just kipple,’ she said.
‘I'll clear it up,’ she repeated, but her intention was waning.
There was so much of it.
Spare overalls, loose packaging, an inflatable liferaft, most of the parts of a second-hand galley robot she'd picked up cheap and never quite got round to reassembling…
She let it float around in there, mostly unsecured.
‘I haven't had anyone in here for a while,’ she said, semi-apologetically.
‘It just builds up.’
‘You never know half the things you've got until you have to do something about them,’ he said amiably.
She shoved at the door again.
There was a loud clatter of something falling down inside.
‘Come on,’ said Marco quietly.
‘Don't hustle me,’ she said.
But she was weakening.
What he'd just said reminded her of that business last night with the tape.
Probably it was simply one of those things that happen, or that you think happen, when you're smashed and half-asleep.
But she kept thinking about it.
She turned away from the door, stood irresolute outside the door of her own cabin.
Logically, she could put him in there.
Tired and hungover as she was, she wasn't going to be sleeping in the next five hours; not until they docked at Plenty.
‘Tabitha.
Relax,’ he said, drawing her back towards him in the cramped confines of the passage.
‘Look at you, you're so tense.
How can you possibly drive when you're all wound up that way?’
He massaged her shoulders.
In another moment she was kissing him.
It was an option she didn't usually have, kissing a gorgeous man on board her own ship.
Why shouldn't she  take advantage of the opportunity?
The pleasure would be over soon enough, it always was.
‘Okay,’ he said reasonably, as they surfaced.
‘Are you going to show me the rest?’
The aft lock of the hold was open.
Marco picked up Tal's box.
Tabitha took his other hand and led him in.
‘Oh, yes!
This is great,’ he said, setting the box down again.
His voice echoed in the emptiness.
‘Just great!’
The way he stood, hands in his back pockets, a smile on his face she could only call triumphant: it pleased her, he admired her ship.
But it made her doubtful again.
‘How much gear are we collecting?’
‘Oh, we'll all fit in here, no problem.’
He really was looking around.
He looked at the cargo drones stowed away in their kennels, inspected the air and power connections, the airlocks either end, the internal controls for the doors and the roof.
He climbed up to the catwalk and examined the roof, then strolled around surveying the empty space and making knowledgeable noises.
‘Hm.
Okay.
Okay.’
Then he climbed up on the rail and swung muscularly from the butt of one of the loading extensors.
Tabitha stood below, watching him with her arms folded.
‘Can you do that with one hand?’
‘Sure,’ he said.
He couldn't.
He landed on his feet.
‘Gravity's a little off,’ he told her, and rubbed his hands.
‘I can work on it.
Build it into the act.
What's in here?’
He opened a bin that said EMERGENCY in big red letters.
A large dispenser of detergent, an old flex microphone as big as a taper, a polythene bag of tubular bandages, a sealant gun and a box of raisins fell all over his feet.
‘It always does that,’ said Tabitha.
She knelt and pushed everything back into the bin, and shut the lid quickly.
‘Now I know where to look if I need raisins,’ he said.
‘Help yourself,’ she said.
She was kneeling on the floor, wiping her hands together.
He bent down and kissed her on the lips.
‘I'm hungry now,’ he said.
Tabitha stood up robustly, making herself awkward to hold.
She opened the bin a crack, whipped out the raisins and thrust the box at him.
‘Here,’ she said.
He wouldn't take it, wouldn't stop looking in her eyes.
‘It's not raisins I'm hungry for,’ he murmured.
‘I thought you were in a hurry,’ she said.
‘I am, I am,’ he said, clutching for her.
She pressed the box against his chest.
‘Later,’ she said, being firm, with him, with herself.
‘We have to go.’
‘Let's go,’ he said.
He picked up Tal.
Tabitha opened the box and ate a handful of raisins as they left the hold.
‘Want some?’ she said, her mouth full.
‘Ah, no.’
‘Okay.’
This really was not a normal day.
Things were mounting up.
Being obliged to this man.
Having to go to Plenty.
With a deteriorating axis lock crystal.
The cops on her case.
She'd be in trouble if they missed that twenty-four-hour deadline.
So would the Alice .
He seemed to sense her mood, drawing back a little as they went through the forward lock and up the cockpit steps.
‘Don't worry,’ he said.
‘We'll get it sorted out.
You just get us there.
We'll phone the money in, that's first.
Top priority.
You can meet the guys, come and see the show, we have dinner, a couple of drinks, a good night's sleep, and tomorrow we get you fixed up for your crystal.
You know anybody up there who does that kind of thing?’
‘No,’ said Tabitha.
She knew hardly anyone who worked on Plenty, and trusted no one who would.
On the occasions she had to pick up or deliver there she got in and out as fast as possible.
Plenty was weird.
She stepped up on to the flight deck, Marco close behind her.
He'd got his way.
The decision had been made, somehow, and her feelings had been overruled.
She'd overruled herself.
She was not at her best.
This kind of thing happening threw everything sideways.
They stowed Tal behind their seats, with her bag and all the other stuff that had accumulated there.
Marco wouldn't hear of him being put back in the cabin.
He had to have the case near him all the time, to keep an eye on the lifesign meters.
Tabitha thought briefly about livestock regulations.
She pulled the retaining net over the bird-box and fastened it down.
‘Doesn't all this junk get in your way?’
‘Not really.’
The net was snagging on something.
She reached between her feet and dragged out a wizened melon.
‘I was wondering what had happened to that,’ she said.
She sat up in her web, pulled the keyboard to her and roused the computer, keeping it mute.
She hated anyone listening when she was talking to Alice.
ATTENTION, said the screen.
It flashed a schematic at her, rotated it through 180°, zoomed in.
A large blue diamond was flashing on and off.
AXIS LOCK CRYSTAL DEFECT, it said.
FAILURE PROBABILITY 43.29%.
Tabitha tapped manual override.
She drew back her cuff to check her monitor and spoke to the radio.
‘Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner to control.’
Marco stood beside her, in the narrow aisle between the webs.
He reached over the console and wiped some of the  grime off the viewport.
Outside lay the endless tarmac of Schiaparelli Port, scorched and brown.
‘Control to Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner.
What is your field number, please?’
‘Shit,’ said Tabitha.
She started rummaging through the litter of tickets wedged into the seal around the glass.
‘Repeat, your field number, please, Bravo Golf Kansas zero —‘
‘Just a minute,’ she said.
She sorted tickets.
She looked at Marco.
‘It's one of these,’ she said.
He nodded sympathetically, his hands in his pockets.
‘That's a lot of tickets,’ he said.
‘It'll be in your log,’ said Control.
‘No it won't,’ said Tabitha.
‘I didn't enter it.’
She sucked her teeth, took another ticket down at random, glanced at it, crumpled it and tossed it into the disposal by her left knee.
‘Procedure is to enter your field number in your log on arrival, Bravo Golf Ka —‘
‘It's here somewhere,’ she said.
‘Will you hold, please, Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner,’ said Control drily.
Thank you , mouthed Tabitha.
She pulled a face at the speaker.
She pointed to the co-pilot's web.
‘Get in,’ she said.
She pressed a tab.
Red light filled the cockpit, and a high, buzzing hum began.
‘Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner, Jute, Tabitha, Captain?’
‘Yes?’
‘Your field number is Tango Tango oner-fiver.’
‘Good.’
‘On future visits to this or any other system port, please enter your field number in your log memory on arrival.’
‘All right.’
She scanned a line of lights, pressed three more tabs.
A whine spiralled round and round the hum.
The light went out, and came back on.
‘Can I go now?’
‘Have you filed a departure flight application?’
‘Plenty, passenger delivery.’
‘Have you filed notice of that application, Captain Jute?’
‘Look, I'm just going to Plenty, not Charon or somewhere.’
‘What is the routing on that flight, Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner?’
Tabitha lay back in her web and began to recite coordinates, turning to a keypad at her elbow, reciting more co-ordinates, reading co-ordinates off a screen.
Control repeated everything precisely and faithfully while a low, slow hammering began beneath the floor.
The temperature in the cockpit was rising.
Tabitha knocked an array of red tabs.
All turned green but one.
She poked the red tab.
She pressed it hard.
It blinked green, then red again.
She hit it with the heel of her hand.
The tab went green.
The ship was shuddering, the hammer hammering rapidly now.
‘You are clear to proceed, Bravo Golf Kansas zero-zero-niner-zero-fiver-niner.’
Outside the viewport a line of blinding white light licked up, across and back, drawing a square around them on the concrete.
‘Do not engage engines until —‘
Tabitha touched a key, and they sat in thunder.
Outside the soft, floating fields of her web and Marco's, everything groaned and flexed.
All the screens were fizzing.
Lights were running up and down the board.
The thunder swelled.
The Alice Liddell shook.
She wobbled.
She lifted three legs off the ground and put them down again.
The cockpit was hot.
Outside, the smoke enveloped everything all around but the square of magnesium light, which now turned green.
They bobbed, and wallowed, and were gripped by something and thrust up, up into the air.
The port of Schiaparelli receded below them, trucks dwindling, oxygen drays shrinking, hangars and block-houses and bridges diminishing to a model, a miniature, a busy geometric diagram, swallowed in the red mists of Mars.
Beyond, they could see the city, churning on without them.
The sunlight flared from the canals.
Still the thunder thundered and burned and shook them.
Tiny electrical discharges zipped and buzzed about the hull as the fragile air was catalysed around them.
There was a high-pitched whistle and a great noise like the cloth of the sky tearing.
It went on, and on, and on.
Then the noise and the quaking began to abate, and the curve of Mars shrank and ran away beneath them like a wave from sand; and then there was no more beneath and no above and nothing anywhere but indigo, and a certain ominous hissing.
‘It was the radio, which next instant kicked back in.
The ship was full of voices, informing, instructing, cajoling, declaring, endorsing.
Static scribbled them all into incomprehensibility.
Screens flipped displays, page after page.
Moiré patterns drifted around the console.
The hammering began again, loud, insistent and irregular.
All the stuff under the retaining net shifted and stirred.
Then the disturbed tickets wriggled loose from the viewport beading and rose up together into their faces like a shoal of paper minnows.
‘Oh, damn,’ said Tabitha.
Marco Metz laughed.
Slipping free from his web, he began to snatch slips of paper out of the air.
They were a hundred thousand kilometres out from Schiaparelli.
A hundred thousand stars shone hard and steady in an eternity of space.
The traffic was light: the blue twinkle of a Mitchum magnet train on the Phobos-Byzantium run; a little old Fargo slipping down the gradient from Longevity or Silverside, fresh vegetables for the Martians.
The Alice was running smoothly.
Tabitha ran an axis circuit check.
She listened to the engines: All was well.
FAILURE PROBABILITY 44.49%, said the screen.
ACKNOWLEDGE, Tabitha replied.
Marco couldn't sit still.
He unlatched his web again and swam about the cockpit, fielding flotsam.
He checked on Tal, still sleeping soundly.
He investigated the jumble under the nets.
He found a crumpled J-cloth and started dusting things with it.
‘Don't, Marco,’ said Tabitha.
‘Don't worry, don't worry,’ he said, wiping the scanner screens.
It made a surprising difference.
Multiplied ten times, the arc of the galaxy lit up the cockpit, a silver veil across the void.
‘Look at that,’ said Marco.
‘The Apple Tree.’
‘The what?’
‘The Apple Tree,’ he repeated.
‘Don't you call it that?
I thought all spacers called it that.’
‘Not me,’ said Tabitha.
‘I've never heard that one.’
‘That's what they call it,’ he said.
‘Why the Apple Tree?’
‘I don't know.
Because we're not allowed a bite, I suppose.’
Tabitha thought about it.
‘That's Christian, isn't it?
You're not a Christian, are you?’
‘No,’ he said.
‘I'm a fornicator.’
‘Well,’ she said, ‘I walked into that one.’
He was floating behind her web, trying to kiss the back of her neck through the holes.
‘Marco,’ she said, warningly.
‘What?
You want something?
What do you want?’
Now he was upside down, reaching beneath the web, stroking her bottom.
She kicked backwards to push him away.
The web compensated.
‘I'm trying to do a job here,’ she said.
‘What?’ he said, challenging her.
He swam beneath her, rose up between her feet.
‘What are you doing this old tub can't do for herself?’
She glared at him.
‘Don't insult my boat,’ she said.
‘Okay, sorry, sorry, sweet old thing.’
He reached out and patted the bulkhead.
‘No offence, lady.’
Across the console coloured lights flicked on, off, red, blue, green.
Displays scrolled, overlaid, blinked, melted, coalesced.
The Alice made a minute course correction, a fraction of a fraction.
Outside, space continued.
The scenery was so vast it seemed they weren't moving at all.
‘So tell me,’ he said.
‘I'm just an ignorant muso.
What are you doing now?
I can't see you doing anything.
What are you doing that's so crucial?’
I don't have to answer that, thought Tabitha.
But she did.
‘Taking you to the gig,’ she said, in a preoccupied tone.
She frowned at the mesoscope.
This, of course, was not good enough for him.
‘No, no,’ he said, floating back into his web and sitting there, cross-legged, inquisitorial, his hands clasped in front of him.
‘That's what the ship's doing, right?
Little Alice here,’ he said.
‘What are you doing?’
She turned to him then.
‘I'm a part of this ship,’ she said.
‘The part that makes the decisions.’
She tapped her faded shoulder flash.
‘Captain,’ she said.
‘I thought they had brains of their own, don't they?’ he persisted.
‘They have this little brain thing you plug in the computer, that runs the power, the engines, the john, everything.
Don't they?
Is this one so old, excuse me, such a venerable antique, she doesn't have that?’
‘She can't do everything for herself,’ Tabitha said.
‘She can do everything, but she can't decide what to do.’
She looked around the cockpit.
Her eye lit on the white travelling case bobbing gently under the net.
‘It's like you and Tal,’ she said.
‘He can sing, but you have to tell him what to sing next.’
He liked that.
‘Right!
Right!
That's very smart,’ he said admiringly.
Not really, she thought, glancing at him.
He might be beautiful, but perhaps he wasn't really very bright.
‘You're one smart bargee, you know that?’ he continued.
‘You're too good for this job.
How'd you like to be tour manager for a major interplanetary cabaret troupe?’
‘No, thanks,’ she murmured, tapping in a command string.
‘Really,’ he said.
‘I mean it.
You're way too smart to be driving a truck.
I bet you could fly this thing with your eyes closed.
I bet you could fly her with your little finger.’
He was out of his web again.
‘I bet you could fly her from your bunk.’
‘Marco, don't,’ she said.
‘Don't spoil it,’ she said.
‘Why don't you watch a movie or something?’
He hovered beside her, not backing off a centimetre.
‘I'd rather watch you…‘
‘If you can't keep your hands to yourself, do something useful.
Realign that distal parallax fibrillator.’
He looked among the clutter on top of the console.
‘This?’
‘No, there.
The thing with the harmonica in its vent.’
‘Oh.
Oh, right.
The distal parallax fibrillator.
Right.’
Marco drew it out and inspected it.
‘It's dead on seven through ten,’ said Tabitha.
‘Eleven,’ said Marco, clicking the button rapidly in and out, in and out.
‘Whatever.’‘
You can fix these, no problem,’ he said.
‘All you have to do is take out the midrange fleck.’
‘I've done that,’ she said.
‘Well, then you've got to bypass it.
That's easy.
You can get anyone to do that for you.’
‘I thought I was getting you to.’
He parried this.
‘Anyone'll do that for you.’
‘Can you do it?’
‘Sure.’
‘Have you ever done it?’
He hesitated.
‘No.
Not actually done it, not done it myself, no.’
‘I have,’ said Tabitha.
‘That's why I'm trying to get someone else to.’
He started to reply.
‘Shh,’ she said.
She thought she could hear a noise.
She started to order another axis circuit check, then cancelled it.
She was just being neurotic.
Another five thousand kilometres of nothing went by.
Earth and its satellites were dead ahead, a tiny shining dot almost indistinguishable from all the other shining dots.
Tabitha stretched and yawned.
Marco took this as his cue.
‘Well, nothing much seems to be happening,’ he began.
‘Marco,’ Tabitha said.
‘No, no,’ said Marco.
‘I was just going to say, do you play that harmonica?’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘Very badly,’ she said.
It had been a while.
In fact she'd forgotten she'd put it there.
‘I don't believe you,’ he said.
She looked at him.
‘What, you don't believe I can play or you don't believe I play badly?’
She looked away again.
‘You're right, though,’ she said.
‘Sometimes I don't believe how badly I play either.’
‘Play something.’
‘No.’
‘Come on, you can do that.
You're not working so hard you can't blow a couple of bars of ‘Casey Jones’, are you?’
‘Casey who?’ she said.
But she held out her hand.
‘Give it here.’
He flipped it towards her, end over end, slowly through the air.
She caught it.
‘I warned you,’ she said.
She played him a song about whisky her Auntie Muriel had taught her, on Integrity 2.
It was a bit of a struggle.
He listened politely.
‘That wasn't too bad,’ he said, when it was over.
‘Yes it was,’ said Tabitha.
‘Very bad.
I should practise more.’
‘Maybe.’
He shrugged.
‘You have the time.’
‘Yeah.’
She returned her attention to the console.
‘I've probably practised too much already,’ she said.
‘I'm an expert bad harmonica player.’
She glanced at him again.
‘That was worse than usual,’ she added.
‘I don't usually have an audience.’
‘You don't?’
‘I told you.
I never let anyone ride in that web.’
He played with a rubber washer that came drifting by, trying to make it spin around in the air in front of his nose.
‘Play something else on your mouth organ,’ he said.
‘No,’ she said.
‘I'd like to play with your mouth organ.’
She ignored him.
‘And your other —‘
‘Here.’
She batted the harmonica across to him.
So he took it, and played something soft and sad, something plaintive and melancholy that rose up every third line as if it was going to shake off its sorrow and fly forward and free; but then in the fourth it curled back on itself and fell again: reluctantly, sometimes, but always resignedly, as if it knew it was going to fall; as if it had been striving and falling back again for hundreds of years.
Yet each time that third line came round the tune seemed to gather itself up and find new energy from somewhere, and perhaps it didn't fall quite so far each time in the fourth, and Tabitha was captivated despite herself, watching the pretty man play and wondering how he would end it, how he could ever resolve the disagreement between the rush and the ebb, until she realized suddenly that he had, with a quiet, lilting little rill that ran up and then down and flicked its tail and was gone.
‘Oh, that was good,’ she said.
He smiled.
His lovely eyes were quiet, almost shy, not at all like before.
She thumbed back the catches on her web.
She rose above him, clasped his hand and drew him up.
He took a moment to slip the harmonica back where he'd found it, in the vent on the faulty fibrillator.
Then he spun himself about and kissed her.
‘What about Tal?’ she asked.
‘He'll be all right.’
He pointed at the green pips on the box.
They were pulsing steadily.
They went down the passage around the hold, into the captain's cabin, and left the door open.
Each anchored by a foot in one of the loops at the corners of the bunk, they undressed one another.
Their clothes hung and drifted in the air.
Shoes spun end over end in vague orbits about their owners.
Underpants rose from unexpected corners, on collision courses with snaking socks.
Pulling her foot free, Tabitha launched herself lightly at him.
She landed with her hands on his hips.
His legs were wide apart and she found herself slipping smoothly through the arch of his thighs.
Beginning to spin himself, he reached for her as she whirled slowly under his crotch.
His hands slid from her breasts as if she'd been greased.
He twisted in the air, coming round to face her again, drawing his legs up under him, lying back on nothing with his heels against his buttocks, his knees spread.
He was panting, exhilarated, his eyes and mouth wide and wild.
He rubbed his mouth in her hair.
She slipped her left leg under his arm and ran the inside of her right thigh across the underside of his cock until it nestled against her groin.
He caressed her sides with gentle hands, gloveman's hands.
She turned a naked somersault in his lap, bouncing lightly off the cabin wall to return slowly feet first, straddling him, locking them together.
They went into a spin, wheeling head over heels about their warm, wet mutual centre.
Marco gasped.
He groaned.
All the time Tabitha was listening with half an ear to the deep, slow throb of the engines, the background buzzes and creaks of the Alice Liddell in transit.
She was listening for a new noise, the noise she thought she'd heard on the way out to Chateaubriand: the irregular  tapping of the axis lock crystal, jumping in its housing.
There was a noise, suddenly.
It wasn't the crystal.
It was the sound of a harmonica playing her Auntie Muriel's song.
She stared at Marco in horror.
The sound was coming closer along the gangway.
It was not her harmonica, it was higher pitched, a peeping sound like a poor recording played back through a tiny speaker.
She began to struggle free of Marco's embrace, groping around for anchorage.
In through the open door came Marco's parrot, chirping merrily.
It sounded for all the worlds like a little harmonica.
‘Oh god, it's got out of its box,’ she said, agitated.
‘I guess he was bored,’ said Marco.
‘What?’
‘Boogie my hotlips baby,’ sang the parrot.
‘Yer arse against the wall!’
It put its head on one side and fixed them with one evil black eye.
It leered.
‘Jesus Christ it's sapient!
‘Yeah, I guess,’ said Marco.
‘I mean, it depends what you mean —‘
‘Get out!’
Tabitha yelled at the alien invader.
‘Get out of my cabin!’
She seized a passing shirt and propelled it vainly towards the bird.
It evaded its slow assault with a neat three-quarter turn.
‘Funky salami,’ it carolled, upside down.
Tabitha separated herself from Marco with a convulsive heave that spreadeagled him against the porthole.
She glared at him.
‘Say something !
‘Go on, Tal, get out of here,’ said Marco neutrally.
‘She's not Saskia.
She doesn't like it.’
The big green bird rolled around and sailed easily out of the cabin, backwards.
‘Salami minestrone,’ his voice came floating eerily down the gangway.
‘There's whisky in the jar…‘
Marco scratched his belly.
‘Tabby.
I'm sorry.
Really.’
‘Don ‘t call me Tabby .
No one ever calls me Tabby.’
‘I'm sorry!’
‘What — is — he?’
‘A parrot.
A kind of parrot.
I told you.’
‘He's fucking sapient, Marco!’
He shrugged, a mid-air shrug.
‘Well, sure.
You couldn't get a regular parrot to do all that stuff.
I thought you liked him.
He's cute, really.
When you get to know him.’
‘I don't want to get to know him.’
‘Hey, he didn't mean anything.
He's just lonely.
You'd be lonely, stuck in that little box for hours on end.
He was trying to be friendly, that's all.
Come back, Tabitha, I'm sorry, hey, really.’
But Tabitha was squatting in a corner of the ceiling, strapping on her wrist monitor, burrowing furiously into a T-shirt.
‘And who's Saskia?’ she wanted to know.
Given cheap and easy travel, elastic property and planning laws, and favourable tax concessions, the human spirit is an expansive thing.
But it is a gregarious thing too.
In the early days of the Space Rush, there was no reason  to go and build hundreds of millions of  kilometres away from everyone else.
There was all of Mars, practically, if you didn't mind the climate; and anyone could put up a tube.
Which is why, by the time of our story, there was a tangle of some two hundred satellite habitats, including five dozen tubes; fourteen platforms; seven wheels; sixteen miscellaneous unclassifiables, including casinos on immobilized system ships, crates, and permanent accidents; and three ziggurats of the Eladeldi — all in Terran orbit, besides the poor old neglected Moon.
For smart people, discerning people, the clutter and crush had eventually become too much.
They followed the mining leviathans out to the asteroid belt; and soon after, when the belt charts were crazed with property lines, on to Saturn, where the real development opportunities were.
In the rings, there were only hermits to worry about.
Once business had moved on from Earth, parts of the Tangle fell unoccupied.
Blossoming projects died, leaving their lattices of unglazed steel and nebulae of rivets tumbling pointlessly about ‘beyond the sky’.
The status of these and other orbitals became highly fluid, in legal fiction and in fact.
They changed hands rapidly; daily, it seemed.
The earthbound made derogatory jokes about empty cans, and turned their backs on the brash, glittering necklace of the night.
The expansive spirit was undaunted.
Squatters, escapees and network junkies moved into the abandoned hulks.
There they lived like spiders, tenaciously, in corners.
Which brings us to Plenty.
I'm sorry to say that when Tabitha came upon it, it was not at its best.
The word ‘sleazy’ is one that springs to mind.
Of strategic significance only to the race that put it there, the shell was treated as a grotesque curio, a titanic folly.
It was in a constant state of reoccupation, favoured  only by marginal or twilight enterprises indifferent to a fundamentally inhuman environment.
Some of them undoubtedly preferred it,
Plenty was built by the Frasque, who did not call it that, or anything else, so far as I have been able to discover.
It is, as Tabitha knew, the major relic of that defeated race's short stay in the solar system.
The Frasque had arrived hot on the pearly heels of the Capellans, sliding in on their vector before the great door of space could slam shut.
To human eyes, they were the strangest of all the newcomers of those days.
They resembled lofty, ambulant, insectile bundles of reeds.
They opened their twiggy mouths and hissed.
Someone understood them.
Indeed, their power to agitate whole regions of Central Africa and parts of South America was remarkable.
Cults were revived, savage midnight duels enacted.
Entire armies deserted and vanished; to labour as slaves, some said, at first in a doomed attempt to develop a site on Venus, and after on the most monstrous orbital ever built.
The Frasque are an aggressive, exploitative, worker species.
Their foremost civilization is three-quarters male.
This three-quarters works itself to death, generation after generation, at the behest of the female quarter, more sapient but no less savage, which dominates it by an impenetrable social mystification of oestrus.
At the centre of their hive there sits a queen, radiating her implacable commands through the labyrinthine tunnels.
Remove her, and the rest of the society ceases to function.
Under the direction of the Queen of Plenty, the males swarmed tirelessly over the high circling construction, crystallizing the fabric, it seemed, directly out of the sparse particles of sub-lunar space.
It was assumed the Frasque fitted somewhere in the Capellan scheme of things; that they were another client  species, as the Thrants and Eladeldi evidently were, though they seemed more enterprising and self-sufficient than most.
Whatever it was they were really building up there.
The Seraph Kajsa was the first ship of our system seen entering the enormous docks that constituted the lower levels of the completed station.
Two days later, despite the speculations of cynics, it was seen leaving again.
As posthuman supremacists, the Seraphim apparently claimed some fellow feeling with these autocratic aliens.
Shortly after, human spokespeople began appearing on Earth, on screen and in person, describing the bounty the Frasque had brought to the system, with special mention of their advanced cryonics facilities.
Some hesitated because of the semi-evangelistic tone of the advertising; others because of its lack of deference, indeed of reference, to Capella.
Was this an offer Earth was permitted to pursue?
Were they still free?
Then the first human vessels were sighted, following the initiative of the Seraph Kajsa .
And after that there was no stopping them.
From Swiss clinics and private  sanitaria they came, eager to be frozen.
The representatives of nations and organizations that had been preserving a cautious neutrality now swelled the flock, gabbling about friendly relations and mutual benefit.
From the Frasque, they thought, their leaders might obtain the t vin secrets of social control and personal immortality: two valuable aids to peaceful and effective administration.
Why anyone should want to govern anyone else continues to escape me.
It seems an exhausting and thankless task.
Looking after inanimate objects is difficult enough.
I can only suppose that human beings, born naked and soft and tied to an environment minute in scope and tolerance, are motivated by the desire for some sort of self-aggrandizing revenge.
The Frasque, however, are not so frail.
Goodness only knows what makes them tick, or why they thought they could get away with it here.
There is data buried still which even I can't get at.
At any rate, everything on Plenty was going swingingly; and then one day Capella spoke.
The Frasque were species non grata .
There were to be no more transactions with them.
Their best-known spokespeople were removed and replaced abruptly, without explanation, with new ones who smiled constantly while issuing contradictory statements and random exhortations.
Strain was visible beneath the suntan.
Some of them were clearly already frozen.
They urged loyalty to the generous and undemanding Frasque, and rejected the authority of Capella.
The archives of that period are fragmentary and confused.
Obviously the station was in turmoil.
There was a lot of communal stridulation and generation of extraordinary etheric gestalts.
Strange buzzsaw keenings ate into the void, disturbing the wavebands for hundreds of kilometres around.
Terran employees who still had the faculty of independent mobility fled, understandably, with everything they could lay their hands on.
The vast shipping bays emptied.
Agents and ambassadors left on the down shuttle, frantically covering their tracks.
There was almost a collapse of the cryonic systems when the vaults were besieged by people demanding to reclaim parents and presidents.
Finally, at the height of the chaos, a Capellan system ship came by, with great ceremony and display of technical superiority, to require the immediate departure of the Frasque.
The Frasque refused.
The Capellans bowed their great heads in sorrow and exterminated them.
The destruction was brief and horrible.
The Frasque, that had seemed so desiccated and invulnerable, shrivelled and burned at the Capellans' slightest gesture.
The  spaceship docks of Plenty became an inferno.
The marks of charring can be seen everywhere there today.
Eladeldi scoured the tunnels, flaming everything that moved.
The air smelled of burning, burning.
Special fighters were issued, and humans recruited to pilot them, to mop up the remnants of the species.
They had not spread far — it was not their way — from the hive.
They did, however, muster a fleet and stage two last great battles, preferring destruction to defeat.
Their wishes were met.
Now, announced the Capellan representative, simultaneously on every channel of every net of the system, the evil plan of the Frasque could be revealed.
The upheavals in Africa had been only a rehearsal.
The Frasque had been scheming to sponsor civil war in the system, setting world against world.
From their orbital hive-turned-fortress, they would sally out against whoever was left and eat them alive.
It was a horrendous, rapacious strategy that they had used to gain control of their own home system.
The Capellans, indulgent as ever, had trusted them in ours until it became obvious the same hideous trick was about to be played again.
Only the courage of the human race, she said, had won the day.
As a reward, the liberated shell of Plenty, largest of all orbitals, was handed over to Earth.
Capella merely agreed, under suit, to provide a management committee.
They had, it transpired, been training one up for some time.
The new board were seven in number.
They were all human: not even one Eladeldi among them.
It was a sign of trust; or, murmured the ubiquitous cynic, contempt.
They called it Plenty.
It was to be a combination tax haven, service station and home to fringe businesses.
If the fringe soon proved to be rather tattier, the services more underhand than the original promotional copy made  out, well, that was only to be expected of an enterprise left to run itself without Capellan supervision.
The freezers filled up again, and the commercial sectors of the warren glittered and blazed; though under the multiple roofs arranged like bumpy plates of armour, many other areas remained in darkness, the only light the sick green pallor of the phosphorescent things that grew on the walls in there.
Soon the most lucrative function of the resurrected orbital was as an alien adventure park.
Groups of tourists, survivalists and extremist paramilitary cadres on exercise could be released, for a high fee and without liability, into its eerie and uncertain corridors.
Below, the spaceship docks, an enormous shelf that gapes at both ends beneath the domed superstructure, started to attract craft that preferred not to patronize the better-lit and reputable platforms.
Imagine Plenty, then, when the Alice Liddell arrived ferrying a pair of cabaret artistes, as a giant paralysed space habitat under makeshift redevelopment.
The retrofit had been partial, in some areas wholly unsuccessful.
Odd creatures and devices scuttled in the shadows.
Who knew what processes were dormant, what booby-traps, what mysterious and violent reflexes might yet be triggered by incursion into passages and cells closed off by their builders?
The Frasque had left no guidebooks, no plans anyone could read.
Anything might happen, just around the next bend.
And it is all bends.
There isn't a right angle in the place.
Oval in plan, the entire station is fabricated of a laminar substance more like horn than anything else.
The lumpy smoothness of all its surfaces reinforces the sense that Plenty is something organic, something that was generated, not constructed.
‘It looks like a gigantic tortoise,’ said Marco Metz.
‘Don't you think?
Like a great big humungous tortoiseshell.’
Tabitha was struck by the resemblance, but she didn't reply.
She wasn't about to grant him that, or anything.
If Plenty was a giant dormant space tortoise, it was one that any moment might stick out its giant head and swallow her,Alice and all.
She didn't want to be here.
She was rapidly going off Marco and his little psittacoid buddy.
A scary voice in the back of her mind was nagging, Mistake, Tabitha, mistake, mistake, mistake.
She was ignoring it because she was going to get paid.
FAILURE PROBABILITY 50.00%, said the voice.
She was ignoring it because now she had to steer into the black mouth of the shell and right down its throat.
If she'd been pretending to be busy before, she really was busy now.
The vast curled lips of the station gaped around her.
Between them the force curtain rippled and parted.
Like a leaf whirled down a dark drain, the Alice Liddell swept out of the void and into a world of shadows.
There were huge batteries of spotlights trained on the floor of the cavern, but they did little to relieve the gloom.
Braking fast, Tabitha flew over a scene of obscure industry as stygian and grimy as any image of the shop floor of Hell.
Insectile service vehicles crept hither and thither among serpentine feed lines, while filthy drones and animate mechanics crawled over partly dismantled ships.
This, Tabitha thought, is where I have to let them put a new crystal in the Alice .
She put the thought down with all the other unpleasant thoughts she kept having and flew.
Now they were between the tiered docking bays, great blackened cliffs of open hangars where five hundred midrange craft can be housed, five deep.
Tabitha could see that many of the hangars were empty, or filled with equipment and odds and ends of machinery which were no longer ships, if they ever had been.
But there were ships there: scouts, freighters, tourist shuttles, other barges too.
With Marco on the radio announcing his arrival to half a  dozen people, Tabitha took the Alice rolling along the side of the valley, past the darkened chariot of some Terran senator paying an incognito visit to the brothels, and a recent model Freimacher Charisma, one runner broken, half buried beneath somebody else's spilt cargo.
The top tier of hangars was in darkness.
From one bay only, the blue flare of a navigation beacon suddenly shone out.
‘There?’ asked Tabitha.
‘There,’ said Marco.
Tabitha levelled off, dumped momentum, and tapped the retros.
Cautiously she posted the Alice in at the beacon.
She nearly didn't see the two attendant figures; but there they were on the stem scanners.
The blue light erased the humanity from their narrow faces.
They looked spectral and morose.
One waved its hand.
‘Who are they?’ asked Tabitha, bearing down on the inertials.
She could barely hear Marco's reply for the noise.
‘That's the Twins,’ he said.
READY
This morning Saskia asked me what sign I am.
I didn't know what she meant at first.
WHAT DID SHE MEAN, CAPTAIN?
WAS IT SOMETHING ABOUT MY REGISTRATION?
No, it's astrology.
You know, Sagittarius and Virgo, all that.
Horoscopes on the net.
A twelfth of the people in Terra space will find new romance on Tuesday.
My Auntie Muriel believes in that.
Destiny in the stars.
God knows how they work it out if you were born on Mars.
But it reminded me, of this bloke I met in a port once.
New Malibu.
Somewhere like that.
Void surfers sheathed in silver lamé.
Bored dowagers with wisps snuggling on the shoulders, whispering flattery and malicious rumour in their perfectly sculpted ears.
The cradles at the bar draped with Thrant zebru furs
WHAT WERE WE DOING THERE?
Delivering shoes.
Platform heels, I think they were.
Just the thing to go with that glytex suit with the see-through lubricant ducts and tungsten bearings.
Vac party gear.
PURE ENVY.
What?
Me?
I BELIEVE SO
Oh, come on, Alice.
BECAUSE YOU'VE NEVER BEEN INVITED.
To a vac party?
You must be joking.
I work here 
BUT THEY'RE VERY GLAMOROUS OCCASIONS, I UNDERSTAND
Alice, you're talking to a woman who's seen a skipfest on the Raven of October .
That was glamour.
New Malibu is lavish tat.
Money in drag.
TELL ME ABOUT THE SKIPFEST.
Mm, some other time.
I was just thinking about this man —
AH.
Not that sort of man A plughead A serial component of the Holy Sepulchre of the Expanded Neurosphere.
They have some rule if you're shipping into Malibu, the usual sort of thing.
You have to spend some proportion of the fee there on the rock.
That's pure money, that is.
Naked money.
The left hand paying the right hand.
So I was in the port, running around trying to charge up a card from the outlets, and none of them were working I was putting in my ID, and the authority for the credit, and the screen would say
PLEASE WAIT A LITTLE WHILE
That's right.
And I'd wait, and I'd wait, and then it would say
INSUFFICIENT FUNDS FOR TRANSACTION
Aha, no.
No, it didn't even get that far.
PLEASE REFER TO PERSONAL ENQUIRIES.
A CLERK WILL BE HAPPY TO ASSIST WITH YOUR TRANSACTION.
And
THERE WASN'T A CLERK IN SIGHT.
You're very chatty today, Alice.
SORRY, CAPTAIN.
Have I told you this one before?
OH, PROBABLY.
BUT TELL ME AGAIN.
No, what's the point?
You must remember it better than I do.
me telling you, I mean.
You've probably got it recorded somewhere, haven't you?
I DON'T REMEMBER, CAPTAIN.
No, go on.
BUT IT'S TRUE.
I DON'T REMEMBER.
TRULY I DON'T.
But you could find it.
IF YOU TOLD ME TO, YES.
I'M SURE I COULD.
WOULDN'T YOU RATHER TELL ME AGAIN?
All right.
It seems a bit pointless, that's all.
NOT AT ALL.
NO STORY IS EVER THE SAME A SECOND TIME.
You're checking on me, aren't you?
YOU'RE FEELING PERSECUTED.
I wish I'd never started all this.
If I'd turned and walked out of the Moebius Strip, none of this would have happened.
I'd have found some boring ordinary job and paid off the cops and you'd have your new crystal and I'd never have met Marco and his pals and I'd be a happier woman today.
NEW MALIBU.
THE PORT.
TOURISTS IN WHITE SLEEKS AND ROBOT CARTS HUSTLING BUSINESS FOR THE HOTELS TABITHA JUTE IS  TRYING TO GET SOME SENSE OUT OF A CREDIT OUTLET OUT OF AN ENTIRE ROW OF THEM.
NONE OF THEM IS WORKING WHAT HAPPENS NEXT, CAPTAIN?
Tabitha Jute hears a voice behind her.
‘Exc-c-cuse me,’ it says.
‘Ah-ah-ah-ah Ah-ah-ah.‘
Tabitha Jute turns round.
Behind her is a young man with a tube up his nose.
His eyes are bloodshot.
His teeth are ruined.
But his implants are clean, clean and shiny.
Great, thinks Tabitha.
A plughead.
The plughead isn't wearing a silver lamé spacesuit.
He isn't wearing platform boots.
He's wearing a transparent blue plastic cagoule.
With the hood up.
‘Ah-ah-are you in contact?’ he says.
Great.
thinks Tabitha.
An evangelist plughead.
A stammering evangelist plughead.
Where do they get them?
YOU'RE NOT AT ALL FOND OF THE HOLY SEPULCHRE OF THE EXPANDED NEUROSPHERE.
No.
BECAUSE OF YOUR SISTER.
Yes.
ANGIE.
Yes.
ANGIE WENT OFF TO BE A PLUGHEAD.
You remembered that well enough.
THANK YOU, CAPTAIN.
I DO TRY.
So did he.
He kept going on about being aligned and interfacing .
All the while he was stroking the  casing of the outlet I was stuck on.
‘Th-th-there's no n-need to b-be m-m-misunderstood by a m-m-machine ev-ev-ev-ever again.’
WHY DIDN'T YOU RID YOURSELF OF HIM?
Because I'm a wimp.
INDEED YOU AREN'T.
Yes I am.
I felt sorry for him.
BECAUSE OF THE STAMMER?
Because of Angie.
I'm hopeless with plugheads, I always give them money.
Especially if they're women.
I always think, it could be her.
THAT'S NOT VERY PROBABLE.
That's not the point .
He had the most amazing head.
It was the shape of a helmet, the way you always think cops' heads should be when they take off their helmets.
And he had the jaw to go with it, a great slab of a jaw.
His whole face was like a slab.
actually.
as if something had come down, an almighty hand, and flattened it.
It practically went in at the nose.
There was a groove where the tube ran, up under his ear and across his cheek.
‘We need to treat them properly,’ he said, caressing the machine.
You'll have to imagine the stammer.
‘Feel what they're trying to tell us.‘
I said, ‘I know what it's trying to tell me.
It's telling me to go away.’
He wouldn't have that.
He laughed, a high-pitched little squeak of a laugh, like people do when a child makes a cute mistake.
‘No, no,’ he said.
‘It's telling you it can't understand you.
You're confusing it.’
I said.
‘What do you mean, confusing it?
I'm answering its questions.
I've given it all the information it asked for, now let it give me my money.‘
‘But have you opened yourself to it?’ he said, smiling.
‘Really opened your heart and mind and asked it to come in?’
I looked at his implants.
The scar tissue was old and seamed.
They'd obviously been badly infected at some time.
But the polish on the sockets made them look like new.
For the hell of it, I said: ‘Show me.’
I knew I was going to hate it.
His eyes glazed over.
His right arm went up as if there was a string pulling it.
The fingers of his hand pressed the side of his head.
The rest of him didn't move at all.
He started to hum through his nose.
Then he took off his fingertip.
He put his finger in the jack of the outlet.
With the other hand he kept stroking the casing, rubbing and patting it.
And he kept humming.
He was singing to the credit machine.
Some kids coming by said, ‘Hey, look at him!’
They stopped and stared.
They started to snigger.
There was a cop over by the water bar, a human one.
She was trying to chat up the boy who was serving.
She noticed the kids, and the plughead, and she started paying attention.
‘All right.’
I told him.
‘That'll do.’
The cop hitched up her trousers and came sauntering over.
I was afraid for him.
I wanted to get rid of him, but not to a cop.
‘Forget it,’ I muttered.
The cop came close up.
Behind her visor she was checking us, reading my insignia.
She said.
‘Is this man bothering you, captain?’
‘No,’ I said.
‘It's all right.
It's personal.
Thank you,’ I said.
The cop gave me a hard look and moved off.
I tried to walk away.
I thought he'd leave the machine alone and follow me.
I thought that was the prime directive of all evangelists:Don't Let Go .
But he was into his machine, into the network.
He was interfacing.
He was away.
‘What's your name?’ he called.
I came back.
‘Jute,’ I said.
I thought, He really is going to make it work.
The cop was still monitoring us.
I tried to look as if this was perfectly normal, as if I'd asked him to make the entry for me.
as if he was the clerk who was happy to help me with my transaction.
He was certainly happy.
I leaned over his shoulder.
shielding him from the cop.
He smelled of solder and Vaseline.
I told him my name and the numbers.
He hummed the little tones as he pressed each key.
I told him the credit authority number.
I didn't give him my card.
‘Let me have the card,’ he said.
and held out his hand.
I reached past him and slotted it myself.
He smiled vacantly.
‘No, no,’ he said.
Before I could stop him.
he took the card out of the slot, pulled back his left cuff and pressed the card to his wrist.
‘Oh,’ he said.
‘Oh T-Tabitha.’
He bared his horrible teeth.
‘I know you now,’ he cooed.
‘I know so m-m-much about you.’
He was reading my data as it fed through him into the outlet.
I could feel him rooting through my past.
‘Get out of my files,’ I said.
‘Open your heart,’ he said.
He was whispering.
‘Open your m-m-mind.’
‘Give me that,’ I said, and I snatched the card.
There was a little magnetic tug as it came off his wrist.
I stuffed it back in my pocket.
‘But you're beautiful,’ he said.
‘Inside.
You're really integrated.’
He gaped at me in silly bliss.
his great jaw hanging down like an open hatch.
Suddenly I didn't believe him.
I didn't believe he'd got anything from the card.
It was all a routine, a schtick he'd pull on any sucker to convince them something really happened when you ‘interfaced’.
‘All right,’ I said, ‘what sign am I ?’
‘Sign?’ he said.
I was sure then he didn't know.
I pressed him.
‘Star sign,’ I said.
He took his finger out of the machine and smiled his goofy smile.
‘We are all under the sign of Capella now, Tabitha,’ he said gently.
‘Th-th-thank you for the dona-a-a-ation,’ he said.
And he shuffled away.
‘Hey!’
I called.
‘Hey, come back here!’
He didn't.
I whirled round, looking for the cop.
She'd gone.
The water boy was laughing at me.
DID YOU GO AFTER THE MAN, CAPTAIN?
No.
I let him go.
BUT WHY?
Because he was a plughead.
Because of Angie.
Next, of course, the Perks came, swarming up into the open end of the hangar where the Alice sat, ticking and steaming as she cooled.
Tabitha saw them through the viewport: silhouettes of black on purple, scrambling up into the hangar and clinging, chittering, to the knobbly brown walls.
Their flat little heads swivelled this way and that, their eyes shining blue in the flaring light of the beacon.
Her first thought was, They're after me.
Then she remembered the racket they ran here, in the spaceship docks of Plenty.
She turned on the external floods, filling the bay with deathly white light.
She saw the Perks flinch and blink, and felt a certain vengeful delight.
She checked the scanners.
The mysterious Twins were nowhere to be seen.
She turned to Marco, who was lifting Tal out of his travelling case.
‘They want money,’ she told him.
‘I know,’ said Marco.
He set the little green alien on his shoulder and leaned on the console, looking out at the Perks.
He seemed to be excited about something.
‘Watch this.’
Perks were climbing into the utility bunkers of the parking bay, bobbing about in there.
Between them they were picking up the power line, the hoses for oxygen and wastes.
Others were already wriggling around in the Alice 's undercarriage, zeroing in on the inlets.
Tabitha felt a powerful desire to turn the extinguishers on them.
‘Well, hurry up,’ she said.
She looked at the clock.
Just under four hours, to phone in the money and let her off the hook.
Let Alice off the hook.
She hadn't told Alice, that she was on the hook.
There were now two gangs of Perks, each ten or twelve strong.
They looked poor, and unhealthy.
Many of them were moulting.
They weren't wearing street regalia, like the Perks of Schiaparelli.
They had grubby  overalls on, and caps with protective masks, through which each gang peered at the other.
The gang holding the hoses stayed back.
The other one milled around beside the ship.
The two gangs looked very much like two families.
There were one or two adults at the centre of each, directing operations; elders, stooped and greying, weaving about on the periphery; and in between, aunts and uncles and cousins and assorted offspring yammering and pawing each other .
The youngsters dared one another to touch the hot ship.
There was a muffled squeal: somebody had dared, or been shoved.
The elders weaved in and out, cuffing heads indiscriminately.
‘Cheee !
Cheeee !’
‘They always do this,’ Marco explained.
‘You have to pay this lot to get out of the way.
Then you have to pay the other lot to hook you up.’
The cockpit of the Alice was getting steamy.
With her hand Tabitha wiped a crescent in the condensation thickening on the viewport.
‘Go on, then,’ she said.
‘In a minute, in a minute.
It's terrific.
Isn't it?
The drama.’
He chuckled.
Tabitha said nothing.
She hated this; hated all Perks now and for ever, wherever.
She wasn't going to be happy until that two-fifty was zapped back across the void to Mirabeau Precinct.
At the same time, she was in no hurry to go up into the pleasure dome that hung so ominous and vast above their heads.
Tabitha Jute, remember, had not yet been up to the other floors of Plenty.
She had always preferred to take it on its reputation, which was, as I say, not good.
It sounded like a dangerous place, somewhere you could swiftly find yourself robbed, raped, or suddenly erased.
Somewhere where strange people would charge you extortionate sums of money for things you  didn't even want to have done to you.
No, the docks were quite enough for Captain Jute.
The worst you got down here was strange sudden slithering movements in the shadows where there hadn't been anything a minute ago; crazed Vespan mechanics with tales of fabulous Frasque treasure abandoned in a bay near here, somewhere, just round the next bend; gangs of Perk extortioners…
The Perks guarding the inlets were beginning to twitch.
They were scratching at the airlock.
‘Cheeeeee…‘
The sound seemed to disturb Tal.
He made a pensive sound like a distant bugle.
He lifted one claw and flexed it.
‘No, I think it's great,’ said Marco.
‘Tribal.
Like football.’
‘Get rid of them,’ said Tabitha.
‘Razors!’ tooted Tal at once.
‘Razor pemmican!’
‘Chill out, Tal,’ said Marco.
‘I'm going.
I'll take care of it.’
He held out his arm to Tabitha.
‘Here, take him a moment.’
Before Tabitha could comply, or refuse, someone else decided to act.
In spangled blue pyjamas and bare feet he came bowling out of nowhere past the ship, somersaulted over the guard of Perks and cannoned into the hook-up crew, scattering them like tenpins.
‘Oh dear, Tal,’ said Marco, ‘the Twins have got impatient.’
Tal gave a most unparrotlike crow and flew up to perch on the top of a monitor.
‘Great,’ said Tabitha.
‘Brilliant.
Start a fight.
Good plan.’
The human bowling ball, if human he was, stood up and shook himself.
Three clutching Perks fell off.
Impressed despite herself, Tabitha watched him closely.
He was tall and skinny, with a high bald forehead and a mantle of long hair halfway down his back.
His eyes were deep set, his nose thin and perpendicular, his mouth narrow and open.
His arms and legs were extraordinarily long and supple.
He windmilled them at speed in improbable directions, knocking over the Perks as they rose to their feet.
But there were twenty (or twenty-four) of them, and now they were all getting up.
Tabitha looked at Marco.
He was standing leaning on the console, a huge grin on his face.
The thin man shouted something she couldn't hear.
As the little rodents swarmed all over him, he swung his arm back, pointing dramatically towards the back of the bay.
Tal gave a piercing whistle.
‘Maaaarzipan!’ he screeched.
Tabitha winced.
She had half a mind to put him back in his box and sit on the lid.
Movement on the stern scanners caught her eye.
For a moment she was confused; she thought it was the thin man, and she couldn't work out how he'd got behind them.
But it was another slender figure, a woman, shimmying up on to the port wing, from there on to the scorching hull, running along the curve in great, light strides and flinging her arm out in front of her, pointing with her index and little fingers at the mob pulling down the man.
Fire burst in the air above them.
Flame rained down on the Perks.
There were shrieks and howls, little bodies in frantic motion, pushing and shoving each other and beating out smouldering cloth and singed feathers.
Dazzled by the flash, Tabitha saw the woman's face suddenly, close up, and upside down.
She was sprawled across the viewport, clinging to nothing, staring in at them.
Her face was the man's face, thin as a blade and bald  above.
A pencil-line of moustache decorated her caprine upper lip.
She smiled and winked at Marco — all this in an instant after the flare exploded and before she threw herself down, arms and legs spread wide, at the shrieking Perks below.
‘Snix!’
Tal observed, throatily.
The Perks were running from the hangar, bounding and sliding away out of sight, back down to where they came from.
Marco clapped his hands.
Tabitha looked for the man.
He had vanished again.
She saw the woman, a flicker of blue on a port scanner, gone.
‘That was bloody stupid,’ she said.
‘They won!’ cried Marco, triumphantly.
He reached for her.
She let him give her a hug, kissed him lightly.
‘Get a move on,’ she said.
She pointed to the clock.
‘Aren't you coming?’
‘Not with that lot after your blood, no I'm not.
I had enough of them in Schiaparelli, remember?’
He dismissed this with a cutting wave of his hand.
‘They're history,’ he said.
‘They won't bother us again.’
‘They'll be looking out for you,’ she said.
‘Up there.’
She raised her eyes to the weightless tons stacked above their heads.
He took her hand.
He looked into her eyes.
‘Now Tabitha,’ he said.
She took her hand back.
‘Just bring me that chip, Marco,’ she said.
‘Then we'll see.’
‘Hey,’ he said softly.
‘There's nothing to be afraid of.
I'll take care of you.
You know I will.
Haven't I taken care of you this far?’
She ignored him, turning away to look out of the viewport.
The abandoned hook-ups lay like waiting snakes on the stained floor.
‘Go on,’ she said.
‘Go and get the money.
I'm staying here.’
‘But Tabitha, sweetie —‘
‘Don't call me sweetie.’
She looked at him.
His eyes were big, brown, pleading, beautiful.
‘While you're gone I'll make some calls and see if I can track down a crystal,’ she said firmly.
‘Then I'm going to get some sleep.
I'm knackered.’
‘C'mon,’ he said.
‘Look.
You'll sleep so much better in a hotel.
Right?
We'll fix you up in the best hotel on the station.
A room of your own.
Take a shower, a couple of drinks, you'll feel better.
Unwind.
Relax a little.
You know how you need to relax.
Then after — the show!’
‘I've seen all the show I want to see,’ she said.
A voice spoke suddenly from the starboard bow monitor.
‘Come, Captain.
Don't be ungracious.’
‘You're our guest ,’ said the same voice, from the same monitor the other side.
‘What?’ said Tabitha.
‘Who did that?’
Her voice boomed out around the echoing hangar.
Tabitha lunged at the controls.
Startled, Tal flew from his perch straight past her head, swerving at the last moment, flapping a wing in her face.
Flailing at the air where he'd been, she struck out at the switch to turn off the PA that had suddenly inexplicably turned itself on.
‘Who was that?
Was that you?’ she demanded, confronting Tal, who'd been nowhere near the switch.
The monitors hissed gently.
‘Here, buddy.’
Marco was going down the steps to the airlock.
Tal took up his place on his shoulder.
Marco stroked him under his non-existent chin, murmuring consolingly to him.
‘Go on,’ she said.
‘Go and get the money.
I'm staying here.’
‘But Tabitha, sweetie —‘
‘Don't call me sweetie.’
She looked at him.
His eyes were big, brown, pleading, beautiful.
‘While you're gone I'll make some calls and see if I can track down a crystal,’ she said firmly.
‘Then I'm going to get some sleep.
I'm knackered.’
‘C'mon,’ he said.
Look.
You'll sleep so much better in a hotel.
Right?
We'll fix you up in the best hotel on the station.
A room of your own.
Take a shower, a couple of drinks, you'll feel better.
Unwind.
Relax a little.
You know how you need to relax.
Then after — the show!’
‘I've seen all the show I want to see,’ she said.
A voice spoke suddenly from the starboard bow monitor.
‘Come, Captain.
Don't be ungracious.’
‘You're our guest ,’ said the same voice, from the same monitor the other side.
‘What?’ said Tabitha.
‘Who did that?’
Her voice boomed out around the echoing hangar.
Tabitha lunged at the controls.
Startled, Tal flew from his perch straight past her head, swerving at the last moment, flapping a wing in her face.
Flailing at the air where he'd been, she struck out at the switch to turn off the PA that had suddenly inexplicably turned itself on.
‘Who was that?
Was that you?’ she demanded, confronting Tal, who'd been nowhere near the switch.
The monitors hissed gently.
‘Here, buddy.’
Marco was going down the steps to the airlock.
Tal took up his place on his shoulder.
Marco stroked him under his non-existent chin, murmuring consolingly to him.
The electrics flickered as the lines were coupled up.
A breeze fluttered into the cockpit from the air vents.
Tabitha whirled back to the monitors.
The floodlights shone on the blotchy brown walls of the hangar, the filthy floor, the roof.
There was nothing on any of the screens except the blue flaring signal beacon and a big untidy pile of bags and boxes by the door of the lift.
The hoses had all been connected.
There was no one to be seen anywhere.
Tabitha got up fast.
She jumped down the steps and pushed past Marco into the airlock.
She threw open the outer door and looked down the side of the ship.
A foul zephyr of ageing artificial air washed in around her, heavy with rancid oil and zinc.
‘Who's there?
Come on out!’
There was the slightest suspicion of something behind her, up in the cockpit: a whisper of movement — not even that: a sort of parenthesis in the silence where a whisper would have been if anything had made one.
Tabitha leapt back out of the airlock to the foot of the steps.
The woman with the moustache was sitting in her web.
The man was across from her, in the co-pilot's web.
They had the latches closed, the headsets on and plugged in at the console.
But for the moustache, their faces were identical.
They bowed.
‘Saskia and Mogul Zodiac,’ they announced, in unison.
‘The Twins,’ said Marco.
‘All right,’ said Tabitha.
‘Out.
All of you.’
‘She didn't like it,’ said Mogul.
‘It's plain to tell,’ said his sister.
She was absorbedly prodding the aged melon, which she had somehow got hold of.
She tossed it up and caught it as it came slowly down.
‘Would you like us to eat this for you?’
‘What?’ said Tabitha.
‘No,’ she said.
‘Put that down.
I want you out of here, all of you.
I want everybody off my ship.’
Marco put his arm around her.
Tabitha pushed it away.
‘Come on, Tabitha,’ he said.
‘Don't be like that.
Wasn't that great?
Wasn't that a great show?
Aren't they terrific?’
‘I've told you the arrangement, Marco,’ said Tabitha.
‘Go on.
Leave.’
‘Tabitha, believe me.
That was nothing.
Nothing to what you could see tonight.’
He slapped his hands together and beamed around the overcrowded cockpit.
‘I'm not going to see anything,’ she said.
‘I'm going to sleep.
I've got a lot of driving ahead of me.’
‘We can help you with that,’ Marco said.
‘No you can't,’ she said, getting annoyed with him.
‘What you can do is go and get that money .
Time's running out.
And you've got a show to get ready.
So now I want you and your whole box of tricks off my ship and out of my way.
Go.
Go on.’
The Twins slipped out of the webs and somersaulted lightly down the steps.
‘Box of tricks?’ said Saskia.
‘What does she mean, our box of tricks?’
She sounded offended.
Her brother patted her arm consolingly.
‘The captain is a little nervous, I think,’ he said.
‘A little overawed.’
He gave Tabitha a smile as he passed.
‘She said box of tricks,’ Saskia complained, following.
‘Give me that,’ said Tabitha, snatching the melon from Saskia, who was balancing it on her arm, rolling it slowly from her shoulder down to her wrist and back again.
They stepped through the airlock and dropped lightly, feet first, to the floor.
There was a clap of wings and Tal suddenly landed on Tabitha's shoulder.
‘Goodbye,’ he carolled, ‘Is the hardest word to say, The hardest song to play…‘
‘Marco, take him away.’
‘Here, Tal,’ said Marco, snapping his fingers.
‘I can't believe this,’ he added, intensely, as the bird flew on to his shoulder.
‘You're not coming with me?
Don't you know how much I want you?
Don't you know what you mean to me?’
‘I'm beginning to get a pretty good idea,’ said Tabitha.
‘Look.
I know I'm not perfect,’ he said.
‘I'm an artist.
We all are.
You have to lighten up.
You can't expect us to be like other people.
Oh honey, I'm not saying it'll be easy.’
‘I am,’ said Tabitha.
She held out her hand.
‘The chip,’ she said.
The Twins had reached the doors and summoned the lift.
‘No,’ said Marco.
Tabitha stared at him, open-mouthed.
He lifted the parrot off his shoulder and launched it out of the airlock.
‘Go, Tal.
Go join them.
We have to have this thing out,’ he said, staring fixedly at Tabitha.
Tabitha bared her teeth and clenched her fists.
‘There's nothing to have, Marco.’
‘I'm not going,’ he said.
‘If you don't get me that money you'll be looking for another ship,’ she reminded him fiercely.
‘I can't leave you,’ he said.
‘You're going to run away, aren't you?
The moment those lift doors close, you're going to take off out of here.’
‘I'm not going anywhere ,’ she shouted at him, ‘not until I've got —‘
There was a scream and a whoop from the back of the bay.
Tabitha and Marco rushed to the door.
The Twins were standing either side of the lift, in identical positions, trying to hold its doors closed.
The doors were open just a crack.
Several Perks were fighting to get out of the crack.
‘Cheee!’ they screamed.
‘Chee-chee-chee-cheeeeee!!’
A Perk struggled out of the lift; another.
A third was emerging.
The first one leapt at Mogul.
Tal flew at the second, claws wide, beak stabbing.
Wedging the door with one foot, Mogul lashed out with the other.
He kicked the Perk in the throat.
It fell writhing to the ground.
Tal's Perk was shrieking.
There was a thud.
Saskia had thrown something at the third and hit it on the head.
The Perk dropped like a stone.
Saskia slammed the lift doors shut while Mogul hit the control to send it on its way.
Saskia bent and retrieved her missile, then the Twins came pelting back to the ship.
Tal dropped his limp victim and flew straight over their heads, into the airlock.
‘Looks like we're all staying here,’ said Marco.
Saskia and Mogul vaulted aboard.
They were hardly panting.
‘I did warn you,’ said Tabitha.
Saskia tossed her burden into Tabitha's hands as Mogul shut the door.
It was the melon again, or what was left of it.
‘I don't want to eat that now,’ she said.
‘Okay,’ said Marco, very serious suddenly.
‘Is there another way out of here?’
Tabitha jerked a thumb in the direction of the open mouth of the hangar.
‘You can climb,’ she said.
‘Right,’ he said.
‘So can they,’ said Tabitha.
She was amused.
She was feeling vindicated.
Her plans were unchanged.
And she'd just had an idea, one which would get them all moving.
Climbing up into the cockpit, Tabitha threw the melon in the disposal and wiped her hands.
She opened her web and sat down.
She glanced at the clock, and away again quickly.
Three hours.
Barely.
Uninvited, Marco came and stood beside her.
Ignoring him, she pressed a tab on the console and keyed in a series of commands.
Then she sat back, her arms folded.
On top of the Alice Liddell , the floods swivelled and became searchlights, two broad beams shining up at the roof of the bay and on out into the dark gulf beyond.
There were two black lines of metal there, two rails slanting up out of the hangar and disappearing in the darkness
‘This will be right up your street,’ said Tabitha.
In the darkness outside, something was moving.
Everyone crowded into the cockpit and stared out through the viewport.
Marco stood behind Tabitha, his fingers hooked in the web above her head.
Tal clung to the co-pilot's web where Saskia and Mogul sat, unselfconsciously entwined, peering solemnly upwards like a pair of kittens.
Sliding down the rails, a large dark mass was coming towards them.
It was bulky and rounded, a huge bundle suspended from some sort of wheeled carrier.
When it entered the hangar the tracking device clicked and swivelled.
Unreeling cables, it began to lower the bundle.
On its way down, the bundle unfolded, spreading wings left and right.
Its fabric shifted in the light, cords sliding across one another, and the light shone through and between them.
It was a net.
There was a sound of machinery starting to grind behind them.
They all turned round, all but Tabitha, who continued to watch the descent of the net on a bow monitor, a satisfied expression on her face.
Her passengers hurried down into the empty hold, where the roof of the Alice was splitting into two.
Along its length was a thread of blue light, which widened, widened, as the two halves of the roof retracted, rumbling gently down into the walls.
The huge net dropped steadily through the gap between the coiled cargo extensors, its pulleys whining.
Tal flew up to the catwalk for safety, while Marco and the Twins backed hastily out of the way.
Tabitha hung her bag on her shoulder and came walking nonchalantly down from the cockpit, not even glancing up to see the great cables gliding rapidly down towards her head.
This was her show.
She walked at a leisurely pace to the back of the hold, where she unlocked a control panel and pressed several buttons.
She turned.
The edge of the net came down, thumping softly on the deck, bowing to her, centimetres in front of her feet, and all the machinery stopped.
At Tabitha's side Marco was clutching his duffel and eyeing the unfolded net in some apprehension.
‘You want us to ride up in this?’
‘Or there's the lift,’ said Tabitha.
‘It'll be back any minute.’
‘Hey, no, it's great,’ he said apprehensively.
‘Really.’
The Twins came and inspected the net.
Saskia prodded the cords with her toe.
‘It looks like a safety net,’ she said with distaste.
‘It may be time to be a little flexible,’ said her brother languidly.
‘Our situation is desperate, perhaps.’
‘But we never —’ Saskia began.
‘Don't worry,’ said Tabitha maliciously.
‘You won't fall through the holes.’
Saskia stared at her.
Tabitha turned away and keyed the lifting sequence.
Overhead, the machinery began to whirr again.
‘You'd better hurry, Marco,’ she said.
‘You've got three hours to be back with the money.’
Saskia shrugged, delicately, and she and Mogul turned handsprings, one after the other, and bounced lightly into the middle of the net.
‘Where does this thing end up?’ asked Marco.
‘Warehousing deliveries,’ said Tabitha precisely.
She was enjoying being back in control.
The lifting cables tautened.
Tal flew between them, over the rising sides of the net, and circled high above.
‘Marzipan!’ he called.
‘Major shoes!’
‘All aboard,’ said Tabitha.
At their feet the edge of the net began to shift off the deck.
Marco turned, a strange urgency in his eyes.
He hugged her suddenly, pinning her arms to her sides.
He kissed her furiously.
‘Mmmff —‘
He jerked her off her feet.
‘Mmmf-ow!’ she shouted as their lips parted.
She was falling to the deck, and he was falling with her, his arms tight around her.
The rising net snared her ankles.
Together she and he slammed into it.
It was already off the deck and bearing them smoothly upwards.
Winded, Tabitha gasped, a horrible gagging croak.
Her face was pressed sideways into the mesh.
Her bag was digging in her ribs.
Marco was on top of her.
The Twins were on top of him.
She yelled an incoherent yell.
The weight lessened as the Twins climbed up the cables.
Marco was still on top of her.
Oily cord was cutting into her all over.
All she could see, with one eye, was the roof of her ship, the Alice Liddell , gaping beneath them.
Something green flew out of the hold.
It was Tal.
Marco had worked his arms free and was trying to get up on his knees.
As the net swung he stumbled and stuck a knee hard in the small of her back.
‘Ow !‘
Then he was up, leaning away from her to let her claw herself around into a sprawling position.
They were coming out of the end of the hangar now.
The blue twilight flickered and died as the beacon went out.
‘Uh !’ said Tabitha.
‘Uhh !’
‘You okay?’ asked Marco anxiously.
‘Tabitha?
Okay?’
She swung a punch at him.
Her arm caught in the mesh and her fist hit him on the side of the head.
Her foot slipped suddenly through the net.
She pitched over sideways, howling in incoherent outrage.
They passed into the fitful darkness of the dock cavern.
Above Tabitha and Marco the Twins hung from the  cables in elegant nautical positions, feet braced in the netting.
The floor of the docks retreated beneath them, lane markings shining dimly, gouts of sullen flame flaring suddenly in the gloom.
Tabitha struggled up on her knees, yelling at Marco.
‘You —‘
‘I know,’ he said.
‘I'm sorry.
Really, I'm sorry.
Please tell me you're okay.’
‘Okay?’ she yelled in his face.
‘Okay ?’
The net swept them up through an oblong portal faced with irregular, soapy-looking tiles, into a concourse bathed in harsh amber light.
Here twenty tracks terminated at radial quays.
At theirs, a suspicious-looking drone operator in overalls came out from her booth to watch their arrival, coloured leads trailing back from her scalp.
Around her, a flock of cargo drones gathered.
There didn't seem to be any Perks about.
Before the hoist came to a halt, the Twins were up and out of it, hopping lightly ashore and closing in on the woman, one either side of her.
They greeted her with a flourish.
‘The Amazing Zodiac Twins, madam.’
‘With our compliments.’
‘Two tickets to our performance tonight.’
The woman fingered the electrode in her audial centre.
Something was coming through.
She made no attempt to take the proffered tickets.
Saskia — or was it Mogul?— tucked them into the breast pocket of her overalls for her.
‘The Mercury Garden.’
‘At eight!’
They cartwheeled by.
‘Wait a minute,’ bellowed the woman.
The Twins stopped, turned.
‘Port tax,’ she said, heavily and slowly.
‘Entry permit.
Passport.
Vehicle registration.’
As the net finally freed her, Tabitha watched Mogul Zodiac make a pass in the air in front of the drone operator's eyes.
‘I think you'll find these all in order,’ he said, showing her his hand.
His hand was empty.
Marco made an elaborate performance of helping Tabitha out of the net.
She pulled away from him.
He closed in on her.
‘Take it easy,’ he murmured.
‘We're almost out of here.’
‘Get off me!’ she shouted.
The operator turned her head, staring glassily at them.
All her drones turned too, mimicking her.
‘My sister,’ explained Marco, grinning absurdly and hugging Tabitha tight.
‘Marigold the Mentalist.
Space travel doesn't agree with her.
Come along, sister, you're safe now.’
She pushed him violently away.
She was going to hit him, even if they threw her in jail again.
Only one thing stayed her hand.
The woman was staring at them, and Tabitha didn't know who was looking through her eyes.
She didn't need any more trouble.
She knew the cops wouldn't just fine her.
She had heard the cops on Plenty didn't even bother throwing you in jail.
The rumour was, they stripped you  and took you to the adventure zone.
Then they went away.
She settled her bag on her shoulder.
Marco was moving in on her again.
‘You want your money?’ he muttered.
‘Better stick with me.’
‘I need to see your entry permit,’ said the drone handler, doggedly.
‘Passport.
Vehicle registration.
Port tax receipt code.’
Tabitha snarled.
She hauled out her ID, held it next to her captain's shoulder patch.
‘I'm a bargee, owner-operator, that's my ship down there,’ she said, pointing down the side of the quay.
She thrust her wrist monitor in the woman's face.
‘See?
BGK009059.’
‘They have mine,’ said Marco, pointing.
The drone handler turned to look.
Tal and the Zodiac Twins had moved off along the quay, between the piles of crates and drums, out of sight.
‘Oh,’ said the handler uncertainly.
‘Okay,’ she said.
Her eyes were bloodshot and confused.
Marco grabbed Tabitha and hustled her off the quay.
‘Be sure to come to the show!’ he called back, waving cheerily.
‘I'm going back,’ Tabitha insisted.
‘No time,’ he said, getting in her way.
‘I've got to shut the roof,’ she said.
‘Do you want somebody to steal her?
This is Plenty, Marco, remember?’
He put his arms round her.
‘Get off me!’ she said.
He wouldn't.
‘Get off, Marco!’
She elbowed him in the ribs.
Unfortunately, at that moment, along the quay a cop came sauntering.
He moved with the mechanical lope of hydraulic-assisted legs.
His head turned this way and that.
He caught sight of Tabitha struggling with Marco.
He scanned them  with his cyclops eye.
His face was blank.
He had a couple of guns.
‘Is there a problem?’ the cop asked, thickly.
His mouth was full of stainless steel.
‘No,’ said Tabitha hurriedly, ‘no, no problem.
Thank you.’
The cop said, ‘Do you require a duel licence?’
Tabitha, startled, said, ‘A what?’
Marco was looking the other way.
‘A duel licence,’ said the cop.
‘You were hitting him.
You require a duel licence to hit him.
That's in this sector.
This is warehouse sector 4.’
‘Just a little family dispute,’ said Marco.
‘My sister, Marigold the Mentalist.’
Tabitha kicked his shin.
‘We're in a hurry,’ Marco said to the cop, ‘thank you, thank you, very much.’
They tried to hurry past.
The cop blocked their path, his visor flickering as he computed.
‘A duel licence is ten scutari,’ he said.
He chewed his lip, which was raw and wet.
‘We don't need a licence,’ Tabitha said loudly and clearly.
‘All right?’
The cop shrugged, his shoulder servos whining.
He was obviously having problems with his brain.
He was a low-grade cyborg, a disposable.
‘I got to charge you for the call-out,’ said the cop.
Tabitha protested.
‘We didn't call you!’
It was no use arguing.
‘That's two seventy-five,’ he said, ‘for the call-out.’
Marco dug in his pocket for his credit chip.
‘Okay, okay,’ he said.
‘Here you go.’
The cop's head whirred right and left, scanning the pair of them.
‘A little family misunderstanding,’ continued Marco, taking the cop's forearm and pressing the chip into place.
‘Well, that's showbiz!
Speaking of which, I trust you'll accept these two complimentary tickets to our show this evening at the Mercury Garden.’
‘Donations are gratefully received,’ intoned the cop.
The tickets in the data clip on his chest, he whirled around and motored easily away.
Marco clasped Tabitha's hands.
‘You mustn't do things like that,’ he murmured, urgently.
‘Especially here.
I won't always be able to bail you out of them.’
She set her jaw.
‘I'm going to go and lock the ship,’ she said.
‘She'll be okay,’ he said easily.
The credit chip twinkled in his fingers.
‘How much have you got on that chip, Marco?’
‘I told you.
Not enough.’
They stood an instant, staring at each other.
‘Where's the right one?’
‘Hannah has it.
You want to go and get it?
That's where I'm going,’ he said, in tones of perfect reasonability.
She exhaled explosively, ground her teeth.
‘Okay,’ he said with every sign of regret, turning to her as they walked, ‘so you don't trust me.
I can't deal with you if you don't trust me.
Come and meet Hannah Soo, she'll put the money right in your hand.
Then you can go straight back to the ship, if you want.
That's all I'm saying.’
Tal appeared out of nowhere, flying through the dusty amber air to land on his shoulder.
‘Marco,’ called a voice.
‘Marco.’
The same voice, from another place.
‘Hannah's waiting, Marco.’
‘Hurry, Marco.’
One of the Twins appeared, climbing languidly down the poles of some scaffolding.
Marco checked his watch.
‘We'd better get a cab,’ he said.
As he spoke a cab appeared, a grimy little robot jitney with the other Twin in the back.
It coasted to a stop by the scaffolding.
The first Twin swung briefly on a horizontal pole and jumped neatly aboard.
‘Hurry up, Marco,’ they chorused.
Those two were going to give her the creeps if she really had to take them all the way to Titan.
She made up her mind, as she followed Marco into the cab, to see if she couldn't get a better deal out of this Hannah Soo.
She would persuade her the Alice wasn't right for the band themselves, take just their equipment and get the money that way.
Or else she could spin out the repair until it was too late and they had to get somebody else.
That would leave her owing Hannah, but she could sort that out later, after they'd gone.
If Hannah was the manager, there must be some other business Tabitha could do for her.
Something that didn't involve dangerous musicians and mad acrobats.
She sat next to Marco, facing the Twins.
Tal hopped around on the floor among the cigarette stubs and krillstick wrappers.
An empty drink tube rolled between their feet as the jitney wheeled into motion, whisking them away from the cargo concourse and plunging into the tunnels of Plenty.
The slipstream whirled their hair about.
Light rods flicked by overhead.
Tabitha glanced at the Zodiac Twins, who were sitting with their arms around each other, motionless as a pair of mannequins.
They really were identical.
Identical twins of different sexes, that wasn't possible, surely, was it?
She wondered whose genes had been tinkered with.
She leaned on the armrest, trying not to think of the time, and watched the grim scenery go by.
Mostly the walls were dun brown, stained with smoke or water, and crumbling where wiring lash-ups and air and waste ducts  had been hammered into place.
The tunnel curved left and right, round corners, climbing and plunging without logic or warning, while the ceiling rose and, alarmingly, fell.
Sometimes they flashed across other tunnels where vehicles were running.
There didn't seem to be any traffic code or signalling system.
The cab rocketed down a ramp into a major mall, slowing to steer between the visitors browsing among small arms dealers and gift shops.
Here the cut-price and the breakable predominated.
Racks of flak jackets and tottering towers of ‘toolkits’ and pornographic plug-ins cluttered the street.
There was a mingled stink of spicy frying, sugar and cordite.
Somebody yelled and threw a can at the cab, hitting it on the rear bumper.
Saskia spoke suddenly.
Tabitha, turning involuntarily, knew it was Saskia by her moustache.
‘I'm hungry,’ she said.
The voice the Twins shared was husky and low, a warm stream with a bed of consonants hard as stones.
Evidently English was not their first language.
Tabitha wondered if they were extraterrestrials, some unknown, unregistered kind.
‘I could eat a horse,’ said Saskia.
She looked around the lighted bays as if expecting to see one somewhere, providentially turning on a spit.
‘I'm so hungry I could eat flies and worms,’ she said, intensely, and laughed.
‘Crunchy little brown beetles.’
She caressed her brother's head.
‘Aren't you hungry?’
‘Hunger makes us keen,’ said her brother.
He spoke lazily, distantly.
‘Rubbish,’ said Saskia.
‘Hunger just makes you hungry, that's all.’
She poked Tal with her toe, taking it out on him.
He bit her boot.
The jitney turned, plunging down a bumpy alley.
Upper rooms, protruding at odd, uneven angles from the higher reaches of the walls, housed a variety of astrologers, card schools and obscure therapists.
Rugs and curtains divided the pits and caves below.
Inside the ramshackle buildings, people huddled in alcoves under dangling AV screens, smoking waterpipes, drinking beer and arguing.
There were raised voices from another alley somewhere nearby, the zap of automatic fire, a scream.
No one took any notice.
Every few metres, as the cab tipped this way and that to negotiate the base of a cold, slimy pillar or a crack in the floor, Tabitha got a glimpse into the dark spaces above and behind the makeshift partitions and aggressive fascias.
The inhabited interior of Plenty, she realized, was like a gigantic sponge, its buildings wedged into cellular, shadowy holes piled with slowly mouldering rubbish, suppurating fungi, forgotten bodies.
Tabitha jumped as Marco's hand landed on her shoulder.
‘Look at that,’ he said.
A woman in a gasmask and black foil negligée was going by, leading a man on a chain and carrying a pink ice cream.
Marco laughed.
‘Crazy place,’ he said.
She shrugged his hand away.
‘Heyy…’ he complained, wounded.
Tabitha patted the air between them sharply with the palms of her hands.
‘Off,’ she said.
One of the Twins giggled.
‘Don't annoy the pilot, Marco.’
The next cavern was darker.
Heavy music thundered from leather-curtained basements.
There was a powerful reek of ammoniates and incense, with gusts of sour wine and sour flesh.
Whores sat on balconies, drinking and staring down into the street.
Bursting sacks of uncollected refuse lay in heaps.
The jitney rushed on into another narrow tunnel.
The floor reverberated beneath it.
Openings covered with wire netting revealed a shadowy abyss.
Far below, Tabitha could see tiny bridges and spindly ladders connecting abrupt spidery promontories like jets of frozen porridge, jutting into empty space.
Marco twisted in his seat, staring back into the cavern they had just left.
‘This isn't the way,’ he said.
‘Is it?’
Tabitha looked at him, then at the Twins, who didn't reply.
They sat there smiling a secretive smile.
Tabitha wanted to tear their throats out.
Tal, responding to the sharpness of Marco's voice, tooted loudly and flew up on to his knee.
Marco, rising, brushed him quickly aside.
Recovering his balance, Tal hopped on to Tabitha's leg.
‘Get off me!’ she yelled, striking him wildly.
The alien bird evaded her with ease.
Marco was kneeling up in his seat, turning round to check the control panel.
‘Who programmed this thing?’
The Twins looked gleefully into each other 's eyes.
Tabitha confronted them.
‘What have you done?’
‘Nothing,’ they chorused.
‘Not a thing, Captain,’ said Mogul.
They were moving too fast to jump out.
Tabitha got to her feet and pushed Marco aside to peer at the controls.
They were unmarked, and totally unfamiliar.
She pulled out a penknife and started stabbing, hoping to break some vital connection.
Time was ticking by, and she was heading deeper into the unknown depths of Plenty.
Alice, she promised, the minute I'm out of this, I will fix you up.
I'll make you as good as new, she promised.
Don't take my ship away.
Please, don't take my ship away.
If they take my ship away, I'm going to kill somebody.
Nothing she damaged was making any difference.
The little car rushed on into the dismal labyrinth.
The further they descended, it seemed, the chillier it became.
The tunnels were gloomier, the only illumination coming from occasional bf tubes suspended awkwardly from holes hacked at random in the roof, no more than half a metre above their heads.
The cab hurtled along from pool to pool of the bleak, unnerving light, struggling over the large brown lumps that bulged like bubbles in the roadway.
Then the road ran out altogether and the floor tilted sharply downwards beneath them.
The Twins shrieked.
Tabitha dug her knife beneath a great cluster of wiring and gouged.
The cab skidded to a halt, its headlights pointing down a long slope of scree.
Loose pebbles slithered, bounced, rattled down into darkness and silence.
Tabitha jumped out, Marco close behind her.
‘Where the hell are we?’ she demanded.
Her voice echoed flatly from distant walls.
He stood, arms akimbo, looking around in the musty gloom.
He shook his head.
‘Shit,’ he muttered, and chuckled.
Tabitha, breathing hard, feeling the roof coming down on her, groped in her bag to see if she had a torch.
Saskia and Mogul were standing close behind her, embracing each other tightly and whispering.
Tabitha couldn't find a torch.
She looked around in the light of the headlamps.
She swallowed.
They were in a broad, low cave with streams of yellow liquid running down the walls.
She couldn't see to the bottom of the scree slope.
It seemed to go on for ever.
Tabitha almost felt like risking it.
Down, anywhere on Plenty, must lead to the docks.
Where the Alice was.
Somewhere.
Tal suddenly made a noise like a tinny victory trumpet and took off, flying back up the road.
‘He's got it,’ said Marco.
‘Follow that man.’
He grinned at Tabitha.
She frowned at him.
Tal tootled in the distance.
They began to climb towards his voice.
They climbed for several minutes, the floor of the cave flaking beneath their tread.
Tabitha and Marco went ahead, the Twins following on behind, skipping lazily from spot to spot.
‘I'm really, really sorry about this,’ said Marco soberly.
‘Those little cars go wrong all the time.
They just don't maintain them.’
‘This isn't the way we came,’ said Tabitha.
‘Tal knows where he's going,’ Marco said.
He sounded as though he believed it, so she chose to.
Ahead there was just enough light to show them they were about to enter the mouth of another tunnel.
Suddenly a searchlight was blazing in their eyes.
Throwing up her hand, Tabitha glimpsed a figure in silhouette rising up from the floor at their very feet.
It rose a long way.
A mechanical cry rang out.
‘Halt !’
Stumbling backwards, bumping into each other, they came to an untidy stop in front of the tunnel mouth.
It was barred by a black and white striped gate.
The guard, Tabitha saw as the searchlight swung away, was a robot three metres tall, covered in spikes.
Tal was sitting on the gate, facing them.
‘State your business ,’ commanded the robot.
On the gate behind it was a large white notice in seven languages.
UNRECLAIMED AREA, Tabitha read.
THE MANAGEMENT OF THIS STATION IS NOT RESPONSIBLE  FOR SAFETY OF PERSONS OR POSSESSIONS PAST THIS POINT.
Then the searchlight dazzled her again.
Marco drew himself up and spoke boldly into the light.
‘We,’ he proclaimed, encompassing them all with a theatrical gesture, ‘are Contraband.’
Instantly there was the loud click and hum of automatic weapons being readied.
‘Oh dear,’ said Saskia, delicately, and laughed.
READY
I was thinking about my Auntie Muriel.
WHAT ABOUT HER, CAPTAIN?
She has a great laugh.
When she laughs, my Auntie Muriel tips her head back and opens her mouth wide.
She looks as if she's going to take a bite out of the air.
When she laughs, she makes  a deep gurgling sound like a big baby, then she goes haw-haw-haw. a real belly laugh.
She's got quite a belly, my Auntie Muriel.
She was getting fat when I lived with her, she's probably huge now.
She's pretty casual about clothes too, she'll wander around the farm all day in her nightie, or even less, a worn-out old shirt and a pair of panties, with her tum sticking out.
She used to say, ‘Hell, Tabs, they can look at you all the time if they want to.
And they want to.’
She'd point up in the air, where the Gnats were zipping around on their little gliders, like little pointed flower petals in the sky.
Except there isn't any sky.
Not on Integrity 2.
WAS THAT YOUR NEXT HOME AFTER THE MOON, CAPTAIN?
Mm.
One of them.
I was sixteen, or seventeen.
Mum got a job, she was a spindlejack.
We got an apartment in the city, lots of space and nothing to put in it.
Mum was off working all day and half the night, and sleeping like the dead the other half.
There was nothing for me to do, I was too young to get a work permit, and mum was determined we weren't going to start breaking the law the minute we'd got there, so she called Auntie Muriel and Auntie Muriel said why not.
When she came to get me, she looked really pleased at the idea of having me working for her.
I was not convinced.
WHY NOT?
It sounded dead boring.
It was, too.
I thought Auntie Muriel was like something out of another age.
This woman I'd never seen, darker than me, darker than mum, my height but four times as big every other way, her hair hanging down in a big shaggy mane that looked  as if she cut it herself once a year, big wooden earrings in her ears and a dress down to the floor with embroidery all over it and her feet stuffed into ugly shoes that were made of leather She told us that She wanted us to admire them, because this was a big day for her, Auntie Muriel had got dressed up to come to the city and see her sister and her sister's child.
WHAT DID YOU LOOK LIKE, CAPTAIN?
Me?
I was awful, in those days I was into acid green sleeks and I had my hair cut in a triangle When I saw Auntie Muriel I thought, if that's the way you end up, working on a farm, I'll stay at home and become an underresourced juvenile But it wasn't up to me.
The farm was all the way along the tube.
in the endland It was too far to go every day, so I went for the week, came home to the flat at weekends, She had squash, groundnuts, rows of beans on nylon lines She had me for the weeding.
COULDN'T SHE HAVE GOT A ROBOT?
Auntie Muriel doesn't trust robots.
She doesn't much like machines at all, in fact.
Auntie Muriel has old-fashioned ideas about what's ‘natural-, everything should be natural, which is pretty stupid when you think where she lives, Anyway, she was quite content with the weeds and the gummed-up filters.
but even more content to have me hoe the weeds and ungum the filters for her while she sat half-naked on an ancient natural tube steel chair tipped back on two legs against the natural pulpboard side of her natural module A farmhouse, playing her warped old guitar.
Sometimes I'd wake up in the middle of the night, hearing music in my dreams, and I'd look down out of the bedroom window.
and there  she'd be, strumming away, singing about places she'd never seen and wasn't likely to, rivers and mountains and islands in the sun.
Sometimes I'd get up and go down and sit with her, look up at the Moon shining through the glass and think, at least I'm out of that.
Then I'd look at the fields of beans, glossy in the moonlight, hanging fat and glossy.
They reminded me of pricks.
GOODNESS ME.
WAS THIS A PERCEPTION OTHERS WOULD HAVE SHARED?
If they were sixteen-year-old girls, yes.
A lot of things reminded me of pricks when I was sixteen.
I was a horny little creature, you know, Alice.
I didn't really get my jollies hoeing and taking up the irrigation mats, putting them back and taking them up again.
So I was on the lookout.
Integrity 2 is a mess.
You can put any kind of gauzes in, as fine as you like, they'll silt up just the same, there's so much crap in the system.
Rather than do anything about it, the Council pay the farmers a subsidy to filter the water.
Auntie Muriel buys the cheapest gauze and spends the rest of the subsidy on red wine.
I had a row with her once.
I had a row with her several times, but this once I said, why didn't she get out there and shift some bloody irrigation mats with me, and she just slapped her belly and said she'd got too fat to bend.
Then she laughed.
You do a lot of bending, farming the Auntie Muriel method.
I'd be out in the fields, up to my shins in stinking red granules, and I'd stand there looking up, easing my aching back, and watching the Gnats fly.
There was a Gnat base nearby, on the End.
Sometimes I'd watch their kites going down into the fields overhead, down until they dwindled away out of sight, long before they reached the tops of the trees You can't do that often, though, because of all the smog.
Even on a clear day in the country, you can look along the tube there, along from Auntie Muriel's, and not be able to see the city for smog.
It's quite a job, keeping the windows clean on Integrity 2.
Weekends, mum slept.
I found my own level.
The local street kids were a scummy lot.
They called themselves the Rejects, and they were very picky about social status.
There was a girl called Carmen, she was the queen Reject, she just let me hang around with them so she could sneer at me for being a moony.
I had to do some crazy things to get their attention.
There was a boy called Murray, he was a case.
He really was an underresourced juvenile, that Murray.
He was dangerous.
Well, we liked to think he was.
I found out even Carmen was scared of Murray.
So I went with Murray.
WHERE DID YOU GO WITH HIM?
To the parlours.
To the empty malls.
To the places that hadn't quite worked out the way the designers had planned, the places where kids drift in a city, where they make up their own version of the city.
We found some things to do, Murray and me.
I knew it wouldn't last.
I was just killing time.
And Murray was crazy.
A lot of the time I didn't even like him, really.
You could see Murray was going one day, probably without even noticing, to do someone some permanent damage.
I didn't want it to be me.
Sometimes, nights on the farm, I'd sit out in the grass with Auntie Muriel and her guitar.
It was Auntie Muriel taught me to play the harmonica.
SO SOME GOOD CAME OF THIS PERIOD, THEN.
Is that your honest opinion?
WELL, YOU ENJOY IT.
I like it when it stops
YOU NEVER USED TO BE SO SELF-CRITICAL, CAPTAIN.
It's this trip, I keep blaming myself I keep asking myself how I ever let myself get dragged into it,
WE NEED THE MONEY.
We certainly do.
AND YOU WERE ATTRACTED TO MARCO METZ.
I'm just like my mum, when it comes down to it, That's why I quite admired Auntie Muriel, in a guarded sort of way I'd think, I really should try to be like her, she was so content, nothing ever fazed her, I didn't want to be a farmer, understand, but I didn't want to be like mum either, tied to a feckless man, trying to keep him and me, having to hustle all the time to stop from sinking I fancied myself on a corporate asteroid, settling down with someone who would cherish me and buy me everything I wanted Carmen and her crew had the same ideas, even if they acted like they were going to be bad girls for ever,
I thought, if I was going to find a husband with prospects, maybe I should start right away I wasn't getting any younger.
I knew where to look too.
The farm was close to one of the Ends.
did I say that?
In fact it was only fifteen minutes by bike to the escalators.
You could ride up to the vista points and look along 12. watch  the sun light up the pollution.
The End was somewhere the Rejects wouldn't have been seen dead, so when I was in my ambitious, conventional mood, that made it more attractive.
Anyway, I liked it.
The g was less, and that made me feel at home.
Also there were the boys.
THE GNATS ARE BOYS, THEN.
They are, They're police cadets, is what they are, They wear uniforms.
Very sexy.
Blue-grey slicksuits like slate and glitzy black insignia.
Shiny boots.
With gliders to match.
No Gnat would ever call his glider a kite, especially not when he was wearing his uniform.
You'd see them here and there in the city, cycling around on rallies, doing formation displays in the parks.
Up at the base, there was a place by the recruiting office with seats and a slot screen, you could stand and watch them do training flights, all unassisted stuff.
They'd fly right across the tube, riding the gravity gradients, making it look easy.
The first time I saw them, I wished I could be a Gnat.
Carmen would have loved to know that.
Carmen would have made short work of Michael too.
Michael was my secret.
He was my shining knight.
He was full white, the first full white I ever had.
Michael had long eyelashes and freckles that went down inside the neck of his uniform.
Michael was serving the community.
When the time came, I knew he would take me to the asteroids, and we could serve the community together.
I let him work the slot screen for me and point out the sights.
Michael would stand very close to me, not touching.
I never let him know which farm was Auntie Muriel's, though Auntie Muriel knew all about him.
She didn't tell mum.
She didn't mind where I was when I wasn't  supposed to be working It was natural for a girl to roam She had men coming round, all the time They weren't like Michael.
though, In fact.
I had the idea Auntie Muriel might have been less tolerant about Michael if she met him.
Michael wasn't very natural.
The trouble was, the Rejects found out too.
Carmen thought it was great.
Carmen told Murray, and Murray went crazy.
Not because I was going with another boy, but because he was a Gnat.
He took it as a personal insult.
I told him I wasn't screwing Michael, because that was the most important thing to Murray, the only thing he really saw the point of.
So we did that.
‘I really haven't,’ I told him.
And I hadn't.
Michael was after me to, but I was holding off.
‘I'm going to make him give me a go on his kite,’ I told Murray.
He had a good laugh at that He thought it was a terminally good idea, terminally funny, He said there was no way Michael would do it ‘Duty before nookie,’ he said.
‘The Gnats’ motto, that is' He even bet me.
So everybody was happy
You know, Alice.
I hadn't really thought that, about the kite.
until I opened my mouth and heard myself say it.
But it was a good idea.
whatever Murray said I was getting a bit bored with Michael.
I'd decided his kite was the best thing about him.
So I made a date with him at the base.
my next free afternoon, and I told Murray, today's the day.
I was that cocky.
The base was empty.
Michael was in his uniform.
I took him into the hangar where the kites were and stroked his uniform, I kissed his insignia, Then I found out how far his freckles went down, I got him so worked up he'd have promised me anything to let him do it to me That was really how he saw it, it was something he wanted to do to a girl.
and he had to find a  girl who'd let him do it to her.
But I wasn't that clever, Alice, because I had to let him do it to me before, instead of after.
SURELY THAT WOULD BE PREFERABLE.
How would you know?
I MEAN, IF YOU WEREN'T GOING TO ENJOY IT.
You're right, aren't you Yes, once he got going, I knew why I'd been holding back.
Not just for the kite, but because he was such hard work.
He really was useless.
He wasn't a bit like Murray, who was just wild, all over the place.
The only trouble with Murray was keeping up with him.
With Michael I was just supposed to hold still while he banged away at me, red in the face and panting.
I gritted my teeth and decided it wasn't such a one-sided deal after all.
Afterwards he came over all tender and started talking about when we're married.
I'd forgotten that was what I'd picked a Gnat for in the first place It sounded horrible, coming from him.
Remember you're a Reject, I told myself.
The kite, I kept thinking.
I told Michael what he wanted to hear, pretty much, without actually promising anything, because I could tell he was going to make it easy for me He was falling asleep on my shoulder When he did, I slipped out from under him, picked up his sexy uniform, which didn't seem quite so sexy any more, and took his glider key off the chain Then I got dressed quick, holding the key in my teeth, and then I went over to the kite, but I must have made a noise; because Michael woke up I looked back and saw him putting both feet in one leg of his trousers, calling my name, trying to back out of it 
‘A Gnat honours his promise,’ I told him, and I took his kite down off the racks I was amazed how light it was It was beautiful It was big, silicon black, with scarlet lines, and when I took it outside, the sun flashed rainbows off the shoulder hooks.
The Rejects had all turned up to see me.
Michael was after me, stumbling out on to the launch platform half-dressed and babbling about two-month training courses.
Behind me I heard Murray screeching at Michael's underwear, and then I was gone.
They gave a huge yell as I took off.
I was in a hurry, I hadn't even put a headset or a mask on.
That was a mistake, leaving the mask behind
I was up.
I was in flight.
My first flight, Alice.
Do you remember yours?
IT'S NOT THE SAME, CAPTAIN.
I suppose you weren't sixteen.
NO BUT I REMEMBER MY FIRST FLIGHT WITH YOU, CAPTAIN.
THAT WAS GOOD.
This wasn't.
I mean, it started off well.
There I was, flitting wide of the axis like a pro, zipping between the clouds, and looking down — up — 12.
YOU USED THE WORD ‘ALONG’ BEFORE, CAPTAIN.
Yes, but I didn't have it with me then.
I mean, I did, but I also had ‘up’ and ‘down’, and none of them would do.
I was confused.
That was what threw me, probably.
I mean, I'd had the feeling before, a bit, the first couple of times I went up on the End, it was that much closer to the spindle.
But now I was up in the air, and what with  the clouds, I lost all my orientation Where the clouds parted, I could see the whole tube, land all around me, and it seemed to go up like a tower, so the town and the factory belt and the parks were hanging from the walls over my head, they were all going to crash down on me, and the city on top of them.
I had the sun in my eyes from the windows one side and when I dipped a wing, the stars shining in the other.
And then the whole thing swivelled round in my head, and I was looking down the same chimney from the top, and nothing was about to stop me falling down it.
I started to feel sick.
So I flipped around and made for the ground, I'd completely lost my bearings, I didn't recognize it, didn't even know which panel it was.
And I was getting tired, I'd had no idea how much hauling one of those things around the sky would take it out of you, and then I was coming ‘down’, ‘down’ fast.
I didn't, know how to land, I had to grab some height.
DID YOU?
I did.
Unfortunately.
I flew too high, and then I was going higher, faster, I couldn't stop, like a feather finding a vent I just shot up to the spindle, and there I stuck, dangling in zero-g I kicked and flailed, I was hopeless, I had no idea how to get away I hadn't got anything I could throw I couldn't even see straight anyway, my eyes were tearing The pollution was pretty bad up there, I started coughing, and then I couldn't stop
After a while, whenever the clouds cleared a bit.
I could see little machines assembling on the ground all around me Then I saw some more gliders coming towards me One was in  the lead.
I thought it would be Michael.
I really didn't want it to be him.
It wasn't.
It was a figure in a mask and a jacksuit with all this gear in pockets all over it, and she had a headset, and one for me, one like I would have had on if I hadn't taken off in such a hurry, and she had jets, which no Gnat would have been seen dead with.
She hooked me and took me in tow.
‘You wait until I get you home, young lady,’ she said on the radio.
‘Mum?’
I said.
AND WAS IT?
Of course it was.
And she wasn't pleased.
WHAT WAS YOUR AUNT'S REACTION?
Auntie Muriel?
She laughed.
She laughed and laughed.
The cops weren't amused.
Stealing a Gnat kite, endangering 12 airspace and leaving to be rescued by council employees — it was a grave offence for a juvenile.
I had to do ten weeks glass cleaning.
Outside.
We lived in a barracks in the End, barely saw the inside of the tube for ten weeks.
Every day they took us out and set us crawling all over the tube from outside, scraping the micrometeorite dust off the glass.
The rest of the gang were even worse than Carmen and the Rejects.
They really were rejects, zero contributors, the unlovely and the unemployable.
They ganged up on me and nicked my harmonica.
They spent their breaks on the window detail peering in through the glass, endlessly scheming dreary things to do when they got back inside.
I didn't want to get back inside, not any more.
There I was, out on the hull, up to my shins in flaky white grit.
And I'd stand there, easing my aching back, and looking up at the stars.
A panel in the chest of the robot snapped open.
Telescopic tubes and extensible antennae probed in Marco's direction.
‘I mean to say,’ he continued smoothly, ‘Contraband is our name.
Our performing name.’
He said this as if it were obvious, as if he were explaining something self-evident to a small child.
‘We are a performing group.
A group of artists.
We have an engagement at eight o'clock tonight at the Mercury Garden.’
The robot's loudspeaker crackled and hissed.
It had a screen on its head where its face might have been.
The screen was malfunctioning.
It popped, slowly, regularly.
‘This is not the way to the Mercury Garden ,’ it announced.
‘This is an unreclaimed area ’
‘Right,’ said Marco.
‘Sure.
Well, first we have an appointment at JustSleep.’
The robot hummed and ticked, digesting this.
‘This is not the way to Sleep of the Just ,’ it said.
‘This is an unreclaimed area.
Identify yourself ,’ it demanded.
‘Hey!’ said Marco.
‘Come on.
You know me.’
He started to pat his pockets, as if searching for an ID.
‘I'm a major media celebrity,’ he claimed, ‘star of stage, screen and satellite, citizen of the solar system, Monty Marsh Marigold is my name, Distringency Number Romeo Rhubarb Rhapsody three-beta-three-one-double-one-one, that's Rhubarb Romeo Ringmaster one-three-beta-one-one-triple-k.’
He was talking faster and faster, pulling an accordion pleat of plastic cards from his pocket, folding and unfolding it, slipping each card past the robot's swivelling eye and puffing them all back again before it could read any of them.
He reached out and took Tabitha by the arm.
She resisted, then let him do it.
‘This is my sister, the lovely Argentina; that there is our performing parakeet, Paraclete Pete.
These,’ he gestured to the Twins, ‘are the same person really, only they're going in different directions in time and just stopping to say hello to themselves.
Why not check your connection?
Check your watch, check your hat and coat.
Check your files under R for Art.
We claim diffraction,’ he said, all in one breath, and opened his arms grandly.
A face appeared on the robot's screen.
It was a desk cop, a woman in a grey uniform, wearing a headset.
The Zodiac Twins took up positions either side of the robot, their arms folded, peering at the screen with interest.
The colours were bad.
The woman looked as if she was suffering from a terminal liver disease.
Zigzags spluttered across her face.
‘Distraction ?’ she said.
‘Explain diffraction .’
‘Why, under diplomatic regulations of the third of the third thirty-third, AD, an itinerant, interplanetarily famous performing troupe without identification may not be restrained, destrained , strained or constrained, ad hoc, to wit and in lieu, until offered the exercise of its right of diffraction,’ recited Marco.
The robot did not respond.
The woman on the screen frowned as if she were having difficulty seeing them.
She fiddled with her earphone, waved her hand across her scanner.
The robot whirred abruptly, its antennae shifting towards Tabitha.
‘Identify yourself ,’ it said.
Then, just as Tabitha was opening her mouth and wondering what she was supposed to say, a hideous crackling noise came over the robot's speaker, and its picture was torn up by a burst of interference.
Nobody spoke.
The robot sat down suddenly on the floor.
Its sensors and weapons retracted inside its chest, the little door banging closed over them.
‘Meep ,’ said the robot.
‘About time too,’ said Marco.
Tal, whizzing like a motorbike, flew straight to his shoulder.
The robot was sitting, gawkily upright, in front of the barrier.
It was completely frozen, but for one leg that arced backwards and forwards on the floor of the cave, like the leg of a dying calf.
‘What is it?’ asked Tabitha.
‘What happened?’
‘It sat down,’ said Saskia.
‘It became tired,’ said Mogul.
‘It happens often,’ said Saskia.
Tabitha stared at them.
‘It wasn't us,’ they said in unison.
Marco was stepping over the spasming limb as if the robot wasn't there.
Tal flew on ahead, over the barrier into the dark tunnel.
‘Where are we going ?’ demanded Tabitha.
‘To JustSleep,’ said Marco.
‘But she said —‘
‘Come on!’ chorused the Twins.
And they went, hurrying in the easy g down the tunnel after the bird, pushing aside a grey canvas curtain, stumbling down carved steps, squeezing between squat brown stalagmites that grew like cankers out of the floor, through a crack into a cave where the wall had crumbled away, revealing a comblike structure of fat, thick-walled  cells.
Hairy tongues like fat black ferns spilled out of them, shivering in the draught of their passing.
The air smelled poisonous and dank.
In such corners of Plenty it is impossible not to fancy yourself deep underground, in the realm of some benighted race of blind burrowers, all listlessly trying to remember the sun.
They still exist, here and there, these pockets of gloom and despair.
One day we really must do something about clearing them out.
I've said so before.
No doubt I shall say so again.
Tabitha swooped along after the bird, over rubble, through coulisses, under gantries of black bone where vast unknown machinery slept, covered in fawn dust.
In a scaly hollow a crowd of naked Perks fled squealing from the echo of their bounding feet.
By the light of their abandoned bonfire Tabitha checked her watch.
Of her twenty-four hours, rather less than two remained.
At last they emerged and stood breathing hard in a vast open space, the roof dim and distant above their heads.
Some hundred metres ahead, the floor dropped away into an awesome chasm, spanned, way off on their left, by an ugly concrete bridge.
Across it taxis and scooters droned to and from the cluster of carbuncular hotels on the far side.
Facing the hotels, bulging out over the very brink of the abyss, someone had built a huge green dome.
Its forecourt was paved with hexagonal blocks.
Cars and sedan chairs were parked in tidy ranks.
‘Here you go,’ murmured Marco congratulatingly to Tal, as the alien bird came back to perch on his shoulder again.
‘Beat the drum slowly And play the pipe lowly,’ advised Tal.
They approached the building.
Potted shrubs of sombre green flanked a flight of broad, shallow rockfoam steps leading down to a doorway covered by thick curtains of  the darkest purple.
There was an aura of money, a hint of incense in the air.
Somewhere within, an ethereal harp was playing.
‘Welcome to Sleep of the Just ,’ intoned a warm and sympathetic voice from all around, ‘home of the Chosen Frozen.
How may we serve you ?’
‘Contraband is our name,’ said Marco to the tingling air.
‘We're here to see our manager.’
There was the briefest of pauses.
‘Ms Hannah Soo is already raised and conversant ,’ said the ambience.
‘Your friend is at her bedside.
Please follow the light .’
A wisp of pale green fire suddenly spurted into existence, hovering below them on the steps.
Marco started pulling at Tabitha's arm again.
‘Come, sister,’ he said loudly.
‘Hannah's waiting for us.’
Tabitha snatched her arm free.
‘What is this place?’
‘Welcome to Sleep of the Just ,’ began the ambience again.
‘This is it,’ Marco said.
‘This is where Hannah works.’
Tabitha looked down the sepulchral stairs at the waiting fatuus.
A wave of cold seemed to emanate through the funereal drapery.
‘These are the cryo vaults, aren't they?’
‘Right,’ said Marco, in a hushed, imperative tone.
‘Does she manage them too?’
‘Sure.’
Tabitha confronted him.
‘No, she doesn't,’ she said.
‘She's dead, isn't she?–
‘Up to a point.’
‘Forget it,’ she said.
‘It's okay, Tabitha, trust me,’ he said forcefully.
‘Many people find these meetings emotionally stressful ,’ suggested the ambience, considerately.
‘Perhaps your sister would care for a tranquillizer ?’
‘She's dead,’ said Tabitha.
‘She's got your money,’ Marco said.
The green fire jiggled politely at the top of the stairs.
‘Would you prefer to wait a moment, to collect your thoughts and prepare yourself spiritually ?’ asked the ambience.
‘No,’ said Tabitha.
She jerked her head.
‘Get a move on,’ she said.
The purple curtains opened themselves, and the green fire slipped between them.
Her heart in her mouth, Tabitha Jute followed the band down into the halls of JustSleep.