

MAL WASHINGTON Role Model French Wide Open Full Preview EDBERG TIES THE KNOT
A WORD FROM THE PUBLISHER
TENNIS WORLD is Britain's best-selling tennis publication on newsstands throughout Britain — almost 50% higher than the L.T.A.'s own publication, with the gap getting wider and wider.
TENNIS WORLD'S ABC figures for the first six months of the year will show an increase in sales of almost 30% in spite of the deep UK recession.
The independent views of TENNIS WORLD will not be silenced.
Our success is due to you the readers, whose loyalty and support has made it all possible.
Our only aim is to give you ever more news and views from some of the outstanding writers on the game.
MAIN POINT
The times, they aren't a changin'
by ALASTAIR McIVER
When John Major first promoted his idea of a classless society in Gt.
Britain, he couldn't have had tennis on his mind.
He couldn't possibly have thought that his proposed legislative programme could ever overturn over 100 years of inherited class discrimination in a sport which has, for so long, in-bred its own special brand of elitist favouritism.
It just wouldn't have been on, even if the thought had, inadvertently, crossed his busy mind.
No, such changes do not come about by laws, do they?
They evolve by changing the attitudes, accessibility and availability of the said sport.
And that has to come from the people involved in the game at the top, those who shape the future and direction of the sport.
I am the first to admit that it is not easy, although I do wonder why we in tennis still use that argument as an excuse for not seeing what the Americans call ‘minority’ players more prominent in the British game.
In this case, ‘minority’, in American speak, really means underprivileged blacks, similar to those referred to in my article on MaliVai Washington, elsewhere in this issue.
The Americans, to their great credit, have recently taken the bold, if not brave, initiative, of  targeting young black talent for special help, in association with many of the foremost, up and running, and independent schemes in the country and in complete accord with United States Tennis Association's (USTA) President, Bob Cookson's stated aim, that of ‘providing growth opportunities for young American tennis players from every background and all environments’.
At the beginning of May a  workshop was held at the International Tennis Centre in Key Biscayne, for what were called ‘minority junior players’.
The event was run by the USTA,(which provided national coaches Nick Saviano and Lynne Rolley, not to mention former US Open quarter finalist Rodney Harmon to assist the youngsters), and the Safe Passage Foundation,(a body committed to using sports as a vehicle to provide ‘safe passage’ for youths and young adults into productive adult lives).
What made this workshop so unusual and, indeed (in some people's eyes), controversial, is that the 19 players who were invited to attend, were indeed, all black.
All were selected by national coaches and all are currently ranked high up in the 16 and 14 and under categories.
Included in the selection  was the brother and sister of MaliVai Washington, Mashishka, 16 and Mashona, whose 16th birthday takes place during the workshop, and Chanda Rubin's brother, Edward, 14, out of Lafayette.
‘The USTA is to be congratulated for taking the initiative in providing counselling for some of our nation's promising junior players,’ enthused Arthur Ashe, who attended the workshop despite the recent publicity surrounding his announcement to the press that he had contracted the Aids virus.
‘America's increasingly diverse population is evident in the drawsheets of our top tier junior events’, he said.
While everyone was careful to avoid the word ‘black’ in their statements, the fact remains that the ‘minority’workshop, which was overseen by one Ramona Edelin of the National Urban Coalition, an urban action organisation founded in 1967, was really a reflection on the efforts of some of the black inspired programmes that have been running for years in America.
For example, 13-year old Monique Weir, from Dorchester, a suburb of Boston, is a product of the Sportsman's Club, which has been providing tennis facilities for the local community since 1961.
Started by a black businessman, Jim Smith, the club today introduces tennis to some 1200 youngsters each year, 80% of them blacks.
Similarly, Arthur Ashe, together with Nick Bollettieri, has his own scheme running in Newark, a city where the black mayor in residence is a tennis buff.
While the USTA does not offer much support to these private ventures, it is nevertheless — and despite the criticism levelled at it — making a tangible  effort to support black tennis in a country where whites still dominate.
The sensitivity of the issue however, can perhaps be  gauged by the fact that America's hottest prospect, Venus Williams, from Los Angeles, was invited to the workshop, but refused to attend.
Whether we in this country could ever support minority groups in this way is a moot point.
Speaking with Sue Wolstenhome of the Lawn Tennis Association Trust, it was clear that LTA policy, quite rightly, does not favour — or exclude — any grouping for special treatment.
Wolstenholme confirmed that Star Clubs and the inner city tournaments that are run by the Trust encourage juniors of all ethnic groups.
Nevertheless, it would be naive to think that black talent is going to come running into tennis merely by stating that fact.
Active encouragement, marketing, if you like, is needed if we are  to entice minority groups into the game in this country.
Whether we in this country could ever get as far as the Americans have done, remains to be seen.
What is for sure, we need to be more active than we have been in this area if tennis is to flourish in this country.
Speaking My Mind
David Wynne-Morgan
The Olympic Games, conceived in the days of ancient Athens, and revived nearly a hundred years ago as a festival of athletic excellence, brings the young from every corner of the globe every four years in the pursuit of glory.
To-day, the world's great athletes in almost every sport have the opportunity to earn large sums of money as a result of their skill and dedication, and no-one begrudges them that, but the Olympians compete in the Olympic Games solely for the glory and the chance of winning a gold, silver, or bronze medal.
Most of the thousands of competitors take part in the true spirit of the games, which is simply that.
To participate and to be a living part of what is still the greatest sporting occasion in the world, is reward in itself.
I have known many who have competed in the Olympic Games and I do not know one who does not still cherish the memory and still treasure that thrill of competition at the highest level.
The very act of sharing this experience with men and women of every background and colour of skin, heightens that sense of being part of something that is truly a part of history.
I find it sad that Jeremy Bates and Jo Durie, Britain's number one tennis players do not apparently feel the same way.
Both for different, but similar, reasons have turned down the chance of participating in the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona in July.
It would be wrong to criticise.
They are both their own people.
They have both carried the burden of bearing the brunt for Britain in international competition for the last decade and more.
They have every right to make their decisions in their own interests.
Ian Peacock, Executive Director of the LTA, stated that they had decided not to go, ‘for different and personal’ reasons — a statement that left one bemused and in the dark.
The decision was clearly a surprise to him, for in the current issue of the LTA's own magazine, photographs of both Jeremy and Jo are, as British team members, featured in a large article on the Olympic Games, which now becomes meaningless.
In fact, the reasons were straightforward, if sad.
Jeremy Bates was not ranked high enough to have gone straight into the main singles draw and would have had to take part in the qualifying competition.
The Olympic tournament is being played on clay, a surface which is not best suited to his style of play, and he is also due to get married the following week.
For those reasons, he declined.
Jo was even more direct and straightforward.
She is ranked sufficiently highly to have gone straight into the main draw, but made it clear that the Games were inconvenient for her schedule this years, as she had a lot of points to defend in tournaments.
These tournaments were also not being played on clay, and she obviously felt that participation in the Olympics would damage her chances on the tournament circuit, where failure to defend her points would mean that she might drop out of the top 100 in world rankings.
There is no doubt that the reasons given by both players made very good practical sense.
Perhaps Jeremy Bates, who with his partner, Neil Broad, were ranked sufficiently highly to go straight into the main draw for the doubles, might have considered the position of his partner a little more sympathetically.
This was almost certainly Neil's only chance of becoming an Olympian and his partner's decision means he has lost it, almost certainly for ever.
There is another side to the 1992 British Olympic tennis story.
Monique Javer, Britain's No. 2 ranked woman player, is so excited at the prospect of playing as a team member for Great Britain and of participating in Barcelona that she can talk of little else.
‘Competing in the Olympic Games means more to me than anything else,’ she says, ‘except perhaps the dream of winning Wimbledon.
Nothing would stop me from being there.
I want to take part in both the opening and closing ceremonies.
I am longing to mix in the Olympic Village with the other competitors from different sports and different countries.
I want to compete for Great Britain and myself.
I cannot conceive anything more exciting, more challenging, or more deeply satisfying.
It has nothing to do with points or prize money.
Both are irrelevant in this instance.’
There could not be a greater contrast in attitude.
Monique Javer, now 23, was born near San Francisco of an English mother, who once played at junior Wimbledon, and an American father, who is a distinguished brain surgeon.
Monique was a student at the university of San Diego, where, in one of the most competitive arenas in tennis, she became the No. 1 ranked college player of the year.
At the time she chose to take British citizenship, which was her right and elected to try to play for Britain.
All the promises of help from the LTA failed to materialise, but nothing clouded her ambitions or her aspirations.
She set out to play the world circuit completely on her own, as she had no financial resources and no sponsorship.
Every penny had to be counted.
Carefully planning the cheapest air fares, allocating her meagre budget as sparingly as possible on food and accommodation, she travelled the world and took on the best.
Her ambition and her determination never faltered, nor did the belief of her parents.
She always answered the call of international duty for Britain and her playing record in international matches is the best of any current British player.
She has worked her way slowly up the rankings until now she is only a few places behind Durie in the high sixties.
This year, she has played in six tournaments as far away as Australia, New Zealand, Tokyo, Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur.
Twice she has been a semi-finalist and twice a quarter-finalist.
This column is genuinely not written with a sense of criticism, but I believe it does demonstrate one of the problems that is at the very heart of British tennis — lack of a sense of vision, a sense of belief and a passionate desire to achieve at the very highest echelons of the world game and not to be content to make a comfortable living in a relatively small pond.
I find it sad that Jeremy Bates and Jo Durie, Britain's number one tennis players, will not be at the Olympics
CONCRETE and CLAY
Alastair McIver looks to this month's French Open — probably the toughest tournament in the world…
What does it take to win the French Open?
Inspiration and a strong pair of legs, if  you're talking ingredients.
Add to that determination, patience, skill, desire, stamina and a good pair of shoes and you may be getting close to finding out.
At Stade Roland Garros, the Centre Court temperature is rarely like to be less than 100 degrees F. The sunbaked concrete and clay cauldron is no place for the weak kneed or willed.
Indeed, if tennis was just the French Open, only the strong would take it up, and even then, many wouldn't survive.
I remember sitting courtside during the 1976 final, potentially a classic encounter between arch-baseliner, the American Harold Solomon,(who has recently been working with Mary Joe Fernandez) and Italian ‘heart throb’ of the classic tennis mould, Adriano Panatta.
Solomon had just lost the third set to go two sets to one down, the crowd was baying for American blood.
An American in Paris…with no friends.
Many would have conceded authority to their opponent under such circumstances.
Not Solomon.
Sweat pouring out from every pore in his body, coke to the lips, he shouted at the crowd what he was going to do to their hero.
Few heard him, but I did.
I couldn't have avoided it if I'd wanted to.
It did not make pleasant listening and most of it was unrepeatable.
Nevertheless, it was a defiant stand which was to be admired even if the final outcome did not bring about the desired result.
Ability apart, if such determination should only result in defeat, then what price the victor's clarion call?
Muster — won in Monte Carlo
That victory was a first in a Grand Slam tournament for Panatta, one of no fewer than 14 players since ‘77 to have  made winning Grand Slam debuts in Paris.
That same year, for example, Britain's Sue Barker enjoyed perhaps her finest hour when she defeated the pretty Czechoslovakian, Renata Tomonova in three sets.
Other first and only Grand Slam successes followed for the Yugoslav Mima Jausovec and the Argentinian Guillermo Vilas,(1977), Romanian Virginia Ruzici,(remember her?) the following year, Mats Wilander in 1982, and Yannick Noah in ‘83.
Lendl ('84) and Graf ('87) made their winning Grand Slam debuts at Roland Garros, while two 17 year olds, Michael Chang and Arantxa Sanchez, took the honours in 1989, the youngest players to accomplish such a feat.
Moving right up to date, Andres Gomez scored a popular point for Ecuador in 1990, while the two most recent Grand Slam debutants were Monica Seles, who first won the French title in the same year and who retained it last year, and the current men's title holder, the American Jim Courier.
Given those records, is it any wonder that the winners of the French Open are so difficult to forecast.
On current form, Michael Chang, with three tournament victories this year at time of going to press, Jim Courier and Thomas Muster, who won the prestigious Monte Carlo title at the end of April, must all be confident of victory.
If you're looking for an ‘outsider’ in the men', I suppose the obvious name to go for is the currently out of form Andre Agassi, a hard hitter in the Courier mould.
Last year, Courier hit harder, stronger and longer than Agassi, who, in the process, suffered his third consecutive Grand Slam final defeat, two of those in Paris.
Surely Agassi's time will come?
As for Monica Seles, her desire to play at Wimbledon this year, coupled with the fact that she already has the Australian title under her belt, might be all the incentive that she needs to go for that Grand Slam this year, that same Grand Slam which she passed up last year with her refusal to play the British leg of the four majors.
Jennifer Capriati reached the semi final in 1990 and the quarters last year.
Now older and perhaps a little more clay-wise, with a win already this year over Monica Seles at Key Biscayne and with her father Stefano as her coach once again, she may well be settled enough to go all the way for the first time, which of course , would be a remarkable achievement for a 16 year old.
In 1991, she won more matches on clay than any other player,(24), and she had the fourth best win/loss record of all players on that surface,(24/3), with a percentage success rate of .904, although it should be noted that, in 7 attempts to date, she has been unable to overcome the dominant hitting of Seles.
However, if the draw is kind to Martinez, she could must make the final this year and then, who knows?
Call girls
If you're looking for an outsider, the obvious name is Andre Agassi
LLOYD'S LINES
Monopoly or Open Market?
by DAVID LLOYD
Last month, I wrote about some of the difficulties we have encountered in operating our Slater squad of young players.
I would like to expand on the same topic by expressing my thoughts on the structures that exist, or fail to exist, in this country to help promising junior players become accomplished professionals.
I will start by saying that any conclusions that I may offer, are exploratory.
I know the questions that I want to raise but the optimum answers are far from clear.
I am always accused of, and criticised for, my comments on the establishment that runs British tennis and it is true that I have been, and will continue to be, critical in the future, but I do believe that constructive critical assessment performs a valuable function.
Nobody could claim that we have a good record of producing players, so the more debate and discussion we can engender, the better.
We all have the same goal, ie to produce successful British tennis players.
We are not in competition but are part of the same team, and so, in that spirit, I would like to turn the spotlight on our existing systems and make some fairly revolutionary suggestions.
The current LTA scheme for juniors is improving all the time.
Richard Lewis has expanded the Bisham Abbey squad and they have started to select children at a younger age than before.
More coaches with international credibility are becoming involved, e.g. Ian Barclay, Bill Knight, Mark Cox, Nick Brown and David Felgate and one or two of the older players are starting to look interesting e.g. Andrew Richardson.
The evident success of the Slater scheme was, in part, responsible for that improvement.
Suddenly, parents had an alternative to Baron's Court when they sought help and sponsorship for would-be players.
The immediate results that were forthcoming were highly embarrassing to the LTA, by comparison with their own.
They were forced to look again at their own system and make adjustments.
Ironically, their improvement, coupled with their highly superior resources, is making it difficult for smaller, less well funded schemes to survive.
There is competition for the same promising children, and it is a difficult decision for any parent to make a choice against the governing body of the sport.
In the past, there has existed an implied threat of discrimination in favour of LTA players when it comes to selection for teams, wild-cards and trips abroad.
There has also been deliberate wooing of parents who had already made their selection, although it is surely obvious that changes in mid-stream can only be damaging, in terms of stability, education and coach/player relationship.
All of these things make it difficult to sustain a viable alternative scheme.
Should the Slater Foundation accept, then, that it has performed a function in goading the LTA forward and retire from the arena and let them get on with it?
In business life, we are suspicious of monopoly, and competition in an open market place is believed to best serve the public interest.
Why should we allow the LTA a monopoly in producing players?
There are good reasons for welcoming alternative schemes.
Geographical location, family considerations, educational aspirations — all these factors can affect a parent's decision to commit their child to one scheme or another.
A player/coach relationship which maximises performance is a delicate and precious commodity.
There are a few classic examples like Bergelin and Borg, and Pickard and Edberg.
Personality and approach have a large part to play in establishing a successful combination and variety will increase the possibilities of finding a good match.
Sometimes, alternative schemes may be able to satisfy some of these demands more effectively.
It is legitimate to question whether it is the LTA's job at all, to produce players, much less, exclusively, its right.
It receives its funding via an agreement signed in the 1920's, from the All England Club, which runs the most successful international tennis tournament in the world.
If the Club was to look for a return on its money, as any other investing institution would, the criteria for that return would be two fold; a boom in the popularity of tennis at grass roots level and/or impressive results at international level.
Neither has been forthcoming.
Other countries exhibit both.
In Sweden and Germany, tennis has flourished subsequent to the appearance of major champions, Borg and Becker respectively.
In America and France, the game boomed first in terms of popularity and participation and out of those competitive breeding grounds, player after player has risen up.
It will surprise nobody that I should like to redistribute the All England Club's money for them but in so doing, give them more direct control over how it is used.
The LTA must be funded and has a large role to play.
Its responsibility should be to the administration of the amateur game, the clubs, the schools, the counties, indoor facilities, to ensure maximum participation and enjoyment on a mass scale throughout the country.
When it comes to the production of players, independent schemes could put forward ‘tenders’ to the All England Club for the allocation of its funds.
The criteria for assessment of these proposals would be quality of coaching, facility provision, managerial quality, pastoral care, educational provision etc.
The criteria for assessment of a return i.e. the balance sheet, could only be results.
These initiatives would have one purpose — the production of players.
With a judgement of timescales allowed, success or failure could be easily monitored, now that there are both junior and senior international computer ranking lists.
In this way, distinct ventures could develop side by side with measurable results — Richard Lewis and his team at Bisham, the Slater squad, Chris Bradnam's group and hopefully, in time, many more.
The LTA would retain its role in team selection but would be truly impartial.
As important as money for independent ventures would be the seal of approval.
AELTC Registered and Approved would make a great difference to parental peace of mind, and to support from outside sponsors.
Thus, a variety of initiatives could exist, co-operate and interact to everyone's gain, on a fair and equal footing.
The immediate need is to expand the entire system.
The independent schemes, like ourselves, need help or they are in danger of being squeezed out.
I believe that would be another loss to add to the enormous catalogue of British losses on the international scene.
you can call me MAL
Alastair McIver looks at the blossoming career of Malivai Washington
Despite the recent and continuing efforts of the United States Tennis Association, and indeed, other National Tennis Associations, to provide better opportunities for all,(see Main Point), it remains a fact that, if you're an aspiring black tennis player, you have to be something very special if you're going to make it in the  professional game these days.
The decision whether or not to come on to the Tour is not an easy one for a young black pro to take.
MaliVai (‘call me Mal’), Washington, out of Glen Cove, a fashionable suburb of New York, is one who took that decision to turn pro back in 1989.
He has no regrets.
‘There's no looking back,’ he says.
‘I can't look back and say, ‘hey, maybe I should have stayed at school’.
It's been a lot of hard work but I knew that it would be when I first came on to the Tour.
I was No 1 in my sophomore year, and I knew it was going to be even tougher to be a top ranking player on the Pro-Tour.’
Tough it may be, but Washington is one who defied the odds to achieve world status in a sport not known for its liberal representation of blacks.
It is a tribute to his determination over his 22 years that he has achieved where so many before him have failed.
It's been a long journey.
‘My dad started me when I was about 5 years old.
He's always been my coach.
He's still my coach now, obviously not on a full time basis because my home's in Michigan.’
Washington's success on the Pro-Tour has come as a surprise to some, not least Brian Gottfried, former touring pro and now head coach at the ATP's headquarters in Florida.
‘His junior record was only fair’, recalls Gottfried, ‘but he had a lot of the tools for the job and he was willing to learn and to put in the time.’
Washington himself is willing to acknowledge the benefits of hard work and identifies one of his fellow pros as the inspiration behind his motivation.
‘I do work hard.
I think that's what it takes…take Ivan Lendl, he's a classic example.
He works hard for what he gets.
I think it's logic that if you work hard, there's a very good chance that you will also achieve a lot in your particular career.’
That hard work has paid dividends for Washington, who has already scored notable career wins over Connors, Chang, Cherkasov, Wheaton and Lendl, and who claimed his first ever senior title in Memphis in February, a win which moved him from 38 to 23 on the IBM/ATP Computer, his highest ever showing.
Washington comes from a tennis family.
Mother Christine and father William both work for General and Motors, the latter being an education and training consultant for the car giant.
They have been able to oversee the family's tennis progress, not least that  of their other son Mashishka and daughter, Mashona, both of whom receive financial support from the USTA.
Perhaps the success of MaliVai has, in the past, and will, in the future, continue to inspire others, his brother and sister included.
There is no question that in America, black tennis has suffered because of the lack of role models for youngsters to aspire to.
Zina Garrison, perhaps one of the best known black tennis players to have emerged in the 1980's, recalls in John Feinstein's book, Hard Courts, the incident in 1975 which first prompted her desire to reach the top.
‘I remember sitting in a room…watching the Wimbledon final in 1975’, she says.
‘When we won, we were unbelievably excited, we all ran outside and I started screaming ‘I'm going to be like Arthur (Ashe).
I can hit the ball just like Arthur.
‘But he was the only tennis player that any of us could relate to.
I mean, what did I have in common with Jimmy Connors, Bjorn Borg or Chris Evert?’
It's a fair question.
Washington, along with his peers, Chip Hooper, Roger Smith, Rodney Harmon and Nduka Odizor, are today's role models for others to follow.
‘When a black kid does see a black athlete, such as myself, a role model if you like, that might be enough to spark a little interest and I thank that the more blacks that you see in tennis, it will promote black tennis further.’
MaliVai Washington is just one of the slowly growing group of black athletes who have made tennis their preferred option, even above baseball and basketball.
A recent long term shoe and clothing deal with Reebok, not to mention other sponsorships with Rossignol, Air France, Evian and Volvo is further confirmation that the rewards are there in tennis if you are reasonably successful.
Yet as well as the returns, Mal also delights in giving back to the sport that he loves.
He attends junior camps when he is not following his hobbies of reading biographies or listening to music, and he is a Board Member of KidSports Foundation, which aims to teach the positive side of sports to youngsters.
‘The results of it can be big, especially for a teenage kid’, he says.
‘I hope it might give a ten year old kid a little inspiration, a little boost and when it comes out of him, I'm happy.
I mean, that's what I do it for.
I do it for the kids.
Maybe they can get something out of it.’
Washington the role model is modest about his achievements, preferring perhaps to identify his role in the context of the greater need of setting an example for others to follow.
He acknowledges that he is pleased with his overall performance to date, but is realistic when making assessments.
caption repeating text omitted
‘I don't think that I've made great strides in the game’, he comments, ‘but I've made steady progress since I turned  pro.’
Gottfried, on the other hand, believes that Washington has the game to go a lot further.
‘He has a great all round game.
He can serve and volley and he can stay back court.’
Such an assessment of Washington's ability to play well on different surfaces was borne out by his performances last year which saw him reach four semi-finals on four different surfaces.
To date, Washington has amassed career earnings of $512,272,(7/4/92), a figure which demonstrates to others who might be thinking of following in his footsteps that tennis can be as lucrative as either baseball or basketball.
The inevitable forces of change are beginning to sweep through in American junior tennis.
It may only be a matter of time before MaliVai Washington, for one, sees the family name being represented in the wider context of majority black participation in the sport which has, for so long, been predominantly whites only territory.
caption repeating text omitted
PARSON'S PERSPECTIVE
ARTHUR'S COURAGE
by JOHN PARSONS, Daily Telegraph
The courage and dignity with which Arthur Ashe announced in New York that he has the AIDS virus, as a result of being given infected blood during one of the two major heart operations he underwent in the mid 1980's, was typical of one of the world's most outstanding and gracious sportsmen.
Only once, and perhaps not surprisingly, when he talked about having to explain the implications of what has happened to him to his  five-year-old daughter, Camera, did he almost break down.
It is surely one of the most cruel twists of fate that a man who has demonstrated such commitment, as well as compassion to overcome so many other problems during his life — and indeed to have helped so many others to have done the same — that he should have become a victim of medical science.
But for his heart problems, which in his case are hereditary, Ashe, the first black male to win the Wimbledon singles title, might easily have become one of America's leading politicians by now.
Ashe, now 49, grew up in the segregated American South of the 1950's, making it wholly appropriate that he should have become such a dedicated campaigner for equal rights all round the world.
It was during one of his earliest visits to Africa that he discovered a young lad with French connections — Yannick Noah.
In 1976, however, when he was Wimbledon champion, even Ashe was given a frightening demonstration of how turbulent life can sometimes be in that part of the world.
The Nigerian head of state at that time was assassinated two days before Arthur was due to start playing in black Africa's first professional tournament in Lagos.
Although the new military rulers eventually decided the tournament should go ahead, somehow the orders did not filter down and a group of soldiers stormed the court, forcing Ashe to take refuge in the dressing room with a machine gun pressing against his neck.
Typical of the man, Ashe seemed more concerned about my welfare, hearing that I had been beaten up outside the stadium by a stick  wielding Army officer, than his own.
Whether while winning the first US Open title in 1968 as an amateur or out-thinking Jimmy Connors in that classic Wimbledon final of 1975, Ashe proved himself one of the  game's most gifted competitors.
Such qualities have been sustained as, among other things, he has been president of the Association of Tennis  Professionals, captain for several years of successful American Davis Cup teams, writer, broadcaster and company director.
Ashe has known since 1988 that he had the deadly virus.
So too did a handful of his closest friends though, for once, this was a rightly kept secret.
Arthur admits that, while he is not ill, he has noticed how he has ‘good days and bad days’, probably due as much to the extra medication he now has to take, as the virus itself.
My last meeting with Ashe before he went public on the news, knowing that an American newspaper was about to do so anyway, was during the Lipton tournament in Key Biscayne a couple of weeks earlier.
It was there, in fact, that when Cliff Drysdale had to leave his place as chairman of the ATP's seminar on power tennis to begin his day's television commentary, that Arthur Ashe took over the role, with customary authority and enthusiasm.
In his autobiography ‘Off the Court’, Ashe wrote that ‘Success is a journey — not a destination.’
How poignant that thought seems now.
NOAH'S SECRET
Until the sudden realisation that the world's best kept secret was about to be broken, Ashe, because of special affinity with Yannick Noah and his own long run as the United States Davis Cup captain, had probably been reading with interest about the rise and fall of Noah as captain of the French Davis Cup Team.
Not the least fascinating aspect of the story, which broke the day after France's quarter final defeat by Switzerland — and barely three months after the memorable celebrations which had accompanied their winning of the trophy for the first time in 59 years — was that although Noah's decision was said to have been known to his players and coaches several weeks earlier, no-one apparently bothered to tell French Tennis president, Philippe Chatrier.
If, as everyone now insists, Noah had made up his mind not to continue as Davis Cup captain well before the match against Switzerland, then the decision cannot have had anything to do with his obvious annoyance that, in his eyes, neither Henri Leconte or Guy Forget had properly prepared for the tie.
Yet Noah is certainly not leaving the French tennis scene.
He has persuaded the French Federation to give him a new consultancy role.
The idea is that he should oversee a programme whereby a team of coaches travels around the world with the leading French players, having a far greater say in where and when they play, train and rest.
Among other things it is hoped that this will eliminate some of the problems which Noah clearly believes led to their defeat by Switzerland — although his own choice of an outdoor clay court for the match against Jakob Hlasek and Marc Rosset, did not help either.
In theory the new French scheme sounds fine.
There is just one snag.
In too many instances a player's schedule is determined just as much by the need to honour commercial contracts or by their agents, as by what is best for him or her.
Somehow I cannot see that changing.
TRIBUTE
Everyone I know, who ever met Winnie Shaw, had an instant respect and affection for the smiling but determined wee Scot, with a great love of life.
It shone through, not only by the dedication she demonstrated to earn her outstanding successes  internationally in both lawn tennis and golf but — in a way — even more so as she faced up the cruel two-year reality of fighting a terminal illness until her recent death at the age of 45.
Quite rightly, therefore, the packed congregation which attended the funeral at St John's Church, Woking, came not to mourn but, as John Barrett said in his superbly affectionate address, ‘…to celebrate everything Winnie had achieved in her all too short life’.
My own earliest memories of Winnie, stretch back to the days when — following in the tennis footsteps of her mother, Winifred Mason, who became Scottish champion twice, she was winning British junior championships titles.
There had been, albeit tenuously, a link between us in that we were both coached at one time by Scottish coach, Bill Moss, although in my case the association was a relatively fleeting one, of which, quite sensibly, he has no recollection.
Bill, who flew down from Scotland with other representatives of Scottish tennis for the funeral, was justly proud of what Winnie went on to achieve.
What struck me about Winnie, even in her junior days, was not just her determination to succeed in everything she tackled — but also to derive the greatest enjoyment as she did so.
They were characteristics which earned her respect and friendship all round the world as, among other things, she twice reached the semi-finals of the Australian Open, twice the quarter-finals of Wimbledon and the semi-finals of the doubles at Wimbledon with her great friend and fellow Scot, Joyce Hume.
‘Fred’ as she was called on the circuit, played no less than 26 Federation and Wightman Cup rubbers for Britain, before directing her sporting talents, in a competitive sense, increasingly towards golf to which she had been introduced by her devoted husband Keith, himself a former leading British tennis junior.
The presence of British Ryder Cup captain, Bernard Gallacher, reading the lesson at her funeral, was a testimony to Winnie's golfing prowess.
Not surprisingly, as with her tennis, she relied more on accuracy, control and skill than power, as she reached a handicap of +2 and won honours first for Surrey and then for her beloved Scotland.
Supported by his wife, Ashe makes his announcement
Noah's secret
Meanwhile Winnie, who for several years ran the old Slazenger Club Championships, continued to repay the joy and rewards she enjoyed from tennis by passing on her knowledge and experience to later generations of British juniors.
She put her points over to the juniors as well as she always did to everyone else, with a wonderful mix of candour, directness, understanding and humour — and always with a twinkle in the eye.
One of her earliest pupils, in whom she had a great deal of confidence, was Brighton's Julie Pullin who poignantly won her first women's international title on the African satellite, 48 hours before Winnie died, and who went on to win a second title two weeks later.
All of us who knew Winnie were richer for the experience.
CAPRIATI'S BRIEF ENCOUNTER
Even though Jennifer Capriati produced arguably the performance of the tournament when she beat world champion Monica Seles in the quarter finals at Key Biscayne, there was the strongest feeling still that her new partnership with Steffi Graf's former coach, Pavel Slozil, could not work.
It was nothing to do with Slozil's coaching quality or his dedication to the task.
Indeed, that was without question and in Australia he had been really excited about the long term prospects.
Yet Jennifer in recent months has been growing through a difficult spell in the growing up process, particularly mentally.
she has reached the stage where she feels much more inclined to strike out to underline her independence.
It was almost bound to lead to differences of opinion with almost all those around her who she viewed in an authoritative light.
In the end matters reached breaking point during the tournament in Hilton Head.
Jennifer's father, Stefano resumed sole charge, at least for the time being, of Jennifer's work on court, while a lady trainer, Laurie Schuett from Palm Beach Sports Institute in Florida, was brought in to help the youngster overcome the weight problems which seemed to be developing.
During Key Biscayne, Jennifer was asked if she agreed with Monica Seles' current belief that if she had known then, what she knows now, what life on the tennis circuit would be like, she would not have started at such an early age.
‘Ask me in a year or two's time’ she replied.
Perhaps deep down, she already knows what she will say when that time comes.
MONEY MAKES THE WORLD GO ROUND
‘Money makes the world go round’, we are told by some.
‘Money is the root of all evil’, is the tune played by others.
When ATP staged their spectacular split from the Men's Tennis Council in 1989, however, their officials constantly told me, ‘This has nothing to do with money.
It's all about players wanting to be in charge of their own destiny.’
Almost everything which has happened since then has demonstrated very clearly that the IBM/ATP Tour IS all about money, be it prize money, appearance money, tournament service fees or the administration costs of the Tour.
Whether that is a good or bad thing probably depends on whether you are paying or receiving.
In truth, the answer is probably somewhere in between.
The only reason I make the point is that I understand ATP have rejected an appeal by the LTA to help guarantee the long term future of the November indoor tournament in Birmingham by lowering the $600,000 prize money to around the $300,000 on offer at the two competing tournaments in Moscow and Sao Paolo that week.
If ever there were special circumstances to justify the LTA's request, this was surely a good example.
After all, the money ‘saved’ would not go back to the LTA but would have been used to swell the amount available to be paid in appearance money to the two or three ‘names’needed to start the telephones ringing in the box office.
The Birmingham week, immediately before the ATP Championships, when few of the Frankfurt qualifiers want to play anyway, is probably the worst in the calendar for attracting a qualifying field.
And not only are there two other tour events taking place the same week but also the ECC special event in Antwerp.
ILL ADVISED
The LTA were clearly ill-advised in the first place to have increased the prize money for Birmingham this year.
On the other hand, if ATP wanted to demonstrate that they really are interested in the welfare of more than just the top 75, as some of their lower-ranked members have recently suggested, then helping Birmingham through its current difficulties, which one hopes are only temporary, would not have been a bad thing.
KING'S CUP REWARD
The European Tennis Association is studying ways of restoring the prestige of the old King's Cup, now the European Men's Team Championship, which it describes as ‘…still the best opportunity for European tennis nations to test their top, and up-coming players in international team competition.’
Horst Klosterkemper, chairman of the relevant committee but probably better known as the man who made the European Team Championships in Dusseldorf such a success, acknowledges that the event — without sponsor prize money for the last two years — has lost some of its gloss.
So in an attempt to upgrade the tournament and I suspect to make sure that the host nation of the top division is bound to be involved in that division, the number of teams in each division has been increased from sic to eight.
To accommodate that change, it also means a knock-out, rather than round-robin format, which is never exactly satisfactory.
This year, for instance, when sadly, in terms of the amount of attention the event will receive, it clashes with the Compaq Grand Slam Cup, the Champions' Division, as the new Division 1 is being called, will be staged in Trieste, Italy, December 9–13.
Apart from Britain, the countries involved will be Austria, CIS (formerly the USSR), Czechoslovakia, Germany, Italy, Holland and Sweden.
My hunch, incidentally, is that these may not be the end of the changes.
Certainly a long term study into how best to transform the European Cups for men and women into a wholly credible fixture on the calendar, is being investigated.
Don't entirely rule out the ultimate staging of a joint men's and women's event.
GRAPEVINE
According to the Parsons grapevine, the idea of a Grand Slam Cup for women is very much on the cards again — probably not this year, but certainly in time for 1993.
Capriati — Brief encounter with Slozil
GORAN
WIMBLEDON CHAMPION IN THE MAKING?
by MIKE DONOVAN
Goran Ivanisevic believes he can become Wimbledon champion.
There is no doubt he has the game.
His bullet, 130 mph serves and improved volleys testify to that.
But another reason for his increased confidence is his Mohican haircut!
‘It makes me a lot faster around the court,’ says the 20-year-old who was unseeded when he reached the semi-final of The Championships two years ago.
‘Things were going wrong for me earlier this year and I was losing games.
‘I remember I was in Brussels and I lost to Ivan Lendl.
So I thought to myself ‘I must make a change’.
‘So I decided to have a haircut.
My brother-in-law shaved a bit more off for me and I like it.
I feel good with it.’
So what chance a Mohican winning at Wimbledon this year?
‘I am capable of winning Wimbledon.
It's a strange surface because it is so hard to play three good sets in a row on.
‘But I can serve good and on grass that is really difficult to play against.’
Ivanisevic has the backing of Boris Becker, three-times All England King who edged him out in the 1990 semis.
The German says, ‘It is VERY probable he can be Wimbledon champion.’
Certainly, Ivanisevic's form has improved this year.
He showed that when winning the prestigious Stuttgart tournament in February when he beat the top two players in the world within seven days.
That sort of thing does not happen too often.
In fact, when he stunned Jim courier and double Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg that week it was only the seventh time in over four years that feat had been achieved.
The suspect temperament of the volatile Ivanisevic had cast a huge question mark over his ability to make it right to the No. 1 spot and to dominate the Grand Slams.
Even his own father thought it a big weakness.
‘Sometimes he's like a grown up man, sometimes like a teenager,’ said Srdjan of his son's passionate nature.
And Ivanisevic admitted he would go ‘crazy’ during matches.
It led to him admitting to ‘tanking’ matches and coming close to defaulting with antics right out of John McEnroe's repertoire.
The 6′4″ left-handed beanpole makes an intimidating figure as he shouts at officials, abuses his racket and sulks on his stool, threatening to strike.
Now he is slowly learning to curb those excesses.
His hotheadedness is cooling.
He says: ‘I've got a fresh attitude.
I'm enjoying it more.
Before, I would go crazy.
And when I was throwing my rackets and talking to the umpire it was breaking my concentration.
It made it difficult to come back but I think I am improving.
I'm much better.’
His new found maturity on and off the court is impressing many and diluting the controversial image he has carried with him since turning professional four years ago.
A speech following a triumph in Australia in Adelaide this year concerning his war-torn nation of Croatia earned him praise.
And his decision not to take part in the World Team Cup this year because Croatia had not been recognised was treated with respect rather than disapproval.
‘It is very bad what is happening in my country,’ he says.
‘It's very sad.’
Several big names have complimented the new Ivanisevic on his court  demeanour , not least Stefan Edberg.
‘Goran seems to be concentrating much more,’ he says.
‘His lapses appear to be getting fewer.’
If that change can be put down to one man it is Bob Brett, who took over coaching duties from Balazs Taroczy in February last year.
Brett parted with Boris Becker after a fruitful association which brought Grand Slam triumphs, including Wimbledon, with the German superstar saying: ‘Bob needs a new challenge.’
And the  diminutive Australian got exactly that with Ivanisevic.
The giant Slav had progressed close to the speed of  light.
He first hit the headlines when he knocked Becker, seeded two out of the French Open in 1990.
He swept from nowhere to 13 in the world in four weeks and kept it going through the rest of the year and throughout 1991.
‘Instead of first round defeats it was all semi-finals or finals,’ he says.
‘Everything was so fast.’
It was too much, too soon because his development as a person couldn't keep pace with his progress as a tennis player.
But the quiet, efficient and unflappable Brett managed to instil more patience into his charge.
And it is transforming Ivanisevic's career.
Besides winning titles in Stuttgart and Adelaide, Ivanisevic, under Brett, won the Manchester Open on grass, reached the final of New Haven on hard courts, and was a semi-finalist in the Australian Indoor Championships and the Tokyo and Swiss Opens at Gstaad.
In his German triumph, he managed 105 aces.
And hapless Edberg saw 32 flying by him in the final.
‘When he serves like that you cannot get to the ball,’ said the Swede.
‘And it's not just the pace of the serves that does it, it's also the fact that they go so close to the line.’
Ivanisevic, touted as having an all-court, grass game, likes to remind people that he is more than just a big server.
‘I think I have proved I can play on all surfaces,’ he says.
‘People say I've got the best serve in the world and that if I don't serve well I cannot win matches.’
‘That's not true because I've won many of my matches when I couldn't hit my serve in court.’
But with the big serves dominating so much on grass, Ivanisevic has an outstanding chance to take the Wimbledon singles title with a game naturally suited to the surface.
In fact, the power and effectiveness of Ivanisevic's serve and the rest of the other ‘boomers’ like David Wheaton, is provoking attempts to change the rules and  lessen their dominance.
Some want softer balls or smaller frames to ensure rallies can still exist on the quickest surface of them all.
Ivanisevic and Co. naturally argue that it is unfair to alter the regulations as it would interfere with the natural development of the game.
The outcome of that debate will take a while to sort out.
In the mean time, if he so desires, Ivanisevic can exploit the green, green grass of SW19 to its fullest advantage.
And this year might be his best chance because he can keep one step ahead of the ‘slow it down’ lobby.
Then he can head for other Grand Slam victories and eventually that coveted No. 1 spot.
‘I can do it,’ he says.
We will see.
VAUXHALL INDOOR TROPHY
VAUXHALL NEWCOMERS EARN HONOURS
The two clubs who earned a place in the Grand Finals of the 1992 Vauxhall Indoor Tennis Trophy in their maiden year in the event, both emerged triumphant from the Graves Indoor Tennis Centre in Sheffield last month.
Against all odds, Royal Berkshire took the men's title and the coveted Trophy back to Bracknell, whilst Long Road, Cambridge took the short road to victory in the women's event without dropping a set.
To cap a highly successful conclusion to the season — in which the Berkshire side first out-matched defending champions David Lloyd, Heston and then, in the Grand Finals, beat the top seeds Ilkley — the club No. 1 Gary Drake was named the special Grand Finals ‘Player-of-the-Tournament’ by Wimbledon referee Alan Mills, and drove away smiling in a brand new £15,000 Vauxhall Astra convertible.
Royal Berkshire started their Trophy title bid in a two-hour double rubber against Yorkshire favourites Ilkley.
The tussle could hardly have been more evenly-matched as Drake and partner Jonathan Smith fought back from a set down to take a 6–7 6–3 7–6 victory in a rubber which featured only three service breaks!
The new Trophy format then saw the two singles rubbers played simultaneously on adjacent courts, with 22-year-old Drake falling to Yorkshire champion Gary Henderson 4–6 2–6, while 37-year-old team-mate Jonathan Smith secured the overall match victory with a 7–5 6–3 win over the Yorkshire champion on Simon Ickringill.
Royal Berkshire's opponents in the Trophy final were former champions Queen's Club, who knocked out local hopes IFG Hallamshire — seeded to reach the final by virtue of a 2–1 semi-final win.
The loss of both Ilkley and Hallamshire immediately wiped out the Yorkshire interest in the men's finals for which the local fans were hoping.
Berkshire's formidable Drake/Smith partnership began in the opening double confrontation in perfect harmony as they out-pointed Queens Patrick Hughesman and Mark Loosemore, 6–4 6–4.
While Smith fell to Hughesman in straight sets in the second string singles rubber, Gary Drake was finding the going a little tough against Queens' rested No. 1 Steve Alger, 33-year-old Vauxhall Trophy ‘veteran’ and a former Bermuda No. 1.
In the match of the tournament, Drake took the first set 6–3 only to see his advantage melt away as Alger powered his way back into the reckoning with a blistering 6–1 win in the second.
Drake, with Smith now providing court-side inspiration, then took the first five games in the third set, and ultimately won the all important rubber and championship by a 6–3 1–6 6–1 margin.
Alongside the Vauxhall car won by Drake for a year, and the £400 team manager's prize collected by Graham Howell, Royal Berkshire were presented with a magnificent Vauxhall Indoor Trophy and a cheque for £2,500.
In the women's competition, the Long Road squad, led by Norfolk's top two county players Amanda Brown and Judy Rich, were favourites to win the national title for indoor tennis clubs — and they soon showed why, as they set off on their victory trail with a quick dismissal of Queen's in the opening doubles rubber of the semi-final.
On adjacent courts, Amanda Brown — the former Wightman Cup player — shone as she romped to victory over Queen's No. 1 Alison Grant 6–1 6–1, while team mate Judy Rich — who this time last year led the Queen's attack — took just four games more to defeat Karen Cass in the other singles rubber.
Long Road's opponents in the final on Sunday were defending champions Puma Welwyn, featuring the Hertfordshire club's regular pairing of Joan Caplen and Mandy Bishop.
The Pumas path to the final saw them account for the second Hallamshire squad represented at the weekend, thus ending any aspirations of Yorkshire success.
The title holders' grip on the Vauxhall Trophy started to slip quickly as the experienced Cambridge duo took the doubles rubber 6–4 6–1.
Amanda Brown gave the Cambridge club match victory in just under the hour, allowing Welwyn's No. 1 Joan Caplen just two games in a straight sets dismissal.
Judy Rich maintained the club's impressive ‘clean sheet’ throughout the weekend by recording a 6–2 6–4 win over Mandy Bishop.
At the post match presentations, Mike Horn collected the team manager's prize of £400 while the victorious Misses Brown and appropriately named Rich, collected the coveted Vauxhall women's Trophy and — like the men — a cheque for £2,500.
Gary Drake receives the keys from tournament referee Alan Mills (centre) and Vauxhall sponsorship manager Alan Mackay
TENNIS WORLD CLUB
BOOM TIME!
Summer approaches and with it comes the summer grass court season, your chance to see the best players in the world.
At Tennis World , we try to bring all of your favourites to your door step by way of our fan club services, six newsletters a year, giving news, views, results and quotes from your favourite players.
Our link up with adidas has certainly provided a boost to membership, with many of you taking up the option to join and receive a free headband or wristband for their trouble.
Additionally, for those of you who take out a joint subscription to Tennis World and the fan club service, you will automatically receive an adidas T Shirt — absolutely free.
It's an offer many of you didn't want to refuse, judging by your response.
The offer continues, so why not take advantage?
Who's your favourite player?
Is it Martina, or Steffi, Michael or Stefan…or Boris?
Look through the list on the page opposite, select the fan club of your choice, send in the form with the remittance and receive six newsletters, six black and white photographs, plus a player biography, not to mention your free adidas accessory.
If you want Tennis World to drop on your doormat each month,(and don't forget that we're now publishing every month — twelve issues a year), then why not join at the reduced joint membership subscription rate shown on the form opposite — and claim your free adidas T Shirt?
adidas and Tennis World — a great team.
MIDLAND BANK JUNIOR CUP by Bill Edwards
ADVANTAGE KENT
Kent, taking full advantage of the disciplinary action that ended the 11 year reign of Essex as boys' champions, won the Midland Bank Junior County Cup for the first time since its inception in 1967, at Bournemouth during April.
They went through unbeaten, as did Surrey in the  girls' event.
Essex and Lancashire, following troubles in their match last year, were both downgraded, Essex, to Group 2 and Lancashire to Group 3.
Essex, after being within one rubber off going down still further, are destined for another season in Group 2, but Lancashire, dropping only five rubbers, have already started their climb back by winning Group 3a.
The absence of Essex and Lancashire brought a new look to the  boys' championship and matches were keenly contested before Kent claimed the title.
Only one Kent player managed a full house, Gareth Jones, who won his singles and doubles against Dorset, Hertfordshire, and Hampshire and Isle of Wight.
Kent had strength in depth, scoring 9–0 whitewashes against Dorset and Hants., Isle of Wight, with a 6–3 win against Herts, the latter being a tight encounter with two of their winning rubbers going to three sets.
Richard Evans was unbeaten for Herts, who finished as runners up.
On the first day, the match score had been printed the wrong way round after he had beaten Julian Evans 7–5, 7–5.
‘There goes my one moment of glory’, he said, after reading that he had lost.
Dorset missed the services of Lee Sabin for the first two rounds.
He was trying to qualify for the Spring Satellite, but he returned in time to defeat Simon Bramwell (Herts), in the final round.
Dorset, along with Hants and Isle of Wight are relegated and replaced in Group 1 next year by Middlesex and Lincolnshire.
Winners of Group 2 last year, Surrey girls, returned to the top to win the Group 1 title for the ninth time.
Their victory was not quite so clear cut as that of the Kent boys but  there was no doubting their overall superiority.
They defeated Essex 6–3, Herts., the defending champions, 7–2, and Dorset, 7–2.
Lorna Woodroffe gave them a great send off by defeating Mandy Wainwright (Essex), the National's 16's champion, 6–3, 6–4, Wainwright gained revenge in the doubles, which was the only reverse that Woodroffe suffered in the series.
The Group wound up with a great relegation battle between Herts and Essex with the scales being tipped by Herts' strength in the doubles.
Herts. won 7–2, leaving Essex to go down along with Dorset.
Replacing them next year will be Sussex and Cheshire.
Gareth Jones — Full house
JUNIOR TENNIS WORLD
Puma Schools Challenge — Tennis to Benefit in Multi Sport Challenge
by ALASTAIR McIVER
Linford Christie, Stuart Pearce, Mark Cox, former England and G.B. Hockey Goalkeeper, John Hurst, and Linda Keough, a Commonwealth Games 400m silver medallist, have all made a commitment to support the Puma Schools Challenge, an innovative idea involving 150 schools in the Hertfordshire, North London and surrounding counties.
The Puma Challenge, for boys and girls under the age of 14, will see school teams competing against each other during the summer, in four sports, namely athletics, tennis, soccer and hockey with the finals being played at the Gosling Sports Centre in Welwyn Garden City in September.
Paul Hutchins, who is the director for Puma's Tennis Support programme, has enlisted the help of the company's various contracted sports personalities, all of whom will make themselves available as part of the prize to the winning team, relevant to their sport.
The winning school tennis team, for example, will be taken to the All England Club to see the Wimbledon Museum, followed by a coaching session  with Cox, former British No. 1 and currently Director for the Rover Junior Tennis Initiative, and Hutchins, the former National Team Manager and Davis Cup Captain.
Cox is in no doubt as to the benefits o f such competitive opportunity.
‘It is the lack of a similar competitive structure in clubs that has hampered the youth development of tennis in this country’, he explains.
‘Talented kids have missed out through lack of the proper learning environment.
It is this we are trying to change.’
The prize for the best athletics team is equally impressive, a coaching session with Linford Christie and Linda Keough, while the hockey winners will visit Bisham Abbey to be coached by John Hurst and members of Great Britain's Hockey team, the current Olympic champions.
Meanwhile, Stuart Pearce, the  Nottingham Forest and England captain will host an entire school football team to a home game at the City Ground, Brian Clough and all.
The Challenge is being run in conjunction with the P.E.
heads of each participating school and will undoubtedly bring out the best in the youngsters, stimulating the competitive instincts in a way that perhaps hasn't been available to schoolchildren in the past.
It is to be hoped, that if the Challenge is as successful as the celebrity involvement in the prizes deserves, that it will expand to regional — even national status in the future.
Linford Christie with Mark Cox and Katie Bensted
And now for something completely different…
Does your tennis game suffer from nervous tension…does it give you a headache…do you need to unwind on court?
If the answer to these questions is ‘yes’, then worry no more.
Your problems are over.
No, we're not looking at a new wonder drug, you know, the type that you swallow with a glass of water.
That was last year's thing.
This is something completely different.
It's something new, it's something innovative, it's something exciting…and it works.
What is it?
It's the new Protagon, the tennis racket which sounds like a drug but which plays like an old friend, the loyal doubles partner who helps you to cope with the important things in life, things like how to fox the club champion who usually knocks you off without ever getting out of auto pilot mode.
 Protagon is the new racket out of tennis mad Germany which feels like that old friend as soon as you come into contact with it, as soon as you shake it by the hand.
It's the racket which offers the user the facility — at the twist of a dial — to dictate the terms on the court.
No more will the clay dust be kicked into your face.
It's you who has the answers now.
It's you who holds the key, literally , the key to success on the court.
Why Protagon?
Well, for one thing, Protagon, the racket which enables you to adjust the string tension to suit your style of play, or the conditions, has  subtly changed the emphasis in the tennis racket market from racket frames to racket strings, thereby identifying two important factors to the tennis paying, playing public at large.
Firstly, the company has recognised that the major manufacturers in the world today continue to concentrate their resources on continuing but minimal  improvements in frame design.
Secondly, Protagon believes that by only concentrating on improving the frames, companies are ignoring the key factor relating to performance, that of string tension.
The company points to the professional as evidence of the importance of string tension, citing numerous televised instances where professionals who change rackets after breaking a string, or the change of ends, tap the strings in an effort to select the right tensions for the prevailing circumstances.
In the recent Association of Tennis Professionals forum which was held in Florida during the Lipton Players International, Professor Rudrapatna V. Ramnath of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, stated the view that ‘…we have reached the stage of diminishing returns in racket technology.
We are pushing hard against the limit’.
Basically, he is questioning the ability of racket manufacturers to make drastic technological alterations that will bring about significant changes to the on court performance of the consumer.
Protagon, while believing that its racket construction meets all the necessary criteria necessary to compete favourably with other top grade rackets on the market today, also believes that, by offering the supplementary facility of string adjustment, it is providing a tangible benefit which year by year frame improvements cannot match.
Indeed, in a recent independent survey by a leading German University, the Esslingen Technical College, of over 20 selected brands of tennis rackets, in which the aim was to establish which racket had the best vibration dampening properties, the Protagon TM 500 came out top.
The importance of this was made evident following the results of another survey in April, this one carried out by the German Government, which identified that 46% of all tennis players suffer from tennis elbow as a result of impact shock vibration.
Similarly, Protagon have had tests carried out on the performance significance of being able to adjust string tensions.
By using two rackets, one with a soft frame and the other with a stiff frame, both strung at the same tension, and with all other  parameters fixed, the tests were able to reveal a 30 cm (almost 1 foot) difference in the length of the shot.
Then, using an average stiffness frame and stringing it at two different tensions, 44lbs and 66 lbs respectively, the result was a massive 350cm (over 11 feet) difference in the length of the shot.
Thus Protagon was able to conclude that the performance of the racket related to adjustment of the string tension is 11 times more than its performance related to the change in the stiffness of the frame.
Protagon believes that, by offering its string adjustment facility, that it is ‘raising the stakes’, so to speak…setting the trend for the nineties, and giving a new meaning to the term ‘user-friendly’.
The Protagon range offers three rackets, all of which are made of 100% high performance (c/c unidirectional carbon as used in the aerospace industry) graphite.
The TM (Tension Master) 500,(£199), for the skilled, touch player, has effortless playability, enabling you to use your opponent's energy for your power.
The TM 400 (£179), has a medium stiff frame for the more free hitting player who demands comfort from his or her racket, while the HiCon 400 (£169), offers both power and control for the baseline enthusiast.
Protagon is the brand name of Arrow Sport which is part of the 45 company strong Pees Group, the Head Office of which is in Essen, Germany.
The Court Family
Tennis World looks at tennis courts and their accompanying facilities
Ten years ago, if you asked any tennis player what he looked for in a court, you would probably get 10 different answers.
Consistent ball bounce, non slip surface, quick drying surface, all year round playability, easy on the legs, low maintenance, would all be at the top of any aspiring club champion's list of requirements.
Nowadays, those same players and their sons and daughters, led by the example of professional tennis players, and more recently national associations, are looking at the effect of the court on their bodies as their main priority when choosing a court or a club to play at.
Health promotion is a growth ‘industry’ these days, it's the trend, if you like.
It's the trend which has switched the emphasis to keeping you on court — rather than being forced off it, as many have been at my club in recent seasons.
It's the trend which has seen Martina Navratilova arrange her playing schedule around selected tournaments compatible with her receiving minimal strain on her knees and back.
And it's the trend which, in addition to its desire to see our juniors competing on the same surfaces as their international counterparts, has seen our own LTA encourage the court manufacturers in this country towards the cushioned acrylic type of tennis courts.
So far, such encouragement has seen a small but significant increase in the numbers of acrylic courts being laid.
Unofficial figures show that over 65% of courts built in 1991 are of the macadam variety, 10% are artificial grass and 6% are acrylic.
In 1990, however, that figure was just 3%.
Front — Mike Lawrence (Greenset) and Chris Trickey (LTA) who opened the new courts at Bexley (above)
Indeed, to date, 15 clubs have installed 44 acrylic surfaces as a  direct result of LTA court surface policy.
Chris Trickey, of the Lawn Tennis Association's Facilities Department, says that the acrylic market is ‘always likely to be relatively small.
The policy, which is aimed primarily at larger clubs, is now widely known and there are many more similar projects in the pipeline.
It's early days and the market for acrylics needs to find its own level.
Nevertheless, the demand for acrylics has definitely grown in what was, in 1991, a fairly static market.’
Doe Contracts,(), is one company which has responded with ‘enthusiasm’ to the LTA initiative over acrylic surfaces, and has recently signed an agreement with GreenSet, a company whose product range includes the appropriately named Grand Prix acrylic and cushioned acrylic surfaces, 10,000 of which,(acrylic), have been constructed to date in Europe.
The system is made up of successive layers of compatible and co-active materials, perhaps best described in the following dual terms:
the foundation, or base layers, which have an expected lifespan of more than 25 years, and the surface layers, which should last between 7 and 10 years.
The Grand Prix Cushion surface layers are blends of acrylic resins, rubber granules and other selected additives.
According to Doe, the surface offers high resilience and durability and most recent installations have been at Loughborough University, Bexley LTC and Westside Club in Wimbledon.
From Fosse Contracts,(), the Leicester based company, comes the Novacrylic, a surface which originates from the United States and which has been installed in the White House, no less.
Novacrylic is a top surface which can be laid directly on to a macadam sub base or on to layers of Novacushion or the new Ultracushion.
European Clay courts from Fosse (Bisham Abbey
Fosse tell us that the non-glare surface is UV stabilised, non slip and has low abrasion qualities.
In addition, the surface  is not affected by extreme weather conditions.
Fosse Contracts also supplies European clay courts and has installed three such courts at Bisham Abbey for the LTA.
The light clay and red brick dust are imported from France, perhaps the only way to re-create the playing conditions that are available at Roland Garros, here in England.
Halmo Sports of Camberley (), which offers the prestigious Plexipave and Plexicushion type of acrylic surfaces, have also laid courts at Bisham Abbey, as well as at the Nottingham Tennis Centre, Sunderland and Batchwood ITI Centres, and Centrecourt Hotel and Tennis Centre.
This year, the company has brought out an enhanced system of Plexicushion, the Plexicushion Prestige, a new and innovative development which sees the use of more resilient base coats beneath the conventional Plexipave system.
The system ensures additional cushioning which should, according to the company, help to prevent player fatigue and wear and tear on muscles and joints.
Plexipave products are the result of 35 years of research and development from the California Products Corporation in the USA.
En-Tout-Cas,(), another company which is based in Leicester, can boast 80 years, no less, experience in building tennis courts.
Whether it be Savanna artificial grass, Tennisquick, a porous concrete court, or Playdek, a bitumen macadam surface, En-Tout-Cas can offer the maximum choice for your home or club.
Most recently, the company has concluded an agreement whereby it has become the exclusive installers for the American Decoturf range of tennis surfaces in the UK.
This acrylic surface is the type that has been used at the US Open ever since it moved from Forest Hills to Flushing Meadows.
Durability, comfort, less fatigue and increased ball control are some of the reasons why it has become a Grand Slam surface, and why En Tout Cas decided to endorse its stated policy of choice and availability of surfaces, by bringing it to the UK.
There will always be a market for artificial grass courts in this country.
Anglian and Midland Sports Surfaces in Peterborough,(), is one company which can supply that market.
Its new Matchplay II surface used staple fibres, needled and resin bonded, to give a tough durable surface.
The Matchplay's unique ‘needlepunch’ construction gives surface texture which, claims Anglian and Midland, makes sand infilling much easier than for other products.
Matchplay II has an integral shockpad which reduces stress on knee and ankle joints.
The reduced sand content and high fibre weight offers better underfoot grip when compared to sand filled tufteds and natural grass.
Playability and ball bounce are two of the advantages of the Omnicourt Pro tennis court, another sand filled artificial grass surface, according to manufacturers Omnisport Landscape Construction Ltd.().
Plexicushion Prestige ensures additional cushioning which should, according to the company, help to prevent player fatigue and wear and tear on muscles and joints
The mixture of sand and fibre is designed to give consistency of bounce, controlled footslide and controlled shock  absorbency .
Fosse believe the Advantage system is the first to be designed specifically for tennis
Cranbrook Castle L.T.C., by day and night — Advantage Fosse
Lighting from LTL Contract
The fibres hold the sand in place.
Good ball action is the result of the ball making contact with the sand, so it is important to keep the fibre erect and the sand uniformly level.
Maintenance is the key to both performance and lifespan and to help with this, Omnicourt has set up a helpline, on .
Moving back to clay, Spade Oak, a company of High Wycombe,(), is offering a new fast dry ‘clay type’ surface called Canada Tenn.
This surface is already well established in the United States, and in Europe, where there are currently 1500 in use.
It is one of three clay type surfaces to come out of America, the others being Lee and Har-Tu.
Canada Tenn courts are constructed from a natural rock  occurring in the USA and laid and bound on a dynamic or engineered base.
The surface is naturally cushioned and allows a controlled slide.
Trevor May, a Kent based contractor,(), offers a variety of all weather surfaces for a variety of sports.
In tennis, it offers colour sprayed, modified bitumen macadams, and ‘Smash’ and ‘Soft’grass surfaces.
All courts are guaranteed for 3 years.
Meanwhile, off court, floodlighting and covers, particularly balloons, are enjoying increasing prominence as court purchasers seek to  maximise use of their investment.
Thorn Lighting, of Borehamwood, is one such company which specialises in providing lighting for tennis courts.
It offers a floodlighting system which operates on 6 metre columns which, claims Thorn, lowers installation and running costs and allows for a more sympathetic hearing from councils when applying for planning permission.
The system, which was originally tested at a local tennis club, operates with low energy, high output 250W Son-T lamps mounted on six columns, set at either 6m or 4.5m mounting heights.
Thorn Lighting has installed a system at the Chingford Tennis School in Essex.
Advantage Lighting systems, a system installed by Fosse Contracts, also offers lower height columns at 6 metres.
Fosse believe that the Advantage system is the first such system to be designed specifically for tennis and says that it has been its most successful introduction into the game with over 200 installations in the last four years.
The light is distributed over the courts by means of multi sided reflectors, rather than by direct light on to the court as is the traditional way.
Advantage uses the widely recognised 1000 Watt Metal Halide Lamps for its illumination.
LTL Contracts, from Farnham, has installed its most recent lighting system at the Avondale LTC in Fleet, Hampshire.
The system has 4×10 metre hinged columns, and uses 2 kw  asymmetric floodlights.
According to LTL, the system costs less than 75 pence per hour to run and is operated by a coin metre which has a flashing ‘5 minutes to go’ warning light.
Moving on to structures, and we look to France for the offer of all year round tennis from the makers of the polygonal, aluminium/fabric system, Walu Structures.
Walu's unique design, which sees a high quality, white polyester cover stretched over a cross timber frame, ensures durability with minimal maintenance.
The polyester PVC fabric diffuses sunlight pleasantly, while fresh air circulates freely thanks to the removable side panels.
Walu structures are not de-mountable structures, like balloons, but aesthetically pleasing, environmentally approved buildings in their own right.
For further details, contact .
Finally, a look at Air Domes Ltd., a new London based company which has just been formed to market the Yeadon Air structure.
Yeadon are one of the foremost manufacturers and installers of structures in North America, having installed 400 air halls in that country and Canada in the past 20 years, including a structure for the  Canadian Tennis Association in Toronto.
The outer is made of long wearing, vinyl coated polyester fabrics, treated for flame resistance, cold cracks, UV, mildew and chemical pollutants.
Double skin protection is provided by way of inner liners which are made from similar, lighter fabrics and which help to improve insulation and sound quality.
For further details, call Air Domes on .
OFF COURT
OLYMPIC BOOST FOR WILSON
Wilson, already the official ball of the US Open, has been selected as the ball to be used in this summer's Olympic Games in Spain and the 1992 Federation Cup in Germany.
The new Wilson ball, which has been specially developed for the Olympics, features a unique new treatment, Baygard, a fabric protector which is applied to the existing Durafelt 135 outer.
Baygard, claims Wilson, enhances the life of the ball by increasing moisture and dirt  repellence by 75% over other tennis balls, thereby reducing the problems of weight gain and fluffiness.
As an adopted ball for LTA sanctioned events,(adoption into the LTA Sponsors Ball Pool), it has already been selected for us in this country at the 14, 16 and 18 and under Midland Bank Junior Championships.
PICKARD'S CHALLENGE
‘If you think that you have found a boy or girl with talent, tell us at the Lawn Tennis Association’.
The instruction came  from British Davis Cup captain Tony Pickard, speaking at Wilson's Staff Coaching seminar at the company's headquarters in Southall, recently.
In a clear reference to past failures by an Association which has, in years gone by, been unwilling to respond positively either to anything which is not of its own making, or anybody who is not on its payroll, Pickard went on to state, ‘If we do not respond, for whatever reasons, keep knocking at the door until someone answers.’
It's not much of an endorsement for the body which employs him, is it?
Yet Pickard was keen also to echo the more positive tone of the seminar and the alleged changing face of the administration in this country, when he said, ‘There are still many things to be done but there is renewed enthusiasm and that must be maintained.
‘For reasons that I cannot understand,’ he continued, ‘we in Britain seem to have a negative response to winners.
It is tough out there, but the rewards are enormous.
Now I am going to throw out a challenge.
Go out and find a champion’
The LTA's telephone number is .
GET NET SET
Want to know what all the umpires and referees are receiving as gifts from the USTA at this year's US Open?
They will all receive individual Net Sets, the new net measurer that collapses to the exact height of the net, then folds away to the size of a pen and clips to the pocket accordingly.
Net Set, available in matt black or 14K gold plate finish makes an ideal tennis gift.
For further details, call .
A GAME OF TENNIS AND A GLASS OF WINE
The Australian Wine Bureau has launched an innovative National Tennis Tournament, the finals of which will take place under the watchful eye of former British Davis Cup captain, the Australian Warren Jacques, at the Queen's Club in September.
Tony Pickard with Wilson coaches
The tournament, the entry fees of which are to be donated to the Wine and Spirit Benevolent Fund, a  registered charity, is open to a wide ranging group of people connected with the trade, including…‘retail, wine bar, restaurant, or hotel trade buyers, writers, waiters or sales assistants, whatever their standard of tennis.’
Initially, the tournament will be played on a regional basis at various locations around the country during July, with the 12 winners (6 men and 6 women), enjoying an overnight stop in London for the finals.
The Bureau is offering tennis rackets as prizes, with on court coaching from Jacques as an additional bonus.
‘I think that it is tremendous that the Australian Wine Bureau is offering so many people the chance to play tennis competitively at great venues and I am looking forward to passing on a few tips to the winners — before joining them in a celebratory glass of Australian wine.’
The initiative is also supported by Wilson Sporting goods who will supply Staff Coaches to give advice at regional Centres, not to mention the Wilson Radar Gun, which will be available at each tournament to enable competitors to measure the speed of their serves.
HEAD LAUNCH ANATOM
Members of the national and specialist press attended the launch of Head's new Anatom System tennis shoe, which took place at the Roehampton Club during April.
Correspondents from five national newspapers, five specialist publications and even a presenter from BBC's Tomorrow's World programme, tried and tested the shoe, which is constructed of two main elements, the outer body, which includes the outsole and leather upper, and a separate removable customised multilayered suspension system.
The suspension system consists of an orthopaedic footbed which locates the foot in a central position and prevents side to side slipping.
The spring plate, on which it sits, is supported by two shock absorbers which, claims Head, disperses up to 99.9% of shock vibration.
The shoe is now available in sports shops around the country.
MARTINA BACK FOR EASTBOURNE
Martina Navratilova will return to Eastbourne again this year,(June 15–20), to defend her  Pilkington Glass title.
‘I love Eastbourne’, she commented.
‘The wonderful crowds, the garden setting, the cry of the gulls all helps to provide a special feeling.’
For the first time this year, ticket holders will receive a full refund if a whole day's play is cancelled because of bad weather.
For ticket details, call .
RADIO WIMBLEDON — ON THE AIR
Visitors to Wimbledon, and local residents, will this year, for the first time, be able to tune into Radio Wimbledon, a special radio station providing all the up to date news on The Championships, weather news reports from the courts, interviews, order of play, results, even the latest weather and traffic information.
Run in association with BBC Radio 5, Radio Wimbledon will be accessible by way of special headsets in the grounds, as well as on radios in cars and homes within a radius of at least two miles.
Wimbledon estimates that this new service, which will  be on air for up to 14 hours for each day of The Championships and which will be presented by commentators such as Andrew Castle, Paul Hutchins and Warren Jacques, will have a potential audience of up to 450,000.
This is the first time that such a service has been available at a tennis event.
‘Radio Wimbledon will provide a bonus for all those involved in The Championships,’ commented John Curry, Chairman of The All England Club, but in particular it will benefit the hundreds of thousands of spectators who come each year.
It will not only be an excellent source of information for those outside the grounds but also in the locality for our near neighbours.’
ADIDAS RENEWS COMMITMENT TO JUNIOR CIRCUIT
The final six tournaments in the 32 event an Challenge were completed during the Easter school holidays at venues throughout the country.
The tournaments have not only provided  performance players (12–16 years of age), with realistic, intensive and challenging winter competition, they have also provided emerging new competitors aged 10 and 11 to the joys and pressures of competition, some for the first time.
The highlight of the 1991/92 series of tournaments will come this June when 30 of the young competitors take part in a clinic with Stefan Edberg and Tony Pickard at Queen's Club.
The sheer volume of entries to the adidas Challenge events is evidence of the interest and popularity of these tournaments.
This success has prompted adidas to renew its sponsorship of the Challenge for a further 2 years.
Weather updates on Radio Wimbledon!
STRINGERS' CORNER
BUZZ WORDS FOR STRINGS
When you talk about racquet strings, you are talking some complicated and sometimes confused words.
Wrapped and cordless multifilaments, hybrids, notching — what do they have to do with how you hit a tennis ball?
Your stringer should be able to explain these terms and more — and understanding some of the stringers' buzz words can be useful, even if it's just to impress your friends.
Virtually all synthetic strings today have more than one strand of fibre in them — therefore they are multifilament.
Some strings have a solid centre core and then up to three outer wrappings of spun or woven small strings.
These are wrapped multifilaments, such as the Prince Synthetic and Babolat Fine Play.
The centre core gives ‘durability’— they'll last a long time and the overwrap improves the ‘playability’ or feel or response to the ball.
Other strings have anything from seven to many hundreds of micro-fibres which are then twisted together in a way similar to natural gut.
These are cordless multifilaments such as Tecnifibre 515.
These strings are designed to give better ‘playability’ and can reduce the shock of the wide body frames.
Monica Seles used these strings for example.
Hybrid is a way of stringing a racquet which uses two different types of string.
For example, Andre Agassi uses Kevlar for the main (vertical) strings and Babolat VS gut for the cross strings to add ‘resilience’ to the strings — that is improving the  strings' ability to regain their original shape after impact with the ball.
Notching is a good way of checking that your stringer is doing a good job.
It is the word stringers use for friction between main and cross strings caused by a stringer pulling a cross string through too quickly — it can mean your string will break too soon.
So, next time you talk to your stringer, check out they know more about their job than you do.
A few questions about playability, resilience and notching could keep them in order!
Stefan Ties The Knot
Stefan Edberg, 26, formerly tennis' most eligible  bachelor , married long time girlfriend Annette Olsen, 27, in the Swedish town of Vaxjo, on 19th April.
Over eighty invited guests, including Tony Pickard, his coach and several of Edberg's closest tennis playing friends from Sweden, were at the town's cathedral to witness the ceremony, which was followed by a reception at the nearby Teleborgs Castle.
Celebrations continued until the early hours of Sunday morning, following the couple's 1am departure.
READERS' LETTERS
LTA fails its MOT
I was glad to read David Wynne Morgan's comments on the LTA magazine in the May issue of Tennis World.
I joined the Associate Membership scheme in the beginning and left it last year because of what I felt was gross overcharging for a pathetic members' service.
The LTA has had the support of many people and yet has managed to alienate many of those who wished to support British tennis.
I queried the cost and funding of the magazine several times but never got an answer.
To me, the content was so uninteresting that I stopped opening the cover, so that the numerous approaches offering me overpriced advertising space were always rejected.
It is time for the magazine to go — what company can justify wasting a reputed £250,000 on a glossy front while a recession is going on?
Certainly not the LTA, whose income should be used for the development of the game in practical ways.
Why is there a shortage of money for our teams and travelling coaches, or is it simply that the LTA's overpaid employees are anxious to preserve their lifestyles at the expense of British tennis?
The LTA seems to have a Rolls Royce body with a clapped out engine that is in urgent need of replacement having failed its MOT (Members Observation Test).
Associate Members should get ground tickets for Wimbledon as a right instead of going in to a ballot.
They have demonstrated their support but only get token reciprocation.
They are taken for granted and are not getting value for their money or support.
An open question to Mr Peacock, the Executive Director of the LTA.
In earlier years, is it true that you attended a Senior Management Seminar as a representative of the International Sports Company,(Dunlop, Slazenger, Carlton, Litesome), and stated that you had the two finest wooden rackets in the world and that you had no intention of following the fibreglass and graphite racket trend as it was all a flash in the pan?
If so, having demonstrated such alarming traditionalism, do you really think that you are the man for the job, which requires open communication and awareness of current and future trends in British and World tennis?
It's time to go, Mr Peacock — your plumes are tarnished with much ado about nothing and, like football clubs, we want results.
US should be proud of Andre
With news of yet another triumphant performance in the Davis Cup by Andre Agassi, it is worth asking what the American Tennis Authorities are thinking of in their choice of players for the Barcelona Olympics.
It seems a strange and very unjust decision to pick Jim Courier for reasons of his present ranking but who  bears no comparison in performance as a Davis Cup player and, even more surprising, as he has actually refused to play for the US team recently.
It is obvious that when it comes to representing his country, there is no one to equal Andre Agassi.
Ranking means nothing and it is very sad to see Andre having such poor results in tournaments and rather puzzling in view of his amazing results in Davis Cup; one wonders if he gives too much to that at his own expense!
America should be very proud of him and show it.
Andre to the rescue again
Andre once again came to the rescue of his country, the USA, in the deciding rubber of the quarter-final of the 1992 Davis Cup.
He beat Karel Novacek, 7–6, 6–0, 6–0 to advance the USA into the semi-final.
This was the pattern of the semi-final against Germany in 1991.
It was a pity he didn't get the opportunity to do the same against France in the final.
He won the only match when the USA eventually lost 1–3 to France.
However, he has not been selected to play in the Olympics this year.
I guess this was because his ranking dropped.
He is going through a dry patch at the moment as he has won only on match in the five tournaments he has played so far this year but I am sure he will work his way back again, he has got it in him.
I am looking forward to seeing him in the French Open and hopefully he will win it this year!
Most of all I am eagerly awaiting his return to Wimbledon this summer to bring more fun and excitement to the fortnight.
Just for the record, I am not a teenager, but I think Andre is the most exciting player on the Tour at the moment.
Devoted Andre Agassi Fan   
Clarification
With reference to the article in your April issue of Tennis World, ‘Expansion  Programme for JTC’, in which my name was mentioned, I would like the following to be noted.
I feel it is important that you, your readers and the tennis public should know that I no longer take part in any decision making relating to the business of the company or the centre and therefore I take no responsibility, for either the success or failure of Junior Tennis Centre Ltd nor Sutton Junior Tennis Centre.
The Sutton Junior Tennis Centre was officially opened in June 1991.
It is unique in that juniors come first, are welcomed at all times in and out of the club house, on and off of the courts and will never be turned off the courts by seniors.
It is the first of its kind in the UK and in my view, putting the idea into practice was ‘many years overdue’.
As co-founder, it was, for me, the culmination of ‘a life time's dream’, nearly three years of work and over thirty years experience developing coaching programmes for juniors and seniors of all levels through Stonebridge Tennis and The Stonebridge Academy.
Unfortunately, however, I found it necessary to resign from the board of Junior Tennis Centres.
I no longer take any interest in the company, nor, although co-founder, do I take any responsibility for the success or failure of present or future coaching programmes, standards of coaching or the selection of coaches (Teaching Professionals) at Sutton Junior Tennis Centre.
More on Goran
I am writing to echo the  thoughts of Mrs Surridge ( Readers' Letters April ‘92 issue).
Please let's have more pics and features on my favourite player Goran Ivanisevic.
How about starting with a report on the Stuttgart Classic event where Goran really excelled himself with brilliant wins over Jim Courier and, of course, the out-of-sorts (surely for the moment only), Stefan Edberg.
Goran's two tournaments wins so far this year prove that he's more than just a serving machine.
No-one gains titles by their service alone.
Are you listening those of you who claim that this is his only strength?
Would any Goran fans out there like to write to me.
Do drop me a line, Mrs Surridge, or anyone else who's interested.
P.S. I hope you can print my letter — Tennis World, and keep up your high standards.
Editor's Note: Thank you for your letter, Susan.
I hope that you enjoy the feature on Goran elsewhere in this issue.
Fab Gab
As a member of the Gabriela Sabatini fan club, I would like to congratulate Gaby on her wins this year and how wonderful she looks as well, her clothing by Sergio Tacchini is ace and I love her racket.
But there is one complaint, so far this year, there hasn't been much about her — no pictures and information.
I'm sure other Sabatini fans would agree!
All her fans, I'm sure, would love to see her in the Sweetspot. come on, how could you resist such an ace player?
Anyone who agrees please write in and say so.
I haven't seen any letters supporting the Argentinian.