

Foreword: Towards education for all
AIMS
This series aims to support teachers as they respond to the challenge they face in meeting the needs of all children in their school, particularly those identified as having special educational needs.
Although there have been many useful publications in the field of special educational needs during the last decade, the distinguishing feature of the present series of volumes lies in their concern with specific areas of the curriculum in primary and secondary schools.
We have tried to produce a series of conceptually coherent and professionally relevant books, each of which is concerned with ways in which children with varying levels of ability and motivation can be taught together.
The books draw on the experience of practising teachers, teacher trainers and researchers and seek to provide practical guidelines on ways in which specific areas of the curriculum can be made more accessible to all children.
The volumes provide many examples of curriculum adaptation, classroom activities, teacher-child interactions, as well as the mobilisation of resources inside and outside the school.
The series is organised largely in terms of age and subject groupings, but three ‘overview’ volumes have been prepared in order to provide an account of some major current issues and developments.
Seamus Hegarty's Meeting Special Needs in Ordinary Schools gives an introduction to the field of special needs as a whole, whilst Sheila Wolfendale's Primary Schools and Special Needs and John Sayer's Secondary Schools for All?address issues more specifically concerned with primary and secondary schools respectively.
We hope that curriculum specialists will find essential background and contextual material in these overview volumes.
In addition, a section of this series will be concerned with examples of obstacles to learning.
All of these specific special needs can be seen on a continuum ranging from mild to severe, or from temporary and transient to long-standing or permanent.
These include difficulties in learning or in adjustment and behaviour, as well as problems resulting largely from sensory or physical impairments or from difficulties of communication from whatever cause.
We hope that teachers will consult the volumes in this section for guidance on working with children with specific difficulties.
The series aims to make a modest ‘distance learning’ contribution to meeting the needs of teachers working with the whole range of pupils with special educational needs by offering a set of resource materials relating to specific areas of the primary and secondary curriculum and by suggesting ways in which learning obstacles, whatever their origin, can be identified and addressed.
We hope that these materials will not only be used for private study but be subjected to critical scrutiny by school-based inservice groups sharing common curricular interests and by staff of institutions of higher education  concerned with both special needs teaching and specific curriculum areas.
The series has been planned to provide a resource for Local Education Authority (LEA) advisers, specialist teachers from all sectors of the education service, educational psychologists, and teacher working parties.
We hope that the books will provide a stimulus for dialogue and serve as catalysts for improved practice.
It is our hope that parents will also be encouraged to read about new ideas in teaching children with special needs so that they can be in a better position to work in partnership with teachers on the basis of an informed and critical understanding of current difficulties and developments.
The goal of ‘Education for All’ can only be reached if we succeed in developing a working partnership between teachers, pupils, parents, and the community at large.
ELEMENTS OF A WHOLE-SCHOOL APPROACH
Meeting special educational needs in ordinary schools is much more than a process of opening school doors to admit children previously placed in special schools.
It involves a radical re-examination of what all schools have to offer all children.
Our efforts will be judged in the long term by our success with children who are already in ordinary schools but whose needs are not being met, for whatever reason.
The additional challenge of achieving full educational as well as social integration for children now in special schools needs to be seen in the wider context of a major reappraisal of what ordinary schools have to offer the pupils already in them.
The debate about integration of handicapped and disabled children in ordinary schools should not be allowed to overshadow the movement for curriculum reform in the schools themselves.
If successful, this could promote the fuller integration of the children already in the schools.
If this is the aim of current policy, as it is of this series of unit texts, we have to begin by examining ways in which schools and school policies can themselves be a major element in children's difficulties.
Can schools cause special needs?
Traditionally, we have looked for causes of learning difficulty in the child.
Children have been subjected to tests and investigations by doctors, psychologists and teachers with the aim of pinpointing the nature of the problem and in the hope that this might lead to specific programmes of teaching and intervention.
We less frequently ask ourselves whether what and how we teach and the way in which we organise and manage our schools could themselves be a major cause of children's difficulties.
The shift of emphasis towards a whole-school policy is sometimes described in terms of a move away from the deficit or medical model of special education towards a more environmental or ecological model.
Clearly, we are concerned here with an interaction between the two.
No one would deny that the origins of some learning difficulties do lie in the child.
But even where a clear cause can be established — for example, a child  with severe brain damage, or one with a serious sensory or motor disorder — it would be simplistic to attribute all the child's learning difficulties to the basic impairment alone.
The ecological model starts from the position that the growth and development of children can be understood only in relation to the nature of their interactions with the various environments which impinge on them and with which they are constantly interacting.
These environments include the home and each individual member of the immediate and extended family.
Equally important are other children in the neighbourhood and at school, as well as people with whom the child comes into casual or closer contact.
We also need to consider the local and wider community and its various institutions — not least, the powerful influence of television, which for some children represents more hours of information intake than is provided by teachers during eleven years of compulsory education.
The ecological model thus describes a gradually widening series of concentric circles, each of which provides a powerful series of influences and possibilities for interaction — and therefore learning.
Schools and schooling are only one of many environmental influences affecting the development and learning of children.
A great deal has been learned from other environments before the child enters school and much more will be learned after the child leaves full-time education.
Schools represent a relatively powerful series of environments, not all concerned with formal learning.
During the hours spent in school, it is hard to estimate the extent to which the number and nature of the interactions experienced by any one child are directly concerned with formal teaching and learning.
Social interactions with other children also need to be considered.
Questions concerned with access to the curriculum lie at the heart of any whole-school policy.
What factors limit the access of certain children to the curriculum?
What modifications are necessary to ensure fuller curriculum access?
Are there areas of the curriculum from which some children are excluded?
Is this because they are thought ‘unlikely to be able to benefit’?
And even if they are physically present, are there particular lessons or activities which are inaccessible because textbooks or work-sheets demand a level of literacy and comprehension which effectively prevent access?
Are there tasks in which children partly or wholly fail to understand the language which the teacher is using?
Are some teaching styles inappropriate for individual children?
Is it possible that some learning difficulties arise from the ways in which schools are organised and managed?
For example, what messages are we conveying when we separate some children from others?
How does the language we use to describe certain children reflect our own values and assumptions?
How do schools transmit value judgements about children who succeed and those who do not?
In the days when there was talk of comprehensive schools being ‘grammar schools for all’, what hope was there for children who were experiencing significant learning difficulties?
And even today, what messages are we transmitting to children and their peers when we exclude them from participation in some school activities?
How many children with special needs will be entered for the new General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) examinations?
How  many have taken or will take part in Technical and Vocational Education Initiative (TVEI) schemes?
The argument here is not that all children should have access to all aspects of the curriculum.
Rather it is a plea for the individualisation of learning opportunities for all children.
This requires a broad curriculum with a rich choice of learning opportunities designed to suit the very wide range of individual needs.
Curriculum reform
The last decade has seen an increasingly interventionist approach by Her Majesty's Inspectors of Education (HMI), by officials of the Department of Education and Science (DES) and by individual Secretaries of State.
The ‘Great Debate’, allegedly beginning in 1976, led to a flood of curriculum guidelines from the centre.
The garden is secret no longer.
Whilst Britain is far from the centrally imposed curriculum found in some other countries, government is increasingly insisting that schools must reflect certain key areas of experience for all pupils, and in particular those concerned with the world of work (sic ), with science and technology, and with economic awareness.
These priorities are also reflected in the prescriptions for teacher education laid down with an increasing degree of firmness from the centre.
There are indications that a major reappraisal of curriculum content and access is already under way and seems to be well supported by teachers.
Perhaps the best known and most recent examples can be found in the series of Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) reports concerned with secondary, primary and special education, known as the Hargreaves, Thomas and Fish Reports (ILEA, 1984, 1985a, 1985b).
In particular, the Hargreaves Report envisaged a radical reform of the secondary curriculum, based to some extent on his book Challenge for the Comprehensive School (Hargreaves, 1982).
This envisages a major shift of emphasis from the ‘cognitive-academic’ curriculum of many secondary schools towards one emphasising more personal involvement by pupils in selecting their own patterns of study from a wider range of choice.
If the proposals in these reports were to be even partially implemented, pupils with special needs would stand to benefit from such a wholesale review of the curriculum of the school as a whole.
Pupils with special needs also stand to benefit from other developments in mainstream education.
These include new approaches to records of achievement, particularly ‘profiling’ and a greater emphasis on criterion-referenced assessment.
Some caution has already been expressed about the extent to which the new GCSE examinations will reach less able children previously excluded from the Certificate of Secondary Education.
Similar caution is justified in relation to the TVEI and the Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education (CPVE).
And what about the new training initiatives for school leavers and the 14–19 age group in general?
Certainly, the pronouncements of the Manpower Services Commission (MSC) emphasise a policy of provision for all, and have made specific arrangements for young people with special needs, including those with disabilities.
In the last analysis, society and its institutions will be judged by  their success in preparing the majority of young people to make an effective and valued contribution to the community as a whole.
A CLIMATE OF CHANGE
Despite the very real and sometimes overwhelming difficulties faced by schools and teachers as a result of underfunding and professional unrest, there are encouraging signs of change and reform which, if successful, could have a significant impact not only on children with special needs but on all children.
Some of these are briefly mentioned below.
The campaign for equal opportunities
First, we are more aware of the need to confront issues concerned with civil rights and equal opportunities.
All professionals concerned with human services are being asked to examine their own attitudes and practices and to question the extent to which these might unwittingly or even deliberately discriminate unfairly against some sections of the population.
We are more conscious than ever of the need to take positive steps to promote the full access of girls and women not only to full educational opportunities but also to the whole range of community resources and services, including employment, leisure, housing, social security and the right to property.
We have a similar concern for members of ethnic and religious groups who have been and still are victims of discrimination and restricted opportunities for participation in society and its institutions.
It is no accident that the title of the Swann Report on children from ethnic minorities was Education for All (Committee of Inquiry, 1985).
This too is the theme of the present series and the underlying aim of the movement to meet the whole range of special needs in ordinary schools.
The equal opportunities movement has not itself always fully accepted people with disabilities and special needs.
At national level, there is no legislation specifically concerned with discrimination against people with disabilities, though this does exist in some other countries.
The Equal Opportunities Commission does not concern itself with disability issues.
On the other hand, an increasing number of local authorities and large corporations claim to be ‘Equal Opportunities Employers’, specifically mentioning disability alongside gender, ethnicity and sexual orientation.
Furthermore, the 1986 Disabled Persons Act, arising from a private member's Bill and now on the statute book, seeks to carry forward for adults some of the more positive features of the 1981 Education Act — for example, it provides for the rights of all people with disabilities to take part or be represented in discussion and decision-making concerning services provided for them.
These developments, however, have been largely concerned with children or adults with disabilities, rather than with children already in ordinary schools.
Powerful voluntary organisations such as MENCAP (the Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults) and the Spastics Society have helped to raise political and public awareness of the needs of children with disabilities and have fought hard and on the whole  successfully to secure better services for them and for their families.
Similarly, organisations of adults with disabilities, such as the British Council of Organisations for Disabled People, are pressing hard for better quality, integrated education, given their own personal experiences of segregated provision.
Special needs and social disadvantage
Even these developments have largely bypassed two of the largest groups now in special schools: those with moderate learning difficulties and those with emotional and behavioural difficulties.
There are no powerful pressure groups to speak for them, for the same reason that no pressure groups speak for the needs of children with special needs already in ordinary schools.
Many of these children come from families which do not readily form themselves into associations and pressure groups.
Many of their parents are unemployed, on low incomes or dependent on social security; many live in overcrowded conditions in poor quality housing or have long-standing health problems.
Some members of these families have themselves experienced school failure and rejection as children.
Problems of poverty and disadvantage are common in families of children with special needs already in ordinary schools.
Low achievement and social disadvantage are clearly associated, though it is important not to assume that there is a simple relation between them.
Although most children from socially disadvantaged backgrounds have not been identified as low achieving, there is still a high correlation between social-class membership and educational achievement, with middle-class children distancing themselves increasingly in educational achievements and perhaps also socially from children from working-class backgrounds — another form of segregation within what purports to be the mainstream.
The probability of socially disadvantaged children being identified as having special needs is very much greater than in other children.
An early estimate suggested that it was more than seven times as high, when social disadvantage was defined by the presence of all three of the following indices: overcrowding (more than 1.5 persons per room), low income (supplementary benefit or free school meals) and adverse family circumstances (coming from a single-parent home or a home with more than five children)(Wedge and Prosser, 1973).
Since this study was published, the number of families coming into these categories has greatly increased as a result of deteriorating economic conditions and changing social circumstances.
In this wider sense, the problem of special needs is largely a problem of social disadvantage and poverty.
Children with special needs are therefore doubly vulnerable to underestimation of their abilities: first, because of their family and social backgrounds, and second, because of their low achievements.
A recent large-scale study of special needs provision in junior schools suggests that while teachers' attitudes to low-achieving children are broadly positive, they are pessimistic about the ability of such children to derive much benefit from increased special needs provision (Croll and Moses, 1985).
Partnership with parents
The Croll and Moses survey of junior school practice confirms that teachers still tend to attribute many children's difficulties to adverse home circumstances.
How many times have we heard comments along the lines of ‘What can you expect from a child from that kind of family?’
Is this not a form of stereotyping at least as damaging as racist and sexist attitudes?
Partnership with parents of socially disadvantaged children thus presents a very different challenge from that portrayed in the many reports of successful practice in some special schools.
Nevertheless, the challenge can be and is being met.
Paul Widlake's recent books (1984,1985) give the lie to the oft-expressed view that some parents are ‘not interested in their child's education’.
Widlake documents project after project in which teachers and parents have worked well together.
Many of these projects have involved teachers visiting homes rather than parents attending school meetings.
There is also now ample research to show that children whose parents listen to them reading at home tend to read better and to enjoy reading more than other children (Topping and Wolfendale, 1985; see also Sheila Wolfendale's Primary Schools and Special Needs , in the present series).
Support in the classroom
If teachers in ordinary schools are to identify and meet the whole range of special needs, including those of children currently in special schools, they are entitled to support.
Above all, this must come from the head teacher and from the senior staff of the school; from any special needs specialists or teams already in the school; from members of the new advisory and support services, as well as from educational psychologists, social workers and any health professionals who may be involved.
This support can take many forms.
In the past, support meant removing the child for considerable periods of time into the care of remedial teachers either within the school or coming from outside.
Withdrawal now tends to be discouraged, partly because it is thought to be another form of segregation within the ordinary school, and therefore in danger of isolating and stigmatising children, and partly because it deprives children of access to lessons and activities available to other children.
In a major survey of special needs provision in middle and secondary schools, Clunies-Ross and Wimhurst (1983) showed that children with special needs were most often withdrawn from science and modern languages in order to find the time to give them extra help with literacy.
Many schools and LEAs are exploring ways in which both teachers and children can be supported without withdrawing children from ordinary classes.
For example, special needs teachers increasingly are working alongside their colleagues in ordinary classrooms, not just with a small group of children with special needs but also with all children.
Others are working as consultants to their colleagues in discussing the level of difficulty demanded of children following a particular course or specific lesson.
An account of recent developments in consultancy is given in Hanko (1985), with particular reference to children with difficulties of behaviour or adjustment.
Although traditional remedial education is undergoing radical reform, major problems remain.
Implementation of new approaches is uneven both between and within LEAs.
Many schools still have a remedial department or are visited by peripatetic remedial teachers who withdraw children for extra tuition in reading with little time for consultation with school staff.
Withdrawal is still the preferred mode of providing extra help in primary schools, as suggested in surveys of current practice (Clunies-Ross and Wimhurst, 1983; Hodgson, Clunies-Ross and Hegarty, 1984; Croll and Moses, 1985).
Nevertheless, an increasing number of schools now see withdrawal as only one of a widening range of options, only to be used where the child's individually assessed needs suggest that this is indeed the most appropriate form of provision.
Other alternatives are now being considered.
The overall aim of most of these involves the development of a working partnership between the ordinary class teacher and members of teams with particular responsibility for meeting special needs.
This partnership can take a variety of forms, depending on particular circumstances and individual preferences.
Much depends on the sheer credibility of special needs teachers, their perceived capacity to offer support and advice and, where necessary, direct, practical help.
We can think of the presence of the specialist teacher as being on a continuum of visibility.
A ‘high-profile’ specialist may sit alongside a pupil with special needs, providing direct assistance and support in participating in activities being followed by the rest of the class.
A ‘low-profile’ specialist may join with a colleague in what is in effect a team-teaching situation, perhaps spending a little more time with individuals or groups with special needs.
An even lower profile is provided by teachers who may not set foot in the classroom at all but who may spend considerable periods of time in discussion with colleagues on ways in which the curriculum can be made more accessible to all children in the class, including the least able.
Such discussions may involve an examination of textbooks and other reading assignments for readability, conceptual difficulty and relevance of content, as well as issues concerned with the presentation of the material, language modes and complexity used to explain what is required, and the use of different approaches to teacher-pupil dialogue.
IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHER TRAINING
Issues of training are raised by the authors of the three overview works in this series but permeate all the volumes concerned with specific areas of the curriculum or specific areas of special needs.
The scale and complexity of changes taking place in the field of special needs and the necessary transformation of the teacher-training curriculum imply an agenda for teacher training that is nothing less than retraining and supporting every teacher in the country in working with pupils with special needs.
Although teacher training represented one of the three major priorities identified by the Warnock Committee, the resources devoted to this priority have been meagre, despite a strong commitment to training from teachers, LEAs, staff of higher education, HMI and the DES itself.
Nevertheless, some positive developments can be noted (for more detailed accounts of developments in teacher education see Sayer and Jones, 1985 and Robson Sebba, Mittler and Davies, 1988).
Initial training
At the initial training level, we now find an insistence that all teachers in training must be exposed to a compulsory component concerned with meeting special needs in the ordinary school.
The Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (CATE) and HMI seem set to enforce these criteria; institutions that do not meet them will not be accredited for teacher training.
Although this policy is welcome from a special needs perspective, many questions remain.
Where will the staff to teach these courses come from?
What happened to the Warnock recommendations for each teacher-training institution to have a small team of staff specifically concerned with this area?
Even when a team exists, they can succeed in ‘permeating’ a special needs element into initial teacher training only to the extent that they influence all their fellow specialist tutors to widen their teaching perspectives to include children with special needs.
Special needs departments in higher education face similar problems to those confronting special needs teams in secondary schools.
They need to gain access to and influence the work of the whole institution.
They also need to avoid the situation where the very existence of an active special needs department results in colleagues regarding special needs as someone else's responsibility, not theirs.
Despite these problems, the outlook in the long term is favourable.
More and more teachers in training are at least receiving an introduction to special needs; are being encouraged to seek out information on special needs policy and practice in the schools in which they are doing their teaching practice, and are being introduced to a variety of approaches to meeting their needs.
Teaching materials are being prepared specifically for initial teacher-training students.
Teacher trainers have also been greatly encouraged by the obvious interest and commitment of students to children with special needs; optional and elective courses on this subject have always been over-subscribed.
Inservice courses for designated teachers
Since 1983, the government has funded a series of one-term full-time courses in polytechnics and universities to provide intensive training for designated teachers with specific responsibility for pupils with special needs in ordinary schools (see Meeting Special Needs in Ordinary Schools by Seamus Hegarty in this series for information on research on evaluation of their effectiveness).
These courses are innovative in a number of respects.
They bring LEA and higher-education staff together in a productive working partnership.
The seconded teacher, headteacher, LEA adviser and higher-education tutor enter into a commitment to train and support the teachers in becoming change agents in their own schools.
Students spend  two days a week in their own schools initiating and implementing change.
All teachers with designated responsibilities for pupils with special needs have the right to be considered for these one-term courses, which are now a national priority area for which central funding is available.
However, not all teachers can gain access to these courses as the institutions are geographically very unevenly distributed.
Other inservice courses
The future of inservice education for teachers (INSET) in education in general and special needs in particular is in a state of transition.
Since April 1987, the government has abolished the central pooling arrangements which previously funded courses and has replaced these by a system in which LEAs are required to identify their training requirements and to submit these to the DES for funding.
LEAs are being asked to negotiate training needs with each school as part of a policy of staff development and appraisal.
Special needs is one of nineteen national priority areas that will receive 70 per cent funding from the DES, as is training for further education (FE) staff with special needs responsibilities.
These new arrangements, known as Grant Related Inservice Training (GRIST), will change the face of inservice training for all teachers but time is needed to assess their impact on training opportunities and teacher effectiveness (see Mittler, 1986, for an interim account of the implications of the proposed changes).
In the meantime, there is serious concern about the future of secondments for courses longer than one term.
Additional staffing will also be needed in higher education to respond to the wider range of demand.
An increasing number of ‘teaching packages’ have become available for teachers working with pupils with special needs.
Some (though not all) of these are well designed and evaluated.
Most of them are school-based and can be used by small groups of teachers working under the supervision of a trained tutor.
The best known of these is the Special Needs Action Programme (SNAP) originally developed for Coventry primary schools (Muncey and Ainscow, 1982) but now being adapted for secondary schools.
This is based on a form of pyramid training in which co-ordinators from each school are trained to train colleagues in their own school or sometimes in a consortium of local schools.
Evaluation by a National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER) research team suggests that SNAP is potentially an effective approach to school-based inservice training, providing that strong management support is guaranteed by the headteacher and by senior LEA staff (see Hegarty,Meeting Special Needs in Ordinary Schools , this series, for a brief summary).
Does training work?
Many readers of this series of books are likely to have recent experience of training courses.
How many of them led to changes in classroom practice?
How often have teachers been frustrated by their inability to introduce and implement change in their schools on returning from a course?
How many  heads actively support their staff in becoming change agents?
How many teachers returning from advanced one-year courses have experienced ‘the re-entry phenomenon’?
At worst, this is quite simply being ignored: neither the LEA adviser, nor the head nor any one else asks about special interests and skills developed on the course and how these could be most effectively put to good use in the school.
Instead, the returning member of staff is put through various re-initiation rituals ('Enjoyed your holiday? '), or is given responsibilities bearing no relation to interests developed on the course.
Not infrequently, colleagues with less experience and fewer qualifications are promoted over their heads during their absence.
At a time of major initiatives in training, it may seem churlish to raise questions about the effectiveness of staff training.
It is necessary to do so because training resources are limited and because the morale and motivation of the teaching force depend on satisfaction with what is offered — indeed, on opportunities to negotiate what is available with course providers.
Blind faith in training for training's sake soon leads to disillusionment and frustration.
For the last three years, a team of researchers at Manchester University and Huddersfield Polytechnic have been involved in a DES funded project which aimed to assess the impact of a range of inservice courses on teachers working with pupils with special educational needs (see Robson, Sebba, Mittler and Davies, 1988, for a full account and Sebba, 1987, for a briefer interim report).
A variety of courses was evaluated; some were held for one evening a week for a term; others were one-week full time; some were award-bearing, others were not.
The former included the North-West regional diploma in special needs, the first example of a course developed in total partnership between a university and a polytechnic which allowed students to take modules from either institution and also gave credit recognition to specific Open University and LEA courses.
The research also evaluated the effectiveness of an already published and disseminated course on behavioural methods of teaching — the EDY course (Farrell, 1985).
Whether or not the readers of these books are or will be experiencing a training course, or whether their training consists only of the reading of one or more of the books in this series, it may be useful to conclude by highlighting a number of challenges facing teachers and teacher trainers in the coming decades.
1.
We are all out of date in relation to the challenges that we face in our work.
2.
Training in isolation achieves very little.
Training must be seen as part of a wider programme of change and development of the institution as a whole.
3.
Each LEA, each school and each agency needs to develop a strategic approach to staff development, involving detailed identification of training and development needs with the staff as a whole and with each individual member of staff.
4.
There must be a commitment by management to enable the staff member to try to implement ideas and methods learned on the course.
5.
This implies a corresponding commitment by the training institutions to prepare the student to become an agent of change.
6.
There is more to training than attending courses.
Much can be learned simply by visiting other schools, seeing teachers and other professionals at work in different settings and exchanging ideas and experiences.
Many valuable training experiences can be arranged within a single school or agency, or by a group of teachers from different schools meeting regularly to carry out an agreed task.
7.
There is now no shortage of books, periodicals, videos and audio-visual aids concerned with the field of special needs.
Every school should therefore have a small staff library which can be used as a resource by staff and parents.
We hope that the present series of unit texts will make a useful contribution to such a library.
The publishers and I would like to thank the many people — too numerous to mention — who have helped to create this series.
In particular we would like to thank the Associate Editors, James Hogg, Peter Pumfrey, Tessa Roberts and Colin Robson, for their active advice and guidance; the Honorary Advisory Board, Neville Bennett, Marion Blythman, George Cooke, John Fish, Ken Jones, Sylvia Phillips, Klaus Wedell and Phillip Williams, for their comments and suggestions; and the teachers, teacher trainers and special needs advisers who took part in our information surveys.
Educational issues relating to pupils with visual disabilities
Teachers will find that the educational goals which they set for their visually handicapped pupils are essentially the same as for the fully sighted children in their classes and that these goals are attainable.
The expertise, professionalism and caring interest that are needed by all pupils from those who teach them give the best basis for the education and support of pupils with special needs, including those who have visual disabilities.
It will be appreciated that a single developmental problem, such as defective vision, need not dominate the pupils' classroom activities, nor differentiate them unduly from the classmates with whom they work and play.
It is the combination of different characteristics, strengths and weaknesses that leads to the development of the pupil's unique personality, and in common with other children, those with visual handicaps will show a range of character, ability and adjustment.
Nor can potential school achievement or social competence be directly linked to levels of sight: pupils with little or no sight have shown that they can achieve well in school, be independent and happy, since the interaction of the child and the learning environment is as significant for them in helping to achieve these goals as it is for any pupil in school.
Sometimes, learning materials will need to be presented in a different way, and emphasis given to particular aspects of learning, but an understanding of the pupil's needs can clarify issues of curriculum access and special adaptations can be made for those pupils who have sight problems.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE WARNOCK REPORT AND THE 1981 EDUCATION ACT
Such specific measures need to be considered in the context of present educational philosophy and provision.
The approaches to the education of children with special needs, culminating in the 1981 Education Act, are equally applicable to pupils with defective vision, some of whom will be included among those pupils who  are defined as having learning disabilities significantly greater than the majority of their peers, or as having some disability which would prevent them from having their needs fully met without special educational adaptations or modification to their curriculum.
In the procedures required to fulfil the special educational needs of visually handicapped pupils, as with any pupils with special needs, the local education authority must make a formal assessment culminating in a statement of the child's individual special needs.
The previous categorising of pupils in terms of the medical aspects of their handicap is no longer the ruling factor in deciding educational placement, although a thorough understanding of the implications of visual loss or reduced vision is necessary in order to meet the pupils' needs effectively.
The philosophy of the Warnock Report (Department of Education and Science, 1978) greatly influenced the content of the 1981 Education Act, particularly with its recommendation that varying and individual educational needs should be acknowledged, rather than prejudged on the basis of categories.
It was recognised by the Warnock Committee that children with sensory impairments could indeed have special educational needs, but that these might be met within a range of different kinds of educational placements, for instance, in individual integration, in special units, or in special schools.
In addition, this committee reflected the view of many educators of visually handicapped pupils that there is no distinct cut-off point between the fully and the partially sighted, nor between the partially sighted and the blind in terms of functioning.
Aspects of personality and motivation, social and cognitive development could be as significant as sensory impairment in affecting the pupil's educational needs and influencing his progress.
The recommendations of the Warnock Report and the legislation of the 1981 Education Act are significant in the educational placement of visually handicapped pupils, especially since the presence of visual impairments is no longer considered to be sufficient reason for special school placement nor is special school placement an inevitable consequence of the ascertainment of visual impairment.
The total and individual needs of each child are considered more fully, and the assessment procedure which precedes recommendations for educational placement calls for information from medical, psychological and educational sources as well as involving parents actively in the final decision about where and how the pupil is to be educated.
PROCEDURES LEADING TO EDUCATIONAL PLACEMENT
As part of the assessment, factors relating to the child's previous history, the medical diagnosis and prognosis and the home and school environment are considered.
Any indications of present or potential learning difficulties are analysed.
Recommendations in the light of this information will be proffered in terms of the resources, environmental adaptations, curriculum modifications and special teaching methods needed to meet the pupil's individual needs.
A recommendation for appropriate school placement is subsequently given, and a draft statement of the child's individual educational needs and the suggested educational placement, together with the reports of the professionals involved in the assessment, are shown to the parents.
If there is agreement on these recommendations, the final statement is authorised.
The positive aspects of this procedure include the full and detailed consideration of the individual needs of each child.
The drawback is that the procedure is time consuming and can result in a backlog of incomplete or unimplemented statements, with the possible consequence that there is undue delay before the pupil is appropriately placed or supported.
The particular needs of children with defective sight call for a report on the child's eye condition or cause of defective vision from an ophthalmologist, and a report is also requested from the educational advisory service for the visually handicapped.
This should be constructive and include an assessment of the child's functional levels of vision, details of preferred lighting, and recommendations regarding the presentation of materials for learning.
Details of any special equipment, such as tape recorders, typewriters and closed circuit television will need to be provided.
The advisory service should also consider the curricular needs of the pupil, and the inclusion of special or additional areas such as keyboard skills or mobility and orientation that will enable the pupil to have full access to the curriculum and to take part in all aspects of school life.
Recommendations may include safety factors in practical areas, for instance, home economics or chemistry, and suggested alternative activities in cases where sight loss is so severe that the general activity is inappropriate, for example , judo or weight lifting instead of football.
The report should also include proposals for extra support teaching and welfare provision if necessary and a recognition that extra preparation time may be required by the pupil.
A full report from a qualified teacher of the visually handicapped is required in order to ensure that the pupil's real needs are identified and provided for.
Parental choice in educational placement
The location of schools and services in relation to the child's home can still influence decisions about the pupil's educational placement despite the ideal of open choice on the part of parents.
Since the 1981 Education Act requires that the wishes of the parents are fully taken into account when school placement is determined, it will be important for them to have access to consultation and discussion with a professional who is well informed about both the educational needs of visually handicapped children and the schools and support services available.
Parents may be faced with the question of whether their child will be considered to be ‘special’ in an ordinary school, or ‘ordinary’in a special school.
Consideration will have to be given to the child's potential and limitations, but it must be remembered that the pupil is part of a family with wishes and ambitions for the child.
Parents can be greatly helped if they have received early information and guidance on the needs of children with no sight or defective vision, and in addition the chance to see for themselves educational provision as well as receiving information about potential placements.
A late identification of visual handicap calls for information and advice to be readily available and sympathetically discussed with parents who are often expected to come to a decision about their child's educational placement while they are still trying to come to terms with the implications of a medical prognosis for their child that may be depressing.
There may well be problems ahead both for the pupil and for the school if the child's family are not in agreement with the professionals' decisions about the educational placement proposed.
The prolonged procedure of appeal which the parents are entitled to embark upon in such circumstances can consume time and energy that would be better used in effecting a workable solution to placement problems.
Time given to listening to the parents' point of view at an early stage and to reducing their anxieties by giving well-founded information can be helpful in arranging a placement which satisfies them.
Educational provision for visually handicapped pupils
Once all the relevant information needed to make a placement decision has been obtained, it is necessary to consider what educational opportunities are at present available for the visually handicapped pupil and sometimes what new opportunities, especially in integrated provision, can be developed.
Since severe visual handicap, especially total blindness, has a low incidence among school-aged children in the United Kingdom, it is  likely that there will be very few children in each local education authority whose education requires significant adaptation as a result of lack of sight or substantially defective vision.
This fact has a profound effect on service provision.
Colbourne-Browne and Tobin (1982) surveyed the educational placement of educationally blind pupils in England and Wales.
By ‘educationally blind’ pupils, these authors mean those children who use tactile methods for their learning.
They discovered that the numbers of such children attending special schools for the visually handicapped and those attending other kinds of schools, including integration into mainstream provision, were not grossly divergent.
There were approximately a thousand in each type of provision.
Those pupils not in special schools for the visually handicapped included pupils with other sensory, learning or physical handicaps who were in some cases attending special schools for children who were deaf, physically handicapped or mentally handicapped.
But an interesting fact revealed by this study is that each of these groups would form a body of pupils scarcely greater than that of a large comprehensive school in mainstream education.
This low incidence of visual handicap means, in effect, that not every local education authority in England and Wales will have a range of appropriate educational placements for the severely visually impaired pupil, and it may be necessary to look for a solution in regional terms, or perhaps attendance at a residential special school may be considered.
Special schools for visually handicapped pupils
There are special schools for visually handicapped pupils in different regions of the country and the majority of these cater for pupils within the full range of visual impairment from total blindness to useful but impaired vision, although in a minority of cases there still remains an emphasis on meeting the needs of pupils who require either tactile or visual methods of working.
A detailed account of the development of special school provision for visually handicapped pupils in the United Kingdom is given in Chapman (1978) and the address and details of all special schools for visually handicapped pupils are listed in the Directory of Resources for those working with visually handicapped children (Travis, 1987), published by Birmingham University.
In most instances these special schools for visually handicapped pupils are for children of primary school age or for the full school age-range and they have in general terms a regional catchment.
There is one selective co-educational secondary school at Worcester College and a large all-age school at Exhall Grange, Warwickshire, both of which draw from a national catchment.
Two special schools sponsored by the RNIB cater for pupils who have significant handicaps in addition to blindness.
Schools offering special education for visually handicapped pupils have in many cases a residential base but still accept pupils on a daily basis when this is practicable.
In the major conurbations day special schools may be available (for example, London, Birmingham), but for pupils in rural or inaccessible areas weekly or half-termly residence at a special school may still be the only viable option.
Parents should be given full information about special school and integrated provision when placement is being considered.
Some will wish to press for more neighbourhood educational provision for visually handicapped pupils and will hope that their child can go to school on a daily basis from home like his fully sighted peers.
Both the recommendations of the Warnock Report and the legislation of the 1981 Education Act give impetus to this demand.
Other parents, however, may want their child to attend a special school and may have had positive information about children with visual handicap who have been happy and successful in these schools.
The placement best suited to the individual family should be sought.
UNIT PROVISION
The integration of visually handicapped pupils into neighbourhood schools can be effected in different ways.
Unit provision usually takes the form of providing a home base in a separate room for visually handicapped pupils with the mainstream school.
These pupils divide their time between the special unit and the ordinary classroom.
The relative amount of time spent in either by an individual pupil will depend on the need for specialised teaching; teaching in the special unit will often be concerned with basic subjects.
The balance of the work and activities may vary from child to child.
For example, a pupil who is mastering literacy and numeracy with few difficulties will spend a considerable amount of time in the ordinary classroom, but another may need a good deal of specialised help and be at a stage of going to only one or two lessons daily in the fully integrated situation.
If the pupil needs to be withdrawn for specialist teaching for a substantial amount of schoolwork, unit provision has a lot to offer.
It may be considered as a transitional stage between attendance at a special school and full integration into mainstream education, or as a stage leading towards more intensive specialised provision.
Unit provision should enable pupils to have their special needs met in an  individual way whilst they are benefiting from the environment of an ordinary school.
RESOURCE CENTRES
Pupils in resource centre provision usually have the ordinary classroom as their home base, with the responsibility for what they are taught resting with their classroom teacher.
Curriculum adaptations and support teaching sessions are provided by the resource teacher, and these sessions may be given either on a withdrawal basis or within the classroom.
In both these settings the specialist teacher can organise, often at short notice, the preparation of appropriate materials or give teaching support in a particular lesson.
Sometimes it is necessary for the specialist teacher to be available to help in providing solutions for specific problems that arise in the classroom or more generally in the school because of specific difficulties that the visually handicapped child encounters, for instance, in dealing with visual materials or in taking part in group activities.
The special teacher will need appropriate training and experience in order to solve many of these problems, and co-operation between specialist and regular teachers is essential in effecting this.
Staff relationships often seem to be most successful when the unit or resource teacher takes a full part as a member of the school staff and is involved in general activities in the school.
There are some practical considerations that must be faced in terms of support for visually handicapped pupils who are being educated in resource situations.
These include consultations over timetables, planning the inclusion of additional areas of the curriculum (braille, typewriting) and working out accessible storage for specialised equipment and materials.
Pupils may still have to travel appreciable distances in order to attend unit or resource provision.
This is not only tiring but may also preclude the child from participating in sports clubs, choir, drama groups or other out-of-school activities.
These considerations can be a factor in deciding whether to provide an individually based integrated situation which gives the visually handicapped pupil the chance to go to school with neighbourhood children.
Problems in this case which require resolution can lie in the need to provide sufficient specialised teaching support together with enough resources and equipment for the individual pupil at the time when they are needed (Chapman, 1978).
The ethos of the receiving school in terms of accepting pupils with special needs and the physical environment in terms of the school campus and classrooms should be  realistically appraised prior to recommendations for individual placements.
It is not in the interest of visually handicapped pupils or their parents for special schools and integrated provision to be considered either as competitors or as exclusive alternatives.
Transfer from special school to integrated provision as a pupil gains mastery of specialised skills or transfer from integrated provision to special provision for specific reasons should be neither surprising nor impossible.
It is the quality and appropriateness of the educational placement that is truly significant for the pupil rather than the theoretical views of those who decide upon it.
Advisory and peripatetic services
The support of an advisory service should be available to teachers who have visually handicapped pupils in their classes in mainstream schools, but there is a particular need for this when implementing the recommendations for a pupil who has been the subject of a statement.
It is likely that the specialised services for visually handicapped children will be part of the local education authority's educational services, although some advisers are based on a special school for visually handicapped children.
The main criterion for an effective service must be that it is staffed by experienced professionals who are appropriately qualified.
The Warnock Report (op. cit.) recognises that pupils with sensory handicaps need advisory services providing support at this level.
The way in which the advisory role is carried out can vary in different locations.
The spread of population, the numbers of visually handicapped pupils in a particular area and the range of educational provision available to them will influence the way in which the advisory service is organised and implemented.
The nature of the work undertaken will also be substantially determined by the size of the advisory team.
For example, some newly established services consist of only one peripatetic teacher responsible for the support of the entire age and ability range of visually handicapped pupils throughout the authority.
Large authorities, or ones with a well-established service, may have several qualified teachers for visually handicapped pupils who are able to specialise in specific areas of support.
These range through the needs of visually handicapped children in the pre-school, primary or secondary stages of education to those of adolescents attending further education courses and the special needs of multi-handicapped children with defective vision.
Benton (1984) lists the specific areas which should be provided by advisory services for visually handicapped pupils; these include the  assessment of the pupils and the evaluation of their needs, direct support for the pupils, consultancy support for their teachers, and advice and counselling for their parents.
The procedures for assessment and the evaluation of educational needs have become more formalised since the 1981 Education Act so that now a report from a qualified teacher of visually handicapped children is a requirement of the assessment procedure for a child whose learning or development is affected by defective sight.
The implications of the medical diagnosis in so far as it is likely to affect the child's education will need to be considered and attention given to the prognosis, especially if it involves the possibility of progressive deterioration of sight.
The child's functional vision, that is the way in which sight is used in day-to-day school activities, must be assessed in addition to clinical information.
Assessing functional vision will involve careful observation of the child's visual behaviour and ability to cope with blackboard and demonstration work, close desk or table tasks, physical and practical activities and recreation and playtime activities.
The optimum conditions for effective functioning in terms of the physical environment, the suitability of learning materials and the need for adaptations to the curriculum will need to be planned.
Recommendations for training visually handicapped pupils to use any sight that they have as effectively as possible should be given, as should training in the use of low vision aids (magnifiers, etc.) and special equipment (closed circuit television) and in techniques for personal independence and mobility if these are necessary.
These aspects of the pupil's education will need to be included in the report by the special teacher and should be taken into consideration when placement decisions are made.
Another function of the advisory service for visually handicapped children involves working with parents and families, and this is of particular importance in the case of the pre-school child with defective vision.
Fortunately, pre-school visually handicapped children are frequently referred to the advisory services by the relevant medical services and this is helpful, since early intervention programmes can then be formulated involving parents and teachers and the possibility of nursery or playgroup provision explored.
It is in these pre-school years that language development, concept formation and early independent mobility should be growing, and advisory services can help parents to encourage these.
A further task for the special advisory team will be to act as consultant to teachers who have visually handicapped pupils in their classes.
The adviser can help to promote confidence in meeting the needs of these pupils by emphasising the aspects of learning which they share with their fully sighted classmates and suggesting  practical measures that can help to minimise difficulties and increase curriculum access.
Teachers can be made aware of the real challenges that visually handicapped pupils have to face.
Sometimes they will complete tasks more slowly, owing to a slower rate of informational input (Mason and Tobin, 1986), but this need not necessarily reflect a reduced level of comprehension, although it may be mistaken for this.
In the ordinary classroom, class and subject teachers should maintain responsibility for the content of lessons.
To put the matter simply, they have the role of deciding what should be taught and when, with the specialist teacher as adviser giving guidance in the case of the visually handicapped pupils as to‘how’.
The way in which learning materials are presented to visually handicapped pupils will be the major concern of the specialist teacher or adviser.
Making or adapting these materials can be a time-consuming business and the help of ancillary assistance can be welcome.
Professional advice on the transcription of reading schemes and work schemes is essential.
The problems that may arise from an individual pupil's needs must also be addressed, and possible solutions proffered.
Direct and regular contact between the class teacher and the specialist teacher/adviser is vital in order to anticipate problems before they arise.
An unduly large caseload of pupils can make this difficult, with the possibility of resentment building up if requests for help are not promptly met.
Forward planning can be helpful in minimising difficulties, especially if any problems that pupils have are briefly recorded in writing rather than simply passed on verbally.
The specialist teacher may find that some visually handicapped pupils require direct support teaching sessions.
These take place in the classroom where the specialist teacher assists or, in the case of practical subjects, in the laboratory, craft or home economics room where the specialist support teacher works with a group of children including those who are visually handicapped.
Teaching sessions on a withdrawal basis may be frequently timetabled and, although these are usually helpful to the pupil mastering basic skills or concepts, they should be monitored carefully in order to maintain the balance of the curriculum.
Physical education, aesthetic and practical areas of learning and expression should be enjoyed by visually handicapped pupils as much as any others and give valuable opportunities for self-expression and the mastery of practical skills.
The curriculum areas in which direct support teaching is most likely to be needed are those of literacy and numeracy, usually throughout the primary stage and often at the secondary stage.
If these basic skills have been mastered, additional explanatory services and individual demonstration of processes  may be needed to clarify work in mathematics and the sciences.
For those pupils who possess some vision, there will need to be an emphasis on helping them to use this effectively for learning, with special training as well as some adapted materials.
Independence in terms of mobility and self-help will need to be encouraged and in some cases specifically taught.
It may also be necessary to begin keyboard skills in the last year of primary school and to continue this as required at the secondary level.
There may be social aspects of the visually handicapped pupil's life at school that can be helped by a perceptive specialist teacher who is able to facilitate communication over matters that a sensitive child or adolescent may be embarrassed to disclose.
Pupils can sometimes be diffident in expressing their anxieties about their visual condition and may be greatly helped if they can talk to someone knowledgeable and experienced in such matters who is unlikely to be surprised by incidents which can be a worry to some youngsters, such as, for instance , a glass eye lost in the swimming pool or the effect of strong light on a photophobic (averse to glare) pupil which makes him sit with closed eyes.
The specialist teacher can help to explain and deal with such problems and increase the confidence of the pupil and the understanding of the regular teacher in unusual cases of anxiety that might otherwise be deemed trivial.
Sometimes the advisory services for visually handicapped pupils are involved in the work of special schools for pupils with learning or physical disabilities as well as defective vision.
In these situations they are able to contribute information and guidance regarding the problems that pupils have with visual activities and to consider on an individual basis the compounding effect that these may have in terms of the other disabilities from which the child may suffer.
Co-operation between the teachers and therapists involved with the child aims at ensuring the formulation of a programme which takes account of all the physical, sensory and cognitive aspects of the child's development.
(The general guidance on environment and the implications of visual handicap described in this book are relevant to the needs of pupils with multiple handicap that includes defective vision.
Such background information is to be used in conjunction with individually formulated programmes, since it is unlikely that severely multi-handicapped pupils will be able to follow the programme of an ordinary class.)
The advisory services may also be responsible for pupils from their authority who attend special schools for the visually handicapped, especially in the case of residential placements.
Links can be established between home, school and the relevant authority which can help to monitor the child's progress, review placement and promote a well co-ordinated plan for the pupil's education.
These varied functions of the educational advisory services for visually handicapped pupils can be summed up as ‘enabling’.
The advisory team should enable the flow of relevant information on the pupils' needs to reach the schools where they are placed and enable teachers and visually handicapped pupils to work in an effective way because they are well informed and well supported.
THE INTERACTION BETWEEN MEDICAL AND EDUCATIONAL FACTORS
Pupils who are blind or who have significant and serious problems of sight have special educational needs whilst at the same time sharing major areas of learning and development with their fully sighted classmates.
These facts are by no means irreconcilable, but it requires skill and knowledge on the part of the teacher to fulfil the special needs within the framework of teaching in the ordinary classroom.
Current educational philosophy has moved away from focusing on the physical or sensory basis of disability and so it may initially appear that an understanding of the cause of a child's disability is primarily a medical matter and not one of concern to the educator.
Certainly the pupil should not be considered primarily as a medical case, nor should preconceived conclusions drawn from information on medical records be used to channel activities or limit opportunities.
It must be emphasised that many factors in the child's motivation and experience affect both development and learning.
Moreover, in the interests of the pupil a balance needs to be struck between the extremes of over-preoccupation with the medical aspects of the pupil's visual condition and ignorance of facts that could help the teacher to understand the child's special needs and find ways to fulfil them.
Although levels of sight do not relate directly to levels of performance in many school activities, there are some direct links between some of the specific forms of visual handicap and the way in which educational materials can most usefully be presented to individual children.
The responsible educator will want to consider this, and use the information to give as much practical help as possible to the pupil who is visually impaired.
There is, in fact, no reason why attention to a particular cause of defective vision should reduce the teacher's appreciation of the child's total needs and, moreover, relevant information can be helpful in offering precise and effective solutions to some of the problems of using materials and developing learning strategies that are likely to give difficulty to visually handicapped pupils.
For this reason, some basic ophthalmic information is given that will, it is hoped, clarify the cause of some of the problems that visually handicapped pupils can face.
Teachers may want to use this information for reference in the case of individual pupils with visual defects or to study it in order to increase their general understanding of the implications of visual handicaps in learning.
It is also relevant to the teacher to have some information about the way in which visually handicapped pupils are identified since they will have passed through these procedures before being in their present school.
IDENTIFICATION AND SCREENING
Teachers with pupils with defective vision in their classes have an interest in knowing how such children are identified and what services and professionals are involved in this procedure.
Most children with severe visual handicaps will have been discovered within a few days of their birth or in their early infancy in hospital.
At home it may in some cases be the parents who notice something ‘odd’ about their baby's eyes or feel an unease about the baby's visual behaviour.
If they voice this concern to the general practitioner or health visitor this may result in the first step being taken in the identification of a visual problem, but unfortunately there can be instances in which the defective vision is not detected until the child has a pre-school medical.
In the early stages of a child's development the visual problem can be masked.
In the confined environment of pre-school life the infant may have appeared to be progressing normally, and it may not be until an objective screening test is given that the sight problem is recognised.
Screening tests for vision are given on average three times during a child's life.
As it is estimated that 25 per cent of schoolchildren will have a sight problem that needs attention (Optical Information Council) it is essential that vision screening procedures should be effective.
To be so, the screening procedures are dependent on the co-operation of school heads and staff in order to ensure that proper facilities are available for the testing to be undertaken properly.
A quiet, empty room is needed so that the testing can be undisturbed, a check must be made for absent children, and the eye charts to be used must be left in a place where pupils will not be able to see them beforehand.
Every pupil should have a basic screening test for vision, and if problems are detected, further and more specific testing will need to be undertaken.
Basic testing will include an assessment of distance vision.
DISTANCE VISION
This may be simply defined as the ability to discriminate highly contrasted figures from a distance.
It involves both sharpness and clarity of vision and this can be measured.
The usual test that is given for this is the Snellen chart for visual acuity, which is well known to anyone who has had a routine medical examination.
The chart itself should be hung on a well-lit, shadow-free wall at a distance of six metres from where the subject stands.
It is placed at  eye level with one eye occluded.
The child is asked to name the letters on the chart beginning with the top line.
(Symbols of equivalent size are used for children who cannot name letters.)
The letters or symbols are exactly measured, of decreasing size and arranged in rows.
Each represents a calculated angle which can be discriminated by a subject with normal vision at a specific distance (60, 36, 24,12, 9, or 6 metres from the chart).
When the subject standing at 6 metres from the chart can read the 6m letters, his sight is recorded as 6/6, the upper figure denoting the distance from the chart, and the lower figure indicating the size of the line that has been read.
This is recorded as normal vision.
If the subject can only read the 24m line when standing at the 6m distance from the chart, vision would be recorded as 6/24.
(This subject would be reading from 6m the size of letter seen clearly by the normally sighted at 24m.)
A subject only able to see the single large letters at the top of the chart (the 6/60 line) would be able only to discriminate at 6m what the normally sighted person would see clearly at 60m.
Such vision would be recorded as 6/60 and would indicate severely reduced visual acuity.
The procedure is followed with each eye being separately tested, with and without corrective glasses.
In measuring visual acuity in this way, a figure which looks like a fraction is recorded.
The top figure denotes the distance from the chart (6m) and the lower figure the distance at which the subject with normal vision can see the letters.
This information is significant for the teacher as blackboard and wall-mounted work may be difficult or impossible to discriminate for a pupil with poor visual acuity.
(It is interesting to note that in order to pass a driving test a motorist needs a visual acuity of 6/15, that is, a standard between the 6/12 and 6/18 line.)
For accurate measurement of distance vision, when the Snellen chart is used, lighting must be good but not dazzling, the test administered singly, and the distance at which the child stands exactly measured.
Consistent standards are essential if visual anomalies are to be recorded accurately.
Pre-school children, or those who are developmentally delayed may be tested with the Sheridan vision test for young children and retardates.
This is known as the STYCAR test and was devised by  Mary Sheridan using the Snellen standard but with a smaller selection of letters and with the possibility of using a 3m distance, more suitable for younger children than the standard 6m distance.
NEAR VISION
In addition to the Snellen test for distance vision, all school-aged children should be screened to assess their levels of near vision.
This again is  relevant to school tasks since it is near vision that is used for close work such as reading and writing.
The subject is given examples of print of decreasing size to discriminate, or single letters of measured and decreasing size.
There are several versions of the near vision test, but in each case there is a standard number preceded by N for each print size.
The larger the number, the larger the print size.
These graduate from N36 to N5 which is the size of print found in the standard telephone directory; the first books in the ‘Ladybird’ series of readers are in N36 print.
If a child's vision report gives a figure of distance vision as 6/24 and near vision as N8 with corrective glasses, this would indicate that the pupil should be able to read quite small print, but has a lowered visual acuity in terms of distance vision.
For such a pupil blackboard work with small writing could well cause difficulty.
COLOUR VISION
Colour vision should also be tested.
Although defective colour perception does not usually have significant effect in many class activities, there are some careers for which absolute perception is needed (armed forces, electrical trades).
Defective colour perception has a high incidence among males (one in ten) and teachers should be aware of the fact that some of the coloured materials that they present will not be normally discriminated by a proportion of their pupils.
One six year old painted a picture of a strawberry in a murky green in spite of the bright red of the original fruit, and it is usually the red/green part of the spectrum that is affected, although blue/yellow deficiency may occur or there may even be a total loss of colour perception.
There are various tests for colour perception, some using plates of solid colour, but the most usual one is the Ishihara Test which presents a symbol or number depicted in coloured dots against a background of dots of another colour.
These presentations are referred to as pseudoisochromatic or confusion plates and set a task in which the normal eye can discriminate figures composed of coloured dots, whilst the eye with abnormal colour vision cannot do so.
If there are reasons to indicate that the child has visual defects, more detailed and sophisticated tests will be undertaken by an ophthalmologist to whom the child will be referred.
These procedures are likely to include mapping out the field of vision in each eye, measuring the pressure within the eyeball, and testing for contrast sensitivity.
Difficulties in contrast sensitivity may not become apparent when the Snellen Test is used, but a child scoring medium or low levels on a contrast sensitivity test could have problems in discriminating print unless it was presented in strong contrast in a good light.
Further procedures which may be undertaken in cases where more detailed information is needed or where it is suspected that there may be serious problems with vision include the visually evaluated response (VER) and the electroretinogram (ERG).
As children grow there can be changes in their vision, and since screening tests may be infrequent, teachers should be aware of some of the physical signs and behaviours that may indicate that a child is having problems with sight.
In both formal and informal activities within the classroom, children use their vision in different ways, and observant teachers can help to identify visual difficulties by being alert to the ways in which such problems can manifest themselves.
Because the recognition of defective sight is so significant in terms of the child's development and learning, it is not surprising that the importance of attention to presenting symptoms has been emphasised by experienced educators of visually handicapped children.
Lists of significant indications of the possibility of sight difficulties on which Marshall (1969), Chapman (1978) and Mason (Fitt and Mason, 1986) lay stress are set out here with only minor variations or additions; the present writers confirm and extend these listings as a basis of cause for further investigation of the child's sight:
1.
Physical indications that may be caused by defective vision : unusual head position while working (poking forward or held sideways); work held at an unusual distance or angle; frowning, squinting or facial grimaces when trying to read; complaints of headache or dizziness during visual activities; covering one eye with the hand, or closing it; aversion to bright light.
2.
Difficulties in managing school tasks : confusion of letters which are similar in shape (o and a); unexplained delay in reading; short attention span in visual tasks; marking the place with the finger continuously when reading; reversing letters; poor hand-eye co-ordination; inability to copy work from blackboard.
3.
Indications of possible visual problems in play activities : reluctance to take part in physical activities; clumsiness and tendency to bump into objects; hovering on the edge of the playground rather than actively playing; walking ‘carefully’; poor balance and fear of lights.
4.
Appearance of the eyes : swollen, sore, crusted or drooping eyelids; continuous or uncontrolled eye movements (nystagmus); misshapen or irregular pupil; eyes that are not normally aligned and working in co-ordination.
Naturally, some of these indications are quite likely to be related to problems other than faulty vision, but since sight problems may be causing them, a screening test which is, after all, quick and easy to perform should help to confirm or rule out defective vision as a reason for concern.
PROCEDURES FOLLOWING VISION SCREENING
Children who do show difficulties in the screening test for vision must be referred for further examination.
Vision screening procedures, even when administered regularly and appropriately, are useless if the results from them are not followed up.
Although it is the responsibility of the Child Health Service to refer the child, the teacher will have an interest in knowing if a hospital appointment has been made and kept even though this is the prime responsibility of the parents.
Co-operation between educational and medical services can minimise potential neglect of visual conditions in children.
Whilst vision screening for the school population as a whole is essential in order to identify pupils with sight defects so that they can have appropriate treatment and correction when this is applicable, there are implications for educators too, arising from the procedures used to identify children with visual handicap.
The specialist teacher or adviser will need to discuss with the pupil's own teacher the information obtained from screening procedures that has a bearing on adaptations to learning materials or to the environment.
Such information will include the consideration of any problems that the child may have with near or distance vision, with colour perception, with reduction of the visual field, with discomfort in strong light (photophobia) or with monocular vision (sight in only one eye) which affects depth perception.
The prognosis of the condition is highly relevant since it may indicate increasing difficulty in using printed material.
It is also important for the teacher to know if any treatment is being given, such as eye drops, whether exercises have been prescribed and if there is any restriction on physical activities such as diving or lifting heavy weights.
Spectacles or low vision aids may have been prescribed in some cases, and teachers should be informed about this.
Both screening and the observation of the child's visual behaviour will be used as a basis to determine the size of print to be used in individual cases, and will also indicate whether braille and tactile materials will need to be used instead.
These measures will show the distance at which the child with defective vision can be expected to discriminate visually presented material.
FUNCTIONAL VISION
Whilst the clinical measurements of visual acuity and visual field yield key information for medical purposes of treatment and correction when possible, they also afford scientifically accurate data to be used as a basis for presenting learning materials that involve the use of vision.
But there are other factors involved in the way in which pupils use their sight that are of relevance to the teacher, especially since it may be found that pupils who have comparable recorded levels of visual acuity seem to use their sight differently.
For instance, there are examples of children with very low levels of vision in terms of measured acuity who use what vision they have remarkably effectively for learning, whilst there are others, less motivated, who use a higher recorded level of acuity apparently to very little effect in day-to-day tasks.
Previous experience of using visually stimulating material, encouragement to do so, interest in the task in hand, curiosity and enjoyment seem to play a part in the way that some pupils use even low levels of vision to help them to find out the things they are interested in.
Apathy, lack of confidence and previous discouragement to use sight actively for learning may contribute to the less effective use of the sight a child does possess.
The negative effects of lack of stimulation on visual functioning and the potential for improved functioning are discussed in studies relating to visual  perception by Hebb (1937), Gibson (1953), Vernon (1966) and Tobin, Chapman et al .
(1978).
Clearly this is a much more subtle, fallible and variable aspect of the child's visual behaviour to attempt to measure than the clinical aspects of use of vision.
But, for the educator, the extent to which a pupil uses vision in day-to-day tasks is a highly relevant factor to take into consideration when planning educational programmes.
Barraga (1976) offers a useful definition of functional vision in the following terms:
Visual functioning is related in part to the condition of the eye.
More explicitly, visual functioning is determined by the experiences, motivations, needs and expectation of each individual in relation to whatever visual capacity is available to satisfy curiosity and accomplish activities for personal satisfaction.
Incidental but careful observation of the way in which the pupil uses his vision in diverse activities can yield useful information about visual functioning, but structured observation with a planned method of recording data is more helpful to the teacher.
One way of checking and recording information about the functional vision of pupils in the 5–11 year old age-group is given in the Look and Think programme (Tobin, Chapman et al .,
1978) and this also gives specific recommendations for programmes to encourage the use of vision in a range of tasks which tap different areas of visual activity.
The advantage of finding out about the pupil's present level of visual functioning is that it can be considered as a starting point.
Appropriate materials and activities can help some pupils to function better in terms of visual competence.
Naturally the physical bases that are the cause of defective sight remain unchanged; measured visual acuity is unlikely to be improved, but children can be positively helped to pay attention to visual stimuli, and can be given motivating visual tasks in optimum conditions that help them to enjoy the experience of using their vision as fully and effectively as possible.
Programmes which seek to do this are referred to as ‘visual enhancement’ and aim to give encouragement and motivation to pupils with defective vision to use this with maximum ‘visual efficiency’.
They are particularly relevant to the visually handicapped child in the first school years in an integrated setting.
REGISTRATION OF VISUAL HANDICAP
If screening procedures and subsequent medical investigations show the presence of significant visual handicap, it may be decided by the  ophthalmologist that the child should be registered as blind or partially sighted.
The BD8 (form of registration of blindness or partial sight) is completed by the consultant ophthalmologist and is designed primarily for medical and legal purposes.
It defines the child as being blind or  partially sighted, and contains information about the age of onset of the visual loss and the prognosis of the visual condition.
Bearing these criteria in mind, the ophthalmologist can also enter a recommendation of this form relating to the educational placement of the child concerned.
Since the implementation of the 1981 Education Act such directives on the BD8 Registration Form are placed alongside other professional recommendations relating to the child's school placement.
The BD8 Form is sent to the Social Services Department and a social worker will then visit the family to inform them about the services and allowances that may be available to them.
The information contained on Form BD8 was previously the main criterion for deciding whether a pupil required education in a special school or an ordinary school, and whether the pupil should be referred to and educated as a blind or a partially sighted child.
There is now much greater flexibility with regard to educational placements for visually handicapped children and less adherence to the use of terms which define children in categories based on medical criteria.
TERMINOLOGY RELATING TO PUPILS WITH VISUAL HANDICAPS
Teachers may find that terminology which is intended to clarify is sometimes on the one hand, over-prescriptive or, on the other, so indefinite as to be confusing.
They may question why the terms ‘blind’ and ‘partially sighted’, still used in the BD8 Form and defined in the Schools Health Services Regulations (1945), are not now used to give precise definition of the educational needs of pupils.
Without these signposts, the terminology used to describe children without sight or with defective vision may seem unduly complex or even inexact.
But the issue is indeed a complex and subtle one and the educational needs of children with visual problems do not fall neatly into two distinct compartments.
Current educational thinking is moving away from the whole concept of labelling children by closely defined categories, and the emphasis is rather on the individual needs of children and on the shared aspects of their development and learning.
Nevertheless it is necessary to use some specialised terminology in order to define pupils who have little or no sight, so that their needs can be realistically exposed and appropriately met.
To this end, the  following commonly accepted terms are considered relevant.
The term ‘visually handicapped’ is used to refer to those pupils who have difficulties in seeing which necessitate the use of special educational methods or adaptations to materials and who need to use special aids and equipment for learning.
This is an umbrella term, used widely and well understood in an educational context.
Barraga (1976) sums up the implications of its usage by stating that: ‘A visually handicapped child is one whose impairment interferes with his optimum learning and achievement, unless adaptations are made in the methods of presenting learning experiences, the nature of the materials used, and/or in the learning environment.’
She amplifies this in a way that is helpful to the teacher by explaining that the term is used to describe the total group of children whose vision is affected by impairments in seeing, irrespective of the nature or extent of these.
It is used with reference to education, and does not divide the pupils sharply into two groups with totally different needs.
For these reasons the term has been chosen for use in the title of the present book and throughout the text to denote the whole range of children from those who are totally blind through to those who possess useful but impaired vision.
It is not a term without some disadvantages, since it can justifiably be argued that the term ‘handicapped’ may have some negative overtones.
But it is here presented to the teacher as the basic condition of the child, offering a challenge that the potentially handicapping effect of lack of vision or defective vision can be overcome or minimised through appropriate education, social opportunities and the provision of well-chosen aids and equipment.
The breadth of this term is useful, but it is necessary to use more specific reference to denote particular levels or types of visual problem in relation to the child's use of sight for learning.
The term ‘blind’ should be used carefully to describe those pupils who are completely without vision, or who have light perception only.
To use the term more widely may reduce the likelihood that the pupil will be encouraged to use any vision, however slight it may be.
Clearly, blind pupils will be those who depend on tactile and auditory means of learning, and they will require specialised equipment and additional elements in their curriculum such as braille, mobility and orientation, but other aspects of their educational needs will include careful consideration of language development, concept formation, social interaction and information processing.
The age at which total sight loss has taken place is also highly relevant to the way in which pupils interpret their environment and the teacher whose class they attend should be aware of this.
Our emphasis on the desirability of using the term ‘blind’ carefully arises from the many positive developments that have taken place over the last two decades.
Previously pupils with very little useful  vision were referred to and treated all too often as if they were totally blind.
Fear that the use of defective vision would make it deteriorate further has been replaced by positive encouragement and training to use even severely defective sight as effectively as possible in learning and in day-to-day living.
Practice and definition have both progressed.
Thus, the description ‘low vision’ used in the educational context is the generally accepted term for those children who are able to use their vision quite effectively in the near environment under suitable lighting conditions, in an appropriate working position and, in many cases, with the use of magnifiers or individually prescribed optical aids.
Such children are the ones who have considerable problems with distance vision, and indeed their sight may not be adequate for the use of print as their means of literacy.
Thus, although they may be braille readers, they are not totally blind children and should be encouraged to use what vision they have in the learning situation.
The use of closed circuit television, the presentation of clear, highly contrasted learning materials and the implementation of visual enhancement programmes are all highly relevant to these pupils.
The term ‘visually limited’ is used frequently by writers in the United States (Barraga, 1976; Bishop, 1971) and refers to pupils who use their vision for all tasks including reading print, but who may need prescriptive lenses in order to do so.
Some of these pupils will be helped by attention to task lighting and to a suitable position in which to work and view demonstrations.
Clearly presented materials and a well-ordered environment can be helpful to them.
‘Impaired’ and ‘defective’are also self-explanatory terms used in relation to vision, sometimes with the addition of ‘severe’to emphasise the degree.
It will be appreciated that the precise nature of the degree or defect in acuity or field of vision is highly individual.
The term ‘partially sighted’ has been used over the years to refer to pupils who have vision useful for all school tasks but require adaptations to teaching methods and materials in order to accomplish them.
It is a broad term, with the appropriate emphasis on the child's potential, but has been used too often previously to contrast with ‘blind’ without consideration for the needs of pupils who have to use both tactile and visual methods for learning.
The simplified scale in Figure 1  gives an indication of the range of vision as described in terminology based on visual acuity.
There may be individual differences in the way in which field defects as well as acuity affects vision and in the way in which children are motivated to use their vision for learning.
These differences should be reflected in the descriptive terminology.
Figure 1 Levels of visual functioning of pupils with impaired sight
SIGHT IN LEARNING AND IN DAY-TO-DAY ACTIVITIES IN SCHOOL
Some of the consequences of vision screening will be in the area of correction or remediation as well as in identifying problems with sight and influencing educational placements.
For example, refractive errors (those defects in the shape of the eye that prevent light rays from being brought sharply on to the retina in a single focus and which include short-sightedness, long-sightedness and astigmatism can often be at least partially corrected by the provision of appropriate lenses in eyeglasses.
The effect of such correction can, in some instances, be dramatic, as in the case of a child who, after receiving his first pair of spectacles, spent several evenings looking at the stars as it was the first time he had ever been able to see them.
Children may sometimes be unaware that their own sight is changing, or indeed of what people with normal vision can see.
‘Can you really see leaves on the trees?’ a nine-year-old girl who was severely short-sighted asked.
She explained that the tree, to her looked like a green fuzzy clump even at a distance of a few feet.
Such anecdotes cannot be a basis for generalisation, but rather illustrated the response of particular children to their own improved or deteriorating vision.
The way in which each child adapts to defective vision will be individual, and there are considerations both in the causes of defective sight and the effects of these on the way that children can use their vision.
Indeed Adams (1985a) states that there is a need for further research into ways of obtaining  ‘realistic and objective’ pictures of the way that visually handicapped people see.
He suggests that many assumed effects of low vision, for example field loss, totally ignored the brain and the whole mechanics and chemistry of visual perception.
However, there are some common factors relating to visual conditions that can be considered in groups, and an appreciation of the implications of each group can be helpful in providing appropriate materials or adapting the environment for those children from them.
In broad and generalised terms, visual defects give rise to loss of clear vision, loss of central vision, or loss of peripheral vision, the visual field may be reduced or interrupted.
A child may have a combination of these effects resulting from complex visual anomalies.
Loss of clear vision
The visual conditions that cause blurring and distortion of sight are also likely to result in the reduction of clear distance vision.
In addition, the powerful lenses needed to correct severe refractive errors also reduce the extent of the field.
(The enlargement, for example, of what is seen results in a smaller area being visible.)
The result of this is likely to be that close work will present few difficulties, but more distant visual tasks such as reading sentences written up on the blackboard will give problems.
Socially, children with unclear vision can seem slightly ‘out of step’.
They may, for instance, be unaware that they are being spoken to unless referred to by name, and they can miss out on humorous incidents which make the rest of the class laugh.
Severe refractive errors can give rise to visual defects of this sort.
Loss of central vision
The central vision area of the retina needs to be intact for it to be possible to discriminate sharp, fine images.
When vision is directed to an object immediately in front of the eyes, objects in the peripheral (outer) areas of the field of vision are not seen in sharp focus, so it is necessary to turn the head and direct the gaze on to these objects in order to see them clearly.
If the central part of the retina is damaged, clear, acute vision will not be possible in any part of the visual field.
In day-to-day activities a child will usually have no problems with mobility, but reading and fine visual tasks may prove to be very difficult.
Misunderstandings can arise as a result of this, when, for example, teachers see children who are able to run about in the playground with confidence, but seem unable to  discriminate printed letters in their reading books.
Disease of and damage to the macula, the central area of the retina used to discriminate fine detail, can give rise to these effects and precise information about the child's eye condition is needed in order to understand the reason for these apparent anomalies.
Loss of peripheral vision
The loss of vision in the peripheral field is frequently referred to as tunnel vision as this describes the effect.
Although it is sometimes simulated by looking through a peephole, this gives only a crude approximation of the condition.
The child's central acuity can be normal, giving detail that is sharp and clear, and there may be no difficulties in reading the Snellen Chart.
However, the child may have problems in getting about easily without bumping into things, and stairs or badly lit corridors can be hazardous.
Reading may be slow as the eyes are able to take in only one short word or a few letters at one glance.
This can disturb the normal eye movements that would be used by a fluent reader, and visual scanning can be impaired.
In the central area of the visual field distance vision can be surprisingly good, and this disparity can give rise to some particular problems in the use of vision in classroom activities.
Variable vision and the effects of fatigue
There are some children whose vision seems to vary from one situation to another, and there may be valid reasons for this.
A pupil who is making a constant effort to use vision as fully as possible in school tasks may sometimes find this effort to be somewhat of an overload when his or her general level of well-being is low, for instance, when suffering from a cold or feeling particularly tired.
Sometimes apparent laziness, or ‘playing-up’ can be the response to visual demands that the pupil is having difficulty in coping with.
For example, the hands or even the figures on the dial of a wall-mounted clock may be clearly visible to the child with tunnel vision, but the problem could be that of locating the clock itself.
Similarly, while a pupil with this type of visual condition might be able to read words up on the blackboard with little difficulty, locating the words themselves could be an initial problem.
These apparent discrepancies in visual behaviour can easily be misunderstood.
Physical activities can also sometimes cause difficulties since restricted visual fields can make it difficult for a child to catch a ball, wield a bat effectively or aim at a goal.
Despite this, there are instances of visually handicapped pupils who do much for  themselves in overcoming their limitations because they are really interested in taking part in sport.
Although intensive visual concentration can sometimes lead to fatigue it must be stressed that it does not damage vision.
Some visually handicapped children will overcome their difficulties so well that they are indistinguishable from their fully sighted classmates, but the effort needed may have a cost for them that is not always appreciated.
To illustrate this, it is relevant to remember that driving a car is possible for the fully sighted in foggy conditions, but it is a more tiring procedure than driving when visibility is good.
Commuters read paperbacks as they sit in trains, but find that they may need to rest from this activity more frequently than when they are reading in a comfortable and well-lit place at home.
Classroom tasks can make considerable demands on children with defective vision, but teachers can reduce the risk of fatigue by trying to ensure optimum learning conditions and offering clearly presented materials.
Visual fatigue can sometimes be lessened if the pupil looks away from a task briefly, or closes the eyes for a minute or two.
This will often be sufficient to relax the sense of pressure and ease tension.
Field loss
There are various ways in which the visual field can be reduced or interrupted, causing problems with some school tasks whilst apparently not affecting others.
For example, one half of the function of the retina of each eye can be lost.
The defective area may extend from the centre of the visual field to its outer perimeter, affecting the same side of the field in each eye.
The condition (hemianopia) usually causes problems with visual tracking as in scanning along a line or print.
Problems of this kind tend to be more pronounced if the left side of the visual field in each eye is affected.
Besides these main groups of effects arising from visual disabilities there are other, sometimes additional, factors which can influence visual behaviour.
Nystagmus (spasmodic oscillation of the eye), for example, may present on its own, but sometimes accompanies visual defects that cause problems with focusing.
Tasks involving fixation, that is, the ability to hold a steady visual image, can be considerably affected by the presence of nystagmus.
Activities involving the close use of vision can be tiring for children with this condition, and stress or excitement seem in some cases to exacerbate it.
Children who are photophobic (sensitive to bright light) will find that dazzle on bright sunny days can be quite distressing, especially when they move from a shaded interior into bright sunlight outside.
Conversely they may find it difficult to adapt to poor lighting  conditions, and they may be nervous when coming indoors after being in brighter light outside.
Varying light conditions, and the demands of either close or distance work will make different visual demands on children, and the nature of these visual tasks should be considered in terms of the child's visual capabilities.
Virtually every task in the ordinary school involves the use of sight, since the ordinary curriculum is designed for fully sighted pupils.
It is usual to assume that the pupils will be able to use close-range materials on the desk or table in front of them, and then look up to the blackboard, perhaps to copy notes or diagrams displayed there, then quickly refocus on to their desk work.
Visual discrimination is exercised in reading print, which can demand some fine visual tasks such as discriminating between letters of similar shape.
The software programs for microcomputers demand visual concentration and sometimes tracking and scanning skills.
Visual tracking skills are also needed for reading a line of writing, and searching and scanning skills will be brought into play in interpreting maps and diagrams or in reading mathematical tables; handwriting, crafts and other practical skills require competent hand-eye co-ordination.
In order to be able to understand the situation of the visually handicapped child in an ordinary class it is relevant to be reminded of the function of the eye and the visual system, since without such basic information the demands which such a child faces are unlikely to be understood.
The following simplified description indicates the areas of the visual system that can be affected by disease or trauma.
Figure 2 Simplified diagram representing cross-section of the human eye
THE VISUAL SYSTEM
A simplified diagram of the eye appears in Figure 2 .
An object cannot be seen unless light reflected from it passes through the eye on to the retina and the brain receives the impulses transmitted from the retina via the optic nerve.
The reflected light first passes through the cornea (the curved transparent outer layer of the eyeball), thus beginning the refraction of light rays which will focus sharply on the retina.
Behind the retina lies the anterior chamber, filled with the aqueous humour.
Light passes through this to the pupil (the central hole in the iris), the iris itself being composed of circular muscles which are visible as the blue, brown or hazel colour of the eye.
The iris reacts quickly to changes in light levels, dilating or contracting, enlarging or decreasing the size of the pupil.
The lens lies immediately behind the pupil; it is a transparent solid body, elliptical in shape, enclosed in a capsule and attached to suspensory ligaments within the eye.
It is the lens which completes the refraction of the rays of light as they pass through the posterior chamber (which is filled with a jelloid substance, the vitreous humour).
The refracted rays then reach the retina.
The retina consists of the inner lining at the back of the eye and is a delicate membrane, constructed of ten different layers, one of which contains the two types of light-sensitive cells, the rods and cones.
The rods are situated mainly in the peripheral area of the retina and they are activated in lower levels of lighting.
The cones are receptive to colour and to higher lighting levels.
These cells are concentrated in the central area of the retina which is used in the discrimination of fine and sharp images.
Visual impulses are transmitted to the visual cortex in the brain via the optic nerve.
The impulses from the right field of vision of both eyes are received by the left side of the brain.
Impulses from the left side of the field of vision are received by the right side of the brain.
The process of seeing is thus a combination of factors, both physiological and psychological.
Not only must the eye itself be functioning fully and normally, but the brain must be intact and visual perception possible, if vision is to be fully developed.
DEVELOPMENTAL ASPECTS OF VISION
The eye is easily discernible in the developing foetus and the development of the retina is complete between the 28th and 36th week of pregnancy, except for the macula area which continues to develop until the baby is four months old.
The development of the eye is susceptible to disease and damage in utero ; for example, rubella (German measles) can seriously damage the visual as well as other systems in the unborn baby.
The visual system is complete at birth, although the eye continues to grow in size until adolescence.
At birth the baby's vision is blurred and he cannot discriminate between foreground and background in the visual panorama.
However, even at this early stage, the baby does respond to a source of light and attempt to follow the mother's face.
Between one and three months of age the baby indulges in finger play, focusing the eye on the hands.
At this stage there may be some long-sightedness which adjusts to the norm as the baby grows.
By about four months of age the baby's visual acuity may be as exact as 6/6, but accurate perception of what is seen will normally still be developing.
There seems to be a readiness in the baby to react keenly to visual stimuli during the first few months of life.
It is sometimes found that operations to remove congenital cataracts (soft opacities in the lens) when a child is of school age are disappointing in that full vision is not effective because the appropriate stage in development of visual perception has been passed while the opacities were still present.
Fortunately, with improved surgical and technical techniques it is now possible to operate on the cataracts of newborn children within the first ten days of life in some cases, and this is considered by some consultants to be advisable.
However, teachers may encounter children at school who still have visual problems although cataracts have been removed.
DISEASES AND DEFECTS THAT MAY CAUSE VISUAL DISABILITY IN CHILDREN
In a book written by educators for educators, a description of some of the causes of visual disability that can be encountered in schoolchildren is given for the guidance of teachers in their work with pupils.
A medical textbook has a different emphasis and purpose but can usefully be referred to when more detailed information about a specific condition is desired.
Albinism
This is an inherited condition, involving the loss of pigment in the hair, skin and eyes.
One type of albino child is very easy to recognise because of his very fair hair, paler skin and the pinkish appearance of the eyes.
But there is another form, known as ‘ocular albinism’, in which only the eyes are affected.
Both types of albino child are photophobic, that is, they will be distressed and even suffer pain when in bright light and most will wear dark glasses to alleviate this.
They will find it extremely difficult going outside on a bright day and may see very little on a sunny day.
Any form of glare will cause difficulty.
Such children, therefore, should not be seated near a window and the classroom levels of lighting may have to be adapted.
Albino children can be near-sighted or long-sighted and need glasses to help with their distance vision, which often is no higher than 6/36.
The prescription of glasses may not help their reading distance, but they may be able to read adequately by holding their books at closer than the normal distance.
Using a book-stand may help to prevent associated posture problems.
Children with albinism may have a squint and nystagmus.
The amount of pigmentation tends to increase slightly with age up to adolescence and brings with it a gradual improvement in visual acuity.
As albinism is of genetic origin, genetic counselling should be available to teenagers.
Aniridia
This means ‘absence of the iris’ and can run in families.
The muscles which open and reduce the pupil are lacking.
The pupil is very large and only a portion of the iris is present, so the eye appears dark in colour.
Because the pupil is so large, the child is usually very photophobic.
Other visual problems can be associated with aniridia.
Amongst these are glaucoma and nystagmus.
Tinted glasses, contact lenses or painted contact lenses with only a small clear ‘pupil’ may make the child more comfortable and improve visual performance.
Attention should be paid to environmental factors which will aid the child (details of which are suggested in Chapter 2).
Complaints of headaches should be taken seriously and genetic counselling made available at the appropriate time.
Cataract
The word ‘cataract’ comes from the Latin word for waterfall and describes the appearance of the eye when the lens becomes cloudy and opaque.
There are many types and causes of cataract.
If present at birth, they are referred to as congenital cataracts.
These can be inherited with other members of the family also having them, but are sometimes caused by the rubella virus.
The cloudy lens prevents the passage of the rays of light on to the retina.
Many children will need cataract surgery.
Unfortunately the eye is then aphakic (loss of lens) and the children still have a visual problem.
They will have to use strong spectacles or contact lenses.
The aphakic  eye is unable to change its focus, so bifocal spectacles are required even for those with contact lenses.
Although some children see very well once their glasses are prescribed, many have vision which cannot be improved above 6/60.
Some children may be better off with early cataracts than with aphakic eyes, so early surgery is not always advisable.
Levels of lighting should be assessed for each child and a good contrast of print on paper provided.
The size of print should be checked and the use of low vision aids or closed circuit television may be appropriate.
The strong glasses needed will give an odd appearance to the eyes which may result in teasing and although the child may see well directly through the glasses, there may be difficulties with the peripheral vision and mobility will have to be watched.
Corneal ulcers and scars
These can be caused in many ways, from infection in another part of the eye such as the eyelids, the iris (iritis) or the ciliary body.
Accidents, both from injuries or harmful substances entering the eye, can cause scarring and ulceration.
These can be very painful at times and also cause photophobia and a deficiency in the vision.
Many are a temporary condition but there are certain types which are difficult to treat and last for a long time.
Children with these conditions will be averse to glare and have severely reduced vision in bright sunlight.
There may be ongoing treatment of which the teacher should be aware.
Dislocation of the lens
The lenses may be partially dislocated.
This is usual in children who suffers from Marfans Syndrome.
With this syndrome, the body is tall and thin, the limbs are elongated, as are the toes and fingers.
There is often associated muscle weakness and sometimes heart problems can occur.
A back corset may be needed to prevent curvature.
There will be blurred distance vision, but the near vision can be good, depending on the type of dislocation.
Physical activities need to be monitored as sudden body contact or jarring of the head can bring about further dislocation.
The advice of the ophthalmologist must be sought before physical activities are allowed.
Glaucoma (Buphthalmos)
Although this is one of the rarer conditions in children, it is included here because children with controlled glaucoma will be in the  ordinary classroom.
It is a condition in which the pressure within the eye is increased, due to faulty drainage of the aqueous (Figure 2 ).
Children with glaucoma at birth often have below normal vision and may need continued operations to keep the pressure at a safe level.
The infant's eye is elastic and so a raised intra-ocular pressure causes the eyeball to enlarge.
The cornea may become cloudy.
Refractive errors develop because of the altered shape of the eye and abnormal position of the lens.
Hemianopia
Damage to one side of the brain can cause visual handicap.
Messages from the right-hand field of vision of both eyes are received by the left-hand side of the brain.
Similarly, messages from the left-hand field of vision of both eyes are transmitted to the right side of the brain.
A tumour or trauma in one side of the brain causes a loss in the field of vision on the other side.
The remaining vision will be good, but mobility and associated activities will be affected.
Reading, too, will be difficult.
Children with right-sided field loss will be looking ahead into a space; left-sided hemianopia causes difficulties in finding the beginning of a line of print.
Glasses will not help this condition, nor will the enlargement of print.
The children need to be taught to move head and eyes to compensate for the field loss.
Macular degeneration
As can be seen from Figure 2 , the macula is a minute area in the centre of the retina.
If the specialised cells in the macula area do not develop before birth or are damaged or destroyed by disease, then the fine central vision will be faulty or absent.
There are many causes of macular degeneration and it may be progressive.
Vision may be normal in early life but deteriorate suddenly, first in one eye and later in the other.
The peripheral vision is good and children may manage well, except in the area of close work.
If the defect is not recognised, the children may be thought to have behaviour problems.
They will see in some situations and not in others.
Close work can be helped with the use of a low vision aid or closed circuit television.
Good contrast is essential and the use of extra lighting may be helpful.
Young children may need large print but should be educated to use smaller print as their reading develops.
Dark lines on paper can be a useful writing aid.
Macular degeneration can be hereditary and genetic counselling appropriate.
Nystagmus
As noted above, nystagmus is an involuntary movement of the eyes which is very noticeable.
The oscillations are usually from side to side but can be up and down.
The condition is usually associated with other problems, such as albinism.
Near vision may not be affected but distance vision will be reduced, possibly severely.
Frequently, those with nystagmus find their vision more stable if the head is held on one side or slightly askew.
A balance must be found between the child's ease of vision and the tension, fatigue and other possible effects of the bad posture.
The class teacher should ask for advice on this.
The child should sit near the blackboard and the teacher must remember that vision across the room may be lowered and the child unable to see demonstration or materials presented.
Optic nerve atrophy
This is a term which describes damage to or degeneration of the cable of nerve fibres that transmits the signals from the retina to the visual centre of the brain (Figure 2 ).
In some cases the optic nerve fails to develop before birth.
In others the optic nerve is damaged by illness, tumour or trauma.
(In hydrocephalic children, where a drainage shunt is fitted, the faulty functioning or blockage of this shunt can lead to damage of the optic nerve.)
How the child's vision is affected will depend on how many nerve fibres are still intact.
Vision may be good or there may be total blindness or one of any gradations in between.
Central acuity and fields of vision can be affected.
Assessment of the functioning vision is important.
Prognosis is also important as it may be necessary for the child to learn braille sometime in the future.
Refractive errors
Myopia (short sight — near sight)
As can be seen from Figure 2 , the normal eye is virtually round, which means that rays of light coming from outside the eye are focused on the retina.
The myopic eye is longer from front to back (Figure 3 ) and the extra length prevents the image being in sharp focus.
Most myopic children can be fitted with glasses with concave lenses which will bring their vision to normal.
If the myopia is of high degree the vision may not be normal even with glasses.
Contact lenses sometimes give better visual acuity in these cases   and the field of vision is nearly always improved.
Myopia tends to progress throughout the growing period and spectacles may have to be changed every six to twelve months.
The child with high myopia is also at risk of further visual deterioration from muscular haemorrhage or retinal detachment.
Books may have to be held very close to the eyes.
Because of poor distance vision, children may miss much of what is going on in the classroom and seem ‘out of step’ with the rest of the class.
Physical education and games will pose difficulties and myopic children will often ‘opt out’ of these activities, preferring to stay on the sidelines.
Figure 3 Graphic representation of abnormality in eye shape
Hypermetropia (far sight — long sight)
It can be seen from Figure 3  that this is the opposite to myopia.
In this case the eye is too short and the rays of light, were they able to do so, would fall behind the retina.
However, light can be focused and distant objects seen clearly if the ciliary muscles contract (as if for near vision).
Even more ciliary muscle contraction will be required for near vision and this may be uncomfortable.
Hypermetropia commonly causes a squint.
Long-sighted children are often reluctant to do much reading and writing and may also suffer from headaches.
Convex lenses can help this condition.
Astigmatism
In this condition the eye has a misshapen curve and this produces a distorted image on the retina.
Once identified it is correctable with  glasses with cylindrical lenses.
Astigmatism that is not discovered can result in a child confusing letters or copying incorrectly.
Faulty concept development may result if appropriate lenses are not prescribed.
Retinitis pigmentosa
This term includes a group of diseases which affect the retina.
They are usually progressive.
It is a hereditary condition and different forms have different types of inheritance.
Though some children are born with extremely poor vision, often the first signs occur in the teenage years and good vision is present until this time.
The condition affects the peripheral area of the retina, including the rod cells which help vision in poor light, and can result in progressive ‘tunnel vision’ and ‘night blindness’, the inability to see in the dark.
The latter is often the first symptom noticed by a young person.
Visual acuity is often normal even when the field of vision is so poor that the child is registered as blind.
Ultimately, however, all vision may be lost.
Since the condition often occurs in the secondary-school years, the young person may not only be faced with the trauma of the diagnosis and the confusion of being still able to see clearly in some situations and not at all in others, but there may also have to be a decision to transfer the medium of communication from print to braille, all this taking place in the years leading up to important examinations.
The following points are important.
A close watch must be kept by the teacher to note any changes in the vision.
Sympathetic handling and understanding of behaviour problems that may arise may be necessary.
The visual skills of scanning and reorientation, for example, from book to blackboard will be difficult.
Mobility may be increasingly affected.
Genetic counselling should be available.
Retinoblastoma
This is a malignant tumour of the retina.
Surgery is often necessary to remove the affected eye and prevent the fatal spread of the tumour of the brain.
In this case, an  artificial eye (prosthesis) is fitted.
The tumours can also be treated by radiation or photocoagulation.
Unfortunately, this is often a bilateral condition so both eyes may have to be removed.
Some cases are hereditary so genetic counselling should be given.
Retrolental fibroplasia
During the 1950s, retrolental fibroplasia was the most common reason for visual handicap in children.
Premature babies, in need of oxygen, were given unlimited amounts.
This caused the growth of deviant blood vessels in the retina.
Once this was discovered, the amount of oxygen given to young babies was carefully monitored and a dramatic fall in the number of cases resulted.
Nowadays some cases do occur, almost always associated with prematurity, and the result can vary from light perception only to relatively good vision.
How useful this vision is will depend on where the undamaged areas are on the retina.
If the macula area remains clear, then reading should be possible.
But the scattering of damage may mean the vision is fragmented.
Scanning and the use of maps and diagrams may cause problems.
There is a risk of further visual deterioration from retinal detachment or glaucoma.
Strabismus (squint)
A squint means that the eyes are not straight; one is directed inwards or outwards relative to the other.
Causes include refractive errors, particularly hypermetropia, eye diseases such as cataracts or retinoblastoma, and ocular muscle paralysis.
If the two eyes are not directed at the same object, double vision results.
However, children rarely complain of double vision because their brains suppress the image from the squinting eye.
If the squint is constantly present, the suppression quickly becomes permanent and the squinting eye becomes ‘lazy’(amblyopia).
An amblyopic may have vision below 6/60.
If a squint and amblyopia are detected early, the amblyopia may be treated by patching the good eye, so that the lazy one has to work.
Patching is more effective if done in the pre-school years.
After the age of seven, a lazy eye is unlikely to improve.
Also patching the good eye of a child whose lazy eye has an acuity of 6/24 or less may make it impossible to manage normal school work.
Once amblyopia has been treated by patching, squint surgery may be necessary to straighten the eye and restore binocular vision, otherwise the problem may recur.
Squint surgery is sometimes required for cosmetic reasons alone.
Occasionally, correction of hypermetropia with glasses is sufficient to straighten the eye.
Because a squint may be due to serious disease, its sudden appearance should always be taken seriously.
SPECTACLES AND CONTACT LENSES
The Warnock Report (Department of Education and Science, 1978) stresses that there are already in ordinary classes children with  special educational needs whose difficulties are not evident as severe physical or sensory handicaps.
These may include pupils who have visual impairments of a slight or moderate degree, including those who need to wear spectacles to correct refractive errors.
Attention to the environment in terms of appropriate lighting, both overall and to meet individual needs, and the provision of clear, well-presented learning materials should be helpful to these pupils as well as to those who have more severe visual defects.
It is important for the teacher to know which pupils should be wearing spectacles, since without the necessary correction provided by lenses these pupils can experience quite unnecessary difficulties with their work.
The hazards to which spectacles are prone include being lost, broken, ill-fitting, dirty, put on crookedly or rejected as an aid to better seeing.
Both pupils and their parents need to know that spectacles will neither cure a visual condition, nor hasten its deterioration; they will simply give necessary correction to vision in appropriate cases whilst they are being worn.
It is important that regular eye tests are given, and that any ophthalmic appointments are kept as levels of vision in the case of children using spectacles may alter.
It is helpful if a pupil who is totally dependent on the use of spectacles for schoolwork can have a reserve pair, since repairs can sometimes take time.
Parents should be aware that vouchers from the DHSS intended to cover the cost of spectacles are available for children.
The use of a spectacle-case for protection and the habit of keeping the lenses clean helps to ensure that these aids to sight are kept in a usable, effective condition.
One may question whether drawing attention to such matters should be part of a teacher's role, but spectacles can be essential for some pupils who will not be able to use learning materials properly without them.
Children can be notoriously careless with their glasses or obstinately refuse to wear them.
Patient insistence is needed.
Contact lenses, now sometimes used with very young children as well as older pupils, provide optical correction in another form.
Pupils should be able to take over increasingly from parents or from care staff in school the responsibility for the management and cleaning of the lenses.
The whole question of eye care and hygiene and the use and proper maintenance of aids to vision needs to be included and discussed in the health education curriculum.
Spectacles
The prescription of glasses is an exact science, and they are made to fit correctly at a specific distance from the eyeball.
They can be made  with either plastic or glass lenses, with convex lenses prescribed for long-sightedness, concave for short-sightedness and cylindrical for astigmatism.
Plastic lenses are lighter, an advantage if the lenses required are of high power, but with the disadvantage of scratching easily.
Glass lenses are heavier, but are less likely to become scratched; they can be made shatterproof.
Fitting must be precise, and in the case of young children who have not yet developed a firm bridge to the nose this can be difficult.
The shafts can be tied on in the case of very young children, especially during active play.
Contact lenses
Contact lenses are less frequently prescribed for children than spectacles because physical growth is still taking place and because they are relatively more expensive.
However there are some conditions in which they give more useful correction and they may therefore be provided for visually handicapped children.
Adolescents conscious of personal appearance may prefer them to eyeglasses.
There are two kinds of contact lenses, hard and soft.
Hard lenses are generally well tolerated and are relatively easy to care for.
Soft lenses are made of plastic with a high water content.
They are soft and pliable and consequently comfortable.
However, they are more expensive, require more complicated care procedure and are more likely to show signs of wear.
All contact lenses must be very carefully fitted to allow the cornea to receive enough oxygen.
The lenses will be as small and thin as possible and fit as loosely as appropriate in order to maintain the health of the eyes.
Teachers should certainly know if any of the younger children are wearing contact lenses.
LOW VISION AIDS
There are specialised optical aids which can be helpful to some visually handicapped pupils.
Low vision aids, as the term implies, are designed to facilitate the use of low vision, and range from the simple magnifier to the complex closed circuit television set.
Optical aids prescribed by a low vision specialist will be described later in this section of the book.
No aid, however beneficial, is totally without disadvantages and children often need positive encouragement in practising their use before they become aware of the advantages that they offer when adroitly used.
Before low vision aids are prescribed, an assessment should be made both of the child's vision and of the varied classroom, home and leisure situation in which the aid will be used.
Unfortunately this is not  always done, lessening the chances of full and effective usage of the aid provided.
Directions as to how to use the aid should also be given together with a discussion of the circumstances in which its use is likely to be helpful.
Directions of this kind, given at the low vision clinic, should be communicated to the teacher who is working with the child at school, and this will usually be done through the specialist adviser for visually handicapped pupils.
The child will need some training in the use of the low vision aid and detailed descriptions of training programmes are to be found in Faye (1984)Clinical Low Vision and Jose (1983)Understanding Low Vision .
Techniques will vary according to whether the aid is to be used for distance work, but the following elements should be included in training a child to use a low vision aid.
Firstly, the aid should be demonstrated for correct holding, the parts named and some instructions given on its care.
Secondly, the pupil will need training in fixation skills, including eccentric viewing (holding reading material in an unusual but visible position), spotting skills, tracing skills, tracking skills, and scanning skills.
In order to master these skills with a low vision aid, it will be appreciated that the development of perceptual skills (visual memory, hand-eye co-ordination, spatial perception, matching and sorting visually) should receive attention prior to its use.
A re-assessment noting the effective use to which the child has put the low vision aid or the reasons for his inability to do so should be made at regular intervals, so that adjustments can be made or more intensive training given.
In integrated settings, children are sometimes understandably reluctant to use aids which are unsightly or cumbersome.
The teacher has a role in encouraging the pupil to use the aid and in reducing teasing by other pupils.
The most frequently prescribed optical aids are microscopes and telescopes with a power of magnification ranging from 1× to 20×.
Microscopes can only be used for close work, telescopes for viewing objects from arm's length distance to infinity.
Usually the microscope will provide a wider viewing field but a short working distance, whilst the telescope give a longer working distance but smaller field of view.
The simplest form of microscope is the convex lens, the magnifying effect being caused by the curvature of the lens.
Unfortunately, as power and therefore magnification increase the maximum working distance decreases also.
The telescopic form of low vision aid can extend the working distance, but with the disadvantage that, as the working distance increases, the field of view decreases.
The effect of this is, for instance, to reduce considerably the number of words, or even letters, visible within the field of the lens.
Both microscopic and telescopic aids can be hand-held, stand-mounted, or fitted into a pair of spectacles.
Hand-held magnifiers do not leave both hands free and are therefore not suitable for some activities, especially practical work.
In addition, when a hand-held instrument is used, any shake or movement of the hands will cause a tremor in viewing, and this will be particularly evident when high magnification is involved.
A low vision aid must be held at the correct distance from the material to be viewed for maximum magnification to be effected, and it can be difficult to sustain this with a hand-held magnifier for any length of time.
Stand magnifiers overcome this problem as they are mounted on supports that ensure the correct viewing distance, and some have built-in illumination to increase the luminosity on the working surface.
However, with stand magnifiers, the restricted space under the lens does not permit activities such as writing or sewing to be undertaken while the lens is being held.
If it is mounted instead in a flexible arm or frame, the working distance can be adjusted.
Aids of this kind are useful but expensive and difficult to carry.
A disadvantage of the microscope aid is that as the magnification increases the size of the lens has to decrease, owing to the weight and expense of high-powered lenses, and this results again in a smaller field of view.
The child may discriminate printed letters with the higher-powered lens, but reading may be slow and laborious.
Telescopes also have a small field of view and are seldom made to magnify more than 2× or 3×, and even low-powered telescopes can create some difficulties of adjustment for the user.
The compact telescope, which is very small and can be mounted on a ring that fits on the finger, is useful in activities which require mobility and can be helpful in identifying street names and bus numbers.
Magnification, however, is not useful for every visually handicapped child.
Those with tunnel vision, for instance, would not find it so.
For such pupils, the application of reduction can be more useful than magnification.
It has the opposite effect from magnification, which reduces the field of vision.
Reduction, while decreasing the size of the print, increases the area of the field being viewed.
(The security ‘peepholes’ used in front doors are an example of this principle.)
One use for an optical aid for pupils with tunnel vision that is designed on this principle is for mobility since it helps to increase the extent of the visual panorama.
Despite some of the disadvantages outlined, low vision aids can be immensely helpful to some visually handicapped pupils in classroom and more general situations, but they are of no use at all lying on a shelf gathering dust.
Pupils do need encouragement and help in making the best of them, and these expensive items should be returned to the clinic if they are not being used.
Teachers should  enquire as to whether a low vision aid would be appropriate for an individual low vision child in their class.
Consultation can be made with the advisory service for the visually handicapped and the ophthalmologist will then usually refer children to the low vision clinic in the region or to an ophthalmic optician who specialises in low vision aids.
The prescription of an aid, however, is only the beginning of the potential improvement in learning for the pupil who uses it.
Learning to use it fully and without embarrassment is a challenge, but one that many visually handicapped pupils have met with success.
QUESTIONS THAT TEACHERS ASK ABOUT VISUAL HANDICAPS
There may be aspects of day-to-day management of visually handicapped pupils that seem simple but require clarification.
For example, teachers may pose the following questions:
Why don't all children with visual handicap wear glasses?
Although spectacle lenses will correct errors, they cannot replace vision that does not exist.
For instance, a visual field loss resulting from a damaged retina will not be helped by wearing spectacles, and they will not be prescribed.
Moreover, spectacles have uses other than for correcting refractive error.
Photophobic children are often recommended to wear dark or tinted glasses to ease the discomfort caused by bright light.
Should children with defective vision be resting their eyes?
In the years before 1945 children with visual defects, especially high myopes (children with severe short sight), were admitted to ‘sight-saving’ classes, as it was then considered that restricting the use of vision would help to conserve it.
Evidence from ophthalmologists, especially Mann and Pirie (1946), and observation of good practice by educational psychologists and teachers confirmed that this was not so, and that children with low levels of vision should be encouraged and trained to use their vision as effectively as possible and to enjoy using it.
Although the concentration and effort required to do this may sometimes produce fatigue, this is temporary and in no way signifies that sight will ‘wear out’ with use.
Do the other senses automatically compensate for limited or non-existent vision?
Visually handicapped pupils can certainly be trained to use their other senses very effectively in listening, tactile, and haptic skills.
Vision, however, is a unifying sense (Lowenfeld, 1974) and helps to integrate the partial or fragmented information transmitted, through the other senses.
It is possible to hear that there are many people in a room, but without vision impossible to count them.
People hear the sound of movement but look to see what has caused it.
Some able and highly motivated visually handicapped people develop sophisticated levels of hearing and touch that astound the fully sighted, but these are not an automatic compensation for poor vision, and there is considerable individual variation in these areas of competence.
Should children attempt to read in poor light?
Any visual task is rendered more difficult and fatiguing if it is undertaken in poor lighting.
Improving the quality of lighting is one of the most effective ways of increasing the effective use of vision, especially when there are problems with sight.
Sometimes lighting levels will need to be reduced to avoid distracting dazzle for photophobic children.
For other conditions such as retinal disease and macular degeneration, illumination must be good but without glare.
Does it matter how close children get to their work?
Proximity to the eye is one effective way of magnifying visual material.
It is not harmful to vision, but attention needs to be given to lighting and position to prevent postural fatigue and the development of spinal curvature.
2 Management of the environment
THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Access and safety
A teacher whose classes include visually handicapped pupils is unlikely to welcome the prospect of trying to engineer an elaborately contrived environment that will single them out unduly from their classmates, and yet may experience apprehension about their safety as they move about the school and within the classroom.
‘But won't they fall over the milk-crates?’ a teacher asked when it was proposed that two young children with severe visual problems should join the reception group.
Alterations to the environment required for safety and access to buildings and classroom by pupils with physical handicaps, especially if they are in wheelchairs, may be more easily foreseen, and their need for ramps or lifts instead of stairs, adaptations to toilet facilities may be readily recognised as essential.
There are fewer generally accepted criteria about what environmental adaptations are necessary or desirable for pupils with problems in seeing and some debate as to whether any special attention needs to be given to them at all.
There is, however, a consensus of opinion among experienced practitioners used to dealing with visually handicapped pupils and among writers concerned with the education of such children that competence in personal mobility and orientation is a prime source of safety and a great help in ensuring access to the whole campus and its various buildings and rooms.
In the case of pupils who are totally blind, or have little guiding sight, an orderly and reasonably predictable environment can help the pupil when he is still gaining confidence in independent mobility, but experience in purposeful movement and appropriate mobility training are even more essential.
The basis of independent and safe personal mobility is best developed in skills established in the pre-school years and fostered in the early years at school.
Purposeful movement results from body awareness and orientation in relation to fixed objects and furniture.
A developmentally based programme of independence training such as that described by  Tooze (1981) is of prime importance in helping the severely visually handicapped pupil to move about safely and adventurously in his school environment.
Early experience in exploring the environment at home should precede this, and will not only be stimulating as an activity in its own right but a helpful and positive preparation for coping with the wider and more varied situation of school.
Although ideally basic competence in moving about independently should be developing by the time the pupil first comes to school, there is likely to be among visually handicapped children a range of levels of skill in independent mobility and in competence in using the environment fully and safely.
These variations can arise from the nature of pre-school opportunities for active play and exploration, as well as from the amount of useful vision the child possesses.
The extent to which the child has been encouraged to be physically independent, to develop spatial awareness, a sense of direction and response to sound and tactile cues and to use any vision he possesses positively will have a considerable influence on the extent to which he is able to meet the demands of his school environment.
The emphasis on helping the visually handicapped pupil to develop skills to cope with his school environment, rather than adapting the environment significantly to accommodate the visually handicapped child, may, however, be usefully tempered by an understanding of the way in which the developmental and experiential levels of the child can be affected by his school life.
Ashcroft (1982) stresses that:
Through our school programmes we alter the capabilities of the student so that environmental demands can be met.
A good example is intensive work on physical development and mobility and orientation, so essential to increase healthy self-regarding attitudes, to increase capability to cope with the environment and to evoke positive attitudes.
Significantly, he recognises that the pupil with defective vision has a need for gradation in the extent to which his environment is adapted or supportive, the ultimate aim being to reduce the supportive and adapted elements so that the totally unmodified environment which the visually handicapped pupil will encounter on leaving school can be faced with safety and confidence.
These recommendations would not preclude sensible attention to aspects of environmental safety particularly important to visually handicapped pupils, but rather they emphasise that the pupil should have the challenge of encountering ‘a series of situations of just manageable difficulty’.
In concrete terms this could involve gradually introducing incidental activities of fetching and returning materials and taking messages, until the pupil is finally able to take  total responsibility for getting about unaided and coping with all aspects of the environment on the school campus.
It can be very helpful for the pupil with marked problems in seeing to have an opportunity to explore the school buildings and the particular class or specialist rooms as the library, gymnasium and science laboratories at a quiet time in order to gain an impression of their layout.
Both tact and time are needed to effect this, and it may be that fully sighted friends are the best guides.
The statement of individual educational need in the case of a child with severe limitation or blindness should give an indication of levels of indoor and outdoor mobility and  whether individual mobility instruction will be needed in order to cope with the ordinary school environment.
The child's class teacher will then more confidently be able to encourage full use of the environment.
Barraga (1976) focuses on encouraging a positive and challenging approach to the visually handicapped child's encounter with every-day surroundings, considering that most mishaps and collisions are a part of learning for future independence, since ‘Expanding knowledge through using the body, combined with interpretation is the key to continuous refinement in motor skills for blind children and youth throughout their lives.’
Specialised help from an adviser for visually handicapped pupils or a specialist teacher or mobility officer will be needed for the blind or virtually blind child to use the environment safely and this should be sought.
Halliday and Kurzhals (1976) describe the value of specialist techniques for the child who ‘learns the simple travel techniques of trailing in unfamiliar places, squaring off directly to go to a designated place, using the cross bar techniques when away from other children on a playground and retrieving dropped objects.
Orientation and mobility should be emphasised in every situation in the school programme.’
The terminology used in mobility training sounds technical, but a trained mobility instructor who has experience in dealing with children or a specialist teacher or adviser trained in mobility and independence skills will be able to plan mobility and orientation activities together with the pupil's class teacher.
These will be relevant to the child's present and future safety and independence.
It is essential that the parents of a severely visually handicapped child know of and agree to the approach to be followed by the school in relation to the pupil's independent mobility, and it will be very helpful if they have seen the school environment and know what kind of tasks it will impose on the daily life of their child.
In attempting to meet the needs of individual pupils, it will be necessary to take into account aspects of the training of the child's visual loss or depreciation of sight which may cause a lack of  confidence in moving about.
A problem here for the responsible head or class teacher is to reduce the possibility of accident (of a different order than the odd bump or collision referred to by Barraga (1976)).
Careless or unsafe elements in the physical environment are a threat to all pupils but especially to those who have poor vision or no sight.
A balance needs to be struck between obtrusively over-protective vigilance and insufficient care for pupils' safety; simple orderliness and environmental awareness are needed.
The pupil's increasing familiarity with the campus and buildings will also increase confidence in their use.
Teachers who are unused to the behaviour of pupils with severely defective sight can be surprised by the way in which such children can move about within a setting in which they feel secure, negotiating stairs and corridors and moving along at speed with the stream of pupils going from room to room; but unfamiliar settings and unexpected obstacles can cause difficulties or even be hazardous, and such hazards should be minimised.
If a sighted guide is needed at the stage when a blind pupil has not completely mastered independent mobility techniques or is in an unfamiliar environment, it is safer and more comfortable if the correct sighted guide technique, which is a very simple one, is adopted.
It can otherwise be all too easy for the blind child to be pushed and pulled about.
The guide should be slightly in front whilst the blind pupil holds the guide's arm lightly just above the elbow.
Techniques for going up and down stairs, through doors and in narrow spaces should be properly demonstrated by a mobility expert so that pupils guiding a blind friend can do it in a safe, efficient way.
The book on independence training by Tooze (op. cit.) illustrates sighted guide techniques clearly.
To consider the effect of the environment of the day-to-day life of the visually handicapped pupil only in terms of minimising hazard and ensuring reasonable safety is to underestimate its potential.
The pupil's surroundings can be used as an aid to mobility by providing clues to help in orientation, and key points in a building or a room can be utilised as reference points in terms of location and direction.
Interesting work has been undertaken in Sweden by Braf (1984) relating to those aspects of the environment that can be of positive help to visually handicapped people.
His work is geared towards the community of which the school is a part.
Other studies which offer recommendations for buildings used by visually handicapped people in the community include those set out by the Royal Institute of British Architects (1981) which give a six-point plan to maximise safety and efficiency in the use of buildings, namely:
1.
orientation and simplicity of layout;
2.
good lighting and elimination of glare;
3.
use of colour and tone contrast;
4.
use of texture contrast and tactile clues;
5.
good acoustic conditions;
6.
clear, large graphics at eye level.
These recommendations are particularly significant in the case of pupils who have fallible and defective vision, and they are as relevant to a school environment as to any other.
They range from fundamental principles to be incorporated in the building at the design and planning stage, to relatively simple but specific attention to décor, illumination and room arrangement.
A positive benefit arising from such specific attention to what is best for visually handicapped pupils can be that there is increased attention to environmental factors that are advantageous to all the pupils in the school
Since the majority of heads of schools and teachers inherit the school and the class or specialist rooms in which they work with their pupils, they are seldom in the happy position of being able to contribute to the initial planning of buildings, and consequently their interest may well be centred on adaptations or changes that they can realistically effect, although an appreciation of the more fundamental issues of design and planning may concern them too.
Relatively small changes in the layout of a room or in its lighting and furniture may seem insignificant when considered separately, but the sum total of such adaptations can result in safer, more pleasing and efficient surroundings for pupils with sight problems.
Common-sense measures likely to minimise problems for children with visual impairments can increase safety awareness for all pupils.
For instance, low-level objects can be dangerous for any pupil, but are especially so for one with little or no sight.
Trailing cords from televisions or projectors, loose mats or badly fitting floor-covering can be hazardous, especially if lighting is poor.
The floor is the worst place of all to store equipment such as typewriters, braillers or even piles of books, especially if they are put down on thoroughfares between desks or tables.
Doors, cupboards and hatch windows should be fully opened and fastened back or else closed.
Any window that opens outwards and is at head level is particularly dangerous for those without sight.
Some visually handicapped pupils have good central vision and seem to have little difficulty in reading, but poor peripheral vision can give them problems in managing their environment.
Adams (1985b) illustrates this kind of difficulty in showing how a subject with good vision in the right eye, but perception of light only in the left eye, could easily bump into a half-open door before realising it was there.
Pupils  with field defects who therefore do not have a complete visual panorama may have difficulties of this kind.
Although pupils with little or no sight will, with training, be able to cope with a variety of environmental situations and even obstacles such as odd chairs, waste-paper baskets or sharp-cornered pieces of furniture scattered or left about in unexpected places, these are an unnecessary and possibly harmful source of trouble for those with visual problems.
Simply remembering to put such objects in accustomed places avoids this.
Décor can be used imaginatively and helpfully as an aid to location for visually handicapped pupils.
The use of strong colour contrast as an aid to orientation is shown graphically in the Welsh Office Package (1984).
Doors painted in a strong, dark colour are shown clearly against light matt walls, or bands of strong colour are used to outline door window frames to emphasise focal points in a room.
The effect of this in an ordinary classroom is interesting and attractive, as well as being useful to pupils who are visually handicapped.
It can be helpful to put contrast paint along the noses of stair treads; yellow is especially visible when used for stairs that are situated in dark places.
Levels of lighting on stairs and in corridors may need boosting.
Whilst specific lighting  recommendations for study are discussed later in this chapter, in general terms good overall lighting is needed in an environment where there are visually handicapped pupils.
Illumination can often be improved quite simply by ensuring that windows, lightbulbs and fittings are kept clean; light matt coloured walls can also give measurably greater light reflection than darker colours used for overall décor, and this should be borne in mind when redecoration is undertaken.
The benefit of giving attention to décor in terms of improving overall light levels is shown by Gazeley (1968) and can be verified by the simple use of a light meter.
The outdoor as well as the indoor environment of the school campus may need to be reviewed when we are considering the needs of visually handicapped pupils.
The surface of an ordinary playground can contain particles of strengthening materials that may, in strong sunlight, make it dazzling for children with photophobia.
Surfacing such as‘Playscreed’ has the advantage of a non-reflective surface and also a shock-absorbing quality which makes it especially useful for playgrounds for children with sensory or physical disabilities.
Strong, well-constructed playground equipment is available from various firms who have given particular attention to safety factors for children with special needs.
A soft play area is desirable for pupils with little or no sight as it can encourage them to move and play adventurously.
Incorporating such  facilities when possible does not constitute over-protection if it encourages visually handicapped children to move about freely and with reasonable safety and to make use of standard facilities with increased confidence and independence.
Classroom organisation
The classroom that offers a pleasant and interesting environment for all the pupils working in it is likely to be well suited to the visually handicapped pupil as it will be to his fully sighted classmates.
For instance, first-school classrooms with colourful montages of the children's own work and collections of objects that are interesting to touch and fun to look at provide a stimulating background for pupils whether they have defective vision or not.
At the present time teachers may be working with limited resources whilst seeking to meet the varying demands of children with special educational needs.
Such pressures can lead to lack of environmental awareness or at least an understandable questioning of whether spending time or money or both on improving classroom ecology justifies the effort involved.
However, an overcrowded room with either poor lighting or too much glare from unshaded windows and haphazard storage of materials adds to the daily problems of self-organisation and comfortable study habits that can be particularly important for children with visual problems.
Good classroom planning and organisation and an awareness of the way in which children relate to and use their surroundings can help to reduce at least some of the stresses and confusion that can arise in day-to-day work for children with sight problems.
Pupils with little or no sight need the opportunity to explore the classroom, not only for reasons of access and safety but also to find out where the key activities take place and where the objects needed for their work and play are kept.
Encouragement to use sight effectively in daily classroom situations can be reinforced by a working environment that facilitates this exploration.
Barraga (1976) claims that ‘In order to stimulate interest in visual development, and in learning to see more things, many children may need to spend some time visually investigating objects in the classroom or in the natural environment to broaden their visual experiences.’
Personal independence can also be encouraged if the visually handicapped pupil can find, fetch and return materials from known locations rather than wasting time trying to investigate muddled cupboards, or asking or expecting the fully sighted to undertake the searching.
Materials and equipment kept in a particular classroom or specialist room should be clearly labelled in large print or braille (such as labelling with Dymotape, for example).
Cupboards and drawers  used for storage should also be labelled and can be colour coded according to contents.
Involving pupils in these tasks as a project can increase interest and emphasise the need for good personal organisation, which will be invaluable for pupils with poor sight both at school and after leaving it.
Confusion and muddle resulting from mislaid books and materials involve a waste of time for any pupil, but are even more of a nuisance for one who sees poorly.
Specialised equipment and materials required for visually handicapped pupils can pose a storage problem.
Braille and large print materials are bulky; braillers, typewriters, tape recorders and closed circuit television sets are both heavy and demanding of space.
The need to store and maintain specialised equipment in good condition is a problem that has to be faced by schools accepting pupils who need to use these in order to fulfil their special educational needs.
A central storage and resource room reduces pressure for space in individual teaching rooms, but needs pre-planning and co-operation in order to have equipment available for specific lessons.
In preparing particular sections or blocks of work for classes or groups of pupils which include visually handicapped children it can be useful to code in a mark when drafting the programme to indicate the need for a piece of specific equipment to be available, and check this quickly on a daily basis (for example, closed circuit television tape recorder; overhead projector).
Materials and equipment less frequently used or too heavy for pupils to handle easily should be stored on upper shelves.
Keeping braillers, typewriters and even magnifiers in their cases, or at least under covers when not in use, helps to maintain them in good condition, since dust and grime can cause damaged surfaces.
Insistence on this in the early stages of use helps to make it become simply a good habit.
In describing stimulating environments for children who are visually handicapped, Halliday (1971) recommends that ‘materials and equipment should be organised and placed in different areas to implement the kind of learning and teaching done in each space’.
She is referring particularly to work with younger children, and suggests not only an area for creative play but, in more structured situations, a library with low cupboards containing a variety of books (some homemade) and ‘in another part of the room…low cupboards containing many kinds of commercial materials, such as peg boards, nesting toys, puzzles, discs for the development of discrimination and hand and finger dexterity’.
Materials of this kind, and strategies to deal neatly with their storage, are typical of many ordinary well-equipped classrooms, but it is the emphasis on the visually handicapped child's special need to learn to master the environment and locate and use the objects in it without too much  difficulty that warrants attention.
The layout and organisation of the classroom should enable the visually handicapped pupil to develop a facility to understand and use the equipment and material in it ‘so that he can feel at ease in the setting, and can respond freely and accurately about what he is doing’.
Reorganisation of both storage and seating arrangements in the class or specialist teaching room may be constrained by the size of the room itself and the size of the class in it, but even so it may be possible to improve the present situation by looking at it purely in terms of its current, rather than traditional, use.
Seating arrangements will, of course, depend on the nature of the activities being undertaken and the extent to which the work is taking place in informal groups or in a more structured teaching situation.
Pupils often want to sit next to their particular friend and many classroom activities involve moving about, but even relatively small alterations can make a difference to the visual comfort of pupils with sight defects.
A major factor here is that the pupils who have useful sight should be able to work in a position that enables them to use it more easily and effectively.
For desk work the pupils should be in a place from which they can most clearly and easily see any demonstration or illustration work that is being shown.
For instance, a pupil with hemianopia or a diminished visual field may have to sit at an angle rather than square to the blackboard in order to use remaining vision usefully to discriminate what is on it.
Over the last twenty years a number of publications concerned with the education of visually handicapped children have given very prescriptive advice on the most suitable seating arrangements for classes which include visually handicapped children.
Both Bishop (1971) and Hathaway (1959) give carefully worked out guidelines of suggested seating in relation to classroom lighting, blackboard and fixed furniture.
These suggestions may be considered dated in that they seem to presuppose a somewhat static teaching situation with pupils amenable to being told where to sit, rather than the modern classroom with its active learning, and mobile, enquiring pupils.
Nevertheless, the basic guidelines are sound and pupils with visual handicap will for the most part be pleased to co-operate in working out their own best visual environment.
There may be pupils whose eye condition makes it difficult to tolerate bright light and who suffer to some extent from photophobia (for instance those who are albinos or who have coloboma).
Such children should not be working in conditions where there is glare, such as bright light from an unshaded window streaming on to a child's face.
A better working position results from arranging the seating with light from the window coming from behind the pupils  and on to the work surface.
It is helpful for pupils not to have to look into bright light.
For instance, when a teacher is speaking or demonstrating it is better not to stand in front of windows.
Bishop (op. cit.) even recommends that spaces between windows are inappropriate places to mount visual materials, again in order to avoid the likelihood of photophobic pupils gazing into bright light.
Visual displays
When visual displays are wall mounted, whether they are instructional, such as graphs, charts and diagrams, or examples of pictures and samples of the pupil's own work, they form part of the informational and aesthetic environment of the classroom.
They should be displayed in a way that enables them to be appreciated by all the children in the class, whatever their visual capabilities.
Just as it is sensible to place notices in braille at hand level or just above so that they can be easily read with the fingers, so visual material needs to be put up near to eye level if it is to be seen or read without difficulty by all the pupils.
Notices should be in clear, good-sized print and they are best removed when they are no longer relevant.
A noticeboard bearing a multitude of papers half pinned over each other, or with yellowing papers curling up at corners, is not an attractive or useful sight.
The use of white wallpaper mounted on dark backing paper gives good  contrast and helps to draw attention to the material displayed.
A room that is visually stimulating and interesting is an encouraging environment in which to use vision for learning.
Wall-mounted material that has both visual and tactile interest is intriguing and can, in the form of collages and friezes, incorporate designs or figures made by the pupils.
Rather than overcrowding the wallspace with closely packed displays which can result in visual muddle, it is more striking to have fewer, more defined displays that are changed quite frequently to stimulate and maintain interest.
Displays of three-dimensional materials can give opportunities to handle and explore interesting objects which pupils would not otherwise have the chance to examine, as well as more commonly found ones.
Pupils have a good deal of two-dimensional material presented to them, on the television screen, in software programs run on visual display units, in books and illustrations.
Pupils with defective sight are especially in need of the opportunity to look at objects at close range, holding them near to the eye and having time to gaze.
Common objects, a marble or pebble, a shell or a shiny conker can be part of a nature table collection and more unusual objects may be borrowed from museums.
Careful exploratory touching and examination of objects by both sight and touch should be encouraged  to help all pupils, but specially those who are visually handicapped, to form concepts relating to solid objects.
Sound in the environment
The environment does not only consist of what we can see and touch, it encompasses sound too.
A reasonably low level of background noise means that the pupil with little or no sight can pick up sound cues without undue difficulty and strain.
Hard surfaces against which objects clatter are no help in reducing environmental noise.
Carpets, carpet tiles or rubberised floors help to keep background noise low, allowing meaningful sounds to be more audible.
Such refinements may seem to be out of reach, but any practical approaches to reducing environmental noise will be helpful to pupils who need to rely more on their hearing as a channel for information.
THE PRESENTATION OF EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS TO VISUALLY HANDICAPPED PUPILS
Visually handicapped pupils are likely to need adaptations to the educational materials that are in the ordinary classroom if they have severe sight defects that prevent them from discriminating the size of print being used by the class.
They may not have become skilled in using aids to vision such as magnifiers or telescopic aids, or the material that they need to read may be finely or densely printed, visually complex, or difficult to decipher.
Even so, the pupil's motivation to use sight purposefully, his interest in the task in hand, the appropriateness of task lighting and position of work can sometimes enable material to be used with surprisingly little adaptation.
The ultimate aim must be to help pupils with defective vision to use as much standard material as possible in common with their classmates.
It will help all of them if the learning materials that they use are clearly presented and legible.
When there is a need for modification beyond this, individual needs must be carefully assessed.
Materials to use for learning through play
Like fully sighted children, pupils who have sight problems will need experience in manipulating and examining three-dimensional materials before they start to interpret two-dimensional representation and later begin to read.
Learning through play gives enjoyable  opportunities for the child with defective vision to handle, explore and build with colourful and attractive three-dimensional material alongside fully sighted children and in interactive play with them.
There is plenty of ordinary play material available commercially that is perfectly suitable for use in shared play by children with a range of levels of vision; simple shapes, bright colours, strong construction and surfaces that are not too shiny are particularly suitable.
Visually stimulating objects, such as Christmas tree decorations and toys with sound effects are recommended for pre-school and playgroup activities.
When these are outgrown and more complex activities and materials are needed, the clear visibility of the item chosen can be enhanced if they are used against a contrasting background.
A good example is the placement of bright-yellow bricks and matching shapes on a table covered with a dark cloth or piece of material.
Play materials should be used in a situation where there is good lighting directed on to the toys and objects being used.
It is useful to have trays with a non-skid surface and a raised rim, so that small objects do not slip on to the floor or out of reach.
Near vision tasks need to be presented in a way that ensures that materials can be easily accessible to handle.
Assessing the need for adaptations in presenting materials
An assessment of how the child is able to use his sight in day-to-day situations of work and play can be helpful in indicating the kind of activities involving vision that will be possible, and the kinds of learning and play materials that will be particularly appropriate for each child.
The Look and Think Checklist (Tobin, Chapman et al .,
1978) administered in the early stages of the visually handicapped child's schooling is a useful predictor of areas of visual perception that may be a source of problems when the child is using ordinary play materials, pictures and toys.
The Checklist enables the teacher or adviser for visually handicapped children to draw up a profile which shows the child's strengths and weaknesses in managing day-to-day visual tasks, and also outlines activities and suggests materials helpful in remediating areas shown to pose problems.
It offers no magic formula to improve the sight but describes activities and materials shown to be motivating in helping pupils to pay attention to visual stimuli.
The companion book which is a sequel to the Checklist is referred to as the ‘Teacher's File’ and recommends appropriate commercially available materials.
It also gives instructions and illustrations of teacher-made materials which have been used effectively with visually handicapped children in the 5–7 year age-group.
The programmes concentrate on such visual tasks as  pattern making and matching, perception of symmetry, perspective and discrimination of detail and describe materials to use in each area, besides suggesting activities involving the interpretation of communication through facial expression and body gesture.
These are all aspects of learning that have been shown to present difficulties to some visually handicapped children, but which may be amenable to remediation.
Although this material was devised nearly a decade ago, it remains a very useful guideline to activities involving visual perception that are tailored to meet the needs of individual children with defective vision.
However, some of the activities suggested can be incorporated into group-work with pupils of differing levels of visual competence.
The visually handicapped pupils in the group will tend to need more extended opportunities to practise such activities as naming and describing drawings and photographs, understanding the concept of perspective in pictures, and matching objects to sample.
The process of discriminating likeness and differences in shapes and patterns, first in three-dimensional and then in two-dimensional form, can be a precursor to discriminating differences in the shape of letters.
Linear search and scan, another Look and Think activity, can lead on to the visual scanning technique required in discriminating the different shapes of words and letters in a line of print.
Tasks of this kind may need extensive practice by children with defective vision, since using their vision for learning may present difficulties in terms of blurring and distortion or a reduced or interrupted visual field.
Choice of books and modifications to print
The books that children use when they begin pre-reading activities and progress to reading itself offer much less fine and complex visual tasks than the textbooks used later on, especially at secondary level.
Small print, dense layout, footnotes and detailed diagrams can be very demanding for some pupils with defective vision.
In addition, as they go up through the school, pupils, whether visually handicapped or not, will increasingly be required to undertake independent study involving looking up references and using graphic information such as charts and diagrams.
If such materials are clear in their visual presentation and able to be used in appropriate environmental conditions, the pupils' task will be that much easier.
The need to build up effective study habits is also essential.
The pupil with sight defects should be encouraged to contribute to discussion about the best presentation of material for  his individual needs, as well as the most useful visual aids to use for independent study.
As reading material progresses in difficulty, presentation as well as content should be considered, especially when pupils have difficulty in seeing.
For initial and early readers, books of a manageable size with clear print giving a good dark contrast against a light background and attractive colourful pictures are readily available.
These are usually well accepted by children with a wide range of vision competence.
Shiny pages can reflect uncomfortable dazzle for photophobic children, and books whose pages combine printed text interwoven with illustrations or print set against varying coloured backgrounds are generally less easy to decipher than simply set out and clearly  contrasted displays.
Although a comprehensive study by Shaw (1969) has shown that increased boldness of print increases legibility for some readers, differences in typography were found to be considerably less significant for younger than for older readers with partial sight.
Bold print, clear layout of the page and adequate margin and spacing between words and letters, however, may well mean that at least in deciphering print, the pupil with sight difficulties is not having to deal with unnecessary complexities to compound existing problems.
If the blackboard is used for notes, these should be written in large, clear print.
If the class contains pupils with very low levels of vision, it is also very helpful for the teacher to read out what is being written.
It is difficult to get a good clear contrast with chalk and an overhead projector, or white board with thick black felt pens for writing, can give better  contrast .
Whatever the method used, the pupil's position in relation to displayed work should be considered.
Sitting close to the blackboard seems like an old-fashioned solution, but remains useful for some pupils.
Advanced planning is needed if ‘desk copies’ of blackboard work are to be used by pupils with defective vision or if the whole class is going to receive them.
In order to justify the time spent on producing them, the copies should be consistently clear and legible.
Older methods of producing duplicated material can be defective in this regard.
The photocopying of typed sheets, although relatively expensive, gives clear and reliably consistent copies.
These can be made even more legible for visually handicapped pupils by turning up the print contrast setting to ‘dark’.
Material produced on a word processor is clear, but can be made even more so by being photocopied on a high-contrast setting.
The provision of copied material is expensive in resources and in time, but can facilitate work for pupils who have problems with distance vision, and a bank of basic material can be built up for future as well as current usage.
Such material is not helpful if it is on sheets that have become dirty or faded; shortages of text material are  disadvantageous for all pupils, but especially so for pupils with poor vision.
Sharing books, or using material that is virtually illegible because it is faint in colour or soiled, increases problems of deciphering.
All our children need adequate resources in order to learn, and while working with such inadequate materials is difficult for the fully sighted, for the visually handicapped it is daunting.
Using materials in the near environment
However clear and well presented reading material may be, there can still be problems in its use, particularly for pupils who need to use it at a very close distance from the eye.
A spontaneous way to effect magnification is to bring reading material close to the eye.
As Lindstedt (1986) explains, ‘there is a simple correspondence between the distance of a focused object from the eye and the size of its image on the retina.
If the distance is reduced to the half, the image will become twice as large, if the distance is reduced to a third, the image becomes three times larger and so on.’
When visually investigating objects for details, the visually impaired child as a rule ‘peers close’, that is, brings the object close to the eye, or the eye close to the object.
By this method the detail of the object will be seen in a wider visual angle and the retinal image will be magnified, a greater part of the retina thus being activated.
This in turn might compensate for a reduced number of active cones and visual neurons per unit of retinal area.
However, Lindstedt cautions that such visual behaviour as peering closely at the work being undertaken by no means offers a complete solution to the problems arising from the need to work at close range.
‘Peering close’ is often looked upon as a sign of excellent accommodation capacity.
Nothing could be more wrong.
On the contrary, as stated above, the ability to accommodate properly is often inadequate, imprecise or totally lacking in the visually impaired child.
The child ‘peers close’ in order to magnify the retinal image.’
The child prefers a large, somewhat blurred image to a small, sharp one.
Lindstedt refers to the possibility of providing reading glasses or magnifying lenses for near work, of a power corresponding to the degree of failing.
In addition to such correction, attention needs to be given to the position in which the pupil is using reading materials.
If the material is being used on a table or flat surface, it means that in order to use it at a close distance from the eye, the head is bent low over the book in order to try to discriminate the print.
This position means that a shadow is inevitably thrown on to the working surface.
The reader's neck and shoulders are bent and tense, postural faults easily  develop, and the whole process of reading is made tiring and uncomfortable.
These are not trivial discomforts.
It is interesting to try reading in this position oneself for a minimum of ten minutes in order to appreciate its inefficiency, and to experience the uncomfortable and tiring effects of doing so.
Close work is not in itself detrimental to sight and need not be discouraged, but it should be undertaken in a comfortable position and with appropriate task lighting.
An adjustable reading stand is an essential piece of equipment for pupils who need to work at a close range.
This needs to be placed at the angle which gives the best support for the material being used in relation to the pupil's vision, and some initial experimenting with different angles of work may be needed in order to settle on this.
A desk with an adjustable sloping top is useful as it provides storage space too, but probably the most practical aid, especially as the pupil progresses into secondary school, is a light, portable reading stand that can be easily taken from room to room as required.
It will need to have a ledge to support the reading material and strong clamps to hold pages in place are useful.
The earlier a pupil is able to find and keep to a comfortable and efficient working position, the better.
Another factor in the pupil's near environment that can affect the comfortable use of vision for work is the ‘fit’ of the furniture (chair, desk, table) in terms of individual requirements.
School furniture usually comes in three standard sizes; pupils do not.
It may be possible to exchange chairs and tables within or between classes, however, to get a better match of furniture to the individual pupil.
Having work at an appropriate height in relation to distance from the eye makes a real difference to avoiding unnecessary fatigue, and this can only be effected by a comfortable working position.
It is well worth checking that the pupil's chair and desk or table make this possible.
The question of enlarged print
The value of using enlarged print for pupils with visual impairments is controversial.
It can be expensive to provide and difficult to obtain at short notice, and has the disadvantage of not being readily available in ordinary schools.
Some special schools for visually handicapped pupils which have facilities for producing their own enlarged print use this for lesson notes and for enlarging finely printed text and reference work, finding this helpful to their pupils.
24 point print, or even 18 point print, gives a very clear distinction of letter shapes, especially if a bold, dark type is used.
However, as with the magnification of print by lenses or low vision aids, enlarged print has the disadvantage of reducing the number of words or even  letters that can be glimpsed at one time, and therefore may reduce speed and fluency in reading.
It is, of course, necessary to check carefully and individually the size of type that a visually impaired pupil can discriminate.
The McClure reading types for children gives examples of type in decreasing size which can be used to test this.
A more complex but useful measure can be obtained by using the Lindstedt BUST playing cards which depict two-dimensional forms in specific sizes on cards which can be given to pupils to discriminate in the form of a game.
The size of figure represented on the card which an individual child can discriminate is then set against the information in the conversion table which indicates the correct text size usable by the child, as well as indicating the visual aid needed when reading certain print sizes at specific distances.
It needs skill and experience to use this comparison table, and the advice of a specialist teacher for visually handicapped pupils should be sought if there are problems in deciding the size of print that should be used in individual cases.
There is, however, a stage in the pupil's progress through school when offering print in an enlarged form may be particularly helpful.
This is when the pupil is still coming to terms with using a low vision aid and is not yet skilful in its use, but needs to read text and notes that are too advanced in content to be available in the large print of junior and early reading books.
In addition secondary-aged pupils find it relaxing to use enlarged print for leisure-time reading at home.
There is no evidence to show that a particular typeface is generally more legible for pupils with visual impairments than any other; it is the layout and contrast that require attention.
Checking printed material for legibility, adapting where necessary and helping pupils to use appropriate aids with well-presented standard material are essential aspects of the presentation of material to visually-handicapped pupils in any educational setting.
Writing
When a pupil who is visually impaired is writing or drawing, his work position is as important as when he is reading.
A comfortable position for writing when work needs to be undertaken at close range is in some respects more difficult to achieve than it is for reading.
The arm can be in a very cramped position and the movement of the hand rather restricted if a flat surface such as a table is used; a desk with an adjustable sloping top gives a much better angle whilst also providing storage for books.
If it is not possible to provide this, a firm, adjustable stand can be used on a table.
An architect's drawing-board makes an excellent piece of  furniture to use for close-range work, but it is too large to be accommodated in the classroom.
Even if it is not feasible to provide a slanting surface for all writing activities, the possibilities of doing so whenever possible should be explored; an inexpensive custom-made board can sometimes provide the answer.
Utensils used for writing need to provide as much contrast as possible with the background against which they are used.
Felt-tips or fibre-tipped pens that give a strong, dark line are useful for children in the first classes, the disadvantage being that pressure can cause the tips to splay or split.
Brightly coloured, non-smudge crayons are suitable for drawing and letter outlines, while if pencils are used, those with thick, dark lead should be chosen.
If they are cut in half they will be easier for younger pupils to wield.
When progress is being made to finer handwriting tasks, a black-coloured ball pen is usually the best choice.
Some experimenting may be needed to find a brand whose ink does not fade and which does not skid on the surface of the paper.
Matt white paper is the most suitable to use and lined paper is helpful for those who have difficulty with hand-eye co-ordination and keeping the line of writing straight.
As the process of copying the shape of a letter can be difficult for some visually handicapped pupils when they begin to learn writing, there will need to be close one-to-one demonstration, or demonstration on a closed circuit television.
Paper which has dark ruled lines alternating with a light pencil line to act as a guide for mid-letter levels may also be employed.
It is the darkness, not the thickness, of the ruled lines that makes it helpful as a guide for writing.
To achieve this, ruled paper can be run off on a photocopier on a high contrast setting.
Squared and lined paper with good contrast can also be obtained in bulk from the Partially Sighted Society.
(See ‘Useful Addresses’ section.
) Both these sources provide suitable but expensive paper; it may be possible instead for a teacher's aid to produce appropriately ruled paper as required.
As writing skills become well established the need to use specially provided paper of this kind will diminish.
THE ROLE OF THE TEACHER IN THE MANAGEMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
Often it is a combination of adaptations to the classroom environment and to materials used for learning that will be most helpful in terms of giving pupils with defective vision the opportunity to have access to the full curriculum followed in the class.
With attempts being made to meet the requirements of pupils with a diversity of special needs in the ordinary school whenever possible, teachers are  facing a considerable challenge.
There may be pupils in the class who require adapted materials or curriculum because of social or cultural factors, or as a result of physical or sensory disabilities and learning difficulties.
The teacher will want to seek ways of meeting diverse needs through the individualisation of programmes, but will also look for solutions to problems of providing appropriate materials in the face of additional complications in class management.
An acceptance of the fact that some pupils will require adaptations to learning materials or specialised equipment such as braillers or magnifying aids as necessary rather than remarkable is a good pragmatic basis on which to work.
Experience in teaching children with special needs helps to reduce apprehensions about their singularity.
Theoretically, the recommendations in this and other chapters which describe adaptations that can usefully be made in order to give pupils with defective vision the most suitable environment and materials for work may seem complex.
In practice, implementing these suggestions is likely to simplify the day-to-day class situation, since the visually handicapped pupils will be in a better position to manage themselves and their belongings and to work independently and effectively.
They will not be struggling with defective sight in a confused environment in which they are using materials that are hard to decipher and presented without sufficient clarity.
In addition, attention to the special needs of the pupil with poor sight in terms of good lighting, classroom arrangement and clear presentation of materials can raise the teacher's awareness of the way in which these aspects of classroom ecology are helpful for all pupils.
There will be classrooms where it is evident that these factors are already borne in mind, and which will need only minor additions such as the clear labelling of cupboards in print or braille, or a rearrangement of seating in relation to light sources from windows and to ensure clear visibility of blackboard or overhead projector.
More specific adaptations and special equipment may be needed in the case of some severely visually impaired pupils in terms of task lighting, position of work or modified learning materials.
These additional changes to the ordinary working environment should be effected as a result of the recommendations in the pupil's statement of special needs.
However, the recommendations here are sometimes generalised, and more detailed and precise help in working with the pupil's exact requirements can be achieved by consultation with an adviser or specialist teacher of visually handicapped children.
Recommendations arising from assessments carried out by an educational psychologist, or from medical records containing information from ophthalmological examination, or from an  ophthalmic optician prescribing low vision aids, will need to be translated into practice in the day-to-day classroom situation, and specialist help from an advisory teacher is invaluable here.
The class teacher will also gain a good deal of useful information by observing how the visually handicapped pupils handle and attempt to use visual material.
Do they try to hold it close to the eyes?
Do they hold it in an unusual position-to the side rather than full-square to the eyes?
Do they seem to be dazzled by strong light, or flounder in less well-lit places?
Such observations should also be discussed with the adviser or specialist teacher as they can be very helpful in working out the optimum visual environment for the pupil.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE TEACHER'S AID
The teacher will be part of a team concerned with the educational support of the severely visually impaired pupil and will be the person responsible for implementing the recommendations of other professionals in day-to-day terms.
Teachers in first schools are often more used to working in the classroom alongside other professionals than those who are subject specialists at the secondary school level.
Ideally consultation with advisory or special teachers should be started before a pupil is accepted into the class, or at least at the very beginning of term, so that the provision of special equipment and materials can be organised.
Subsequently it will be necessary to review the nature of the support regularly, since co-operation between professional and ancillaries in terms of provision of materials and the need for individual help in some curriculum areas will need to be continuous.
The class or specialist subject teacher will be able to contribute a great deal to the discussion of the pupil's special needs as a result of daily or frequent observation of the pupil's visual behaviour.
However, it is the setting up and initial implementation in practical day-to-day terms of recommendations from other professionals about the nature and extent of specialised equipment, materials and support that is the most demanding phase for the teacher in the ordinary school whose class contains visually handicapped pupils.
Once changes in the classroom have been made and special items of furniture and equipment have been introduced, they usually come to be accepted as a matter of course and are regarded by pupils as ‘how things are’.
It is the initial sorting out of requirements that must be done on an individual basis for the pupil with severe visual defect.
Obtaining the necessary, sometimes expensive, special equipment such as closed circuit television takes time and persistence.
Then there is the need for the nature of any  adaptation to learning material to be understood by the teacher and the teacher's aid.
Again, once this has been clarified, custom is likely to work in favour of continuing use.
Teachers who have a severely handicapped pupil in an ordinary class can be greatly helped by a teacher's aid, especially in first-school work and in those areas of the curriculum in the secondary school that involve practical processes such as science and geography.
The teacher's aid can give valuable assistance in producing specialised materials under guidance of the teacher or adviser.
Help which involves working directly with the pupil in class or specialist subject room must be geared towards increasing, not reducing, the level of personal independence of the visually handicapped pupil; this aim needs to be discussed by the teacher and teacher's aid and to be understood and accepted.
The aim will be fulfilled if the teacher's aid encourages self-help skills and good personal organisation by the pupil rather than doing everything for him in the way of fetching and returning materials.
It can be all too easy for a severely visually handicapped pupil to be physically inactive and desk-bound, or dependent on the adult helper.
The teacher's aid can help, however, by ensuring that equipment that is difficult for a child to handle is available when needed and properly stored when not in use.
A skilful teacher's aid, with the teacher's guidance, can be very helpful in adapting materials, perhaps by making a large, hand-made copy of a detailed map or diagram, photocopying material, producing darkly ruled paper, and reproducing lesson notes in large, clear handwriting.
Sitting beside the pupil with severe sight problems in some learning situations, the teacher's aid can describe visual demonstrations and oversee the handling of objects in practical work.
THE NEED FOR CLEAR EXPLANATION
The valuable contribution of the teacher's aid is, as the name implies, a help to the teacher, but it is the teacher who takes the main responsibility for preparing work in a clear way for all pupils, including those who are visually handicapped.
Since there are pupils in the class with defective vision, however, there will need to be an additional emphasis on some aspects of teaching.
The pupil with poor sight may not be able to see facial expression and body gesture clearly, and these forms of non-verbal communication reinforce meaning and intent.
Because of this, verbal explanations and instructions must be particularly clear, and sometimes include more precise detail or directions in words than would ordinarily be necessary for fully sighted pupils.
Vague or inexact directions can be  mystifying for pupils with poor vision.
For instance, the instruction ‘Put it over there ’ is far less useful to them than the more precise directive ‘Put that back on the table by the door.’
In the teaching situation, verbal descriptions should draw on aspects of the pupil's experience, and it will be necessary to ensure that there are opportunities for individual and small-group demonstrations supported by relevant verbal descriptions.
Even simple activities, such as the right way to hold and use a pair of scissors, may need to be shown to a pupil with very poor vision, not because it is beyond the child's capacity, but because defective vision may make it difficult to see exactly how to manipulate utensils and objects without precise demonstration on how to do so.
It is easy to assume that such skills will be picked up incidentally, as they will usually be by fully sighted children, who often copy what they see other children doing, especially if a teacher's directions are unclear to them.
Such useful solutions to confusing situations are difficult to adapt by children who have visual disabilities.
Any additional support or special tuition that a pupil needs as a result of defective sight must be given tactfully by the teacher or teacher's aid, with an emphasis on what the pupil can do rather than on difficulties.
Reducing possible misunderstanding or confusion by ensuring that tasks requiring vision are presented as clearly as possible both in terms of the materials themselves and the way in which explanations and directions are given will be a great help not only to pupils with defective vision but also to their classmates.
LIGHTING
The importance of good lighting for people who are visually handicapped has already been stressed, as has the need for each child's requirements in levels of lighting to be stressed.
Classroom teachers who look at the lighting in their classroom may question whether they are able to do anything positive to help.
However, understanding what good lighting means is the first step; assessing what the ideal situation would be, then working towards it follow after.
Requests for adaptations to classroom lighting or for individual lamps cannot sensibly be made until the principles are understood.
Requirements for lighting fall into two groups-firstly, environmental, and secondly, task lighting.
Environmental lighting is generally concerned with mobility in the environment.
Is there sufficient light to be able to move around safely?
Task lighting usually entails higher levels of illumination needed for reading and other close work.
Shops mainly concentrate on environmental  lighting which is cleverly designed to make the environs and merchandise attractive visually, often with extra lighting at service points and cash tills.
There are three main sources of light, the first of which is the sun which provides natural daylight.
In the United Kingdom, there is, to say the least, variable illumination with different levels being present in winter and summer and in varying weather conditions.
Modern school buildings make as much use as possible of natural light, incorporating as they do large windows.
Natural light, though a good-quality light, does produce problems.
Often the light is too bright, which can cause difficulties for all children.
Window glass can produce glare and the sun can cause harsh shadows.
The other two sources of light are the ordinary, filament light bulb and fluorescent tubes.
Although in common use, the tungsten light bulb has several disadvantages, and the preferred source of light for public buildings, and increasingly for homes, is the fluorescent tube.
This makes efficient use of electricity and provides more light.
There is now a wide variety of hues available, but the deluxe warm white is considered to be more appropriate for people who are visually handicapped than lighting which is blue-white (Jay, 1978).
As fluorescent light comes from a larger area the light is more diffuse and therefore produces less glare, and the flickering that was associated with the early form of fluorescent lighting should not be experienced now.
For desk lighting, provision of an individual lamp can be most helpful for those who are visually handicapped, although the availability of power points in the classroom may cause problems.
However, if an individual lamp will help a child to succeed in an integrated setting, every effort should be made to provide one.
The L80 asymmetric light is particularly suitable.
It contains a fluorescent tube and can be set at different angles and at varying distances from the working surface.
The shade has a double skin so that it remains cool and the light is well diffused, thus reducing glare and shadows.
Another suitable lamp is the Waldmann light, but this is slightly more expensive.
(Addresses where these can be obtained are at the end of the book.)
Levels of lighting are measured in lux, which is the amount of light landing on a surface, not the light emitted from a source.
Recommended levels of lighting are given in the Code for Interior Lighting (Illuminating Engineering Society, 1977).
For instance, an operating theatre would need a level of over 10,000 lux, a boxing ring 2,000 lux, kitchens 300 lux and bathroom 100.
It is suggested that the lighting of blackboards should be 500 lux, and general teaching areas 300 lux.
A light meter can be used to assess the level of lighting present.
It is vitally important to remember that the lighting source is only one factor.
Just as important is the amount of light reflected from walls, ceilings and floors.
Light is absorbed by dark surfaces and reflected by lighter surfaces.
The level of lighting can be increased greatly by paying attention to the décor and state of cleanliness.
For some visually handicapped children the amount of glare caused by various forms of lighting adds considerably to their difficulties.
Discomfort glare, experienced by the normally sighted when looking at something in bright light, causes no special difficulties.
Disability glare is rarer and affects some low vision or partially sighted people.
This is where the lighting is excessive, such as in bright sunlight, or where glare is caused by badly sited lighting or unsuitable décor, so that the person is unable to function visually.
What may be discomfort glare to the normally sighted may well be disability glare to the visually handicapped.
In order to assess the children's lighting needs, teachers must look at the tasks that are to be performed, such as moving around, close and distance work, and see how each child performs in different lighting conditions, then adapt accordingly.
Once the ideal conditions have been decided, every effort must be made to attain them.
Although some expense may be involved, much can be done by the class teacher in the day-to-day management of the classroom.
Whilst considering lighting levels, the problems of open spaces should be appreciated.
These cause special problems for many partially sighted people who must be shown how to negotiate them.
Any dangerous elements in large halls and playgrounds should be pointed out, as should the changing effect of shadows which may create false edges and hide certain landmarks.
Ways in which mobility can be made easier for visually handicapped pupils are discussed in the section on mobility in Chapter 6.
Suffice it here to remind the teacher that areas which are well and appropriately lit in the morning may be dark or over-bright in the afternoon and vice versa.
Children who perform differently at different times of day may be reacting to a changed quantity or quality of lighting level.
Figure 4  summarises the recommendations given in this chapter for    the organisation of the physical environments.
A teacher who has visually handicapped pupils in the class will need to consider these recommendations and implement them as necessary.
Pupils with mild or moderate levels of visual problems are likely to need only some of the adaptations listed (for example, closed circuit television will not be needed), but they will benefit from an environment and materials that are clear in visual terms.
Pupils who need to work in a tactile mode will also be helped by a well-organised physical environment and their special needs are described in Chapter 6.
Figure 4 Recommended measures to help visually handicapped pupils in the school environment
It can be helpful to check the environment and materials used in the classroom in terms of the functional vision of the pupils.
The following checklist (Figure 5 ) is an example of the way in which useful information about the child's needs in this regard can be compiled.
THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
There is an emphasis in educational thinking today which stresses the common and shared aspects of children's schooling.
Classes in ordinary schools are increasingly composed of pupils of different ethnic origin, cultural and religious persuasion, pupils who may have physical or sensory impairments, learning difficulties or social and emotional problems, since the neighbourhood school rather than the special school is seen to be the first choice for children's education.
Emphasis is laid on trying to meet the special needs of pupils on an individual basis, rather than choosing educational placements with regard to a category.
In order to be able to meet the diverse needs of individual children, the social climate within the class must be an accepting one, and resources in material and human terms sufficient to be able to accept these special children without neglecting the others.
There will be pupils who need to work at a different pace from most of their classmates, and who require specialised equipment and materials in order to have access to the curriculum.
Such pupils are likely to flourish in a class where the ambience is not competitive, pupils' achievements are not ranked against each other, and individual progress and achievement are encouraged in their own right.
Competition can be a spur to some pupils and fun in some activities, but the individual's improvement of his own levels of attainment should be seen to be what really matters and be the most evident cause of encouragement.
Theoretically, in today's educational environment, the disabled pupil has the right to be different, to be accepted in the ordinary class, encouraged to participate in it fully and in his own way and to    be considered as an individual, a totality with assets and strengths in addition to those disadvantages or difficulties which arise from his disability.
The de-categorising of pupils with special needs does not automatically lead them to full social integration in an ordinary class.
A pupil whose difficulties in learning and in social interaction are connected with difficulties in seeing and the way that these difficulties are regarded by others will require both understanding and knowledge of the nature of the problems from the teacher.
To put the case simply, such a pupil may not be able to undertake a task such as cutting out a paper figure, not because of not understanding how to do so, but because of being unable to see properly how it is done.
Figure 5 Classroom checklist for functional vision
There are risks of misjudging the nature of a visually handicapped pupil's problems both in learning and in social situations.
In a class buzzing with activity a child with severely defective vision can get left behind or left out because he cannot see clearly how to perform the tasks involved.
It is easy in this situation for classmates to consider such a child a bit stupid and for.the teacher to consider the problem to be a cognitive one.
It needs to be appreciated that pupils with defective vision may respond inappropriately as a result of missing visual detail, for instance the facial expression and body gestures of others.
Other day-to-day situations that may not be attributed to visual difficulties include the extended time the children may need to complete tasks, their need to come close to the blackboard or to demonstrations, and their apparent clumsiness in certain practical activities and sports such as ball games.
These are not inevitable problems for visually handicapped children and where they occur can sometimes be improved, but they do not tend to be considered assets by other pupils and may contribute to low self-concept.
That these may be continuing problems is evident by a study by Bauman (1964) who found partially sighted pupils to be particularly insecure and with a greater sense of loneliness when they were integrated into open education systems.
The anxieties for these pupils centred around areas of social competence, personal appearance and adjustment to handicap.
Ironically, some of the aids to vision which can be helpful in assisting the pupil to see more clearly, and thus perform tasks more adroitly and effectively, may be rejected by the pupil because of a dislike of looking different.
These fears are not always groundless.
Even an aid as commonly encountered as a pair of spectacles can be a focus for teasing.
Madge and Fassam (1982) examined some of the social interactions of physically disabled pupils in a range of educational situations including integration into ordinary schools.
In this study a 13 year old, when asked about being teased in his comprehensive school, replied, ‘I should think  that in my first week or so there was a fair bit.
Because when I first got my glasses they all went ‘Ha, ha, four eyes’ for about a week or so, and then they all shut up because they forgot about it.’
Also in this study another pupil's comment was ‘But in this school they see you're different from them — like you would wear glasses — and they'll be calling you names.’
These disabled children sometimes showed resilience and determination, calling names back or, better still, ignoring unkind comments.
Although the findings relate to physically rather than visually handicapped pupils, there are implication for teachers with disabled pupils in their classes and an indication of a special need to be aware of potential problems for secondary school pupils.
The study concludes that ‘teasing of disabled children does occur both in and out of school…older pupils and those in integrated schooling are particularly likely to come across such behaviour.’
More hearteningly it showed that teasing seemed to decrease as pupils got to know each other better as classmates, and despite the possibility of teasing most of the children interviewed welcomed the social breadth of the integrated setting.
In the case of visually handicapped pupils in an ordinary school, there will be spectacle wearers and pupils with mild visual handicaps.
Even those few with more severe visual handicaps will operate as sighted people.
Because of the low incidence of blindness among school-aged children in the UK there will be only a few pupils who are totally blind.
Among the visually handicapped pupils there will, of course, be as many heterogeneous characteristics as among children in any class, some being immediately attractive and outgoing, others timid or aggressive, just as one finds among their classmates.
Visual handicap is not going to elicit a common response to situations although it can impose some shared problems.
Jones (1970) observes that:
…the child with a severe visual handicap may be diffident, or at the other extreme, amazingly precocious.
These different conditions can arise from over-protection or lack of understanding of visual handicap.
This shows failure to provide an environment conducive to normal growth, where initiative and independence will develop.
The need to give attention to the social aspects of the school environment for the integrated visually handicapped pupil should not be underestimated.
It is significant that currently in Sweden, where resources to support visually handicapped pupils in mainstream schools are considerable and of high level and where the integration of handicapped pupils is particularly well supported and virtually universal, there are still problems for a significant  number of visually handicapped pupils in terms of social adjustment (Svenson, 1986).
Besides opening up and retaining choice of educational placement for pupils with severe visual handicaps, evidence of this kind calls for continuing research into the social aspects of integration for such pupils.
The teacher with less severely visually impaired pupils already in the class who faces the prospect of receiving pupils with more severe visual disabilities will want to consider practical and immediate strategies to mitigate problems of social acceptance and to reduce or eliminate cruel teasing or isolation of the pupils who have defective vision.
It may not occur; pupils may be resilient enough to deal with negative social encounters themselves, or may have the kind of personality that makes them unlikely to arise.
Good practice such as that described by Hegarty et al .
(1981) also shows how positive measures to meet the needs of visually handicapped pupils can help them to flourish in a happy community atmosphere.
Where poor social acceptance does occur it can be useful to look at ways in which this problem has been tackled, possibly with children who have other educational disadvantages.
Strategies used to help mildly academically handicapped pupils to remedy situations of social rejection include co-operative learning and working together to achieve common goals; both strategies can be used with visually handicapped pupils.
Less easy to implement is the suggested ‘coaching’ in social skills, in which the poorly accepted child has specific instruction on how to interact with peers in a positive way.
It is conceded in this study (Hegarty et al .,
op. cit.) that the class teacher is unlikely to have time or training to do this, but that an adviser or social education teacher may be able to do so.
One turns here to child guidance and the role of the educational psychologist.
Further work with such pupils which has shown success has included structuring games in which poorly accepted pupils were paired with moderately accepted pupils; modelling with guided examples on film and video was also found to be helpful in terms of social acceptance.
A more modest role model is offered in Suzy (Chapman, 1982) which illustrates in a simple way some of the practicalities of coping with poor sight in day-to-day situations on the ways that friends can help.
‘Suzy’, an imaginary character in a small book for and about children, is a 10-year-old partially sighted pupil going to an ordinary school.
The incidents related in her story, however, are drawn from actual experiences of visually handicapped pupils.
The use of specialised equipment, telescopic aids, reading stands and closed circuit television may make a pupil feel singled out from others because of having to use such devices.
Fortunately the introduction of microcomputers into schools and their use by pupils in individualised programmes, makes the use of sophisticated  equipment less remarkable in the classroom than was the case some years ago, and some software is specially designed or particularly useful for visually handicapped pupils.
One positive approach to the acceptance of other special equipment is to explain its use to fully sighted pupils, let them see it and use it so that it is regarded as something of interest to everyone.
The skilful use of a piece of interesting technology by a visually handicapped pupil can become a source of pride rather than embarrassment.
For all that the teacher can do to promote acceptance, it will ultimately be the shared interest and enthusiasm of pupils that help them to form and maintain friendship.
Encouraging the visually handicapped pupil to improve self-help skills and personal organisation can help to reduce the ‘nuisance level’ of visual impairment and enable the pupil more confidently to ‘have a go’at enjoyable activities with friends.
The ‘buddy’ system, whereby a fully sighted pupil is paired with a visually handicapped peer, can sometimes be enjoyable and lead to lasting friendship, but care must be taken that the visually handicapped pupil is not always dependent.
Lukoff and Whiteman (1960) found that blind pupils make blind friends when they have the opportunity to do so, and it may be that they need as they grow up to have some shared experience with children and young people who face similar challenges.
These authors state that ‘For events of monumental significance for one's life's chances, such as blindness, there are important experiences in addition to the direction of the norms for independence.’
They caution, however, against a situation which can occur in the special school when the organisation of the entire curriculum is adapted to the vision problems of the students.
The entire education of these children in these schools, then, is attuned to their handicap.
Raefnaeskol in Kalundberg in Denmark is able to offer holiday summer schools for visually handicapped pupils who are otherwise in ordinary schools but who apparently welcome the social interaction with other visually disabled pupils, whilst enjoying integrated schooling at other times.
Teachers in ordinary schools need to be aware that some visually handicapped pupils may have these social needs while at the same time encouraging positive and enjoyable social interaction between pupils within the full range of vision.
The visually handicapped pupils attending an ordinary school may be greatly helped by a physical and social environment that has been planned with some sensitivity to their special needs while retaining a challenging or ‘normal’ character.
Specific steps may need to be taken.
‘Buddies’, for example, can be briefed about particular environmental hazards for their classmates with sight  defects, and shown how to help them when necessary by using correct sighted guide techniques.
Environmental awareness and friendly helpfulness are important aspects of daily life at school for pupils who have sight problems.