

VATICAN GIVES OFFICIAL APPROVAL OF DEATH PENALTY
‘SPARKS FLY IN ROME’ OVER POPE'S RULING
The Vatican approves of the death penalty as a ‘legitimate’ punishment, according to a leaked report of the new Universal Catechism, the ultimate policy statement of the Catholic Church.
The Catholic Herald reported on 7 July that the Church's new Universal Catechism, approved by Pope John Paul II in July, ‘has sent sparks flying in Rome’.
A preview of the Catechism was leaked to an Italian news agency, ANSA, which quotes the contentious death penalty clause:
‘For the sake of the common good, aggressors might have to be placed in a position where they cannot cause further harm.
Public authorities have the right and the obligation to issue proportionate punishment including the death penalty.’
Although the leaked Catechism concedes that ‘non-violent measures are preferable’ as forms of punishment, it nevertheless declares that the death penalty ‘is legitimate’.
The Catechism was conceived as a model which local bishops' conferences around the world could look to when preparing their own Catechisms, and is described by the Pope as ‘a secure point of reference in the elaboration of national and diocesan Catechisms’.
Pope John Paul II: approved the Catechism endorsing death penalty
A committee of seven bishops working with a team of 40 consultants began to draft this definite document in 1986 after Vatican criticisms of several local versions.
However, the document's final approval had to come from the Pope himself, a task the Pontiff apparently relished.
John Paul II described how he personally scrutinised successive drafts — 10 in all — which were presented for his consideration.
He said he gave ‘observations, proposals, counsels’ which were ‘carried out with careful fidelity’.
Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, whose Rome Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith co-ordinated the drafting of the documents, described it as a response to the ‘thirst for truth and certainty’, but admitted that the death penalty references were ‘discussed at length, and not without difficulty’.
There is no doubt, however, that the new document carries the full weight of Vatican authority.
‘The Catechism is the official line on Church teaching.
It states doctrine categorically and fully represents the official line,’Catholic Herald editor Cristina Odone told AMNESTY.
Although the Vatican City State abolished the death penalty for all offences in 1969, there has never been an official statement from the Holy See condemning governments' use of the death penalty.
However, the leak has precipitated a furious debate in the corridors of the Vatican, and among senior Catholic officials.
Sr Gillian Price, a nun based in Hertfordshire, has ignited a debate in religious newspapers by condemning the Vatican's position on the death penalty, and contrasting it with the Church's unequivocal stand on abortion.
She declared she was ‘appalled and deeply ashamed’ about the document.
‘Any Christian Catechism that does not uphold this right (to life) cannot claim to be an authentic, integral, complete announcement of the Christian faith’, she wrote in the Catholic newspaper,The Tablet .
Nevertheless, now it has the necessary imprimatur from the Pope, the Catechism will be sent for translation into dozens of languages and prepared for dispatch around the world.
It is set for public release at Christmas.
POC WEEK — FOR CHILDREN
Every day a child somewhere is a victim.
The plight of children worldwide is the theme of this year's Prisoner of Conscience Week, from 18–24 October.
Amnesty International seeks to draw attention to cases of children, from babies to teenagers, who have been the victims of human rights atrocities.
Consider three-year-old Anita Nsabimana, killed by a grenade thrown into her family home by Burundi soldiers.
Or Munni, a slum dweller in Delhi, arrested with 11 others and kept overnight at a police station where she was stripped and beaten.
She, one of the eldest, was 13.
To bring attention to these cases Amnesty International has invited personalities, including children's TV presenters Andi Peters and Diane Louise Jordan, to record details of individual cases for radio.
Local groups are organising write-a-thons to encourage the public to participate in sending appeals to governments on behalf of the children.
They will be raising funds through the door-to-door collections.
If you would like to help, please contact Chris Gore or Rosie Lee for the name of your local group.
To obtain a Special PoC Week Action Pack, containing children's appeal cases, contact the Groups Department, AIBS.
Also available are Children's Working Group Packs, for £3.
AMNESTY IN GAZA
Omar Shaban Ismail, the co-ordinator of seven Amnesty pre-groups (those being formed) in the Gaza Strip, visited London in September at the invitation of Amnesty International.
Mr Shaban told AIBS representatives of the difficulties he had experienced in establishing Amnesty pre-groups in Gaza over the past three years.
‘The Gaza Strip is like one big gaol with barbed wire all around it,’ he said.
Gaza's seven groups have 8–10 members each, and operate from Gaza City and smaller towns in this 35km stretch of desert.
The Gaza groups maintained ‘good relations’ with the Israeli section of Amnesty International, Mr Shaban said, although no formal co-operation existed.
Mr Shaban, an economic researcher working for the Palestinian Agricultural Relief Committee in Gaza City, believed that writing letters to prisoners-of-conscience in other countries gave Palestinians in Gaza a sense of the true value of freedom.
Palestinians in Gaza live in densely crowded conditions, under a nightly curfew, without freedom of movement, whose nationality is entered in their passports as ‘Undefined’.
INTERNATIONAL NEWS
REPORT ON SOMALIAN ABUSES
A HUMAN RIGHTS DISASTER
SOMALIA: Clan warfare and anarchic violence have led to the deaths of more than 10,000 people in Somalia over the past 18 months, according to an Amnesty International report,Somalia: A Human Rights Disaster , published on 5 August.
Since President Siad Barre's brutal 21-year reign ended, armed groups have been killing each other and civilians simply on account of their clan origin, according to the Amnesty report.
Civil war has severely hampered the efforts of relief agencies to curb the ravages of drought and famine which has swept through the Horn of Africa and is threatening much of the surviving Somali population with further massive loss of life.
The report documents human rights abuses committed mostly by General Mohamed Farah Aideed's faction of the United Somali Congress, against supporters of the Somali National Front, particularly the Darod clan.
A witness described what happened in Bulohawo, a town on the Somali-Kenyan border:
‘People fled…before Aideed's forces arrived.
Those remaining were mostly old men, women and children.
They separated people by clan…their own people — Hawiyes — they left alone.
Darod men and children they killed.
Darod women they raped and often killed too.
The weaker ones were bayoneted.’
Amnesty International is appealing to Somali political leaders and the international community to take urgent steps to end the spiral of killings and torture which has become known locally as the ‘Mogadishu Scenario’.
HUNDREDS DIE IN IRANIAN GAOLS
IRAN: Hundreds of prisoners, prisoners of conscience, continue to be executed each year in Iran, a pattern which has persisted since the proclamation of the Islamic Republic in 1979.
Most victims have been hung, sometimes publicly and in groups, but many have also been stoned to death, beheaded, or subjected to flogging and amputation before being executed.
In political cases, trial hearings are usually held secretly inside prisons, with defendants having no access to lawyers, or right of appeal.
The last mass execution of political prisoners took place in the second half of 1988, when at least 2500 political prisoners were executed in prisons throughout Iran.
Most of the victims were members of the People's Mojahedin Organisation of Iran (PMOI), an Iraq-based opposition group, but many belonged to other political groups.
Some were prisoners-of-conscience.
In almost all cases, relatives were not officially informed of the executions and were forced to search for the victims' bodies in mass graves.
Iran: executions of prisoners continue unabated.
SOUTH AFRICA: EVIDENCE OF POLICE KILLINGS
SOUTH AFRICA: Dr Jonathan Gluckman, South Africa's leading independent forensic pathologist, has received death threats following his publication of 26 July of forensic evidence that the police has murdered scores of people in custody.
Dr Gluckman, who raised the high numbers of deaths in custody with the state president and senior cabinet ministers in 1991, published his findings after performing a post mortem examination on behalf of the family of Simon Mthimkulu, who died in custody.
On 14 July, 19-year-old Simon Mthimkulu and a friend were arrested by police in Sebokeng township.
The friend, who was released, said he saw policemen kick and beat Simon Mthimkulu and drop a ‘huge rock’ on his ribs three times.
The police told Simon Mthimkulu's mother that he had been ‘spanked’ and sent home.
The next day she located his body at a mortuary.
Dr Gluckman found injuries consistent with the witness's account of the police assault on Simon Mthimkulu.
Official indifference led him to publish his findings in this and scores of other cases.
The Minister of Law and Order denied any police responsibility and suggested that many of those who died had committed suicide.
At least 79 people died in police custody in South Africa in the first eight months of 1992.
RELEASES
SYRIA
DR NOUR al-Din al-Atassi, the former president of Syria, and Muhammad Rabah al-Tawil, the former Minister of the Interior, have recently been released.
Both had been in detention without charge or trial since their arrest following the coup d'état which brought Hafez al-Assad to power in November 1970.
Fourteen other former government officials arrested as a result of the coup and since detained without charge or trial continue to be held in al-Mizze Prison in  Damascus .
CHINA — TIBET
DORJE WANGDU, the prisoner-of-conscience whose condition was covered in the Tibet Appeal (AMNESTY, June/July), was released in May this year.
Dorje had been sentenced to three years of hard labour, but according to the Chinese Government, he ‘showed signs of reform’ and ‘was granted early release’.
This explains why letters sent to Dorje Wangdu in gaol were returned unopened.
Thank you for your efforts, nevertheless.
GHANA
AT LEAST 16 political prisoners were among about 50 detainees quietly released in April and May.
The government had released 17 political prisoners in March (see AMNESTY, June/July).
Most of those released had not been charged or tried.
They included several prisoners of conscience held in connection with an alleged conspiracy in September 1989 led by Major Courage Quarshigah, and Corporal Moses Harlley.
At least one political detainee, Corporal Thomas Benefo, remains in detention without charge or trial.
CÔTE D'IVOIRE
AT LEAST 77 prisoners of conscience, serving sentences ranging from one to three years, were released on 31 July, two days after an amnesty law was unanimously passed by the National Assembly.
Among those released were the opposition leader Laurent Gbagbo and human rights activist Ren Degni Sgui, as well as teachers, trade unionists, students and journalists.
HOME NEWS
AIBS PROTESTS AT UK'S TREATMENT OF ASYLUM-SEEKERS
MUDDLING THROUGH THE HYPOCRISY
AIBS Director David Bull has sent a letter of protest to the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, at Britain's failure to comply with a request from the United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR) Britain to be ‘more flexible’ in its approach towards refugees from the former Yugoslavia.
The letter of protest also expressed Amnesty's concern at the deportation from Britain of 36 Yugoslavs to other countries.
The 36 would-be refugees — including Serbians, Croatians and Bosnians — were refused asylum in Britain and deported back to other countries, mainly Belgium and Germany, under the so-called ‘safe third country’ rule.
Under this rule — a generally accepted principle of international law — governments can return would-be refugees who have arrived via other countries.
Since direct passenger flights from Yugoslavia to Britain are virtually non-existent, nearly all of the 1,300 Yugoslavs seeking asylum in Britain since January have travelled overland.
Among those deported was a woman who, accompanied by her young child, fled to the UK to join her sister, Ljubitza Kendall, who lives in Leicestershire.
The deportations were carried out despite a formal request from the UNHCR that Britain be more flexible in the application of its asylum rules in the interest of ‘international burden sharing’.
The UNHCR also specifically asked Britain to suspend application of the ‘safe third country’ rule in the case of Yugoslavs, and to ‘refrain altogether’from ‘third country’deportations.
The refugee crisis arising from the conflict in the former Yugoslavia is the largest in Europe since the Second World War.
Several European countries have taken in large numbers of refugees: Germany has accepted more than 200,000; Austria and Hungary 50,000 each; and Sweden 45,000.
The junior Home Office minister, Charles Wardle MP, defended the Government's action by citing the Dublin Convention, an EC agreement which allows — but does not compel — the Government to return would-be refugees who have arrived via other EC country.
However, he omitted to mention that the agreement (drawn up in secret in 1990) has been ratified by only three of the 12 EC countries and is therefore not in force.
Mr Wardle also claimed that Britain ‘is the only EC country not to have a visa regime against any of the (Yugoslav) republics’.
Apart from being inaccurate — Denmark has no visa regime — the statement betrayed the Minister's muddled thinking on refugee issues.
For by seeking to claim credit for the fact that Britain had not imposed a visa regime, Mr Wardle implicitly suggested that such measures obstruct refugees from gaining access to countries where they can seek asylum (as indeed Amnesty believes they do).
ASHDOWN SPEAKS TO AMNESTY
BRITAIN should send military aircraft to ensure humanitarian aid arrives safely in Sarajevo, Paddy Ashdown, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said on the eve of the Party Conference this month.
In an exclusive interview with Amnesty International, Mr Ashdown strongly criticised the response of Western Governments to the Balkans War: ‘The attitude of the West has shown all the weakness of Munich and the folly of the Versailles railway carriage,’ he said.
He proposed that Britain used air power to remove the artillery positions surrounding the airport in Sarajevo.
‘With half a squadron of our helicopters, their guns would melt away into the forest,’ Mr Ashdown said.
He urged that military support be sent immediately to protect humanitarian convoys entering Sarajevo.
Without such protection, the West's capacity to check human rights abuses was ‘greatly diminished’.
‘What is most depressing is that the Balkan conflict may be a harbinger of what is to come, if, as now seems likely, human rights can be violated with impunity.
Like a mammoth trapped in the Siberian tundra, history has been deep frozen by the Cold War.
Now the mammoth is emerging,’ he said.
URGENT!
PERU
A FAVOURITE story of the Urgent Action team concerns a Peruvian, who was ‘disappeared’, but happily, and unusually, reappeared.
Through a local human rights group, to whom copies of appeals had been sent, he got hold of photocopies of all the letters from around the world that had been written on his behalf.
He had them bound into a small handbook, which he carried around with him at all times, like a passport.
Whenever he is stopped at military posts now, he produces his book and says, ‘Look, these are all my friends who will protest if I am arrested again’.
USA — UTAH
IN JUNE 1992, William Andrews, under sentence of death in Utah, became the subject of an Urgent Action.
A month later, USA Today (22 July 1992) reported that ‘The Utah Board of Pardons and Paroles has an 18-inch stack of letters and faxes, opposing Andrews’ execution…many from England, Germany, Australia and other countries’.
In comparison, the stack supporting execution ‘is one-half inch thick’.
If you would like more information about the Urgent Action network, please write to the Urgent Action Co-ordinator at the British Section office.
COUNTRY REPORTS
GOVERNMENT HOPES TO MUZZLE PROTESTS
WHITEHALL TO BAN EMBASSY DEMOS
THE UK Government proposes to ban demonstrations outside embassies in London, in an effort to protect ‘diplomats’ dignity’.
The proposal would prohibit large protests such as those staged this year outside the Iranian embassy, against the execution of opponents of the regime; outside the Turkish embassy, over the oppression of the Kurds; and outside the Chinese embassy, over the Tiananmen Square massacre.
According to a report in The Independent last month, the Department of the Environment and the Foreign Office are proposing that only participants in military parades and religious marches will be allowed to chant and sing in the embassyland of Kensington and Belgravia.
A DoE spokeswoman said: ‘Under the Vienna Convention we are obliged to ensure that embassies do not suffer from disturbances which would impair their dignity.’
The proposal is part of a DoE consultative document on procedures for noise abatement in the UK.
The Noise Abatement Society, a pressure group devoted to making Britain quieter, was surprised to find that demonstrators outside embassies were to be treated like owners of ghetto blasters and howling dogs.
John Wadham, legal officer for the Liberty Group, a civil liberties organisation, said that banning people from demonstrating, ‘on the spurious grounds of noise abatement, shows the almost casual contempt for human rights in this country.’
AMNESTY LAUNCHES NATIONAL CHILDREN'S ART COMPETITION
AMNESTY International is organising its second national children's art competition in the autumn, in which young people will be asked to make their own Postcards For Freedom.
The postcard designs, on the theme of children's rights, will be produced as a series of postcard-sized prints, on which the children will write their own appeals to governments on behalf of one of eight young people's cases featured in Amnesty's PoC Week (from 18 October).
The children will send one postcard appeal to Amnesty as their competition entry.
The competition, open to school students from ages 5–18, is being organised by the Working Group for Children and the Teachers Network of Amnesty's British Section.
Teachers, youth workers, school governors and parents throughout the country are asked to encourage school students to get involved.
The judges include children's illustrators Raymond Briggs and Jan Pienkowski.
South Korean woodcut artist Hong Song-Dam has been invited to join the judges' panel.
(His work appears in Amnesty's art education pack, Free Expressions; price £23, including postage.)
The best postcards will be exhibited on a national tour, to be launched, it is hoped by Parliament next Spring.
The children's designs will be used in a new set of Amnesty posters on children's rights and in Amnesty's educational publications.
The top 25 winners will be invited to London to visit Amnesty International, meet the judges and a prisoner-of-conscience, tour the Foreign Office and have tea in the House of Lords with the Parliamentary Human Rights Group.
First prize will be a trip to the World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna in May next year as a guest of Amnesty International and the British Government.
The closing date for entries is 17 December, 1992.
For further details of the competition, case notes and accompanying information for teachers, please write to  
CORRECTION
The printed version of Cheryl Law's article on Slovenia in the August/September issue of AMNESTY contained some regrettable errors: Ljubljana is the capital of Slovenia, not a mountainous region in Slovenia; the Ljubljana Amnesty Group received support, but not financial support, from the IS, to hold its seminar; and ‘Herhard Mensink’ is spelled Gerhard Mensink.
AMNESTY wishes to apologise to Cheryl Law, Gerhard Mensink and the Ljubljana Group for these errors.
DIARY
FROM 7 DECEMBER
BBC 2 Prisoners of Conscience series.
Each night, for 10 week nights, BBC 2 will show a five-minute programme in which a celebrity (previous years' have ranged from Sting to Ted Heath) describes the condition of a prisoner-of-conscience.
Viewers are invited to phone a free number for information on how to help the prisoners.
Over the past four years, an average of 13,000 people contacted the BBC each year, and 20 of the 40 cases have been released.
The series coincides with activities you may be planning for human rights day on 10 December.
Transmission dates: 6 December — a 30-minute programme looking at five years of the series; 7–11 and 14–18 December — a series of five-minute programmes at about 8pm and repeated at 11.20pm each night on BBC2.
UNTIL 27 NOVEMBER
AMNESTY members will receive £5.00 off top price tickets for any Monday-to-Thursday performance of Someone Who'll Watch Over Me , a play about three Beirut hostages by Frank McGuinness.
To book, call the Vaudeville Theatre,.
17 OCTOBER
THE THIRD UK Christian Human Rights Conference, at Church House, Westminster, London, starting at 10am.
Contact: Rev Tom Green, Christian Solidarity International,
IN 1971…
MOTHER Teresa is awarded Pope John XXIII Peace Prize.
PLO blows up Boeing 747 in Jordan.
IRA bombs Post Office Tower.
Rolls Royce is declared bankrupt.
Indo-Pakistan war begins.
‘Internment’ introduced in Northern Ireland.
Lt Calley is convicted in My Lai massacre case.
Emperor Hirohito visits the UK, the first Japanese sovereign to do so.
Kurt Waldheim elected UN General Secretary.
Idi Amin gains control of Uganda.
US resumes bombing of North Vietnam.
Andy Warhol at the Tate.
Stanley Kubrick makes A Clockwork Orange .
Chay Blyth sails around the world single-handed.
Apollo 14 lands on the moon.
AMNESTY International's 10th anniversary attracts mass media attention.
The Postcards For Prisoners campaign sees the release of 21 prisoners; of the 1,271 new prisoners adopted, 727 have been released.
The UN declares 1971 the International Year for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, organised in conjunction with Amnesty.
The movement has 1,000 groups in 30 countries, with the next year's international budget set at £90,000.
Amnesty issues a press release denying contact between it and kidnappers of the Swiss Ambassador to Brazil, following reports that a German magazine had offered money to Amnesty to publish the article.
GOODNIGHT: Louis Armstrong, Coco Chanel, Harold Lloyd, Nikita Kruschev, Ogden Nash, Lord Reith and Georg Lukács.
FUND RAISING
WALK FOR LIFE
ALWAYS on the trail of new and exciting ideas, or at least variations on the oldest ones, Amnesty Fundraising Department is proud to announce the launch of Amnesty's Walk For Life.
Open to everyone, it will be a sponsored event lasting from September '92 until September '93.
We are asking all Amnesty supporters, from groups to individuals, trade unionists, students and religious bodies, to set aside one weekend/day/evening in the coming 12 months and…
Walk For Life.
Your event can be as big or small as you like — it's entirely up to you.
You could organise a large event at your local park or a sponsored ramble in the country; or you could simply leave the car at home and get people to sponsor your walk to the station.
Your Walk For Life needn't even be a walk.
You can Ride For Life, Dance for Life…
The specially prepared Walk For Life sponsorship forms are in this issue of the journal.
If you need more forms simply contact the Fundraising Department or photocopy the one supplied.
You will notice that the form also contains an order form for the Walk For Life T-shirt.
This design has been commissioned from award-winning designer Sheila Moxley, and you can be sure that no fashion victim will be seen without one of these on their back in the coming months.
Avoid disappointment and order NOW.
Amnesty's Walk For Life will be one of the major fundraising events of the next 12 months.
Please join in the fun, buy the T-shirt, fill up your sponsor forms and do the Walk — The Walk For Life.
DOOR-TO-DOOR COLLECTION
WHAT will you be doing between 18 and 25 October ‘92?
Summer holidays are over, it's too early for Christmas shopping, and you're not yet into the swing of evening classes!
So why not spare just a few hours for Amnesty International?
Hard=working Amnesty groups throughout the country will be collecting in their area during this Week, which this year coincides with the Prisoner of Conscience Week.
We desperately need collectors.
This is an ideal opportunity, to do promotion and fundraising for Amnesty, for all those who are unable to get involved in Amnesty activities throughout the year.
Please contact the AIBS Fundraising Department —— and we will put you in contact with your local group.
THE '92 SPRING RAFFLE RECRUITED 63 NEW MEMBERS, RAISED £100,945
ON hearing the news, the Amnesty office resounded with words like Brilliant!
Fantastic!
Unbelievable!
Amazing!
Thrilled! etc — just our way of showing what we think of our supporters.
Such emotion reminded Fundraising of the most successful-ever Amnesty raffle in 1989 which made £102,700.
So this Spring Raffle came a very, very, close second to the most successful ever…
Many, many thanks to everyone who bought or sold a ticket! and all those who very kindly donated a prize…
You're brilliant…fantastic…unbelievable…etc
THE CHRISTMAS RAFFLE ‘92
HOLIDAY homes are obviously very popular, judging from the proceeds of the Amnesty Spring Raffle.
However, for something completely different, this raffle is an opportunity to win an item no home should be without: a Zanussi Dishwasher, a Ridgeback Mountain Bike, or a present from Marks & Spencer.
There are also lots of smaller, but exciting prizes.
We still have extra books of tickets.
Please complete the back of the ticket counterfoil and send to the Amnesty Fundraising Department, with your request for extra tickets.
GROUPS
FORMER PRISONER-OF-CONSCIENCE MEETS MEMBERS OF THE HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM GROUP WHO WROTE FOR HIS RELEASE FOR THREE YEARS
OCCASIONALLY THE UNIMAGINABLE HAPPENS
JEAN-MARIE Yacoubou, a former prisoner of conscience in Benin, told the Hammersmith & Fulham Group recently that he could never have imagined being among the people with whom he had corresponded while in prison.
Yacoubou, who attended the Group's meeting in July, was imprisoned in 1986 for demonstrating in support of democracy, and was released in 1990.
For three years, members of the Group wrote to the Benin Government asking that Yacoubou be released.
A Belgian member wrote letters in French to Yacoubou himself.
The Group eventually received a reply and a correspondence followed.
Members sent Yacoubou medicines and some books, including some with which he taught himself to speak English.
Yacoubou told the Group how student demonstrators were arrested and sent to prison in remote areas, where they were ill-treated and denied any contact with their families.
Jean-Marie  Yacoubou and members of the Hammersmith & Fulham Group
Some prisoners were so scarred by their treatment that they could not resume a normal life.
He said that a prisoner one day received a batch of letters from Amnesty members, to which the prisoners were allowed to reply.
After this, conditions improved.
Yacoubou attributed the improvement to Benin's need for economic aid, hence the need to show international goodwill.
He and others were released in 1990, following the change of Government in Benin.
Members of the Hammersmith & Fulham Group said they were struck by Yacoubou's composure, as well as his considerable command of English.
Yacoubou officially opened the Saturday bookshop which the branch runs in the Hammersmith tube station.
He spent 10 days in London, at the Group's invitation.
Roger Pringle, director of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, signs the first letter for the Stratford-on-Avon Group at their stall set up in the town centre.
The Group asked the members of the public to sign letters to the President of Syria requesting the release of Yuris-al-Hayik, their adopted prisoner.
THE DAY OF THE ‘DISAPPEARED’
‘DISAPPEARED’ people around the world may not know it yet, but 28 of them were recently ‘twinned’with British celebrities as part of the publicity for the Day of the ‘Disappeared’, held on 18 July at The Garage, Kings Road, London.
Jeremy Paxton, Sue Arnold, Dame Judi Dench, Harold Pinter, Kate Bush, Richard Branson and others agreed to be twinned with ‘disappeared’ people from 12 countries, including India, Peru, Chile and Morocco.
They will write letters on behalf of their ‘twin’ to try and uncover their whereabouts and to draw attention to the plight of ‘disappeared’people.
Richard Branson has agreed to send letters to the Chilean authorities to uncover the whereabouts of Muriel Dockendorff Navarette, a Chilean economics student who was ‘disappeared’ in 1974, reported dead by security officers in 1975, then later sighted in the Villa Grimaldi Torture Centre.
The celebrities' example inspired many others to adopt a ‘twin’ on the day, which featured music by Fancy Footwork, Heaven West Eleven, Lord Eric, Jerry Lyseight, Bhai Mohan Sing Khali, Abraham Shiakani and Schooners Rig and a poetry reading by Alfredo Cordal, a Chilean poet.
While highlighting the issue of disappearances, entertainment and big names can soften the perception of what it means to be ‘disappeared’.
But the presence of Gladis Villalobos and other parents of disappeared people ensured the tragic reality was not forgotten.
Gladis, a mother from El Salvador whose son was ‘disappeared’ for protesting against the cost of education in her country, is a founder member of the Committee for the Mothers of the Disappeared.
With the assistance of Archbishop Romero — who was subsequently assassinated — she found her son, who was tried and sentenced to 30 years in prison.
He was later released through Romero's efforts, at which point he joined a  guerrilla movement and was killed in combat.
Gladis now lives in England with her daughter.
A Colombian whose daughter had ‘disappeared’ gave an impromptu speech.
He felt he could not give public evidence, for fear of reprisals against his family in Colombia, but spoke with great compassion about the plight of ‘disappeared’ people in his native country.
Many thanks also to Private Eye , who donated a free advertisement publicising the event, and whose editor, Ian Hislop, now has a twin: Marco Antonio Guzman Zorrilla of Peru.
A Colombian father (rt) whose daughter ‘disappeared’
ROSSENDALE'S ‘GREEK NIGHT’
THE PLIGHT of Greek Jehovah's Witnesses was raised by the Rossendale and Hyndburn Group at their recent ‘Greek Night’.
The evening aimed to raise awareness of Greek conscientious objectors, as part of Amnesty's Greek Action.
Jehovah's Witnesses' religious beliefs precludes them from undertaking compulsory national service.
In Greece, they are routinely imprisoned for this ‘offence’.
Rossendale Group's chairperson Kate Conbay-Greenwood said she ‘realised that this would not be the easiest area of Amnesty's work to publicise, but that shouldn't deter us from truing to raise awareness (of Jehovah's Witnesses in Greece).’
The group invited the local Elder of the Jehovah's Witnesses, who was wary at first, but then agreed to attend as an ‘observer’.
The guests included the Mayor, Graeme Pearson, and Mayoress, Valerie Hartley, of Rossendale, Janet Anderson, the newly elected local Labour MP, and Kevin O'Connor, parliamentary candidate for the Liberal Democrats.
The Kosmos, a Greek restaurant in Manchester, supplied free food for the night — compliments of the owner, who far from being a former Greek army officer, was in fact a member of Amnesty.
A petition was arranged on behalf of one young conscientious objector in Greece.
Kate said the evening had been a great success: it received plenty of local press coverage, the Rossendale Group increased its membership, and the Mayor agreed to donate £100 to Amnesty.
A great success: Rossendale's ‘Greek Night’ attended by the Mayor (left) and local MP Janet Anderson (right), with Kate Conbay-Greenwood (centre)
Ian Taylor, Conservative MP for Esher, signs a letter for the Amnesty India Campaign at the Clayton Flower Show in July.
The stall was organised by the Esher and District Group.
To the left is Robert Owen, Group Treasurer, and Sonia Singham, India Campaign Co-Ordinator.
120 letters were signed on the day.
HAY-ON-WYE AMNESTY BENEFIT
THE EPPING Forest/Redbridge and Ludlow/Hereford Groups organised a benefit reading at the Hay-on-Wye Literature Festival.
The performance, called ‘Writers and Witnesses’, raised £250 for Amnesty International.
It included readings of poems and prose by South American writers such as Jorges Luis Borges, Stephen Dobyns, Isabel Allende, Ariel Dorfman, Claribel Alegria, Caly Domitilia Canek and Martin Steingesser.
The reading was performed by members of the English Shakespeare Company.
Sonia Ritter, a member of the Epping Forest Group and an actress with the English Shakespeare Company, approached the Festival's organiser, Peter Florence, with the idea.
He readily agreed to the event, and the local Ludlow/Hereford Group offered assistance with publicity and accommodation.
Sonia said: ‘It seemed to fit in with the spirit of the Festival — how political change in history is articulated — and celebrated the most remarkable use of language, worldwide.
‘I hope it reminded festival goers that in many countries, freedom of expression through words, never mind a literature festival, is just a dream.’
The two Amnesty Groups involved would like to thank Peter Florence for fitting the benefit in to a tight schedule at such short notice.
Members of the East Kilbride Group explaining human rights problems in Peru to their MP, Adam Ingram, who visited the Group recently.
He agreed to write to the Peruvian Government.
JOIN A GROUP!
If you would like to be involved in activities such as these — writing letters to help victims of human rights abuses and campaigning on their behalf — please contact your nearest local group.
Full details are available from Anne Rimmer or Chris Gore in the Groups Office  .
LETTERS
LETTER OF THANKS
(A letter of reply to David French, a British Amnesty member, from Fernand Tala-Ngai, President of the Zairean opposition party, Rally for Progress, who was briefly imprisoned on 2 March 1992)
Dear M French,
I HAVE just received the photocopies of personal interventions, including yours, to the authority of Zaire, from the President of Human Rights in Zaire.
These interventions from the outside made a strong contribution towards my freedom.
The international action made me aware of the necessity for international co-operation in the fight for the fundamental rights of man and reassured me that human compassion is still alive in this world.
This is why in the name of those whose interests I defend, and my own name, I thank you, from the bottom of my heart.
Following your example I have become an apostle for the fight for human rights around the world.
Thanking you again, once more, I beg you to accept the expression of my best feelings.
TREES, ANIMALS OR PEOPLE?
I WAS impressed by Billy McKenna's powerful article, ‘Pushing up the daffodils in Brazil’ and horrified — even as an Amnesty International member of some years' standing — to read of the brutality meted out to Antonio Gilvan da Cruz and others.
It was disappointing, though, that he seemed to be knocking the efforts of those with other aims: ‘How can we expect the Brazilian Government to care for trees when it doesn't care for many of its people?’
How, indeed!
The Brazilian Government isn't likely to change its spots in either way without massive pressure of public opinion, and it should be pressed to change its attitude in both directions.
‘Billy McKenna wonders whether human rights is a higher priority’.
Well, it depends on your starting point and aim.
We would all say, as Amnesty International members, that people are more important than trees, in one sense.
Nevertheless, in terms of practical results, the deforestation of vast areas of Brazil affects the rest of the world much more than the oppression and murder of relatively small numbers of people.
There is much to do, in the inter-connected aspects of caring for human beings, animals and the environment, and we all have the opportunity to do what we can in our own situations.
Because we find ourselves concentrating mainly on human rights, we shouldn't knock others who are working on other tasks which are also essential.
Regarding another feature (AMNESTY, June/July)— another excellent issue, by the way, as usual— I felt very much for David Bull in view of the rockets he collected over the India fundraising appeal.
Having made two journeys to India and stayed with Indian friends there, I did not find the quote at all out of order, and to me the emphasis naturally fell on the words ‘now that their lives have been ruined’ rather than the five preceding words.
It is quite right that members sensitivities should be aired.
But as David Bull says in his reply, even if we have misgivings about the way any campaign is handled, let's hope we are not deterred from getting on with the job in hand!
IMPRESSED, POSITIVE
I AM a new member of Amnesty International, and read with interest the letters of criticism (AMNESTY June/July) about your appeal envelope — I'm glad that you had the courage to print such obviously justified disapproval.
However, I was even more impressed by your reply.
Your honest apology and commitment to make good were clear.
I wish to thank you for listening to what was ‘said’ to you and for your integrity in replying publicly and as you did.
This practical demonstration of working positively with conflict gives me confidence in your work and helps me to see how I can listen better to others.
BEDROCK OF AUTHORITY
AS ONE of the original correspondents who wrote to David Bull complaining about the India campaign letter, I would like to comment on the criticisms made by the female correspondent in the August/September edition of AMNESTY.
Amnesty International works on behalf of a wide variety of people from a wide variety of cultures.
Our mandate does not change from culture to culture.
An illustration of this is the issue of rape.
Amnesty strives to stop rape because, in keeping with our mandate, it is seen by us as ‘cruel and inhuman’; not because of the social consequences.
This in no way trivialises these consequences, but we would still strive to stop rape, even if the social consequences were not detrimental to the victims.
Thus the core of our concern is rape itself, and fighting it falls within our mandate.
The quote on the campaign envelope suggested the core of our concern is elsewhere.
Amnesty is not in the business of commenting on the attitudes of any culture — thank goodness.
Our actions are based on our mandate.
This fact is the bedrock of our authority, indeed its sole source.
OF RIGHTS AND WOODCUTS
I FELT I had to write and say how moved I was when I visited the exhibition of wood-cuts by Hong Song-Dam.
The wood-cuts were on display at the Rick Institute in  Kilmanock , and I happened to visit on the day of the General Election.
People in Great Britain really have no idea how fortunate they are in so many ways — the right to free speech, and even the ‘right’(!) to throw an egg at the Prime Minister and only receive a bill for the dry cleaning.
The Kwanggu prints moved me to tears, and to wish that all the people who didn't vote were made to view these simple but powerful images.
CALLING ALL TEACHERS
AMNESTY'S Teachers and Academics Network is looking for new recruits.
The Network is already 200-strong and is producing termly actions, information and newsletters.
It has two functions:
1
To inform teachers and academics of the work of Amnesty International and in particular to encourage them to campaign on behalf of colleagues around the world who are victims of human rights abuses.
2
To help and advise Amnesty in the development, testing and promotion of human rights education materials and methods at all levels of education.
WANTED!
Were YOU in the SERVICES?
Amnesty International's Ex-Services Group is keen to contact any Amnesty member who has served in the armed forces.
Please write for further information to the Amnesty International Ex-Services Group Secretary, who was a warrant officer in the army:
The Annual Meeting of the Ex-Services Group takes place at La Finca Tapas Bar  (near King's Cross and Angel Tube Stations) on Saturday, 7 November, from 12.00pm.
The invited speaker is Captain van Kuik, chair of the Amnesty Professional Military Group in the Dutch Section.
He will talk about human rights and military training, and the responsibility to refuse to obey an illegal order.
All are welcome to attend.
CAMPAIGN ACTION
AMNESTY RESEARCHERS CATALOGUE THE RECORD OF HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES OF THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES IN NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA, IN THIS, THE 500TH ANNIVERSARY YEAR OF CHRISTOPHER COLOMBUS'S VOYAGE OF ‘DISCOVERY’
BITTER LEGACY
FIVE hundred years of conquest and colonisation have left a bitter legacy for many of the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Indigenous people in the Americas have been the victims of gross human rights abuses ever since Christopher Colombus landed on the island of Hispaniola on 12 October, 1492.
This island will be the scene of many official celebrations in October 1992: its indigenous population was wiped out long ago.
In North, South and Central America, conquerors and colonisers used armed force, outright slaughter and slavery to subjugate ‘First Nation’ Americans.
According to one estimate, these abuses and the ravages of European diseases and starvation reduced the indigenous population of the Americas from 100 to 10 million in the first century of conquest.
Mass killings of indigenous peoples may have reduced in scale over the past 500 years, but they have never stopped.
It is only just over 100 years since the last major ‘battle’ in the USA, at Wounded Knee, in December 1890.
The slaughter of around 30,000 peasants in the aftermath of a revolt in El Salvador in 1932 virtually eliminated the indigenous Salvadoreans.
Indian survivors abandoned traditional dress to avoid summary execution and stopped using indigenous languages in public.
In the late-1970s and early-1980s, the Guatemalan army killed tens of thousands of civilian indigenous peasants during so-called ‘counter-insurgency’ operations.
440 villages were erased from the map.
Hundreds of thousands of indigenous peasants fled the countryside, seeking refuge in Mexico or the relative safety of the cities.
Today, indigenous peoples face threats to their human rights from a variety of directions.
In Ecuador and Mexico, Indians involved in bitter struggles for land have been routinely arrested and tortured.
Some have been killed.
Native Americans in the USA are on death row awaiting judicial execution.
Members of the American Indian Movement (AIM) have been apparently falsely and selectively prosecuted by the FBI for political reasons.
In other countries, the indigenous peoples live in a state of siege.
The Quechua and Aymara-speaking peasants who live in Peru's Andean highland have suffered abuses from both government forces and guerrillas during nearly 10 years of civil war.
Activists throughout the Americas have paid a heavy price for their determination to defend their land and their cultures.
In Honduras, for example, nine leaders of the indigenous organisation Federation of Xicaques Tribes of Yoro have been killed in the past four years.
No one has been brought to justice for any of these killings, nor does it appear that they have been properly investigated.
Others have been singled out because of their involvement in a trade union  or political party.
The situation in Guatemala remains grim.
Discrimination against indigenous peoples is endemic.
Despite the fact that indigenous peoples are the majority of the population in some countries, they tend to be among the poorest and politically weakest sectors of society.
Despite a 500-year legacy of abuse, the indigenous peoples of the Americas have struggled to preserve their identities, their cultures, the languages, their lands and — in many cases — their lives.
There is a resurgence of indigenous organisations and groups throughout the Americas are working at community, national and international levels to ensure the protection of their civil, political, economic, cultural and social rights.
The growing awareness of environmental and ecological issues often coincides with traditional beliefs and practices.
Amnesty International is working throughout 1992 to raise awareness about human rights violations against the indigenous peoples of the Americas and is striving to bring them to an end.
APPEAL CASES: BRAZIL
ON 28 November 1990, Antonio Gilvan da Cruz, a member of the Truka community, was seized at his home by about eight armed men in civilian clothes (see AMNESTY June/July, ‘Pushing up the daffodils in Brazil’, pp18–19).
A few hours later, Antonio Gilvan's body was found.
He was castrated and his body bore extensive cigarette burns and bullet and knife wounds.
One arm and one leg had been broken and an eye had been gouged out.
His family believe that some of his assailants were members of the local police.
The murder followed a protest by the Truka community against a local landowner who had enclosed land they believed to be within their territory.
The landowner, accompanied by civil and military police, had twice entered the indigenous area to look for Antonio Gilvan and other organisers of the Truka protest.
No one has been charged with Antonio Gilvan's murder.
Police investigations have made little progress.
Other Truka activists have received death threats and the community has repeatedly alerted the federal authorities, who, under Brazilian law, have responsibility for indigenous affairs.
But federal involvement in the case has been limited and little action appears to have been taken.
There are some 220,000 indigenous people living in Brazil today, comprising some 200 distinct groups with more than 100 different languages.
Top: Mother and son of ‘disappeared’ Pineda Henestrosa, in Mexico; bottom: Prayer in Santiago Atitlan in Guatemala to mark the first anniversary of the massacre of 15 Tzutuhil Indians
APPEAL CASES: GUATEMALA
MARÍA Mejía, a 47-year-old Quiche Indian, was shot dead in her home in the village of Parraxtut Segundo Centro, El Quiche department, by two Guatemalan military agents.
Her husband, Pedro Castro Tojín, was seriously wounded in the attack.
Both had received death threats from military officials because of their membership in Council of Ethnic Communities (CERJ), formed in 1988 to defend indigenous rights.
According to Pedro Castro Tojín's testimony, two men whom he recognised as agents of the Guatemalan army forced their way into his family home in the early evening of 17 March 1990, and opened fire, hitting both himself and his wife.
They then shot the wounded María Mejía in the head.
Judicial and police officials arrived the next day to investigate, but their inquiry was seriously flawed.
No photographs were taken; no effort was made to locate material evidence; no autopsy was even conducted on María Mejía's body.
The two agents were arrested in May 1990, but were released a few days later on grounds of insufficient evidence.
The testimony of Pedro Castro Tojín was ruled to be inadmissible evidence because of his relationship with the victim.
Guatemala has one of the highest percentages of indigenous peoples of any country in the Americas; the proportion may be as high as 70 to 75 per cent.
Indigenous Guatemalans in highland departments where guerrillas were active in the late 1970s and early 1980s were a major target of army counter-insurgency policies.
Tens of thousands were killed or ‘disappeared’; thousands of others were displaced or forced into exile as successive military governments sought to eliminate any potential source of political sympathy or logistical support for the armed opposition.
WHAT YOU CAN DO:
Write appeal letters on behalf of the cases listed and send any replies received to Amnesty International British Section;
Spread the word to friends, relatives and organisations;
Send for the Amnesty International report,The Americas: Human Rights Violations Against Indigenous Peoples — £6. —, plus £1. — p&p
ANALYSIS
DR MIKA HARITOS-FATOURAS SAYS TORTURERS ARE NOT MONSTERS, THEY ARE ‘NORMAL’ PEOPLE, PERVERTED BY ‘EVIL REGIMES’
HOW GOVERNMENTS TRAIN THEIR TORTURERS
Most torturers are not born but are fashioned deliberately from ordinary people, Dr Mika Haritos-Fatouros says.
She believes that the powerful can, like latter-day Frankensteins, turn the boy or girl next door into the instrument of an evil state.
When Dr Haritos-Fatouros began her research 15 years ago into the minds of torturers — particularly those who served the Greek dictatorship of 1967–74 — she assumed they must be sadists.
But even before she started to interview torturers, she ‘had stopped expecting a monster’.
She had come to believe instead in what might be called the ‘Obedient Torturer’.
Her conclusion — that torturers are, indeed must be, normal people — did not disturb her.
‘But other people became very sad and worried.
I had given them the idea that maybe they would become torturers.’
While most of us would admit to having hurt another person deliberately, we recoil in horror from the thought of subjecting someone to extreme pain for impersonal reasons.
But Dr Haritos-Fatouros, Professor of Clinical Psychology at the University of Thessalonika, concludes that such feelings of shared humanity are often not strong enough to override our obedience to authority.
Any of us might torture a stranger, even a friend, she says, if we are told to.
The key lies in the principles used to train élite military corps all over the world.
It's not a question of one ideology or another — all military training is similar — some states use soldiers for atrocities, some don't.
The state must destroy the individual and remake him — sometimes in the image of the torturer.’
The methods used at KESA, the Greek Military Police training camp, involved putting recruits through a punishing physical regime and brutal treatment by NCO's to build esprit de corps .
One KESA graduate, who was known as a superstar in the world of torture, said of his training: ‘They aimed to produce tools — people with no minds of their own, people who, when you said ‘stand up’, stood up.’
Recruits were forced to march along dusty tracks on their knees, packs on their backs, caps held above their heads; they were woken and made to hop on the spot, half-naked and loaded down with sandbags, for two to three hours.
‘It was incomprehensible,’ he told Dr Haritos-Fatouros.
‘It was completely crazy.
You felt totally lost.
You didn't know what was happening or why.’
Dr Haritos-Fatouros says the first rule for those selecting potential torturers is: do not hire a sadist.
A delight in inflicting pain is a disadvantage; a sadist might make it personal.
One Latin American country drew up guidelines which specified that torturers must be able to control themselves; must go as far as is necessary and no further; and must have goals that are both important and impersonal.
Regimes seeking the ideal torturer need candidates who are young, educated, with a track record of obedience to authority — to parents, teachers, priests — and who come from families sympathetic to the political aims of the state.
Some people are more susceptible to recruitment then others, the doctor says: for example, older people are less easily influenced than the young.
‘But I think there is a breaking point for everyone.’
Torture does not need to be a male preserve, she says.
The vast majority of torturers are men simply because it is usually men who do military service, work as police or in concentration camps.
Women could be trained in the same way.
Those who graduated from the KESA had made it as members of a close-knit elite.
Men with potential were sent to torture school and underwent a process of desensitisation.
They took food to prisoners, mopped up the blood, and performed minor or group torture sessions, under supervision.
‘They simply left you no chance of thinking like a human being,’ said the former torturer.
‘The strange thing is that outside the camp, many of the torturers led normal lives,’ Dr Haritos-Fatouros says.
‘One of the cruellest had a girlfriend who had many friends involved in the struggle against the regime and he would go with her to cafes, where they would sing songs against the dictatorship.’
And then he would go back to work.
Only one of the soldiers Dr Haritos-Fatouros interviewed said the use of torture was justified.
‘He  thought it was OK, he had no scruples about it, but he was not selected.
I think this was perhaps because the kind of personality he had was not always willing to obey, he did not have a ‘normal’ psychology.
I think they needed normal people who would be in complete control of themselves, who wouldn't get carried away by any sadistic impulses.’
Dr Haritos-Fatouros found herself making friends with most of the torturers she interviewed.
‘There were two or three who didn't have any remorse; these people I didn't feel comfortable with.
With the others I felt…on the same side as them because they were saying that they had been tortured themselves in a way, had been turned into animals, tools.
So I felt close to them.’
It is the system that is to blame, she concludes.
‘That does not mean they can be absolved — the element of personal responsibility will always be there.
‘The point is, if you go through the training and can't escape, for whatever reason, be it political, social or economic, you are responsible, but not to blame as much as, for example, the officers.
‘My desire was for punishment, not revenge, and was directed at the officers who gave the orders — perhaps because of the interviews.’
The doctor herself was arrested during the dictatorship after a colleague named her, under torture, as a member of a clandestine socialist movement, Democratic Defence.
‘I knew there was a great possibility that I would be tortured.
My comrade who had talked and named me had been tortured very badly.’
They brought him out so that he could denounce her in person.
‘I denied everything.’
They released her unharmed.
‘I never felt badly about it,’ she says.
‘I liked him a lot, we're still close politically and good friends.
All the time, I was shouting at him saying he was telling lies, I was trying to give him signs that I didn't mean it, and he told me he saw that.’
Can torturers be rehabilitated?
‘I don't know.
I don't know what they would do under the same circumstances.
A lot maintained their links to former officers.’
‘One reason I continued with my research was the belief that it would help to prevent torture.
If people are aware of the fact that (torture) is the fault not of bad people but of bad systems — social, economic, political — then they will be more careful, and will examine the systems and try to change them, not the people.’
This article is reprinted from The Independent , 10 August 1992  
THE ‘MASTERS’ OF TORTURE
TORTURERS BELIEVE THEY ARE ON A TRANSCENDENTAL MISSION TO DEFEND THE STATE.
DR HAROLD HILLMAN REPORTS
In many countries, prisoners were killed quickly if they refused to give information, or had no information to give…the screams of victims was unimaginable — a howl which sounded inhuman.
AT LEIDEN University late last year, about 1,000 sociologists, human rights workers, students and former victims, attended a Symposium at the Centre for the Study of Social Conflicts, on ‘Torturers and their Political Masters’.
The Symposium was sponsored by P100M — a Dutch-based organisation set up three years ago to study the causes of violations of human rights — and the NVPP — the Dutch Association for Political Psychology.
The earnest audience was concerned that despite the United Nations condemnation of torture in 1982, it was now epidemic.
One reason for the widespread torture today is that many victims are killed, while others are afraid to speak out.
However, the torturers have recently begun to talk.
Professor Pieter Kooijmans, former Vice-Chairman of the Dutch delegation to the United Nations, opened the Symposium by reading a letter from a prisoner, which he had received the week before.
The man said that he had been alone in a cell 4 metres by 5 metres, with only loudspeakers for company for a week.
Then he had been taken to a torture room, where he was told, ‘it is in your interests to give up resistance and to co-operate.’
He was then whipped for several hours, and then hung up by special handcuffs around his wrists.
The prisoner was forbidden all human rights, to communicate with his family, to be represented by a lawyer, to protest against the torture, or even to be put on trial.
Kooijmans said that international bodies had agreed on many rules, but the worldwide campaign against torture had failed to stop it.
He had made official representations to many governments, but had received only two replies.
Herbert Kelman, Professor of Social Ethics at Harvard University, talked about the social context of torture.
It was nearly always organised by a government, although some torturers acted on their own initiatives.
A government wishing to destroy an opposition, an ethnic minority, a minority religion or a ‘heretic’ cult, characterised its members as enemies, beyond the state, non-persons, so that moral principles of society need not be applied to them.
The torturers were given a ‘transcendental mission’ to defend the state.
Torture became an integral part of the legal process.
It required a large, professional, secret and coherent organisation.
A specially trained team tortured a single victim; each member of the team reinforced the others and shared the responsibility.
Torture became routine, each member of the team making his own contribution.
The profession had a vocabulary of euphemisms; it had a training programme; its most successful operatives were promoted to an ‘elite’, which enjoyed a high standard of living.
The torturers usually assumed that the victim had useful information and was guilty.
Kelman did not believe that everyone could be a torturer.
In the well-known experiments of Stanley Milgrom in the United States, where members of the public were invited off the streets to torture others, although 60 per cent did so, 40 per cent did not.
He was sorry to say that torture had even taken place in democratic countries, such as Britain and Israel.
Other democratic countries, such as USA, France and Britain had trained policemen and soldiers to interrogate, he said.
Dr Crelinsten, a criminologist from Ottawa University, had accumulated the information from victims, tortures and their supervisors.
He had found a Khmer Rouge Handbook of Torture.
It pointed out that a prisoner might die, before the information had been extracted, if the torture was too severe: ‘One must give them pain to make them respond quickly, to make them afraid, not to kill them, but to bring them close to death.’
The handbook said that the torturer had a job to do, and he had to do it well.
He had to obtain results.
He had to inflict pain on people he was told were enemies.
He must not be hesitant.
Broken people and information were his end-products.
In Israel, the Landau Commission, set up by the Government, said that non-violent psychological pressures could be used, then ‘moderate physical pressure’.
The victims would resist more if they knew the limits of ill-treatment to which they might be subjected.
In Uruguay, the torturers wanted confessions; in Namibia, they sought information; in Cambodia, they wanted to destroy the personality of the prisoner; in Chile, at one time, they tortured all detainees.
Some torturers continuously used obscenities.
Others talked human rights language.
Others indulged in horse-play with each other.
Some played tricks on their victims.
Others used jargon of medicine, cookery or religion for describing the tortures.
In Brazil, 583 different methods of moral, psychological and physical  torture were used.
Torturers kept making up new arbitrary rules, for which they would punish disobedience.
In many countries, prisoners were killed quickly if they refused to give information, or had no information, or had already revealed all.
The scream of victims was unimaginable — a howl which sounded inhuman.
Crelinsten classified torturers into the zealots, who were professionals and true believers in the causes for which they tortured; the careerists, who wanted a well-paid job with privileges; and the sadists, who enjoyed cruelty.
He thought that the latter were only a small minority.
The closely-knit corps of torturers made it difficult for a torturer to give up his job.
On the whole their families did not know what they did at work.
Dr Edwin Staub, a Professor of Psychology at the University of  Massachusetts , said that difficult economic conditions, large discrepancies between rich and poor, strong religious or national ideology and a monolithic society, all contributed to a government starting to torture its citizens.
Many torturers had themselves suffered physical or sexual abuse as children.
The majority of citizens were ‘bystanders’, and themselves often contemptuous of the victims.
Dr Wolfgang Heinz, a P100M research worker, travelled to Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay, to interview the ‘masters’ of torture.
After the Cuban Revolution in 1959, the fear of Communism spread throughout South America.
The democratic governments in Chile and Uruguay were taken over by military dictatorships, as were the civilian regimes of Argentine and Brazil.
The dictators were frightened of left-wing intellectuals and liberal Catholics.
The United States shared their interest in keeping Communism out of South America.
Torturers were either trained policemen or soldiers, or they were special commando units, or they were trained in USA or Panama, or they simply carried on the tradition of civilian torture.
People of European origin were less likely to be tortured than black people.
There were different reasons for torture:
i
the military saw real threats from the thousands of well organised  guerrillas ;
ii
most of the  guerrillas were civilians, who could easily be identified;
iii
the governments were quite unprepared for  guerrilla warfare;
iv
the  guerrillas targeted military officers, who felt themselves personally at risk;
v
torture was used to extract information rapidly about other members of  guerrilla cells, before they dispersed;
vi
the  guerrillas did not deserve any mercy, since they had started the civil wars.
Most of the ‘masters’ of torture said that they had been fighting a desperate unseen war, whose atmosphere could not be imagined by people from democracies.
Some denied the practices.
Others said that they had acted under orders.
A few admitted that there had been excesses.
Heinz suggested that laws and constitutions of countries should be strengthened to make international declarations against torture into enforceable law.
Codes of ethics and concepts of human rights should be introduced into military training, when countries became democratic.
The mass media should be free to expose torture before it became institutionalised.
International pressure should be mobilised much earlier, as it can be effective in preventing this practice.
Dr Alex Schmid, the founder of P100M, categorised the many academics who did not seem to be interested in human rights.
The defeatists felt that the power of the torturers was too great to try to combat; the purists were too busy discussing semantics to take up the real problems; the perfectionists thought that the data on human rights was too imprecise to be used for high quality research; the paradigm thinkers believed that massive political and social changes would be necessary before torture could be stopped; many other concerned persons were involved in other cases, such as environment, ecology, animal rights, etc.
After the meeting, I wondered whether there could be more important causes than stopping torture.
As Dr Schmid said, people in free countries should show solidarity with those who suffer.
Dr Harold Hillman is the Director of the Unity Laboratory of Applied Neurobiology at the University of Surrey.
Twelve-year-old Sabina Yasmeen of West Bengal, was tortured in police custody after being arrested in February 1990.
Her arrest was attributed to her village leader's opposition to the state ruling party.
REVIEWS
BORN TO DIE IN MEDELLIN
FAMILIARITY with reports of cocaine barons, death squads and street children will still leave you unprepared for the stories captured by Alonso Salazar in his collection of interviews with the teenage contract killers of Medellin, their families and their opponents.
Columbia's bloody past has caught up with its present with a vengeance.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Columbia went through a period known simply as ‘La Violencia’, when some 200,000 were killed for their allegiance to the Liberals or Conservatives.
In the 1970s and 1980s, left-wing guerrilla groups moved into the cities, trained teenagers in the use of weapons and were then pushed back in to the countryside by the army.
Those teenagers left behind did not let their new skills go to waste.
Young men speak to Salazar of their role in killings.
The horror stories include León, getting drunk and high on coke before shooting his best friend during a trivial row.
‘He spent a fortnight going around completely filthy until he gradually got over it’ León, that is, not his best friend.
More usually street gangs such as the Nachos, Montañeros and Calvos are hired by drug barons for a ‘kill’ for between £1,000 and £5,000, depending on the importance of the victim and the risks of being caught.
Rival gangs then charge their own local ‘taxes’ and fight out their own vendettas against each other.
Armed vigilante groups fight back against the gangs, adding to a vicious circle of violence.
Mario ends up in Bellavista prison, built to hold 800 but actually taking some 3,000 prisoners.
‘The thing is that killing got to be a habit with Mario’, adds his friend Juan.
Inside Bellavista life is even cheaper than on the streets of Medellin.
The gang wars continue unabated.
Orders to kill are still issued by the drug barons.
A women was caught trying to smuggle in a grenade inside her vagina.
‘They only discovered the grenade because she hadn't done a deal properly.
You can bring anything in here if you pay for it.
There are revolvers, submachine guns, gunpowder, dynamite, everything, you name it, in the yards.’
One grenade was not found and was lobbed over a wall from one yard to another, injuring 40 prisoners.
At one stage, the prison guards went on strike, claiming the prisoners were better armed than them.
No wonder Pablo Escobar insisted on his own separate prison.
WELCOME TO HELL
QUITE why adversity stimulates excellent literature is unclear.
War and imprisonment have helped to generate some of the finest writing ever produced, and  Welcome To hell is among the best modern examples of this tradition.
Jan Arriens has brought together a remarkable compilation of letters from prisoners facing execution in the USA.
Few on death row have had the sort of education enjoyed by jail-writers like Thoreau, Wilde, Gandhi and King, but from their cells the eloquence and reflection is unmistakable.
In purely literary terms, the collection is excellent.
Some arrive in a prison with a death sentence barely literate, but the years on death row offer bizarre opportunities for examining the legal system, the injustice of the death penalty, and social deprivation in America.
Needless to say, many of the letters are genuinely moving.
Most of the writing is taken from letters to members of Lifelines, a British and Irish-based organisation which puts death row inmates in touch with potential letter-writers.
On letters written on typewriters made from old toothbrushes and elastic bands, prisoners facing death tell their correspondents of daily life in the jail, of the regulations, of the procedure before an execution is carried out, of how their cell light shudder under the strain when someone is electrocuted in the chair.
For some, the death row experience is the stable period of their lives, when they can develop communication and teaching skills.
One prisoner writes of another in his block: ‘He has an IQ that's slightly above freezing temperature  Fahrenheit but he knows that he was wrong and he is not as dumb as he wants people to believe.
I've spent hours and hours and MORE hours helping him to learn to read…’
There is also something peculiarly American about the attitudes of many of the prisoners.
Despite the fact that the state has decided to put them to death, many prisoners remain positively patriotic, and refuse to dismiss the notion that America's injustices cannot be reformed.
Others display a sharp sense of personal responsibility and self-reliance.
One, keen to express himself through hard work, sees that his only choice is to ‘better myself and pick my life up.
If I don't help myself, how can I expect anyone else to want to help?’
One or two stretch the notion of individual guilt so far that they embark on self-mutilation.
Nevertheless, this is an ultimately inspiring study of prisoners speaking for themselves.
THE TAIL OF THE NAIL
THE LAND of Dictory is ruled by King Trucibaldo I Command, a dictator with a love-hate relationship with his teddy bear.
Like many well known dictators, the King always has to have his own way, and is terrified of being laughed at.
His teetering ego needs constant priming by the sneaky, slimy, slippery Wimpy Goldfinger (Hiss!
Boo!)
.
The King makes all the rules, appoints and dismisses Prime Ministers, and insists on marshmallows and cocoa for breakfast, while his subjects get only dry toast.
Laughter is forbidden in the land, and the people are kept illiterate — the only thing taught in school being the King's own poetry.
Bridget Crowley raises through this simple story several human rights issues.
But the emphasis of the play, aimed at primary school children, is always on clarity and entertainment.
It works beautifully.
The set is in the shape of a giant book, whose pages open to reveal the Royal Palace, a dungeon, the cellar of a former teacher, Mr Nibbs, and the river, beyond which lies the democratic Singing Land — a country where people are able to choose their own leaders.
The Kings rule is undermined by the lively and intelligent Nail, whose thirst for justice and learning not only topples the dictatorship, but helps to convince the King that this was no way to run a country.
The question of what ‘freedom’ actually means is acted out — the difference between being ‘free’and being able to do exactly what you like without thought for others is explained.
Without laws, the Nail recognises, someone could just walk in and steal my bike.
Mr Nibbs tempers the Nail's desire for vengeance against the King, insisting that the King be treated justly — taken down a peg or two without injury.
The Tale of the Nail is to go on national tour in October, accompanied by workshops and teaching materials.
It is an excellent way of introducing the issue of human rights to school children.
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL MANDATE
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL is a worldwide human rights movement which is independent of any government, political faction, ideology, economic interest or religious creed.
In Britain the organisation has 90,000 members and 320 local groups.
Members can join a variety of specialised groups and networks: eg, women, youth, business, children, medical professionals, lawyers, journalists, teachers, police, ex-services and more.
Members work within a closely defined mandate: to seek the release of prisoners of conscience — people imprisoned solely for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin, sex, language or religion, provided they have neither used nor advocated the use of violence; to ensure fair and prompt trials for political prisoners; to oppose the death penalty, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of all prisoners.; and to end extrajudicial executions and ‘disappearances’.
Amnesty International opposes abuses by opposition groups — hostage taking, torture and killing of prisoners and other arbitrary killings.
WORLD WIDE APPEAL
CHILE
JACQUELINE DROULLY JURICK: on 30 October 1974 the 24-year-old student and member of the Movement of the Revolutionary Left was arrested at her home in Santiago by armed men in civilian clothes.
She was three  months pregnant.
Her husband was arrested a few hours later.
Both remain ‘disappeared’.
In the weeks following her arrest Jacqueline Droully was seen by other prisoners in secret detention centres run by the Directorate of National Intelligence (DINA), the security police at the time.
One former detainee said he saw Jacqueline Droully using the sun's reflection in a mirror to send messages to her husband in another cell.
A July 1975 report in a pro-government newspaper claimed that Jacqueline Droully was among 119 people killed in an armed confrontation between left-wing extremists in Argentina.
The report was false and apparently intended to undermine relatives' appeals for new court investigations into the fate of the ‘disappeared’.
In 1990, when Chile returned to civilian rule, The National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation confirmed that 957 people had ‘disappeared’ under military rule, the majority of them between 1973 and 1978.
Amnesty International believes the actual figure may well be higher.
Evidence previously submitted to the courts leaves little doubt that the fate of the ‘disappeared’ could be clarified.
However, an amnesty law passed in 1978, which granted immunity to the perpetrators of human rights violations, has been used by the courts to block full investigations into these cases.
Hundreds of families are still waiting for justice to be done.
GREECE
GIANNIA TSORTSOS: a 20-year-old student of computer science from Athens, he has been in prison since September 1991 for refusing on grounds of conscience to perform military service.
In February 1992 he was sentenced to four years in prison, which he is currently serving in Sindos Military Prison near Thessaloniki.
He is a prisoner of conscience.
Giannis Tzortsos is a Jehovah's Witness, whose religious beliefs do not permit him to serve in the armed forces in any capacity.
He is one of 400 conscientious objectors imprisoned in Greece.
Almost all are Jehovah's Witnesses.
Greek conscientious objectors are not allowed to perform civilian alternative service but instead may perform unarmed military service lasting twice as long as normal military service.
This is an unacceptable to most of them as they believe that such service furthers military aims.
Most conscientious objectors are given four-year sentences which they reduce to about two and a half years by working.
Amnesty International considers all of them to be prisoners of conscience and has repeatedly called on successive Greek Governments to release them and introduce alternative civilian service of non-punitive length.
The United Nations Commission on Human Rights, the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers and the European Parliament have called on member states to introduce civilian service for conscientious objectors.
Successive Greek governments have not taken any concrete steps towards bringing Greek legislation into line with these international standards.
EGYPT
AHMED ASHRAF MUHAMMED MUSTAFA: an agricultural engineer, he was tortured for nine days while detained without charge for six weeks in 1989.
Under torture, which included beatings on the hands and feet, suspension by the wrists and electric shocks, he was forced to confess that he was a member of a banned Islamic organisation.
He was then freed.
After his release Ahmed Ashraf and his lawyer submitted a formal, written complaint to the Procurator General's Office.
In this, Ahmed Ashraf named two of the security police officers who had tortured him.
A few days later he received a summons to interrogation by one of these officers, which he refused to attend.
His lawyer made a further complaint, alleging harassment, and urged that those responsible for the torture be brought to justice.
In response to Amnesty International's inquiries about Ahmed Ashraf, the Egyptian authorities have twice stated that investigations into all cases of torture raised by Amnesty International have found no evidence that torture had taken place.
They further said that they had received no formal complaint from Ahmed Ashraf.
Ahmed Ashaf knows of no official investigation into his case.
He was not given a medical examination after he lodged his complaint; however, he still bore scars from the torture one year after his arrest.
As a state party to the United Nations Convention Against Torture, Egypt is required to ‘ensure that any individual who alleges he has been subjected to torture in any territory under its jurisdiction has the right to complain to, and to have his case promptly and impartially examined by, its competent authorities…’
SOUTH KOREA
SUH KYUNG-WON: a 55-year-old parliamentarian, he is serving a 10-year prison sentence for making an unauthorized visit to North Korea and meeting North Korean officials.
He is a prisoner of conscience.
Suh Kyung-won was an activist in the farmers' movement and became president of the Catholic Farmers Association in 1982.
In 1988 he was elected to the National Assembly on behalf of the main opposition party at that time, the Party for Peace and Democracy, and in August of that year he made an unauthorized visit to North Korea where he reportedly met the North Korean President Kim Il-sing and other officials.
Suh Kyung-won was arrested in June 1989 and charged under the National Security Law with spying for North Korea.
He was interrogated by the Agency for National Security Planning for 24 days during which time he was denied access to his lawyers.
At his trial in September 1989, Suh Kyung-won testified to having been ill-treated during his interrogation and said that he had been forced to make false statements under duress.
He denied acting as a North Korean spy and justified his visit to North Korea and his discussion with North Korean officials as motivated by his desire to see Korea reunified.
In its verdict, the court found that ‘the content of Suh Kyung-won's conversation with the North Korean leader Kim Il-sung does not appear to have contained what could be called top secrets vital to national security.’
Amnesty International believes that Suh Kyung-won is held for his peaceful political activities and views on reunification.
It believes that the mere fact of travelling to North Korea without evidence either of espionage activities or of the use or advocacy of violence does not justify imprisonment.
ISRAEL/OCCUPIED TERRITORIES
MORDECHAI VANUNU: a former nuclear technician at Dimona in Israel, he has been held in solitary confinement since October 1986.
He was abducted in Europe by Israeli Government agents after he provided information on Israel's nuclear programme to a British newspaper.
He maintains that he did so in order to promote a public debate on Israel's nuclear programme.
Mordechai Vanunu's detention in Israel was not officially acknowledged until 9 November 1986.
The charges against him included treason.
His trial was held in camera.
Although he had full access to legal counsel, he was not allowed to reveal details of his abduction to the judges.
In March 1988 the Jerusalem District Court sentenced him to 18 years' imprisonment, upheld in May 1989 by the Supreme Court.
Amnesty International was not allowed to attend the trial proceedings.
Mordechai Vanunu continues to be held in solitary confinement in Ashkelon prison.
He is permitted absolutely no contact with other inmates.
He may meet in private with his lawyer, but access to his family is severely restricted: he can see them for no more than one hour a month, under tight surveillance.
Israeli officials have maintained that solitary confinement is necessary to prevent Mordechai Vanunu from other inmates and to prevent him from revealing further classified information, including details of his abduction, which was illegal according to international law.
TURKEY
SELAHATTIN SIMSEK: a 37-year-old Kurdish school teacher, he has been in prison for more than 12 years.
Following a grossly unfair trial in military court, he was convicted of robbery and killing a policeman on behalf of the Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK).
He has consistently denied any involvement in these crimes.
Selahattin Simsek said that during his interrogation, police officers tortured him for 23 consecutive days, but he confessed to nothing more than ‘a certain sympathy’ for the PKK.
‘I was stripped naked and suspended on a crucifix,’ he said.
‘One electric cable was fixed to the small finger of my right hand and the other cable was moved over various parts of my body.
‘This torture was repeated three times a day…
I was also suspended by my feet, and by my wrists while they were tied behind my back.
I was repeatedly threatened with rape and at one stage they tried to make a fellow detainee rape me.
He was severely beaten when he refused.’
During a two-year-trial, which involved more than 500 defendants, Selahattin Simsek was able to see his lawyer only once.
None of the prosecution witnesses was able to identify him in court, and his conviction was based on contradictory evidence, mainly statements extracted by torture from his fellow defendants.
He did not receive important legal documents relating to his case — including the testimony of witnesses — until three years after the trail ended.
He was sentenced to death in 1983, although the sentence was commuted to a 20-year prison term in 1991.
Selahattin Simsek is currently being held in Bursa Special Type Prison and has up to eight more years of his sentence to serve.
PROFILE
RICHARD REOCH REFLECTS ON IAN MARTIN'S RECORD AS SECRETARY GENERAL OF AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL.
MR MARTIN STEPPED DOWN IN SEPTEMBER, AFTER SIX YEARS IN THE POST
A MAN OF RARE INTEGRITY
When Ian Martin first announced to the world that he would be leaving the post of secretary general, there were few among us who could believe it.
He had guided the complex and nerve-wracking work of the international organisation so deftly and with such insight that it was hard to imagine anyone else measuring up to the job.
When told that Amnesty International had made a radical new departure in the choice of his successor, a decision that it was hoped would be regarded as courageous, Ian's response was to nod.
‘Yes’ he said, ‘I think it is very courageous of Pierre Sane’to take the job’.
It was the sort of wit, understated and warm, which characterised his years at the International Secretariat, first as head of the Asia Region and then throughout his term as secretary general.
And it was this ability to get straight to the point and to turn conventional wisdom on its head that earned him the respect of so many staff and others with whom he regularly had to confront thorny questions of Amnesty strategy and its relations with governments.
More than 1,200 people from more than 30 countries applied to follow in his footsteps.
Few among them could have known what the job entailed.
Responsibility for the conduct of the affairs of Amnesty International, in the words of the Statute, involves a punishing schedule.
It runs virtually non-stop, seven days a week and requires superb management skills — both political and organisational.
The days are a constant avalanche of meetings on human rights cries in various countries, detailed briefings for appointments with ambassadors, and working sessions with Amnesty International members and delegates from all over the world.
The volume of documentation that must be digested is staggering.
And given the political sensitivity of so much of our work, it is under the secretary general's guidance that difficult discussions on strengthening the movement's development and human rights awareness programmes must take place and where the final green light must be given for increasingly complex initiatives to intensify public pressure on governments.
It is the kind of job that can easily be made to seem glamorous or tempt the power-mad.
Especially with an organisation whose public profile continues to rise, whose impact on governments is openly acknowledged, and which is steadily gathering support from more and more people.
In the six years in which Ian Martin was secretary general, Amnesty International's worldwide tally of members and subscribers doubled from about 500,000 in 1986 to more than a million at the beginning of the 1990s.
But it is a measure of the man that he turned his energies not in the direction of the limelight, but to effecting a quiet, persistent transformation within Amnesty International, starting with its International Secretariat.
‘He unshackled us from the formality we had started to develop’, said one of the top staff in the Research Department.
‘He told us to write letters to governments that were direct and to the point.
Of course, the letters were to be polite, but he did away with all the pompous formalities reserved for potentates.
‘And he set us on a new track as far as putting human rights violations in a political context was concerned.
Our country reports and the annual report have changed.
Now you get more of the political and social backdrop against which the atrocities are occurring’.
Other changes were in the offing.
We began to pick up speed in our responses to unfolding human rights crises.
Experiments began: internal decision-making was delegated and streamlined.
Video cameras could accompany Amnesty missions to secure unique footage for release to television worldwide.
The racial and cultural diversity of Amnesty delegations to countries began to expand: no longer could Amnesty representatives be caricatured in pin-striped suits.
The man was passionate about building links with local human rights activists.
He argued that these were the people on the front line.
Amnesty needed the benefit of their first-hand experience and must itself show open solidarity with then in their courageous efforts.
I remember how he flew unhesitatingly to Peru to protest openly against the bombing of human rights organisations there — and took the personal decision that it would be, in his carefully chosen words, ‘inappropriate’ for him to use the special security protection he was provided with.
There was to be no self-dramatisation and nothing that would set Amnesty International apart from the very people that it was seeking to protect from the same potential threat.
Such qualities of judgement and personal courage over and over again inspired those of us who had the privilege to work closely him — his intense concern for human rights and his determination to take Amnesty's campaign right to the doorstep of the perpetrators.
What left his stamp on the stewardship of our movement was that he held to these passions so tenaciously and yet drew on inner reserves that illumined them with an unshakeable commitment to excellence and that rarest of all qualities personal integrity.
Ian Martin, fundraising at the Virgin cricket match