

Sensations of Colour
What does it mean to say that something is white?
This is an odd question.
If it had been, ‘What does it mean to say that something is beautiful?’, it would have been more understandable.
People often discuss what it means to say that something is beautiful.
But unless one is blind, or does not know the language, surely one would not be likely to ask what it means to say that something is white?
And yet some philosophers have taken questions like this one about whiteness very seriously.
What is more, they have said that there is a good deal more to noticing that things are white, and calling them ‘white’, than one would suppose.
Some such philosophers say that one notices that something is white through noticing its resemblance to other things.
Others say that the resemblance one notices is between sensations, and that what one means when one says something is white is that a sensation one has on looking at it resembles a sensation one has had before and to which one gave the name ‘sensation of white’.
This is what John Stuart Mill says.
Why do philosophers talk of ‘resemblances’ and ‘sensations’in this connection?
Some philosophers talk of ‘resemblances’, I suppose, because they think of the question, ‘What does it mean to say that something is white?’ as involving the question, ‘What reason has a person, on looking at something white, to call it white?’
The theory seems to be (1) that some act — noticing a resemblance — must precede uttering the word ‘white’ for the person who utters the word genuinely to be describing the object, and not merely coming out with the words, ‘It's white’as might a parrot, no matter what it was shown; and (2) that the resemblance the theory requires one to have noticed, which is supposed to justify one's calling it white as opposed, say, to blue, is what one is referring to when one calls the object ‘white’.
And philosophers talk of ‘sensations’ in this connection because of views they hold about perception.
They may hold these views  about perception because of views they hold about our nature and the nature of the things we look at.
Thus if it is held that really we are substances (Descartes), then, it would seem, it must also be held that all we can be aware of in perception are modifications of ourselves, which are, at most, the representations in us of modifications of other substances.
If these modifications are called ‘sensations’, and if it is allowed that different substances can be related causally, then on this view something's looking white to someone is his having certain sensations which are excited in him by what we would ordinarily say was the object he saw to be white.
Mill's answer to the question, ‘What does it mean to say that something is white?’ arises out of his reflections on the representative theory of perception.
Making use of quotations from Mill, the argument may be summarised as follows:
On a representative theory of perception, something's looking white to us consists in our having sensations of white which are excited in us by the object.
We attribute the quality, whiteness, to the object in virtue of its exciting the sensations.
Moreover, ‘we know not, and cannot know, anything of bodies but the sensations which they excite in us’.
It follows that ‘those sensations must be all that we can, at bottom, mean by their attributes; and the distinction which we verbally make between the properties of things and the sensations we receive from them, must originate in the convenience of discourse rather than in the nature of what is signified by the terms’.
However, ‘it may be said that…because one thing may be the sole evidence of the existence of another thing, it does not follow that the two are one and the same.
The attribute whiteness (it may be said) is not the fact of receiving the sensation, but something in the object itself; a power inherent in it; something in virtue of which the object produces the sensation’.
But the only foundation for this view is ‘the disposition, wherever we meet with two names which are not precisely synonymous, to suppose that they must be the names of two different things’.
The reasonable conclusion is that one and the same thing is ‘called a sensation when considered merely in itself, and a quality when looked at in relation to any one of the numerous objects, the presence of which to our organs excites in our minds that among various other sensations or feelings.
The last sentence of this summary repays careful study.
Compare it with the sentence: ‘That sensation is excited in our minds by the presence to our organs of any one of numerous objects.’
What is the logic of the expression ‘that among various other sensations or feelings’ in Mill's sentence, and of ‘that sensation’in mine?
Is the concept of sensation involved in these sentences such that it makes sense to say that the same sensation is excited by the presence to our organs of numerous objects, or is it such that numerous objects (and, indeed, the same object at different times) cannot but excite different , though possibly exactly similar sensations?
Have the ‘sensations’ to which Mill refers the character of universals, or the character of particulars?
It is as if Mill was in two minds about it.
In so far as sensations are ‘things excited in our minds’, they seem to have the character of particulars; but in so far as the same sensation can be excited by any one of numerous objects, they (the sensations) seem to have the character of universals.
We can see how Mill resolves the issue if we turn to his editorial footnote to his father's Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind (1869).
In the text James Mill writes that it is ‘obvious, and certain, that men were led to class solely for the purpose of economizing in the use of names’:
Could the processes of naming and discourse have been as conveniently managed by a name for every individual, the names of classes, and the idea of classification, would never have existed.
But as the limits of the human memory did not enable men to retain beyond a very limited number of names; and even if it had, as it would have required a most inconvenient portion of time, to run over in discourse, as many names of individuals, and of individual qualities, as there is occasion to refer to in discourse, it was necessary to have contrivances of abridgment.
In his footnote, John Stuart Mill objects that economising in the use of names is not the sole purpose of classification: ‘We could not have dispensed with names to mark the points in which different individuals resemble one another: and these are class-names.’
In other words, we need class-names to predicate qualities of individuals.
From the passage quoted from James Mill, it might seem that he would reply that names can be given to ‘individual qualities’ without classification; that is, that names of ‘individual qualities’are not class-names.
John Stuart Mill notices this (he quotes the sentence in question, italicising ‘and of individual qualities’), and proceeds (1) to ask what is meant by an ‘individual quality’;(2) as if he knows the answer to this question (namely, the individual qualities of an object are ‘the individual and instantaneous impressions which it produces in us’), to deny that predicating a quality of an object is predicating of it one of its individual qualities; and (3) to say what it is to predicate a quality of an object (namely, ‘to assert that the object affects us in a manner similar to that in which we are affected by a known class of objects’).
He writes:
But what is meant by an individual quality?
It is not individual qualities that we ever have occasion to predicate.
It is true that the qualities of an object are only the various ways in which we or other minds are affected by it, and these affections are not the same in different objects, except in the sense in which the word same stands for exact similarity.
But we never have occasion to predicate of an object the individual and instantaneous impressions which it produces in us.
The only meaning of predicating a quality at all, is to affirm a resemblance.
When we ascribe a quality to an object we intend to assert that the object affects us in a manner similar to that in which we are affected by a known class of objects.
A quality, indeed, in the custom of language, does not admit of individuality: it is supposed to be one thing common to many; which, being explained, means that it is the name of a resemblance among our sensations, and not a name of the individual sensations which resemble.
Qualities, therefore, cannot be predicated without general names; nor, consequently, without classification.
In this passage J. S. Mill resolutely turns his back on allowing sensations to have a universal character.
‘These affections are not the same in different objects, except in the sense in which the word same stands for exact similarity.’
This being so, he has to locate the universality elsewhere.
He locates it in the resemblance of a sensation to other sensations.
He holds what might be called ‘the resemblance doctrine’.
Mill's version of the resemblance doctrine, however, differs from that of some other, more recent, holders of it — and not merely in that for him it is a matter of the resemblance of sensations, not objects.
His version can be introduced by asking: what is classification?
To find out whether an element is a metal, a metal being defined as an element whose oxide dissolved in water yields an alkaline solution, I have to find out whether the element has this peculiarity in common with other metals.
Is this process of finding out (performing tests indicated by the definition) classification?
Or is only pronouncing the element to be a metal (or a non-metal) classification?
The point is that not all general names have definitions.
The names for what Mill calls ‘simple feelings’ have not.
Consequently, there is no test I can perform, comparable to dissolving oxides in water, and so on, to give me the right to say something looks white.
All I can do is look.
Things do not look white in virtue of something analytically involved in their looking white, something which they have in common— as metals have in common that their oxides dissolved in water yield an alkaline solution — with other things that look white.
If we say that they do have something in common with other things that look white we must remember that their having something in common simply is their looking white .
It makes sense to say, ‘Ah, now I see what metals have in common with’; but it makes no sense to say, ‘Ah, now I see what things that look white have in common with ’.
They do not look white in virtue of having something in common; they have something in common (their whiteness) in virtue of looking white.
Their resemblance is a consequence, not a precondition, of their looking white.
There are several ways in which this difference between names like ‘metal’ and those like ‘white’can be marked.
One would be to say that the predicating of names like ‘white’ does not involve classification (taking classification to be the performing of tests indicated by the definition of the general name).
Another would be to say that whereas some classes (for example, the class ‘metal’) are grounded on resemblance in some respect, others (for example , the class ‘sensation of white’) are not grounded on resemblance at all .
(This is not to deny that the members of the class resemble one another— they must — but only that the resemblance comes first, and so can be the ‘ground’ of the class.)
To say this would be to deny the universality of what Professor A. J. Ayer says it is natural for us to assume, namely that we use the same word in different situations because we have noticed a distinctive common feature.
J. S. Mill adopts neither of these ways of marking the difference.
He marks it by distinguishing between resemblance in a given  particular, resemblance which consists in the possession of certain common peculiarities, on the one hand, and what he calls ‘mere general resemblance’, ‘general unanalysable resemblance’, or ‘simple likeness’, on the other.
Sensations of white are not alike in some respect; they are alike ‘altogether’.
In his A System of Logic he writes:
It is sometimes said, that all propositions whatever, of which the predicate is a general name, do, in point of fact, affirm or deny resemblance…
There is some slight degree of foundation for this remark, but no more than a slight degree.
The arrangement of things into classes, such as the class metal , or the class man , is grounded indeed on a resemblance among the things which are placed in the same class, but not on a mere general resemblance; the resemblance it is grounded on consists in the possession by all those things of certain common peculiarities; and those peculiarities it is which the terms connote, and which the propositions consequently assert; not the resemblance.
For though when I say Gold is a metal, I say by implication that if there be any other metals it must resemble them, yet if there were no other metals I might still assert the proposition with the same meaning as at present, namely, that gold has the various properties implied in the word metal…
Propositions, therefore, in which objects are referred to a class, because they possess the attributes constituting the class, are so far from asserting nothing but resemblance at all…
[There is an]exceptional case, in which, though the predicate is the name of a class, yet in predicating it we affirm nothing but resemblance, the class being founded not on resemblance in any given particular, but on general unanalysable resemblance.
The classes in question are those into which our simple sensations, or rather simple feelings, are divided.
Sensations of white, for instance, are classed together, not because we can take them to pieces, and say they are alike in this, and not alike in that, but because we feel them to be alike altogether, though in different degrees.
When, therefore, I say ‘The colour I saw yesterday was a white colour,, or ‘The sensation I feel is one of tightness’, in both cases the attribute I affirm of the colour or of the other sensation is mere resemblance — simple likeness to sensations I have had before, and which have had those names bestowed upon them.
The names of feelings, like other concrete general names, are connotative; but they connote a mere resemblance.
When predicated of any individual  feeling, the information they convey is that of its likeness to the other feelings which we have been accustomed to call by the same name.
To understand this we have to see that Mill is basing his answer to one question on his answer to another.
There is the Ayer-Hare question, ‘Why do we use the same colour-word in different situations?’ to which Mill gives the non-Ayer-Hare answer, ‘Not because of resemblance in some respect, but because of mere resemblance’; and there is the question, ‘What does the colour-word connote?’to which Mill gives the answer, ‘The mere resemblance’.
He is stuck with this answer to the second question because he holds (as does Hare, but not Ayer) that what one is saying about something when one calls it x is identical with one's reason for calling it x .
In short, his argument is of the form:
1.
Sensations of white are not alike in some respect ; they are alike altogether .
Therefore
2.
My reason for calling a sensation ‘a sensation of white’ is not its resemblance in some respect to other sensations called by the same name, but its mere resemblance to them.
But
3.
What I mean by calling a sensation ‘a sensation of white’ is the same as my reason for calling it ‘a sensation of white’.
Therefore
4.
What I mean by calling a sensation ‘a sensation of white’ is its mere resemblance to other sensations called by the same name.
In his footnote to Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , J. S. Mill says that it is not ‘the individual and instantaneous impressions’ that an object produces in us that we predicate of the object.
How does he conceive of these ‘impressions’.
In Book I, Chapter 3, Section 3 of his A System of Logic (written before he had decided that a quality is simply a sensation regarded in a certain relation) he distinguishes between a sensation and a quality, a distinction which, he feels, may be missed because we can seldom refer to the sensation otherwise than by a circumlocution, for example, by reference to the quality, as when we call a  sensation ‘the sensation of white’.
This suggests that he thinks of the impression as being something that could have a name of its own.
He regrets that ‘language, which adapts itself for the most part only to the common uses of life, has provided us with no single-worded or immediate designation’ for the impression.
This suggestion is combined with his version of the resemblance doctrine in the following passage:
The only names which are unsusceptible of definition, because their meaning is unsusceptible of analysis, are the names of the simple feelings themselves.
These are in the same condition as proper names.
They are not indeed, like proper names, unmeaning; for the words sensation of white signify, that the sensation which I so denominate resembles other sensations which I remember to have had before, and to have called by that name.
But as we have no words by which to recall those former sensations except the very word which we seek to define, or some other which, being exactly synonymous with it, requires definition as much, words cannot unfold the signification of this class of names; and we are obliged to make a direct appeal to the personal experience of the individual whom we address.
The implication of this passage is that the words ‘sensation of white’denote the sensation, but connote its resemblance to other sensations called by the same name.
The words ‘sensation of white’ are unlike a proper name in that they have connotation.
They differ from connotative terms like ‘metal’— and to this extent ‘are in the same condition as proper names’— in that whereas to the question, ‘What are the things the resemblance to which you mark by calling this thing a ‘metal’?’ the answer, ‘Things of which it is true that their oxide dissolved in water yields an alkaline solution’can be given; to the question, ‘What are the things the resemblance to which you mark by calling this sensation ‘a sensation of white’?’the only answer that can be given is, ‘Sensations to which I have given the name ‘a sensation of white’’, an answer that does not ‘unfold the signification of this class of names’.
The signification is private to the user, and he can only hope that resemblances in his own experience have their counterpart in the experience of others, so that they can attach a meaning of their own to what he says.
Are there conditions which have to be satisfied for a colour-word  to be used meaningfully?
The implications of Mill's answer to the question, ‘What does it mean to say that something is white?’ for this question, are clear.
If I had not had a sensation which resembles my present sensation I could not assert, ‘My sensation is a sensation of white’ with the same meaning as it would have if I had had a sensation resembling it.
The only meaning it could have would be, ‘I bestow the name ‘sensation of white’ on the sensation I am now having.’
In other words, having had a previous similar sensation is a logically necessary condition of my apprehending a sensation of white as such, on Mill's version of the resemblance doctrine.
On a version such as Hare's, which does not incorporate a representative theory of perception, there will be a comparable implication: if things had not, in the past, looked to me as this now looks, I could not mean by ‘This looks white’ what I do mean.
Mill does not explicitly assert this implication of his holding the resemblance doctrine.
The closest he comes to it is, I think, in the passage quoted earlier in which he says that ‘though when I say Gold is a metal, I say by implication that if there be any other metals it must resemble them, yet if there were no other metals I might still assert the proposition with the same meaning as at present, namely that gold has the various properties implied in the word metal’.
This remark, occurring as it does in a passage in which he is distinguishing between the grounds of the class metal (‘the possession of certain common peculiarities’) and those of the class sensation of white (‘nothing but resemblance’) clearly implies that if I had had no other sensations of white I could not assert the proposition ‘This is a sensation of white’ with the meaning it has when I have had such sensations.
Even if one rejected Mill's answer to the question, ‘What does it mean to say something is white?’ one might still hold there to be conditions which have to be satisfied for a colour-word to be used meaningfully.
According to Wittgenstein, for instance, it is a condition of a colour-word, such as ‘blue’, being used meaningfully by a person, that he should have learnt (been trained) to react to the things other people call ‘blue’ in the same way as they do.
Without this agreement communication would not be possible.
There is a difference, however, between what Mill says about the conditions of a colour-word being used meaningfully, and what Wittgenstein says.
What one means when one calls something ‘white’, according to Mill, is that one's present sensation resembles a past one.
The condition of what one says being meaningful is  part of what one means.
For Wittgenstein, on the other hand, the condition is not part of what one means.
In Zettel , he explicitly denies that the agreement between colour-word-users is part of what is communicated.
I want, now, to turn to another question, which is not, or not obviously, about the meaning of, or the conditions of the meaningful employment of, colour-words, but about our experience of colours.
It is a question which may be introduced by quoting something Wittgenstein says about experiencing first one, and then another, side of a triangle at its base.
Writing about ‘aspects of organization’ in his Philosophical Investigations , Wittgenstein says:
One kind of aspect might be called ‘aspects of organization’.
When the aspect changes parts of the picture go together which before did not.
In the triangle I can see now this as apex,that as base — now this as apex,that as base.
— Clearly the words ‘Now I am seeing this as apex’ cannot so far mean anything to a learner who has only just met the concepts of apex, base and so on— But I do not mean this as empirical proposition.
‘Now he's seeing it like this' , ‘now like that ’ would only be said of someone capable of making certain applications of the figure quite freely.
The substratum of this experience is the mastery of a technique.
But how queer for this to be the logical condition of someone's having such-and-such an experience !
After all, you don't say that one only ‘has toothache’ if one is capable of doing such-and-such.
— From this it follows that we cannot be dealing with the same concept of experience here.
It is a different though related concept.
It is only if someone can do , has learnt, is master of, such-and-such, that it makes sense to say he had had this experience.
And if this sounds crazy, you need to reflect that the concept of seeing is modified here.
Formulated in words suggested by this quotation, the question I want to find an answer to is: are there logical conditions of someone's having the experience of seeing something as, say, blue?
I prefer the formulation: are there logical conditions of something's looking blue to someone?
It is clear what Mill's answer would have to be: ‘Yes, since to  see that something is a certain colour is to be aware of the mere resemblance between a present sensation and a remembered past one.’
For a number of reasons I cannot accept Mill's answer to the question, ‘What does it mean to say that something is white?’
In the first place I do not accept the representative theory of perception.
Second, I do not accept any version of the resemblance doctrine.
(I am persuaded of the untenability of Hare's version by what Wittgenstein says in part 11 of the ‘Brown Book’.
In Section 2 he rejects the suggestion, conveyed by the exclamation, ‘Surely a similarity must strike us, or we shouldn't be moved to use the same word’, that some act must precede the act of using the word; and in Sections 5 and 10 he talks about the ‘mistake’ labelled by the word ‘to make’as it occurs in the question, ‘What made you call this ‘red’?’)
Third, I do not accept the principle that the meaning of utterances is the same as a person's (alleged) reasons for saying what he says.
This being so, I cannot accept what would be Mill's reason for giving an affirmative answer to the question, ‘Are there logical conditions of something's looking blue to someone?’
Are there reasons for giving an affirmative answer to it to be found in what Wittgenstein says?
If there are, they are not obvious to me.
At the beginning of the section from which I have just quoted he distinguishes two ‘objects’ of sight, between which, he says, there is a categorial difference.
The first ‘object’ is what is there to be seen; the second is what it looks like.
There are logical conditions of experiencing objects of the second category, but colour always figures as an object of the first category, as in the following passage:
If I saw the duck-rabbit as a rabbit, then I saw: these shapes and colours (I give them in detail)— and I saw besides something like this: and here I point to a number of different pictures of rabbits.
This shows the difference between the concepts.
It might be said that what Wittgenstein says about the criteria of someone having understood a colour-word provides a reason for answering the question affirmatively.
If I said, ‘It looks blue’ but otherwise seemed incapable of colour discrimination, of being able to respond differently, verbally and in other ways, to differently coloured things, and, particularly, of being able to tell when other blue things were present and when  absent, then people would rightly suspect that I did not know what I was talking about, that my experience could not really be of its looking blue.
The nagging doubt remains, however, that the thing might have looked blue to me, and that I had simply not realised that it was to the thing's colour that I was expected to respond.
Not to admit this doubt is to embrace behaviourism.
Wittgenstein is not a behaviourist.
In spite of not being able to find support for an affirmative answer to the question, ‘Are there logical conditions of something's looking blue to someone?’ in what Wittgenstein says, and not accepting what would be Mill's reason for an affirmative answer, I think an affirmative answer is the right answer.
I must now try to show that it is.
The first step is to distinguish between two senses of ‘something's looking blue’.
One sense is an obvious one, but the other is not obvious, and possibly for that reason, although they are radically different senses, their difference is not recognised and people suppose they are dealing with an unambiguous expression.
Perhaps the distinction I want to draw can be seen more clearly if we start with an example involving size rather than colour.
Berkeley, in his New Theory of Vision , remarks that ‘the apparent magnitude of the moon, when placed in the horizon, is much greater than when it is in the meridian’.
One can ask: does he mean that the horizontal moon, perhaps owing to some magnifying effect of the earth's atmosphere, actually presents a larger appearance than the meridian moon, or does he mean merely that it looks bigger, perhaps because it is seen in a context of trees and houses?
Leaving aside the question as to which Berkeley meant, let us consider the alternatives.
How could we settle whether or not the horizontal moon actually does present a larger appearance?
One way would be to hold up a pencil at arm's length and measure their relative sizes as an artist might.
Another would be to take photographs of the moon on the horizon, and in the meridian, without altering the camera settings, and compare the size of the moon on the two prints.
It might be found that there was no difference.
And yet the horizontal moon might look bigger than the meridian moon in the other, non-objective, sense of ‘looks’.
The terms ‘objective’ and ‘subjective’being over-worked, I shall refer to the ‘presentation appearance’and the ‘perceived-as appearance’.
One can talk of an object presenting an appearance to an  unoccupied point in space, and of the presentation appearance of an object itself being larger or smaller than the presentation appearance of another to that point.
Whether it is larger or smaller will depend entirely on such factors as the relative size of the objects, their distance from the point, magnifying effects of the media, and soon.
Suppose there is a piece of grey material on a yellow background.
It will be perceived as blue (phenomenon of colour contrast).
But human sensory physiology, which mediates the colour contrast phenomenon, does not have anything to do with the presentation appearance of the material to the point at which the observer is.
In ‘white’ light this will be the colour of the material, grey.
An artist, to convey the scene as it presents itself, would have to paint his representation of the grey material, not as he sees it, blue, but as it is, grey.
One difference between perceived-as appearances and presentation appearances is that whereas it does not make sense to talk of being mistaken about the former it does make sense to talk of being mistaken about the latter.
In fact, one frequently is mistaken.
A person may falsely believe that the horizontal moon, because it is perceived as being larger, must be presenting a larger appearance.
He may falsely believe that the difference between something's looking blue and its looking grey cannot be merely a perceived-as appearance difference, but that there must be a difference in the presentation appearance.
As R. H. Thouless's classical experiments on ‘phenomenal Regression to the ‘Real’ Object' have shown, we can be wrong about the presentation appearance even when, short of holding a pencil at arm's length and measuring, we are doing our best to be right about it.
The constancy effects Thouless demonstrated are built into our perceptual mechanism.
We can conjure them away only by observing things under conditions in which the cues to three-dimensional perception are inoperative.
Asked to see things as if they were inoperative when they are not inoperative, one no more knows what to do than one does if asked to see things as if the phenomena of colour contrast were absent when they are present.
I said that whereas it does make sense to talk of being mistaken about presentation appearances it does not make sense to talk of being mistaken about perceived-as appearances.
This is because in saying what something looks like to me I am not saying something about something other than the thing I am looking at, its  look.
To talk of the presentation appearance, on the other hand, is to talk of something that can, itself, properly be said to be large, round, blue, and so on.
The presentation appearance of the horizontal moon, for instance, can properly, though falsely, be said to be larger than the presentation appearance of the meridian moon.
There is something for me to be mistaken about.
I cannot be mistaken about perceiving something as, say, a cigarette case, because in saying, ‘It looks like a cigarette case’ I am not saying that there is an appearance which is a cigarette case.
Professor R. M. Chisholm has expressed this well in Perceiving.: A Philosophical Study :
‘The pail feels empty’ and ‘The woods sound inhabited’do not imply that there is an appearance which is empty or one which is inhabited; ‘The curtains appear green’does not imply that there is an appearance — or way of appearing — which is green.
And, more generally, the locution x appears…to S does not imply There is something which is….
The second step in my attempt to show that an affirmative answer to the question, ‘Are there logical conditions of something's looking blue to someone?’ is warranted, is to identify perceived-as appearances with would-be beliefs.
In Chapter 8, I wrote:
A stick half in water looks bent both to the man who says, ‘It's bent’ and to the man who says, ‘It looks bent’.
But the man who says, ‘It looks bent’ thereby exhibits his sophistication in the matter of how an object's being half in water leads to his seeing it otherwise than as it is.
What an object looks like to somebody is what, on looking at it, that person would take it to be, if he had no reason to think otherwise.
If he has a reason to think otherwise then he says, not ‘It is…’, but ‘It looks…’.
I now say: that to talk about perceived-as appearances, and to talk about what, on looking at things, listening to them, and so on, we would believe about them if we had no reason to think otherwise, are to talk about one and the same thing.
In other words, to give, to the question, ‘Why, on looking at the horizontal moon, would you believe it to be larger than the meridian moon if you had no reason to think otherwise?’ the answer, ‘Because it appears larger’, is, if it means ‘Because I perceive it as larger’to give no answer at all.
Only if it means ‘Because it is presenting a larger appearance’ is it to give an answer, one which happens to be wrong.
We can explain, correctly or incorrectly, our would-be beliefs on looking at things by reference to presentation appearances, but to try to explain them by reference to perceived-as appearances is to try to explain them by reference to themselves.
Now, one cannot have what I have called a ‘would-be belief’ that something is x unless there is at least the possibility of taking the thing to be x .
And one cannot take something to be x unless one can distinguish between things which are x and things which are not x , as such.
And so the experience of seeing something as blue has logical conditions in that one logically cannot have it unless one can discriminate between objects in respect of their being or not being blue.
To someone without this discriminative capacity, either congenitally or because it has not been developed, a thing can present a blue appearance, but he cannot see it as blue.
He can see it as blue (that is, it can be the case that, on looking at it, he would take it to be blue if he had no reason to think otherwise) only if he can discriminate between objects in respect of their being or not being blue.
He can be trained to discriminate as the rest of us do, between things that are blue and things that are not, just as people can be trained to discriminate between harmonies and discords.
His discriminating as the rest of us do is, in Wittgenstein's phrase, ‘the substratum of the experience’ of seeing something as blue.
To this it might be objected that one learns the meaning of ‘blue’ through seeing blue things and being told they are blue; learning the meaning of the word is a matter of attaching a word to the look of something; the look is basic.
This objection relies for its persuasiveness partly on an ambiguity in ‘seeing blue things’.
Does this mean ‘there being things one sees that are in fact blue’ or does it mean ‘one's seeing things as blue’?
Compare, ‘One learns what it is for something to be absent through things being absent’; and, ‘One learns what it is for something to be absent through noticing the absence of things’.
Neither will do.
If one can notice the absence of something one must already  know what it is for things to be absent.
Similarly, if one can see things as blue one must already have the concept of blueness.
On the other hand, that something is in fact absent, or in fact blue, does not help.
Empiricism, as a theory of how we acquire concepts, requires there to be something which is both a ‘state of consciousness’and such that it does not have logical conditions, that is, is unlike a would-be belief.
What it requires it posits: a ‘feeling’ or ‘sensation’.
‘What I am conscious of when I see the colour blue’, says Mill ‘is a feeling of blue colour’— a feeling excited in my mind by the outward object.
Once posited, to be what the colour-word is the name of, this ‘feeling’ or ‘sensation’becomes an element, in our thought about these matters, of which it is almost impossible to rid ourselves.
OF THE VISIBLE APPEARANCES OF OBJECTS
Although John Locke was neither the first nor the last philosopher to address a problem which artists and aestheticians as well as other philosophers constantly must face, he exerted a telling influence on its history.
In his Essay he observed, ‘When we set before our eyes a round globe…it is certain that the idea thereby imprinted in our mind is of a flat circle.’
According to David Hume, Locke was not alone in thinking that visual perception involves something two-dimensional: ‘It is commonly allowed by philosophers that all bodies which discover themselves to the eye appear as if painted on a plain surface.’
Philosophers, and especially philosophers of art, who say that visual perception involves something two-dimensional usually go on to say that it involves something else, a judgement whereby we get from the two-dimensional to the three-dimensional, the world of solid objects at a distance from the perceiver.
At the same time they grant that this account of visual perception does not accord with how things seem to ‘the vulgar’.
The vulgar, they explain, mistake what is really something judged for something we just see.
René Descartes, for instance, says that the size, shape and distance of a staff ‘clearly depend upon the understanding alone’, but ‘are vulgarly assigned to sense’.
Why?
‘The reason for this is just that in these matters custom makes us reason and judge so quickly, or rather we recall the judgments previously made about similar things; and thus we fail to distinguish the difference between these operations and a simple sense perception’.
Locke gives much the same explanation.
The judgement is ‘performed so constantly and so quick, that we take that for the perception of our sensation which is an idea formed by our judgment’.
It is hard to see how this explanation can do what is required of it.
In making a judgement a person can be right or wrong.
But it makes no sense to say of something imprinted that it is right  or wrong.
This difference remains however constantly or quickly a judgement ensues on what the advocates of the theory call a ‘sensation’ or ‘impression,.
Perhaps Locke did not recognise the difference because he used the same word, ‘idea’, both for what we would ordinarily call an idea and for what is imprinted in, or on, the mind, the ‘sensation’.
Baruch Spinoza called Locke's ‘sensation’ an image, and warned about not distinguishing between an idea, as something affirmed or denied, and an image:
I warn the readers to make an accurate distinction between idea, or a conception of the mind, and the images of things…
Those who think that ideas consist of images which are formed in us by the concourse of bodies…regard ideas as lifeless pictures on a board, and preoccupied thus with this misconception they do not see that an idea, insofar as it is an idea, involves affirmation or negation.
Locke seems not to have heeded Spinoza's warning.
If Locke's account is rejected then we are back with the admission that our visual experience does not seem to accord with the impression theory.
What really happens when we look at a globe, or a painting?
Are we wrong about our perceptual experience, or is the impression theory a false theory?
Let us discuss these questions separately.
Let us begin with the proposition that our visual experience does somehow involve a judgement.
Can some account be given of how it does so which does not commit us to the theory that there are two distinct elements in visual perception, something two-dimensional, picture-like, on the one hand, and a judgement, on the other?
I shall approach this question via consideration of two senses of ‘appearance’.
What Thomas Reid says in a section entitled, ‘Of the visible appearances of objects’ in his Inquiry into the Human Mind will provide a convenient entry into the discussion.
THE MEANING OF ‘APPEAR TO BE'
At the beginning of the section Reid considers the artist's need to acquire ‘the habit of distinguishing the appearance of objects  to the eye, from the judgment which we form by sight, of their colour, distance, magnitude, and figure.’
painting, he says, is ‘the only profession in life wherein it is necessary to make this distinction.’
It is necessary for the painter to make the distinction because unless what he captures on his canvas is what Reid calls ‘the appearance of objects to the eye’ the viewer of the painting will not make the right judgements.
That is, he will not make the same judgements as he would make if he were viewing the scene itself.
Suppose, for example, that the sea is such that one might remark on its blueness.
If the painter were to use the same intensity of blue for the sea both near and far then the effect would not be at all realistic.
for the sea to be judged to be the same colour the painter has to paint it different colours.
There has to be a degradation of the colour on the canvas to correspond to the distance of the sea in the scene depicted.
The masters in painting, Reid says, ‘know how to make the objects appear to be of the same colour by making their picture really of different colours’.
It is his use of ‘appear to be’ that concerns us.
What is this sense of ‘appear to be’?
In the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary there are eight meanings of ‘appear’ listed.
The seventh is ‘to be in one's opinion; to seem’.
Does this help?
Is ‘The sea appears to a viewer to be the same colour all over’ simply an alternative way of saying ‘The viewer is of the opinion that (or judges that, or thinks that) the sea is the same colour all over?’
The trouble with this is that the viewer, to whom the sea appears to be uniformly blue in the sense of ‘appears’ in question, may, in fact, think that the sea merely reflects the colour of the sky, or even that colours exist only in the mind.
If ‘appears’ is the logical complement of ‘thinks’, so that‘X appears φ to Y’means ‘Y thinks X is φ’, then the thinking involved must somehow be on a different level, or something, to what we ordinarily understand by thinking.
Otherwise the ‘thought’ that the sea is uniformly blue, which is the logical complement of its appearing to be uniformly blue, could not consistently be entertained along with the thought that the sea is not really blue at all.
The position we have reached is that when it is said that the sea appears to a viewer to be uniformly blue this is neither a statement about what Reid calls the ‘visible appearance’ of the sea, nor straightforwardly a statement about the viewer's opinion.
It begins to look as if ‘the appearance of objects to the eye’ and ‘the judgement which we form by sight’do not constitute a dichotomy.
Both the  rationalists and the empiricists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries thought in terms of a dichotomous division between sensing and thinking.
It begins to look as if there is a sense of ‘appears’ which is the complement neither of ‘senses’nor of ‘thinks’.
This may become clearer if we consider a different example, the Müller-Lyer illusion (Figure 10.1).
In some sense of ‘appears’ one of the lines in the familiar Müller-Lyer figure AB appears shorter  than the other, BC.
It is not the sense in which a lamppost in the distance appears shorter than one a few feet away.
That is, the appearance of AB being shorter than BC is not what may be called a ‘perspectival appearance’.
If I trace the two lines on a transparent screen between my eye and the lines, the lines in my tracing, as in the original, will be equal in length.
Furthermore, ‘AB appears shorter than BC’ does not mean the same as ‘AB is in my opinion shorter than BC’.
AB still appears shorter than BC even after I have measured them and found them to be equal.
All the same, opinions do come into it somehow.
But how?
I said, above, that if ‘appears’ is the logical complement of ‘thinks’then ‘the thinking involved must somehow be on a different level, or something, to what we ordinarily understand by thinking’.
By considering what our two examples, the apparently blue sea and the apparently unequal lines, have in common, it is now possible to take this a stage further.
What they have in common is that we have qualms about both ‘The sea is blue’ and ‘The lines are unequal’.
We say, ‘The sea appears blue’ and ‘AB looks shorter than BC’because we have reason to refrain from the stronger statement.
Someone who did not know about the Müller-Lyer illusion being an illusion might well say, ‘AB is shorter than BC’(if the appearance was not misleading in this way we would not call it an ‘illusion’).
What this means is that the appearance, in the nonperspectival sense, can be identified by the use of a hypothetical  statement.
The appearance is such that if the viewer did not know better then he would say, ‘AB is shorter than BC’.
The point of saying ‘AB looks shorter’ is to exhibit one's sophistication in the matter.
And the same goes for ‘The sea looks blue’.
One does not say of a cornflower that it looks blue — unless, of course, one wants to exhibit one's sophistication in the matter of colours being ‘secondary qualities’.
The nonperspectival appearance, then, is identified by reference to a thought from which we wisely refrain, a ‘would-be’ thought.
Since it has this connection with thoughts I shall call it the epistemic or cognitive appearance.
That one does not say of a cornflower that it looks blue is a linguistic point, not a psychological one.
If someone, looking at a flower, said, ‘It's blue’, on account of what he saw, drawing no inferences, and not lying, then it would be psychologically true to say that it looked blue to him even though it would be linguistically odd to say this if one had no reason to doubt that the flower was blue.
The fact that we may have no reason to say of someone looking at a blue flower that it looks blue to him does not mean that it does not look blue to him.
Whenever anyone, Y, is in a position to say, ‘X is φ’ on account of what he sees, drawing no inferences, and not lying, then it is true to say that X appears to him to be φ, even if it goes against our linguistic practice of saying, ‘X appears to Y to be φ’only if we have a reason not to say, ‘X is φ’.
In this sense, epistemic appearances are coextensive with empirical knowledge, and without epistemic appearances there would be no empirical knowledge.
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN EPISTEMIC AND PERSPECTIVAL APPEARANCES
There are four related conceptual differences between epistemic and perspectival appearances:(1) Epistemic appearances are subjective, whereas perspectival appearances are objective;(2) It makes no sense to say that X appears to be φ to Y but Y does not know it, whereas it does make sense to say that X presents such-and-such a perspectival appearance to the point of view Y occupies but Y does not know it;(3) X can appear to be φ to Y only if Y possesses the concept φ: nothing similar can be said about perspectival appearances;(4) Epistemic appearances are related to their  objects by being true or false of them, whereas perspectival appearances are related to their objects mathematically.
All these differences require elucidation.
(1) Reid remarks that ‘a man born blind, if he were instructed in mathematics, would be able to determine the visible figure of a body, when its real figure, distance, and position, are given.’
Another way of putting this would be to say that the perspectival appearance of an object at a point of view is a function of the object's real figure, its inclination relative to the point of view, and its distance from the point of view, and is a function of nothing else.
To the perspectival appearance at that point of view being what it is it makes no difference whether or not the point of view is occupied by a viewer.
The perspectival appearance, in other words, is objective.
It is as objective as the object of which it is a perspectival appearance.
There could still be perspectival appearances of objects to points of view even if all sentient life ceased to exist.
The epistemic appearance, on the other hand, is subjective.
Think, for example, of the well-known figure (Figure 10.2) which originally appeared in the American Journal of Psychology .
Some  times it looks like an old woman with a large hooked nose, at other times like a charming young lady with her face turned away over her right shoulder.
The old woman's sharp mouth is the young lady's neckband.
‘Now it appears to be a picture of an old woman’ invites the question, ‘To whom?’
Epistemic appearances are appearances of objects to beings capable of recognising them.
There would be no epistemic appearances were there no such beings.
(2) In the epistemic sense of ‘appears’ it makes no sense to say that the sea appears to be blue to someone but he does not know it, or that line AB appears to him to be shorter than line BC but he does not know it, or that the young lady/old woman figure appears to him to be a drawing of a young lady but he does not know it.
On the other hand, in the perspectival sense of ‘appears’ an object can present a certain appearance to someone occupying a certain point of view and he may not know it.
Even if he is trying to attend to the perspectival appearance presented to his point of view he may get it wrong.
Psychological experiments have proved this.ii
(3) I remarked above that epistemic appearances are identified by reference to a thought from which we wisely refrain, a ‘would-be’ thought.
We say, for example, ‘Looking at the Müller-Lyer figure, I would have said that AB was shorter than BC had I not known it to be an illusion’.
To be capable of such a thought one must possess the relevant concept, in this case that of length.
AB cannot appear, in the epistemic sense of ‘appear’, to me to be shorter than BC unless I possess this concept.
Similarly, the young lady/old woman figure cannot appear to me to be a picture of a young lady unless I possess the concept of age, and all the other concepts involved in that of age.
Epistemic appearances are concept-dependent.
Perspectival appearances, on the other hand, are not concept-dependent.
Since they are objective the question of whether or not someone possesses a concept does not arise.
(4) Epistemic appearances are true or false of their objects.
A cornflower appears to be blue, and it is blue.
The sea appears to be blue, but it is not really blue; it merely reflects the sky.
AB appears to be shorter than BC, but is not; the appearance does not correspond to reality; the appearance, we might say, is nonveridical.
If most experiences were nonveridical — or, to put it another way, if seeing did not usually justify believing — we probably would not survive for long.
Nature has seen to it that for the most part we see things as they are, and so have little occasion to say, ‘It appears to be….’
Epistemic appearances can be true or false of objects by virtue of being identified by reference to would-be thoughts about them.
Perspectival appearances are not so identified.
Given an object and a point of view relative to it, the perspectival appearance the object presents to that point of view is determined mathematically.
It makes no more sense to say that the perspectival appearance is true (or false) of the object than it would be to say that the size of the angle of a triangle is true (or false) of the other two angles, which determine its size.
IS THE IMPRESSION THEORY FALSE?
In the introduction I raised the question, ‘Are we wrong about our perceptual experience, or is the impression theory a false theory?’
To accept what I have been saying about epistemic appearances is to accept that our visual experience does somehow involve a judgement about what we are looking at, whether in our experience of works of art or in ordinary visual experience.
Locke was evidently not prepared to accept this.
Doubtless he acknowledged the epistemic sense of ‘to appear to be’ in his everyday life and conversation.
But he did not acknowledge it in his philosophy.
Why not?
The story goes back to Descartes.
He conceived of mind and matter as two substances, the relation between which can only be a causal one.
Moreover, the only properties he would allow to matter were ones that could be dealt with by the science of mathematics.
Sensible colours, sounds, tastes, and so on, must somehow be fitted into the mind side of the mind/matter divide.
They must be what Robert Boyle later called ‘secondary’ qualities.
If the mind is so conceived that its relation to the world can only be a causal one, then to perceive something must be to be causally affected by it.
Now, most of our everyday talk about the objects of perception does not reflect this.
As Thomas Reid remarked, in a passage that could be mistaken for one by the twentieth-century Oxford philosopher J. L. Austin:
There is a figurative meaning of impressions on the mind…but this meaning applies only to objects that are interesting.
To  say that an object which I see with perfect indifference makes an impression upon my mind is not, as I apprehend, good English…
When I look upon the wall of my room, the wall does not act at all, nor is capable of acting; the perceiving is an act or operation in me.
That this is the common apprehension of mankind with regard to perception is evident from the manner of expressing it in all languages.
To someone who holds the Cartesian view it must seem that only something we would hardly call ‘perception’ reflects the philosophical truth of the matter.
I may say that I ‘perceive’ the indigestibility of something I have eaten through its effects on me; the unpleasant feelings I have in my stomach.
Allowing that, being feelings, they are, more accurately speaking, in my mind, this use of ‘perceive’, though to us a rather strained one, must seem to the Cartesian to be the paradigm for philosophically responsible talk of what it is to perceive something.
For only this use of ‘perceive’ exhibits the supposed philosophical truth that perceiving is a matter of being causally affected by something.
It seemed to Locke that the strained sense of ‘perceive’ must indeed be the one on which all the rest of our talk about the objects of perception should be fashioned.
The example in terms of which he expounds his Cartesian theory of perception is that of eating manna.
Of the various meanings of ‘manna’, perhaps ‘laxative’ makes most sense in the context.
Locke notes that ‘manna, by the bulk, figure, texture and motion of its parts, has a power to produce the sensations of sickness, and sometimes of acute pains or gripings in us’.
He then goes on to declare that ‘as the pain and sickness caused by manna are confessedly nothing but the effects of its operation on the stomach’, so sweetness and whiteness are ‘but the effects of the operations of manna by the motion, size, and figure of its particles on the eyes and palate’.
He notes that ‘men are hardly to be brought to think that sweetness and whiteness are not really in manna’, but this does not lead him to question his  declared view that sweetness and whiteness are on a par with the ‘ideas of sickness and pain', ideas which ‘are not in the manna, but effects of its operations on us, and are nowhere when we feel them not’.
Locke's use of the term ‘ideas’(‘ideas of sickness and pain') is a clue as to why the manna → gripings model for talk about the objects of perception appealed to him so much.
In spite of the  causal theory's having been taken over from the rationalist, Descartes, it could be put to use in the interests of empiricism.
If the things produced in us through perception are ideas, that is, the very same things that are the meanings of words, then words have meaning for us by virtue of our present-life perceptual experiences.
And the nonempiricist theories that they have meaning for us by virtue of our having  encountered platonic forms in an earlier non-bodily life, or by virtue of having had ideas put into our mind-s by God, or by virtue of our having been born with them, can all be happily abandoned.
The stock objection to Locke's identification of the ‘idea’ that is the meaning of the word ‘pain' with the ‘idea’, the feeling or sensation, that is caused in us when we eat too much manna is that what someone needs, in order to be able to use the word ‘pain' meaningfully, is not pain, but the concept ‘pain'.
This is clear in the case of the thought that someone else is in pain.
As Ludwig Wittgenstein puts it: ‘In order to doubt whether someone else is in pain he needs, not pain, but the concept ‘pain'.
But what is it to have the concept ‘pain' if not to have in one's mind some notion of what the word means, a notion presumably acquired by experiencing pain?
Wittgenstein says: ‘You learned the concept ‘pain' when you learned language.’
To understand this remark it is necessary to appreciate how radically Wittgenstein's conception of language, in the Investigations and Zettel , differs from that of John Locke.
In brief, Locke followed Thomas Hobbes in thinking of language as something to be understood in terms of thoughts.
He held what may be called the ‘thought → speech → thought’ or ‘translation’theory of communication.
Hobbes had said, ‘The general use of speech is to transfer our mental discourse into verbal; or the train of our thoughts, into a train of words.’
Just as Hobbes distinguished between mental discourse and verbal discourse, so Locke distinguished between ‘mental propositions’ and ‘verbal propositions’.
And he held the elements of mental propositions to be ideas, just as those of verbal propositions are words.
These ideas are, or are derived by ‘abstraction’ from, the ideas (= feelings, sensation) said to be caused in us when we perceive things, on the manna → gripings model for talk about the objects of perception.
If we wonder why it is not generally recognised that there are, besides verbal propositions composed of words, mental ones composed of ideas, an explanation is readily available: ‘it is very difficult to  treat of them asunder.
Because it is unavoidable, in treating of mental propositions, to make use of words; and then the instances of mental propositions cease immediately to be barely mental, and become verbal.’
Wittgenstein, on the other hand, thought of thinking as something to be understood in terms of language; and of the meaningfulness of a linguistic utterance as something to be understood in terms of a linguistic practice.
We are right in distinguishing between a sentence and its sense.
But we are wrong in thinking of the sense as something —some thing — behind the sentence.
It is the sentence, and nothing else, which has sense, and it has sense by virtue of there being an accepted common practice with sentences like it, and others.
It is this accepted common practice, not the existence of mental propositions composed of gripings-like ideas, which makes communication possible.
An expression has meaning by virtue of its use conforming to the accepted common practice.
In this connection we may even talk of rules of language, as if a linguistic practice were like a game.
Because the practice is something in which people share, there are behavioural criteria for saying that someone has cottoned on to the use of an expression.
A person without the use of his sense of sight would certainly not be in a position to make the same use of colour words as the rest of us.
Moreover, he would not be in the same position as the rest of us to cotton on to their use.
But to say this is not to say that sighted people acquire colour concepts by ‘experiencing’ colours.
To say this would be like saying that people acquire the concept of the past by experiencing it in memory.
All this about Descartes's doctrine that mind and matter are two causally-related substances, about the manna → gripings model for talk about the objects of perception, and about the empiricist doctrine about how language is meaningful, has been with a view to understanding why Locke could not acknowledge the existence of the epistemic appearances of objects.
There are two reasons, one arising from the manna → gripings model, the other from the empiricist doctrine about how language is meaningful.
(1) If seeing something is like eating it with the eye, so that it gives us sensations in our eyes as eating manna gives us ‘sensations of sickness, and sometimes of acute pains or gripings’ in our stomachs, then what physically enters the eye comes to have an importance not only for understanding the physical mechanism of visual perception, but also for understand the concept of visual  perception.
Now the lens in the eye forms an image on the retina, and, granted that physical space is Euclidean, that light travels in straight lines, that the lens in the eye is optically perfect, that the retina is uniformly curved, and so on, the image will be related by the mathematical laws of perspective to the object of which it is an image.
If seeing the object is then thought of, as required by Descartes's concept of mind, as the mind being affected by it, that is, of there being an impression not only on the retina but also on the mind, then the obvious candidate for the impression on the mind will be something that corresponds to the image on the retina.
For example, if I look at a round globe then the image on my retina will be circular, and there will be no reason to suppose that the idea imprinted in my mind will be anything other than that of a flat circle.
Unless one supposes there to be two categorially different kinds of appearances presented to the mind it will then seem that this flat circle must be the only object of visual perception, and the round globe I seem to see, the epistemic appearance, must really be a judgement I mistake for a sensation.
I am so used to leaping from the sensation, the flat circle, to the judgement, a globe, and do it so quickly, that I do not notice I have done it.
Before going on to the second reason for Locke's not acknowledging the existence of epistemic appearances I must correct a false impression I may have given, that all the seventeenth-century philosophers who succeeded Descartes toed the Cartesian line about the mind perceiving things by being causally affected by them.
One of the interesting exceptions was Antoine Arnauld.
His principal work in philosophy is a detailed refutation of Nicolas Malebranche's Cartesian theory of perception and of his non-Cartesian, Augustinian, doctrine of ‘vision in God’, the doctrine from which George Berkeley sought to dissociate himself.
With regard to the former, Arnauld argued against Malebranche that ‘objective presence’ to a mind does not require ‘local presence’, and that for something to be objectively present to a mind is not the same thing as for it to be causally active on it.
Intermediary entities called ‘ideas’ are needed neither as local presences nor as effects.
The only ‘ideas’ are acts of perception, and these in no sense come between the perceiver and the object perceived.
The concept of mind is such that we should not wonder how material objects can be present to it.
Locke read Malebranche.
His Examination of Malebranche's Opinion appeared in 1706.
But he had probably not read Arnauld, at any  rate not before he wrote the Essay.
Reid was familiar with the works of both Malebranche and Arnauld, and expressed views strikingly similar to those in the latter's Treatise in his own Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man .
(2) The reason arising from the empiricist doctrine about how language is meaningful is fairly obvious.
Epistemic appearances are concept-dependent, by virtue of being identified by reference to would-be thoughts.
Someone who has not the concept of age cannot be expected to see someone as young or old.
If, then, someone had to appear old to him for him to acquire the concept ‘old’, he would never get started.
Whatever the empiricists' originative material for concept-abstraction may be, it cannot be epistemic appearances.
For an object to appear to be φ to someone, in the epistemic sense of ‘appear’, he must already have the concept φ.
WITTGENSTEIN, AND ‘SO WE INTERPRET IT, AND SEE IT AS WE INTERPRET IT'
Locke attempted to explain epistemic appearances in terms of sensations leading so quickly on to judgements that we mistake the judgements for sensations.
Given a dichotomous division between sensing and thinking this would appear to be the only option open to him.
In Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations there is what can be construed as an argument to show that the explanation cannot work:
You could imagine the illustration [Figure 10.3]appearing in several places in a book, a text-book for instance.
In the relevant text something different is in question every time: here a glass   cube, there an inverted open box, there a wire frame of that shape, there three boards forming a solid angle.
Each time the text supplies the interpretation of the illustration.
But we can also see the illustration now as one thing now as another.
— So we interpret it, and see it as we interpret it.
Here perhaps we would like to reply: The description of what is got immediately, i.e. of the visual experience, by means of an interpretation — in an indirect description, ‘I see the figure as a box’ means: I have a particular visual experience which I have found that I always have when I interpret the figure as a box or when I look at a box.
But if it meant this I ought to know it.
I ought to be able to refer to the experience directly, and not only indirectly.
(As I can speak of red without calling it the colour of blood.)
When Wittgenstein says, ‘Each time the text supplies the interpretation of the illustration’, I think he means ‘Each time the text indicates how we are to treat the illustration’.
The same figure occurs in several places in a textbook.
Sometimes we are to treat it as a drawing of a box, sometimes as one of wire frames.
If there are nine straight lines in the figure, then interpreting it as a drawing of a box means, among other things, thinking that the box is not made of transparent material.
Otherwise there would be twelve lines in the figure.
The nine-lined figure represents a normal twelve-ed-ged non-transparent box.
Interpreting the figure as a drawing of a wire frame, on the other hand, means thinking of there being just nine pieces of straight wire in the frame.
In the latter case we apply the figure differently; the rules of projection are not the same.
The text indicates how we are to treat, how we are to apply, the figure.
This is what interpreting is.
Having said, ‘Each time the text supplies the interpretation of the illustration.
But we can also see the illustration now as one thing, now as another’, Wittgenstein imagines someone like Locke — though he does not mention Locke — saying that ‘I see the figure as a box’ means ‘I have a particular visual experience which I have found that I always have when I interpret the figure as a box or when I look at a box.’
To which he, Wittgenstein, replies, ‘But if it meant that, then I ought to know it, I ought to be able to refer to the experience directly, and not only indirectly.
(As I can speak of red without calling it the colour of blood.)’
This is not an easy point to grasp.
Let me rephrase it.
Wittgenstein  says that in addition to interpreting (= treating, applying) the figure in different ways, we can also see it in different ways: now as one thing, now as another.
The question is: what is it to see something as something?
Does ‘I see the figure as a box’ mean ‘I am experiencing something, something an artist could put on paper, which I have found I experience when I am prepared, by the text, to apply the figure in certain ways?’
Wittgenstein uses another illustration which may help to make the point clearer, the familiar ‘duck-rabbit’.
At one moment I see it as a drawing of a duck, at the next as that of a rabbit.
Is the  difference one which I could apprehend without any thoughts of ducks and rabbits?
When I say, ‘Now I see it as a duck’, am I saying that I have a certain Lockean visual sensation — that is, that the figure appears to me, in a non-concept-dependent sense of ‘appears’, in a certain way — which I have found I always have when I am led by the accompanying text to apply the figure in a certain way?
If ‘Now I see it as a duck’ did mean this, then the sensation would have to be such as to lead to the judgement ‘a drawing of a duck’and not such as to lead to the judgement ‘a drawing of a rabbit’.
But in that case it cannot be ‘a sensation of the lines on the paper’.
For that, on Locke's understanding of how visual sensations are related to impressions on the retina, is the same in the two cases of my seeing the figure as a drawing of a duck and my seeing it as a drawing of a rabbit.
Earlier we considered an objection to Locke's explanation of why our perceptual experience does not seem to accord with the impression theory of perception.
His explanation was that ‘we take that for the perception of our sensation which is an idea formed by our judgement’.
The objection was that we can be right or wrong in what we judge, but that it makes no sense to talk of something  imprinted, an impression or sensation, being right or wrong.
This makes it  difficult to see how the judgement could be mistaken for a sensation.
Wittgenstein's argument provides us with a related objection to Locke's explanation.
On Locke's understanding of visual experience there is no means of explaining, in terms of what he experiences, why a perceiver should at one moment say ‘a drawing of a duck’ and at another ‘a drawing of a rabbit’.
Far from explaining how judgement arises out of experience, the holder of the impression theory of perception makes the connection inexplicable, whether we speak of the visual experience of a globe, a duck-rabbit, or a Constable painting of a cornfield.
THE LOCATION OF BODILY SENSATIONS
What is the difference between a pain in one's foot and a pain in one's stomach?
‘The most natural and immediate answer’, says Williams James, in The Principles of Psychology , is that the difference is one ‘of place pure and simple’.
But this answer James himself rejects.
He rejects it not because of what his experiments, or his introspections, tell him but because of what he calls ‘an insuperable logical difficulty’.
Gilbert Ryle, in The Concept of Mind , does not even consider what James calls ‘the most natural and immediate answer’.
For him, the first question is, ‘By what criteria do we come to locate or mislocate sensations as being in some sense of ‘in’ in the right knee or in the pit of the stomach?’, as though it were obviously not simply a matter of having the sensation in a certain place.
A pain's having a certain location, says Ryle, is like its being, say, a rheumatic pain, and ‘pains do not arrive already hall-marked ‘rheumatic’’.
The ‘insuperable logical difficulty’, according to James, is that ‘no single quale of sensation can, by itself, amount to a consciousness of position …
Position has nothing intrinsic about it’.
To understand this, one has to think along certain lines, about what it means to talk of a sensation being in a certain part of one's body.
I shall now try to make explicit what these lines are.
A person may say that he feels a pain in his foot, where his shoe pinches him.
The grammatical similarity of this to talk of a person feeling, say a pin in his foot might lead one to suppose that pains are in parts of one's body in the same way as pins, wounds and broken bones, are in parts of one's body; that is, that they differ from these latter only in being invisible, intangible, and so on : they are the proper objects of the sense of pain.
Indeed, one scientist has been so misled by this grammatical similarity as to say that, given appropriate nerve graftings, two people could feel the same pain just as, if they looked in the same direction, they could see the same table.
But to say this is to confuse a sensation with its cause or object.
Pains are sensations, not things sensed.
Admittedly, we do sometimes talk as if a person could have a pain in his foot and be unaware of it, perhaps while his attention is on something else, but this is explained by there being different levels of consciousness, or self-consciousness, in the mind; it does not require our saying that pains have the same sort of mind-independent existence as tables.
This being so, when a person says that he feels a pain in his foot, what he means is not anything like what he means when he says he feels a pin in his foot.
In talk of ‘feeling a pain' the word ‘feel’ is being used pleonastically.
Instead of saying that a person feels a pain in his foot it might be less misleading to say that he has an in-the-foot pain.
But expressing it like this makes it look as if there could be a quality of ‘in-the-foot-ness’, and this is absurd since position is not a quality.
(To say that something has a certain position is to say how it is related spatially to other things.
One can say that the whole material universe has a certain colour, but not that it has a certain position.
Similarly, one can say that a bodily sensation has the intrinsic quality of being a tingle, or is hall-marked ‘tingling’, but not that it has an in-the-foot quality.)
Position not being a quality, and sensations not being in parts of the body as pins, wounds and broken bones are in parts of the body, it would seem that the only way in which a part of the body can enter into one's experience of a pain is as the apparent place of the prick, scratch, cut, or whatever it may be, which has given rise to the sensation.
So to have a pain ‘in one's foot’ is to have a pain which one associates with something being the matter with one's foot.
Strictly speaking, the sensation itself is not located; to talk of having a pain ‘in one's foot’ is to talk elliptically.
One is not really aware of the pain as being in a certain place; one is aware of the pain, and one connects it with a certain place, rather as one connects different sorts of sensations with different sorts of malady — rheumatism, indigestion, and so on.
Ryle asks, ‘By what criteria do we come to locate or mislocate sensations as being in some sense of ‘'in’ in the right knee or in the pit of the stomach?’
But he gives only the outline of an answer to this question, for he does not say what the criteria are.
We can recognise a ‘dull load’ as a sign of indigestion through its being located in the stomach, since previous stomach-located ‘dull loads’have occurred in conjunction with the other things which go to  make up indigestion.
But what is it that enables a person to recognise a pain as having its source in, say, his finger?
If the pain which he had whenever he had anything the matter with his finger had always been a throbbing pain, and the pain caused by anything the matter with any other part of his body had never been a throbbing pain, then now, on experiencing a throbbing pain, he would naturally associate it with his finger.
In that case the throbbingness of the pain would be his criterion for its being a finger pain.
Ryle seems to imply that there are such criteria, but he does not say what they are.
The theory of which Ryle's answer provides an outline has been known traditionally as ‘the Local Sign theory’.
It is a theory with a negative, and a positive, side to it.
James expressed the negative side when he described it as ‘the theory which denies that there can be in a sensation any element of actual locality, any tone as it were which cries to us immediately and without further ado, ‘I am here’ or ‘I am there’’.
Positively, the theory asserts that there is something about the sensation which correlates with the stimulation being at a certain point, and which can thus, in time, become a sign to us of the stimulation being at that point.
In the latter half of the nineteenth century there was considerable controversy as to what it was about a sensation, which differed according to the part of the body stimulated.
The philosopher-psychologist Hermann Lotze distinguished what he called ‘a main impression’(of impact, pressure, heat or cold), and ‘an auxiliary impression’.
The auxiliary impression, he suggested, was due to such things as the skin being of different thicknesses at different parts of the body, the fact that sometimes it extends over the firm surfaces of the bones, sometimes over the flesh of the muscles, sometimes over cavities, and so on.
Lotze's account of how these ‘auxiliary impressions’ became signs of location is much the same as Ryle's.
That there are auxiliary impressions, Lotze points out, ‘merely explains the possibility of distinguishing impressions made at different places; but each impression must also be referred to the definite place at which it acts.
This is easy for one who sees, since he already possesses a picture of the surface of his own body; and, on this account, he now, by means of the unchanging local sign, even in the dark, translates each stimulus which he has once seen act on a definite place, to the same place in this picture of the body which is mentally presented before him.’
Objections were raised to Lotze's candidate for the position of ‘local sign’ on such grounds as that localisation was prompt and certain just where, according to Lotze's theory, one would expect it to be difficult if not impossible.
Later psychologists were cautious not to be too specific as to the exact nature of the local sign.
For example, in his Outlines of Psychology , Wilhelm Wundt said that the local sign was ‘probably due to the character of the structure of the skin', and left it at that.
The local sign itself he described as ‘a peculiar qualitative colouring, which is independent of the quality of the external impression’.
It might be thought that so long as one asserted the local sign theory only in principle (that is, did not specify the precise nature of the ‘feeling’ or ‘colouring’which is supposed to subserve localisation), one could rely on the testimony of introspection for one's theory to be confirmed.
Thus in a passage quoted by James, Wundt writes: ‘If we touch first the back of one hand and then of the other, we remark a qualitative unlikeness of sensation.
It must not be thought that such differences are mere matters of imagination, and that we take the sensations to be different because we represent each of them to ourselves as occupying a different place.
With sufficient sharpening of the attention we may, confining ourselves to the quality of the feelings alone, entirely abstract from their locality, and yet notice the difference quite as markedly.’
But other psychologists who presumably are not merely inattentive, do not find what Wundt claims to find.
Külpe, for example, in his Outlines of Psychology , writes: ‘Our sensible discrimination enables us to localise cutaneous impressions with a considerable degree of accuracy.
It is tempting to refer this accuracy of localisation to qualitative differences within the scale of pressure sensations.
But if we try to abstract, as far as possible, from the local value of the impressions which affect different parts of our skins, we seem to find nothing like a really qualitative difference in the sensations.’
When an increasing number of psychologists could not find what the theory required them to find, the theory was modified.
The presupposition that for something about a stimulus to mediate localisation it must be something of which one is conscious, was abandoned.
Külpe attributed this presupposition to ‘metaphysical prepossession’.
He wrote, with reference to the local sign theories of Lotze and Wundt: ‘The thought upon which this whole theory is based is that the impressions must all be of a conscious nature.
And here we see the influence of metaphysical prepossession.
It was difficult to conceive that an unequivocal relation obtaining between tactual impressions and visual ideas, or other factors subserving localisation, could have arisen without conscious direction, by way of purely physiological connection.
But there is no justification for the assumption of these conscious intermediaries in the facts of consciousness itself.’
With this admission, the positive side of the local sign theory became the unexceptionable thesis that there is some cause in our bodily make-up for our localising sensations as we do.
Besides attempting to say what it was about a sensation which served as a sign of the location of whatever had given rise to it, adherents of the local sign theory had also to say in what way the reference to a part of the body was made — whether in the form of visual imagery, or of a judgement, or of something else.
They had denied, in the negative side of their theory, that the part of the body entered directly into the experience, as the place of the sensation; they had to supply an account to take the place of this ‘natural’ view of the matter.
The accounts which local sign theorists have given of what might loosely be called the ‘experience’ of localisation have, in the main, been variations on three themes.
The first is that it consists in visual imagery.
Lotze's own notion would appear to be that in addition to the experience of the touch we have a visual image of the whole body, with one part, as it were, highlighted.
The more usual version of this theme is simply that one has a visual image of the part of the body touched.
There is not held to be any appreciable time-lapse -between the experience of the touch and the arising in one's mind of the visual image.
One author uses the expression ‘with the speed of lightning’ in this connection.
Secondly, it has been held that ‘the pressure may touch off at once some form of words.’
This account is rarely given in isolation.
The verbal judgement would seem to be thought of, rather, as an adjunct to the visual image.
The third theme is to the effect that localisation consists in movement, or in a felt tendency to movement, either of a hand or foot to the part of one's body touched (Gardner Murphy), or of one's eyes in the direction of the part touched (Alexander Bain).
From their written works it would appear that most psychologists up to about 1935 have assumed that these three things, separately or together, must constitute the whole of what we mean when  we speak of a person feeling a touch as a touch on his shoulder or a pain as a pain in his foot.
Little has been written on the subject since then, but one may infer from the few remarks that are made on it that psychologists are no longer so impressed by ‘the insuperable logical difficulty’ James believed there to be in the way of saying that the difference between sensations may be one of ‘place pure and simple’.
Indeed, the whole point of the local sign theory, as an alternative to the ‘place pure and simple’ account has been lost on some psychologists.
Thus K. F. Muenzinger writes: ‘When a point on the skin is stimulated by contact, the perception contains not merely the element of touch but also that of a definite place where the contact occurs.
This second element has been given the name ‘local sign’’.
William James, at least, is in no doubt that the local sign theory is not ‘the most natural and immediate answer’ to the question with which this paper began.
He accepts it only because of what he calls ‘an insuperable logical difficulty’: position is not a quality, so a sensation can convey to us the position of a stimulus only by virtue of our ability to interpret something about it as meaning a certain position.
I said that to understand this difficulty one has to think along certain lines.
I said this because if one were to think along certain other lines the fact that position is not a quality would seem irrelevant.
I shall now try to make explicit these other lines of thought about the location of bodily sensations.
The two lines of thought start from roughly the same point, but soon diverge.
A person may say that he feels a pain in his foot, but it is obvious that he does not feel it as he might feel a pin in his foot.
He does not get at the pain ‘outwardly’(by the use of hands, eyes, and so on), but ‘inwardly’.
But what does the word ‘inwardly’ mean here?
W. Russell Brain has said: ‘The surface of the body is a frontier which is perceived from both sides, by vision as part of the external world and from within by the various forms of cutaneous sensibility.’
But this talk about ‘a frontier which is perceived from both sides’ makes it sound as if in addition to the physical eye which I can use to get at the pin there is a sort of phantom eye in my skull with which I can see what goes on under my skin.
Obviously this will not do, for pain is itself a sensation, not something of which one is aware through a sensation.
This interpretation of the terms ‘outwardly’ and ‘inwardly’is too literal, too space-minded.
A less literal interpretation of the terms ‘outwardly’ and ‘inwardly’is suggested by what C. A. Mace writes in an article in British Philosophy in Mid-Century .
Summing up his criticism of what he calls ‘dispositional’ and ‘analytic’behaviourism, Mace writes: ‘In short, there is a ghost in the machine after all.
The ghost in the machine is, we may say, the machine itself as it appears to itself…
The ‘introspected self’ is thus a bodily self, not as someone else's body appears to and is described by the professional anatomist in his laboratory, but as the anatomist's own body appears to the anatomist himself.’
At the end of the article he writes: ‘We may say, if we like, that the introspected mind is just a body and its goings on as they appear to the body in question and not to anybody else.
Or, if we prefer it, we may say the physical body as it is described by the anatomist is the more ghostly thing, a phantasy of cells and cell assemblies, a convenient way of talking about ourselves and that we really are more or less what we feel ourselves to be.’
It is not perfectly clear from what Mace says what it is that he wants to contrast with my body as it appears to others.
He mentions ‘my body as it appears to me’, and also ‘my body as it appears to itself’.
What would ordinarily be meant by ‘my body as it appears to me’?
To a person's tongue, a hole in one of his teeth may seem very large, although to others, looking in his mouth, it may seem quite small.
This is a case in which we distinguish between a person's body as it appears to that person, and as it appears to others.
A person who has a migraine or who has been spinning round and round, may feel as if he is reeling over, although there is no movement to be seen by people watching him.
This is the sort of situation which leads to our distinguishing ‘ourselves as we feel ourselves to be’ and ‘ourselves as we are to others’.
If Mace means what is ordinarily meant by ‘my body as it appears to me’ then the distinction he draws is of no use to us.
I can feel a hole, but not a pain, in my tooth, with my tongue.
It is not in my body as it might appear to others (if they put their tongue in my mouth) but does appear to me (who has got my tongue in my mouth) that I have pains.
But from his identifying a person's body as it appears to that person with that person's ‘introspected self’, it would seem that Mace cannot mean what is ordinarily meant by the former phrase.
What then does he mean?
John-Paul Sartre, in Being and Nothingness , writes: ‘So far as the physicians have had any experience with my body, it was with my body in the midst of the world and as it is for others.
My body as it is for me does not appear to me in the midst of the world.’
One might go a step further.
My body as it is for me does not appear at all.
The notion of ‘something appearing to somebody’ is inapplicable here.
If we distinguish between ‘my body’ and ‘how it appears to me’we can only be considering what Sartre calls ‘my body in the midst of the world’.
One way of expressing this point would be to say that my body as it is for me is sensitive , whereas my body in the midst of the world is sensible (meaning, to be sensed or perceived).
It is in my body qua sensitive that sensations occur; and the occurrence of a sensation in some part of my body qua sensitive is all that I mean when I say that I feel a sensation in some part of my body.
The only job the words ‘I feel’ have, in a report of one's bodily sensations, is to prepare the hearer for its being a report about one's body qua sensitive and not about one's body qua sensible.
That this is so comes out in the way we say, for example, ‘There is a pain in my foot’ as readily as ‘I feel a pain in my foot’.
When we say, ‘I feel a pain in my foot’ we do not mean that we have observed or witnessed something, and hence we do not mean that we have observed or witnessed something as being in a certain place.
Now the fact that position is not a quality is certainly relevant to one's awareness of the position of things; it means that to be aware of a thing's position it is logically necessary that one should be aware of how it stands in relation to something else.
But it is not relevant to a thing's having the position it has; it does not mean, for example, that to have the position it has, a thing must be aware of how it stands in relation to something else.
If one thinks of feeling a sensation in some part of one's body on the pattern of being aware of the position of something, then the fact that position is not a quality will seem relevant.
But once the difference between one's body qua sensitive and one's body qua sensible, is realised, it is seen not to be relevant.
To understand what is meant by talk of ‘one's body qua sensitive’ is to appreciate how misleading is talk of ‘feeling’bodily sensations.
It misleads one into thinking that a person is somehow divorced from his body, a disembodied observer of it.
The lines of thought outlined above start from roughly the same point, but lead to very different conclusions.
For convenience I  shall refer to these conclusions as the Sartre-type account, and the James-type account, of the location of bodily sensations.
The Sartre-type account is really no more than an endorsement of what James called ‘the most natural and immediate answer’ to the question, ‘What is the difference between a pain in one's foot and a pain in one's stomach?’
The difference is said to be one of place, the place of the sensation in the body qua sensitive.
In this conclusion nothing is explained; all that is provided is a terminology (the distinction between the body-as-it-is-for-me or body qua sensitive; and the body-in-the-midst-of-the-world or body qua sensible) which makes it possible to state the ‘natural’ answer unambiguously and so that it is not open to logical difficulties.
The James-type account is, by contrast, one which requires us to concede that we are somehow mistaken about the nature of our experience of bodily sensations.
It requires us to admit that having a pain in one's foot is really having a pain (in the void, so to speak), and associating it with one's foot, such association being in the form, say, of a judgement that there is something the matter with one's foot.
There are indications that the James-type account is the more popular among those few contemporary British philosophers who have anything to say on the subject.
One such indication is the readiness with which some philosophers talk of a person locating a pain in another person's body, or in an article of furniture.
Such talk can be given meaning only if a James-type account is accepted.
Then it means that a person, as the result of observing that whenever, say, a table is hit, he suffers pain, when now he is in pain, automatically associates it with the table.
This, or something like it, is, on the James-type account, what is meant by his having a pain ‘in the table’.
And for him to have a pain ‘in his foot’ is the same, except that‘his foot’takes the place of ‘the table’.
Since it is, to say the least' paradoxical to suppose that we are mistaken about our own experiences, there must be some explanation of the popularity of the James-type account.
The ‘insuperable logical difficulty’ to which James refers cannot be the whole explanation, since it appears as a difficulty only if the general conceptual background of the local sign theory is granted.
We must now turn our attention to this general conceptual background itself.
How does it differ from the conceptual background of the Sartre-type account?
There would seem to be two main differences.
One difference is this: Sartre's aim is the philosophical one of redescribing the location of bodily sensations in a way which does not lend itself to such misunderstandings as that two people could feel the same pain as they can see the same table.
James's aim is the psychological one of explaining how it is that a person is able to locate a stimulus on the surface of his body.
The positive side of the local sign theory is an expression of the faith that such abilities can be explained by reference to processes (of inference from observed correlations, and so on) which are themselves conscious.
The negative side of the local sign theory is what is left over when the search for a sign of location is abandoned.
The other difference is that in the James-type account the mind is pictured as being related to the body in a certain manner.
What this manner is is usually not made very plain.
Often no more is said than that the brain is the ‘organ’ or ‘seat’of the mind.
But along with this goes the idea that to talk of ‘the mind’ is to talk of something actually in the head, or at any rate capable of making contact with the rest of the body via the brain.
Such a picture of the mind naturally lends itself to a James-type account of the localisation of bodily sensations: if the mind has its ‘seat’ in the head, and sensations are in the mind, then what appears to be the directly-kno-wn location of the sensation must really be the indirectly-known location of the source of the sensation.
In the Sartre-type account, on the other hand, the relation of my-body-as-it-is-for-me and my-bod-y-in-the-midst-of-the-world is not pictured at all.
Sartre himself writes:
If we wish to reflect on the nature of the body we must in succession examine the body first as being-for-itself and then as being-for-others.
We must keep constantly in mind the idea that since these two aspects of the body are on different and incommunicable levels of being, they can not be reduced to one another.
Being-for-itself must be wholly body and it must be wholly consciousness; it cannot be united with a body.
Similarly being-for-others is wholly body; there are no ‘psychic phenomena’ there to be united with the body.
There is nothing behind the body.
It is not easy for a person with one sort of conceptual background to understand an account which presupposes a different conceptual background.
It is even harder to get somebody to renounce his  conceptual background.
This is because the connection between a person's everyday experience and his conceptual background is usually a good deal more tenuous than that between, say, his everyday experience of the weather and his belief that August is a wetter month than July.
It is correspondingly harder to find something at which one can point, and say, ‘This shows you to be wrong’.
The philosopher's task must always be to seek out and make the most of those regions in which the connection is least tenuous.
In this essay I have tried to make the most of one such region — in which the connection between one's everyday experience of bodily sensations and one's conception of the relation of body and mind seems fairly plain: to accept the James-type account, and the general conceptual background of which it is a symptom, is to deny one's everyday experience of the difference between a pain in one's foot and a pain in one's stomach.
The World Without
All that I ever learned at college of philosophy had been a conception of the external world as a colourless and soundless wilderness whose true nature one could never know, which one could not even imagine — but which I did, none the less, imagine as a vast landscape of polar spaces in whose eternal twilight one wandered, preoccupied and deluded by a flicker of magic-lantern pictures which danced inside one's mind and for ever remained private to oneself.
Edmund Wilson,I Thought of Daisy 
THE HEAT-PAIN ARGUMENT
I have the impression that the man in Edmund Wilson's novel,I Thought of Daisy , did not like what he had learned of  philosophy at college.
He preferred another conception of the world, the conception of it as a familiar, warm, colourful, sound-filled place to be shared with others — and perhaps especially with Daisy.
I sympathise.
The logical thing to do, however, is not to turn one's back on philosophy in general, but to look for mistakes in the particular philosophy of which the conception of the world as ‘external’, colourless, and so on , is a part.
What emerges when we do this is that the philosophy in question was originally fashioned to suit scientists.
Scientists found themselves able to explain how one event causes another in the physical world without supposing objects in that world to have all the qualities we perceive them as having.
Sometimes the scientist and the philosopher were one and the same person.
As scientist he adopted a certain method of explaining things; as philosopher he tried to go one step further, he tried to justify his scientific methodology with arguments intended to prove that the things he did not need in his explanations — objective colours, sounds, and so on— did  not exist.
He tried to prove that colours, sounds, and so on, existed
The argument that is to be found most frequently in the writings of the philosophers who held this conception does not in fact relate to colours and sounds, though colours and sounds certainly received a good deal of attention.
It relates to heat.
Perhaps this was because Galileo had claimed of heat that its ‘generally accepted notion comes very far from the truth…inasmuch as it is supposed to be a true accident, affection, and quality really residing in the thing which we perceive to be heated.’
The problem for the philosophers was: how to prove the generally accepted notion to be false.
I think it was René Descartes who first formulated what I have called ‘the heat-pain argument’.
He wrote:
I have a sensation of heat as I approach the fire; but when I approach the same fire too closely, I have a sensation of pain; so there is nothing to convince me that something in the fire resembles heat, any more than the pain; it is just that there must be something in it (whatever this may turn out to be) that produces the sensations of heat or pain.
John Locke put the argument like this:
He that will consider that the same fire that at one distance produces in us the sensation of warmth, does at a nearer approach produce in us the far different sensation of pain, ought to bethink himself what reason he has to say, that his idea of warmth which was produced in him by the fire, is actually in the fire, and his idea of pain which the same fire produced in him the same way is not in the fire.
George Berkeley expounded the argument in a dialogue between two imaginary characters, Hylas and Philonous.
Hylas is persuaded to admit that when he puts his hand uncomfortably near the fire he cannot distinguish between the heat he feels, and the pain.
It is, he admits ‘one simple uniform sensation ‘.
And being one sensation, what is true of the pain must be true of the heat.
Like the pain, it ‘cannot exist but in a mind perceiving it.’
Hylas, in Berkeley's dialogue, is a born loser.
I have written another dialogue, in which I have allowed Hylas to fight back.
Philonous, in my dialogue, is much the same as he was in Berkeley's dialogue; but Hylas is a changed character.
I think the man in Edmund Wilson's novel would have liked the new Hylas.
They are on the same side.
PROOF IN PHILOSOPHY
In Berkeley's own dialogue, Hylas concedes.
In mine it is Philonous who finally says, ‘All right’(though note that it is followed by ‘but’).
Philosophers in dialogues may be persuaded by their opponents in twenty minutes of fast talk.
Philosophers in real life are more resistant to persuasion.
Let me illustrate this by relating some of the history of my ‘Hylas Fights Back’ dialogue.
I had for a long time being trying to find a way of showing the heat-pain argument to be invalid, because I could not accept the conclusion, that heat exists only as a sensation in the mind.
I had reached the point of distinguishing between the use of words like ‘hot’ and ‘cold’to say how we feel, and their use to describe things like fire and snow.
And I was trying to grasp, in terms of this distinction, the significance of Philonous's insistence, in Berkeley's dialogue, that material things are ‘senseless beings’, It struck me that Berkeley's argument must really be as follows:
We use the same word for a quality of material things as we use for a bodily sensation.
We are justified in using it for a quality of material things only if the quality is like the bodily sensation.
But they cannot be alike, since one of them requires a sentient being for its existence while the other does not.
Therefore we are not justified in using it for a quality of material things.
If I was right in supposing this to be the nub of his argument, then a prior question to be considered was: ‘Do people in fact suppose themselves to be justified in using the word ‘hot’ of material things, like fires, because they think there is something in the fire like what is in them when they feel hot?’
To this the answer seemed to me to be ‘No’.
And there, for the time being, I stuck, without being able to see how to make any headway.
What could explain the dual use of words like ‘hot’ and ‘cold’if not resemblance in the things of which they were used?
I returned to Berkeley's argument some time later, having in the meantime read Ludwig Wittgenstein's Blue and Brown Books,and in particular, his treatment of the question ‘What is it that bodily and mental strain have in common ?’
I tried to apply what Wittgenstein says about the dual use of the word ‘strain' to the dual use of the word ‘hot’, and wrote up my conclusions in a paper entitled ‘Berkeley and Sensations of Heat.’
In the course of the paper I addressed myself to the question: ‘Why is it that people unhesitatingly talk of feeling hot as well as of feeling the heat of things?’
I wrote:
There is nothing impossible about a person's forehead feeling cold to him, although, when he touches it, it feels hot to his hand.
But this is an exception to the rule.
It is the sort of thing which would happen only if the person was in some unusual condition, such as a fever.
Usually if a part of the body is hot, or is cold, it feels hot or cold, to the person whose body it is.
Suppose' however' that there were not this degree of regularity.
Suppose, first, that what is true to a limited extent of pain were true to a much greater extent of feelings of hot and cold.
What is true of pain is that a bodily feeling which is usually painful may, under certain conditions, be enjoyed.
Suppose that, similarly, the effect of a hot bath depended on, say, our emotional state, rather as whether we feel an icicle down our backs as an icicle or as a red-hot dagger depends on what we have been led to expect.
Usually we would feel warm but sometimes we would feel cold.
The closer the number of times we felt cold came to equalling the number of times we felt warm, the more inclined we would be to think of the words ‘warm’ and ‘cold’as applying to the sensation only indirectly.
That is, the sensation itself we would apprehend as, perhaps, a mild, diffused prickling, and the  warmth and coldness would be our classification of it as ‘the sort of sensation which is usually caused by being in hot water’ and ‘the sort of sensation which is usually caused by being in cold water’.
If there were no regularity at all, if the sort of sensation which is caused by being in hot water were equally often caused by being in cold water, and vice versa , then we would be denied even the possibility of this notional classification.
But, as things stand, cases of a person feeling cold when conditions are such as would ordinarily make him feel warm are the exception to the rule.
Now, is it not possible that it is this rule which is the explanation of our referring to the feelings produced in our bodies by prolonged contact with hot or cold objects, as ‘hot’ and ‘cold’?
Is it not possible that we apprehend them as feelings of hotness and coldness because the feelings are usually of one sort when our bodies are hot, and of another sort when our bodies are cold?
If this were so, then any inclination we may have to think that the heat we attribute to external objects and the bodily sensation of being hot must be alike derives from our using the same word for a quality of external objects and for a sensation, and not vice versa.
That is, we refer to our sensations as ‘hot’ and ‘cold’because they are the sensations which usually go with our bodies being hot or cold; and it is not the case that we call external things hot and cold because we think there is something in common between them and our bodily sensations.
So the fact that material things are ‘senseless beings’, and hence that the heat which is perceived and the bodily sensation cannot be alike, cannot constitute a proof that we are not justified in attributing heat and cold to material things.
What justifies us in attributing heat and cold to material things is our perceiving them to be hot and cold; and they could still feel hot and cold to us even if we never felt hot or cold ourselves.
The persuasiveness of Berkeley's argument about heat and pain depends on two things:(i) our readiness to distinguish between feeling heat and feeling hot, and (ii) our having the idea that if two things are called by the same name it must be because we suppose them to be like one another.
Only if both these things are accepted can the further point that material things are ‘senseless beings’ be used to promote the conclusion that we are not justified in attributing heat to material things.
Two years later, professor D. M. Armstrong, in his book Bodily Sensations , offered an alternative explanation: ‘To have a sensation of heat is to feel that a portion of our body is hot.’
He described a view he rejected as follows:
It may be said that a sensation of heat in the hand is not really an impression as of our hand being hot, but is simply something that we normally happen to get when our hand heats up.
It gets its description ‘sensation of heat’ simply from the causal conditions of its production.
His objection to this view was:
On such a view there is a mere contingent connection between sensations of heat and the heat of a limb.
But if this is so, it is very mysterious that we have no vocabulary to describe the sensations as they are in their own nature, apart from the conditions in which they are normally produced.
Their quality seems to be exhausted by the ‘conditions of their production’, which suggests they are simply impressions of heat, etc.
On the face of it, there was an enviable simplicity about Armstrong's own view.
And, like mine, it did not lend itself to the sort of conclusion Berkeley wanted to draw, to the effect that we are not justified in calling material things hot and cold.
But the more I thought about his view the less happy I became about it.
Is not the heat of a material thing essentially something one is aware of by touching it or, if it is very hot, holding one's hand, or some other part of one's body, near it?
Yet according to Armstrong one can be aware of the heat of some material things, the parts of one's body, without feeling the heat with anything.
In a paper in the Australasian Journal of Philosophy I defended the view he rejected by saying that the ‘nature’ of the ‘sensations as they are in their own nature’is the nature we apprehend them as having when a certain way of describing them comes to us naturally, and that the reason why a certain way of describing them comes to us naturally need not be a reason of which we are conscious.
And I attacked his view (that ‘to have a sensation of heat is to feel that a portion of our body is hot ‘) by saying that to talk of feeling the heat of one's hand without touching it would be like talking of feeling the roughness of the back of one's hand without touching it.
Armstrong replied, in a later number of the same journal, that it is simply an empirical fact about our proprioceptive powers that we are able to perceive the heat of our hand directly but not the roughness of its surface.
This reminded me strongly of Wittgenstein's story of ‘the diviner who tells us that when he holds the rod he feels that the water is five feet under the ground’, and who, when we express our doubts, says, ‘You can estimate a length when you see it.
Why shouldn't I have a different way of estimating it?
We may say to the diviner ‘You mean’ you have learnt that when you have a certain feeling of strain in your hands, then water is usually to be found so many feet under the ground?’
But he may reply, ‘No, I am able to perceive the depth directly.’
Depth being what it is, what can he mean?
Similarly, the heat of a material thing being something that we feel with some part of our body, what can someone mean who says that he perceives the heat of something directly?
Armstrong's answer to this would, I think, have been that the cases were not similar.
It was with this old — and, to my mind, unresolved — dispute at the back of my mind that I came to write ‘Hylas Fights Back’.
My primary target was the heat-pain argument, and its conclusion: that heat, like pain, ‘cannot exist but in a mind perceiving it’.
But I wanted, if possible, to put something into the dialogue that would have a bearing on my dispute with Armstrong about his account of bodily sensations.
I chose the example of our use of words like ‘giddy’ and ‘dizzy ‘.
That someone is unsteady on his feet, off-balance, swaying bout, is something to be seen, or, if we are holding him, felt.
The person in question may report feelings of giddiness.
Is what he feels the same as what we would feel were we holding him?
I think I know how Armstrong's answer to this would begin.
It would begin ‘No, but…’.
That is what philosophy is like.
As professor J. N. Findlay once remarked:
There can be nothing really ‘clinching’ in philosophy: ‘proofs’and ‘disproofs’hold only for those who adopt certain premisses ‘who are willing to follow certain rules of argument, and who use their terms in certain definite ways.
And every proof or dis-proof can be readily evaded, if one questions the truth of its premisses, or the validity of its type of inference, or if one finds new senses in which its terms may be used.
IS TALK A MODE OF TRANSPORT?
The theory that talk is a mode of transport sounds rather strange.
Actually  it is a very familiar theory.
It is the theory that linguistic communication consists in conveying mental things — ideas — from one person's mind to another person's mind by means of things that can be heard or seen, things which if one accepts the theory, are called ‘signs’ or ‘symbols ‘.
The theory is that these audible or visible things have meaning only in virtue of expressing and evoking mental things, ideas or thoughts.
A speaker somehow ‘translates’ his ideas or thoughts into spoken or written signs, he ‘encodes’them, and the hearer translates them back again, he ‘decodes’them, so that he has the same thoughts, near enough, as the speaker.
A corollary of the theory is that if only we were all experts at telepathy we could manage without language at all.
Communication would be direct, the non-mediated transference of ideas from one mind to another.
I said that it is a familiar theory.
On second thoughts, it might be better to say that it goes without saying that linguistic communication is a matter of conveying ideas or thoughts.
For when what goes without saying, especially the bit about translating thoughts into spoken or written signs and then back again, is actually said , it begins to lose its air of obviousness.
In fact, it begins to look very much like a piece of a priori theorising about how language works.
People may say that understanding something, as you are now understanding what I have written, involves interpretation, that is, translating something linguistic, a sentence, into something non-linguistic, a thought; but they do not say it because they have found they actually have to do any such translating.
Rather, they say it because they think it must be like that.
It must be like that, they think, because what is said, or written' is not intrinsically meaningful.
It is really just sounds in the air, or marks on paper.
So the meaningfulness must be located elsewhere.
Where better  to locate it than in the mind?
It is well known that things can happen in the mind that cannot happen elsewhere.
Alternatively, it might be said that the talk about words conveying ideas it not to be taken seriously.
It is not intended as an explanation of linguistic communication, a theory we might proceed to test.
When people say, ‘What's the big idea?’ or ‘Have you any idea of the time?’or ‘I've no idea what she sees in him’, they are not exhibiting their acceptance of a theory of language, the theory that words work by conveying ideas.
It is just a way of talking.
This may be true of the common-or-garden use of the word idea , but when a philosopher like John Locke says that a man is not speaking intelligibly unless his words ‘excite the same ideas in the hearer which he makes them stand for in speaking ‘i it is not just a way of talking.
It is a theory.
In Locke's Essay , moreover it is a theory with considerable ramifications.
A Lockean ‘idea’ is not just what a word stands for if it is to be meaningful.
It is also what is impressed on the passive mind in perception.
So if I have associated the right word — say, the word blue — with the right impression — the impression I get when I look at a cornflower — there is no fear of my language not mirroring reality as there is if I talk about fate or fortune , these not being words for simple ideas impressed on my mind by external objects.
In short, talk of ‘ideas’may be wholly innocuous, just a part of everyday, theory-unladen, chat.
But it may, as in the case of Locke, be meant to be taken seriously.
Next, it might be said that although Locke was in the business of trying to explain communication in terms of ideas being conveyed from one mind to another, now we know better.
We no longer resort to bogus mentalistic explanations.
Linguistics, like psychology, has grown up, and flown the nest of philosophy, to become a science in its own right.
But calling something a science does not guarantee that its practitioners forthwith cease to be attracted to the same specious accounts of what it is to communicate to which the rest of us are attracted when we try to say what communicating is.
Scientists cannot be observing and experimenting all the time, and when a scientist is thinking about communication he is no less subject to the superficial attractions of the ‘transporting ideas’ model than the rest of us.
Consider, for example, Jerold J. Katz:
Roughly, linguistic communication consists in the production of some external, publicly observable, acoustic phenomenon whose phonetic and syntactic structure encodes a speaker's inner, private thoughts or ideas and the decoding of the phonetic and syntactic structure exhibited in such a physical phenomenon by other speakers in the form of an inner private experience of the same thoughts or ideas.
Roughly, and somewhat metaphorically, we can say that something of the following sort goes on when successful communication takes place.
The speaker…chooses some message he wants to convey to his listeners: some thought he wants them to receive…
This message is encoded in the form of a phonetic representation….
This encoding then becomes a signal to the speaker's articulatory organs, and he vocalises an utterance of the proper phonetic shape.
This is, in turn, picked up by the hearer's auditory organs.
The speech sounds that stimulate these organs are then converted into a neural signal from which a phonetic representation equivalent to the one into which the speaker encoded his message is obtained.
This representation is decoded into a representation of the same message that the speaker originally chose to convey.
Despite his scientific-sounding terminology, Katz is not so very different from Locke.
Both of them are captivated by what I shall call ‘the myth of the sense behind the sentence ‘.
I do not mean that there is not a valid distinction to be drawn between sense and sentence; only that it is a mistake to think of the sense of an utterance as though it were something existing alongside the utterance but in the ethereal medium of the mind.
We do not have to encode what we want to say from something else before we can say it, or decode it before we can understand it.
To put it another way, we are not foreigners in our own language, we are at home in it.
It is not enough, of course, simply to call something a ‘myth ‘and hope that it will go away.
One has to try to deal with it.
But how? philosophical myths are not like scientific theories; they are not amenable to experimental testing.
One way of dealing with a philosophical myth is to expose its implications.
It is not difficult to see what are the implications of the ‘transporting ideas’ model of linguistic communication.
If, as the advocates of the theory hold, ideas and thoughts are ‘inner’ and ‘private’, then how can a speaker and a hearer, a writer and  a reader, ever know that the ideas and thoughts that are evoked by an utterance are the same as the ideas and thoughts expressed by it?
According to the theory, one is never in a position to compare them.
One cannot see into another person's mind.
The trouble with this way of dealing with the myth is that the myth is so attractive that people are not put off by the objection that it opens the door to scepticism about common meanings.
Such scepticism seems academic against the working assurance that everyone means the same by ‘The bus is late’ and ‘It's going to rain'.
There must, we think, be some argument from analogy to provide a way round scepticism.
It is just a matter of working out how to formulate the argument.
There is another way of dealing with a philosophical myth.
Instead of considering its consequences, we can consider how it arose.
Perhaps we do not need it.
Consider the circumstances in which we say, of a small child, that he has mastered the use of some term, such as like.
Perhaps ‘dislike’ would be better for our purposes.
If the child says, ‘I dislike Auntie Kate’ but seeks her company, holds her by the hand when they go out for a walk, and so on, we would conclude that he has not understood the word dislike .
perhaps he thinks it is a strong form of like .
But when on several occasions there is the right correlation of the child's behaviour with the child's use of the term, we conclude that he has mastered its correct use.
By having such behavioural criteria for the truth of a third-person statement, such as‘He dislikes So-and-so,’ we are able to determine whether someone has a correct understanding of the term in question.
Let us suppose, now, that the child has mastered the correct us of like and dislike .
He says, ‘I like Auntie Kate’.
Notice that for him to be able to say this he does not have to have observed his own behaviour.
His behaviour must match what he says for us to say he has mastered the correct us of the terms he uses, but he does not have to observe his behaviour to be able to say, ‘I like Auntie Kate.’
In other words, in respect of his behaviour, his self-testimony (his testifying that he likes Auntie Kate) is autonomous, free-standing.
There is nothing in the autonomous status of self-testimony to call for our adopting the myth of the sense behind the sentence.
But suppose we think that everything that is said purports to be a statement of fact, and suppose we think that for someone to be justified in saying what he says he must say it on the basis  of something he has observed.
These suppositions may strike those of us who are attracted by empiricism as eminently reasonable.
If exceptions, such as‘I promise to tell the truth’, occur to us, we can treat them as the exceptions that prove the rule.
They are ‘performatives’, not statements like ‘I like Auntie Kate’ and ‘I hope she'll come again ‘.
Now, if we think along these lines then we will be sorely tempted to say that although the child does not have to observe his behaviour to be able to say, ‘I like Auntie Kate’, there is something else he must observe, something inner and private , a ‘feeling’ he has somehow identified as a liking-Auntie-Kate feeling.
That is, we are tempted to say that when he says, ‘I like Auntie Kate’ he is reporting his observation, by introspection, of a private object, an Auntie-Kate-directed feeling of liking.
We think we should not accept ‘I like Auntie Kate’ as a valid communication unless we allow for an answer to the question, ‘How does he know?’or ‘What observation justifies him in saying that?’
And we posit an inner private object to be what the child knows and what he uses the words ‘I like Auntie Kate’ to stand for.
Our conception of how language relates to reality is such that we cannot see ‘I like Auntie Kate’ as itself a bit of Auntie-Kate-liking behaviour.
Language mirrors, but is not itself a part of, reality.
But consider the following.
We can distinguish between using an expression and attending to an expression.
Do you see what I mean?
There; I have just used the expression ‘Do you see what I mean?’ and now you are attending to it, perhaps wondering what I am going to say about it.
It is a bit like using spectacles to see with, and taking them off and looking at them.
I want to connect this up with something I said earlier: ‘We are not foreigners in our own language; we are at home in it.’
The connection is this.
In so far as I am using an expression, as distinct from attending to it, I am at home in it.
That is, there is not a ‘what-I-think’ distinct from, behind, the ‘what-I-say’, and which I have had to translate into what I say.
For example' suppose my wife sees me putting on my coat to go out, and asks me to buy a paper.
I say I am going to the bank.
(The bank is in the opposite direction to the newspaper shop.)
Do I think I am going to the bank at the same time as I say I am going to the bank?
I would say: if you want to talk of my thinking it in such circumstances then the least misleading thing to say is that I think it in saying it.
That is, the thinking is in the saying; it is not behind it.
Suppose, however, that as I say it it strikes me that the word bank is ambiguous.
(We happen  to live near a river bank.)
Then I attend to the words I have uttered, and, in so doing, I put myself, as a thinker,outside what I have said, and perhaps prepare to say something further, such as‘to cash a cheque’.
I have seen how what I said could be misunderstood, misinterpreted.
The point I want to make is this.
The fact that one can always see what one has said as a string of words, which might be interpreted in this way or that, does not entail that whenever one says something there is an accompanying interpretation going through one's head.
When one uses some expression, such as‘I'm going to the bank’, there are usually not two things, one that one is saying and one that one is thinking.
Anyone who thinks that there must be, and that there must be a process of encoding a thought into a form of words, says so in spite of , and not because of, his experience of what it is to say things.
The investigations of the psychologist, Jean Piaget, into the child's conception of thinking, are interesting in this connection.
They are reported in a book called The Child's Conception of the World .
Piaget would ask the children a question about thinking, and note down the answers he got from six-year-olds, from eight-year-olds and from children of eleven or twelve.
He regarded their answers as evidence of an increasing sophistication in the conception of thinking as the children got older.
The question he put to the children was: ‘What is it you think with?’
If a child did not know what to make of this question Piaget would prompt him: ‘When you walk, you walk with feet; well then, when you think, what do you think with?’
I shall tell you what the six-year-olds said in a moment.
Let us begin with the eight-year-olds, at the second stage of sophistication.
Piaget writes: ‘The second stage is marked by adult influences.
The child has learnt that we think with the head; sometimes it even alludes to the brain'.
At the third, and final, stage of sophistication, at age eleven or twelve, Piaget writes, thought is ‘no longer materialised’.
In other words, the child has progressed to the conception of thinking as something mental, behind any verbal expression.
This is, in fact, Piaget's own conception of thinking.
In the course of reporting his investigations he makes remarks like, ‘When the child is questioned he translates his thoughts into words, but these words are necessarily inadequate’, and ‘Whatever the answer may be, the meaning behind the words is what matters.’
Now for the answer of the six-year-olds to the question ‘What  is it you think with?’
Piaget writes: ‘During the first stage children believe that thinking is ‘with the mouth’.
Thought is identified with the voice.
Nothing takes place in the head or in the body…
There is nothing subjective in the act of thinking.’
Later, he comments on this, as follows: ‘In treating of the development of the notion of thought, we may regard as primitive the child's conviction that it thinks with the mouth.
The notion of thinking, as soon as it appears, becomes confused with that of voice, that is to say with words, either spoken or heard.’
Why does Piaget use the word confused here?
I think it is because he accepts what is said at the third stage, the eleven and twelve-year-olds, as giving the truth of the matter.
He believes in what I earlier called ‘the myth of the sense behind the sentence’.
It is Piaget who needs some philosophical help, not the six-year-old.
In fact the six-year-old is saying things remarkably similar to what Ludwig Wittgenstein says in The Blue Book .
Perhaps Wittgenstein read Piaget.
I do not know.
Anyway, this is what Wittgenstein says:
It is misleading to talk of thinking as a mental activity.
We may say that thinking is essentially the activity of operating with signs.
This activity is performed by the hand, when we think by writing; by the mouth and larynx, when we think by speaking; and if we think by imagining signs or pictures, I can give you no agent that thinks.
If then you say that in such cases the mind thinks, I would only draw your attention to the fact that you are using a metaphor, that here the mind is an agent in a different sense from that in which the hand can be said to be the agent in writing.
If again we talk about the locality where thinking takes place we have a right to say that this locality is the paper on which we write or the mouth which speaks.
And if we talk of the head or the brain as the locality of thought, this is using the expression ‘locality of thinking’ in a different sense…
Perhaps the main reason why we are so strongly inclined to talk of the head as the locality of our thoughts is this…
We say, ‘The thought is not the same as the sentence, for an English and a French sentence, which are utterly different, can express the same thought.’
And now, as the sentences are somewhere , we look for a place for the thought…
We say, ‘surely the thought is something ; it is not nothing ‘; and all one can answer to this is, that the word ‘thought’ has its use , which is of a totally different kind from the use of the word ‘sentence’.
In this passage, Wittgenstein mentions one argument for saying that the thought is not the same as the sentence — two sentences ‘one in English and one in French, may be said to express the same thought; since the thought is the same but the sentences different the thought is not the same as either of the sentences.
Another of the traditional arguments is what may be called ‘the parrot argument’.
It goes like this: we could easily train a parrot to respond to a certain signal with the words ‘Going to the bank’.
We say to the parrot, ‘Where's Polly going, then’ and the parrot responds, ‘Going to the bank’.
Now, unless we are extraordinarily naïve we do not credit the parrot with meaning what it says.
I am not even sure we would say that the parrot had said it was going to the bank, that is, had made an assertion.
Why not?
Well — the argument goes — it must be because we do not think that behind the parrot's utterance is the thought ‘I'm going to the bank’.
Without something mental to back it up, the utterance is just sounds in the air, a meaningless noise.
I do not wish to deny that most people find the parrot argument pretty convincing.
If they did not, the myth of the sense behind the sentence would not be as popular as it is.
But I am not convinced by it.
There is an assumption in it, and, I contend, the assumption is false.
The assumption is about what lies behind our saying of a man , when he comes out with the sounds, ‘I'm going to the bank’, that he is asserting that he is going to the bank, but our not saying this of the parrot.
The assumption is that there is only one possible explanation of our saying this: namely, that we believe that the man's utterance is the result of encoding something that exists at a pre-linguistic level, namely a thought, and that in the case of the parrot there is nothing at this level.
To show that this assumption is false I need, of course, to supply an alternative explanation.
The alternative explanation is this.
We say that the man, who utters the same sounds as the parrot, is asserting that he is going to the bank because he is a man, and not a parrot.
And unless he speaks in a very odd way we take it for granted that he knows what he is saying.
In other words, he knows the language, in the sense of being able to use it as the rest of us do.
For instance, we assume he would satisfy our behavioural criteria for being someone who knows the meaning of the word bank .
We think he is a member of our linguistic community.
We know the parrot is not.
Let me try and sum all this up, making use of the notion of  a ‘linguistic practice’.
We are right' I am saying, in distinguishing between sense and sentence.
But we are wrong in thinking of the sense as something —some thing — behind the sentence.
It is the sentence, and nothing else' which has sense, and it has sense in virtue of there being an accepted common practice with sentences like it, and others.
It is this accepted common practice which makes communication possible, not the existence of mental items — ideas or thoughts — to be transported from one mind to another.
SELF-ACQUAINTANCE AND THE MEANING OF ‘I'
SELF-ACQUAINTANCE
David Hume begins the section of A Treatise of Human Nature on personal identity with the sentence: ‘There are some philosophers, who imagine we are every moment intimately conscious of what we call our SELF; that we feel its existence and its continuance in existence; and are certain, beyond the evidence of a demonstration, both of its perfect identity and simplicity’.
One of the philosophers he may have had in mind is Joseph Butler.
In his dissertation,Of Personal Identity , Butler says that ‘by reflecting upon that, which is my self now, and that, which was my self twenty years ago, I discern they are not two, but one and the same self’.
This presupposes that a person (a) is now conscious of the self he is now;(b) is now conscious of the self he was at some time in the past; and (c) can discern the identity of the self he is now and the self he was at some time in the past.
To do the last is presumably, in Hume's words, to feel his self's ‘continuance in existence’.
Butler does not argue for, but simply presupposes, that a person is conscious of his self.
Bertrand Russell, on the other hand, in The Problems of Philosophy , gives us an argument:
The question whether we are acquainted with our bare selves, as opposed to particular thoughts and feelings, is a very difficult one, upon which it would be rash to speak positively.
When we try to look into ourselves we always seem to come upon some particular thought or feeling, and not upon the ‘I’ which has the thought or feeling.
Nevertheless there are some reasons for thinking that we are acquainted with the ‘I’.
One of the reasons Russell mentions is the following:
we know the truth ‘I am acquainted with this sense-datum’.
It is hard to see how we could know this truth, or even understand  what is meant by it, unless we were acquainted with something which we call ‘I’…
Thus, in some sense it would seem we must be acquainted with our Selves as opposed to our particular experiences.
But the question is difficult, and complicated arguments can be adduced on either side.
Hence, although acquaintance with ourselves seems probably to occur, it is not wise to assert that it undoubtedly does occur.
The argument to which Russell here attaches some weight is: to know the truth, or even the meaning, of a sentence of the form ‘I am aware of…’, the person who utters it must know, by acquaintance' something which he calls ‘I’.
Russell does not say what form the ‘complicated arguments’ about the validity of this argument might take, but the chapter in which it occurs is entitled ‘Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description’, so it is reasonable to suppose that one thing that was bothering Russell was the possibility that a person who meaningfully uses the word ‘I’does so in virtue of knowing something which he calls ‘I’not by acquaintance , but by description .
J. McT.
E. McTaggart, in The Nature of Existence , refers to Russell as having led him ‘to accept the view that the self is known to itself by direct perception’.
He says that Russell did not work out his position in detail and had ceased to hold the position at all.
McTaggart states the argument as follows:
‘I am aware of equality.’
This proposition, whether true or false, has certainly a meaning.
And since I know what the proposition means, I must know each constituent of it.
I must therefore know ‘I ‘.
Whatever is known must be known by acquaintance or by description.
If therefore, ‘I’ cannot be known by description, it must be known by acquaintance, and I must be aware of it.
What would it be for ‘I’ to be known by description?
McTaggart considers, and dismisses, two possibilities.
The first is that to know ‘I’ by description is to know it not as ‘that which is aware of something’or which has a mental state’but as, in Hume's words' ‘a bundle or collection of different perceptions’.
If we hold this ‘bundle’ view of the self, McTaggart observes,
we must no longer say that the self perceives, thinks, or loves, or that it has a perception or thought or an emotion.
We can  only say that the bundle includes a perception, a thought, or an emotion as one of its parts.
On this theory, then, when I use the word ‘I ‘, I know what ‘I’ means by description, and it is described as meaning that bundle of mental states of which my use of the word is one member.
McTaggart cannot accept this Humean view because he can discover no relation between mental states which could determine the bundle to which they belong other than one through the self: ‘We must say that those states, and those only, which are states of the same self form the bundle of parts of that self.’
But this, he says, would be fatal to the attempt to know ‘I’ by description: ‘It would obviously be a vicious circle if I described ‘I’as being that bundle of states of which my use of the word is a member, and then distinguished that bundle from other groups by describing it as that group of mental states which are states of ‘I’.’
The second possibility McTaggart considers is that two mental states ‘belong to the same self when, and only when, the same living body (or what appears as such) stands in a certain relation of causality to both of them’.
I think he may have in mind the view advanced by John Stuart Mill in An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy .
Mill analyses material objects into ‘permanent groups of possibilities of sensation’ and reports finding, among these groups, ‘one (my own body) which is not only composed, like the rest, of a mixed multitude of sensations and possibilities, but is also connected, in a peculiar manner, with all my sensations’.
The ‘peculiar manner’ is causal.
Mill finds that his body is ‘always present as an antecedent condition’ of every sensation he has.
McTaggart raises a number of difficulties for this view.
The first is that of narrowing down the causal relation so as not to include, as being in the same self, mental states that belong to different selves.
The movements of one actor's body may cause aesthetic emotions in many people.
These different people's mental states are caused by the same body, so on the theory in question should be part of the same self.
McTaggart comments: ‘It might perhaps suffice if we say that the relation between the living body and the mental state must not be mediated by intervention of any other living body.’
A more serious difficulty is that on the theory in question:
No man has any reason to say that any two states belong to  the same self unless he has a reason to believe them to be caused by the same body.
And this means that the vast majority of such statements as ‘I was envious yesterday’ are absolutely untrustworthy.
In the first place, by far the greater number of them have been made by people who have never heard of the doctrine that emotions and judgements are caused by bodily states…
In the second place, even those people who have heard of the doctrine, and who accept it, do not, in far the greater number of cases, base their judgements that two states belong to the same self on a previous conviction that they are caused by the same body.
But it is not just that, on the theory, statements like ‘I was envious yesterday’ become untrustworthy.
They become meaningless:
‘I was envious yesterday’ has no meaning for anyone who does not know the meaning of ‘I’.
Now if ‘I can only be known by description, and the only description which is true of it is ‘that group of mental states, caused by the same living body’ of which the envy and my judgement are members', it follows that anyone who does not describe ‘I’in that way, will not know what ‘I’means, and so will mean nothing when he says ‘I was envious yesterday’.
The view McTaggart finds unsatisfactory — that ‘I’ is known by description — seems to be that to which Russell had become converted when he wrote The Analysis of Mind (1921).
(I mentioned McTaggaet's saying that Russell had ceased to hold his earlier view, that ‘I’ is known by acquaintance.)
But Russell does not distinguish, as McTaggart does, between the Humean ‘bundle’ view and the view that mental states belong to the same self if they are causally related to the same body.
He runs the two views together.
He writes:
It is supposed that thoughts cannot just come and go, but need a person to think them.
Now, of course it is true that thoughts can be collected into bundles, so that one bundle is my thoughts, another is your thoughts, and a third is the thoughts of Mr Jones.
But I think the person is not an ingredient in the single thought: he is rather constituted by relations of the thoughts to each other and to the body…the grammatical forms ‘I think’, ‘you think’, and ‘Mr Jones thinks’, are misleading if regarded as indicating an analysis of a single thought.
It would be better to say ‘it thinks in me’, like ‘it rains here’.
Russell refers to Ernst Mach's The Analysis of Sensation as ‘a book of fundamental importance’ in connection with the view he is expounding.
Mach quotes Lichtenberg:
We know only the existence of our sensations, percepts, and thoughts.
We should say It thinks , just as we say,It lightens .
It is going too far to say,cogito , if we translate cogito by I think .
Russell agrees with Lichtenberg that we should not say ‘I think’.
But evidently he thinks ‘It thinks’ is not enough.
There must be something to individuate the thinking in question.
So he adds ‘in me’.
But isn't saying ‘in me’ smuggling in ‘I’by the back door, so to speak?
And so reintroducing a possible object of knowledge by acquaintance?
So he adds ‘like ‘it rains here’’.
One doesn't need to know something by acquaintance to use the word ‘here’ meaningfully.
Similarly, he seems to be suggesting, one doesn't need to know something by acquaintance to use the expression ‘in me’ meaningfully.
This raises a lot of questions.
Let us consider just two of them:(1) Is it true that the word ‘here’ is an exception to the rule that knowing the meaning of a word means knowing what is meant by it, that is, knowing something which we call by that word? and (2) Supposing that the word ‘here’can be used meaningfully without our knowing something which we call ‘here’, are Russell and McTaggart right in their assumption that the word ‘I’is not like ‘here’in this respect?
In other words, are they right in thinking that a person must know something he calls ‘I’, either by acquaintance or by description, to use the word ‘I’ meaningfully?
(If they are not right, then we need have no qualms about using the word ‘I’ in the absence of inward empirical discoveries.)
THE MEANING OF ‘HERE'
One use of the word ‘here’ is the following.
My wife, on returning from shopping on Saturday afternoon, calls out, ‘Where are you?’ and I reply, ‘Here’.
She knows, from this, roughly where I am.
But how?
Did I say where I was?
No.
She heard my voice coming from upstairs, or from the kitchen, or from my workshop.
Like most people, she can tell, just by listening, from what direction a sound is coming.
She learnt, from my saying, ‘Here’, where I was, although I did not say where I was.
I did not say where (was and, also, I did not need to know where I was.
Suppose that in my wife's absence I had been knocked unconscious by a burglar.
To give him time to make his getaway he ties me up, blindfolds me, gags me and hides me in a cupboard.
I recover consciousness, not knowing where I am.
I manage to bite through the gag.
When I hear my wife I call out, ‘I'm here’, and she, hearing the sound coming from the cupboard under the stairs, soon releases me.
I did not know where I was, but that did not stop me saying, ‘I'm here’.
It would be absurd if my wife were to accuse me of using the word ‘here’ without meaning, since I did not know where I was.
But if I didn't know where I was, what did I mean by the word?
What meaning could it have had?
Behind this question seems to be the idea that to talk of the ‘meaning’ of a word is to talk of some thing — either some thing in the world, which the word stands for, or some thing in the mind of the person who utters the word and in the mind of the person who hears it.
(On the latter view, communication is successful when the things, ‘ideas ‘, in the minds of the speaker and hearer correspond.
This raises the problem of how one is to tell when they correspond, and the solution to it in terms of a distinction between ‘structure’ and ‘content’.)
But the idea that to talk of the ‘meaning’ of a word is to talk of some thing does not seem to apply to the use we have been considering of the word ‘here’.
An utterance like ‘Here’ can have a use without there being something that is meant by the word uttered, something which the utterer must know, either by acquaintance or by description, for the utterance to have that use.
People know where I am, on hearing me say ‘Here’, not in virtue of knowing what I mean, but in virtue of being able to locate sounds.
‘Cooee, would have served just as well.
But isn't there a difference between ‘Cooee’ and ‘Here’?
Someone who calls out ‘Cooee’ cannot be said to be saying something that is true or false.
But isn't someone who says, ‘Here’, in answer to, ‘Where are you?’ speaking the truth?
He is where he is, and not somewhere else.
I am inclined to say that ‘Here’, in answer to‘Where are you?’ is true only in so far as it basks in the reflected glory of such genuine truths as, ‘Here’, said as I point into the flower-vase, having been asked, ‘Where is it?’in the course of a game of hunt-the-thimble.
I could be mistaken, or even deliberately telling a falsehood, about the thimble.
But how could ‘Here’, in answer to‘Where are you?’, be false?
Would it be false if I could actually ‘throw my voice’ so that it seemed to come from somewhere else?
If I did this with the intention of deceiving people, would I be telling a lie?
I think that people would be justified in rebuking me for deceiving them as to my whereabouts, but that I would no more have actually lied than if I had thrown my voice and said ‘Cooee ‘.
There can be intentionally deceiving verbal behaviour that does not come under the heading ‘telling lies’.
(Another example could be my answering the telephone in a high voice so as to make the caller think he is speaking to my sister.)
What I mean by ‘basks in the reflected glory’ is this.
When I say, ‘Here’ in answer to‘Where are you?
‘, I seem to be saying where I am only because there is another use of ‘Here’, as for example in answer to‘Where's the thimble?’, in which I am saying where something is.
Why should the first use of ‘Here’ bask in the reflected glory of the second, granted that the first serves to inform others of my whereabouts only in virtue of their being able to locate sounds?
Is it simply a matter of the same word being used, or is there more to it than that?
In pointing into the flower-vase and saying, ‘Here’, I am obviously distinguishing one place from another as the place where the thimble is.
If places couldn't be distinguished — by pointing, or naming, or describing, or giving co-ordinates or in some other way — there would be no possibility of the second use of ‘Here’.
There would be no possibility of the second use of ‘Here’ in a non-spatial world, or in a spatial world inhabited only by non-spatial beings.
This is obvious in the case of the second use of ‘Here’, because in saying ‘Here’ one is saying where something is.
But it is true of the first use, also.
For although in saying, ‘Here’, in answer to‘Where are you?’,
I am not saying where I am, nevertheless the hearer learns where I am from my saying it.
If no one could learn anything from my saying, ‘Here’, in answer to‘Where are you?’, there would not be that use of ‘Here’.
One of the conditions of people learning anything is that they can locate sounds.
But there is a more general condition, which the first use of ‘Here’ shares with the second, namely, the possibility of distinguishing  one place from another.
If one place could not be distinguished from another there would be nothing for me to seem to be saying in saying, ‘Here’ in answer to‘Where are you?’.
This whole discussion of the meaning of ‘here’ might be summed up by saying that in so far as‘Here’, in reply to ‘Where are you?‘, has a meaning, as distinct from a use, its meaningfulness is parasitic on the meaningfulness of ‘Here’in reply to ‘Where is it?’, the meaningfulness of this being conditional on the possibility of distinguishing places.
THE MEANING OF ‘I'
Russell said that rather than say ‘I think’ it would be better to say ‘It thinks in me’, like ‘It rains here ‘.
Evidently he thought that a person can quite properly use the word ‘here’ without knowing, either by acquaintance or description, some thing which is what the word means, but that the word ‘I’is different, and therefore that someone who cannot, however hard he introspects, discover some thing which is what the word means, should not use it.
But is the word ‘I’ different?
Are there not' in fact striking resemblances between the uses of ‘I’ and those of ‘here’?
P. T. Geach,Mental Acts , refers to the Cartesian idea ‘that introspection can give the word ‘I’ a special sense, which each of us can learn on his own account'.
He reminds us, however, that
The word ‘I’, spoken by p.
T. G., serves to draw people's attention to p.
T. G.; and if it is not at once clear who is speaking, there is a genuine question ‘Who said that?’ or ‘Who is ‘I’?’
Now consider Descartes brooding over his poêle and saying: ‘I’ m getting into an awful muddle — but who then is this ‘I’who is getting into a muddle?’
When ‘I'm getting into a muddle’ is a soliloquy, ‘I’certainly does not serve to direct Descartes's attention to Descartes, or to show that it is Descartes, none other, who is getting into a muddle.
We are not to argue, though, that since ‘I’ does not refer to the man René Descartes it has some other, more intangible, thing to refer to.
Rather, in this context the word ‘I’ is idle, superfluous; it is used only because Descartes is habituated to the use of ‘I’in expressing his thoughts and feelings to other people.
The use of ‘I’ in soliloquy may be compared to the use of ‘here’in soliloquy.
Suppose my wife and I are lost, in cloud, on a mountain.
We try to keep in touch by shouting occasionally: ‘Where are you?’
‘Here’.
But we drift apart, and can no longer hear one another.
Still lost, I say to myself , ‘Where am 1?’ and reply, ‘Here’.
But whereas my wife could have learnt in what direction I was from her had she heard me, there is nothing I can learn from it.
It is, as Geach would say, ‘idle, superfluous’.
Geach says: ‘We are not to argue, though, that since ‘I’ does not refer to the man René Descartes it has some other, more intangible thing to refer to.’
He could have put it more strongly.
We are not to argue that ‘I’ refers to an intangible, invisible, inaudible Cartesian spiritual substance.
Can comparison of uses of ‘I’ with uses of ‘here’help us to see why we are not to argue thus?
Instead of uses of ‘I’, let us consider uses of ‘It's me’.
(I regard ‘It's I’ as pedantic.)
Suppose I have lost my memory.
All I can find in my pockets is a scrap of paper with a telephone number written on it.
Perhaps if I ring the number the person who answers will know who I am.
I ring the number, and say, ‘It's me ‘, hoping for recognition.
This case is like the case in which I am lost in cloud and shout out, ‘Here’ to let my wife know where I am.
I no more say who I am in this case than I say I'm off to my wife's right in the lost-in-cloud case.
I don't know, in both cases.
And there is an ‘idle’, soliloquising use of ‘Here’ in the lost-in-cloud case.
I am all set to say, ‘It's me’, but nobody answers the phone.
Emptily I say to myself, ‘It's me, whoever I am.’
A use of ‘It's me’ like that of ‘Here’in answer to‘Where is the thimble?’would be the following.
Someone asks, ‘Who is the youngest professor in the faculty?’ and I say, ‘It's me’.
As in the case of the whereabouts of the thimble, I could be mistaken, or even deliberately telling a falsehood.
I said that in pointing into the flower-vase and saying, ‘Here’, I am obviously distinguishing one place from another as the place where the thimble is, and that if places couldn't be distinguished — by pointing, or naming, or describing, or giving co-ordinates or in some other way — there would be no possibility of this use of ‘Here’.
There would be no possibility of it in a non-spatial world, or in a spatial world inhabited only by non-spatial beings.
In saying; ‘It's me, in answer to; ‘Who is the youngest professor in the faculty?’, am I distinguishing one person from another?
The questioner sees who has answered.
I could have written ‘It's me’ on a piece of paper and passed it to him.
For him to learn anything  from it, he must know who wrote it.
Perhaps I simply raise my hand.
I don't think it matters whether or not we call this a case of my distinguishing myself from others.
The point is that if I could not be distinguished from others in some way, then the utterance ‘It's me’ would be useless.
In other words, the meaningfulness of ‘It's me’ in reply to‘Who is so-and-so?’is conditional on the possibility of distinguishing people.
We have not yet compared ‘It's me ‘, said by the victim of amnesia in hope of recognition’ with ‘I'm here’in reply to‘Where are you?’, in respect of having a meaning as distinct from a use.
I said that in so far as‘Here’, in reply to ‘Where are you?’ has a meaning, as distinct from a use, its meaningfulness is parasitic on the meaningfulness of ‘Here’in reply to ‘Where is it?’, the meaningfulness of this being conditional on the possibility of distinguishing places.
A parallel remark about ‘It's me’ would be that in so far as‘It's me’, said by the victim of amnesia in hope of recognition, has a meaning, as distinct from a use, its meaningfulness is parasitic on the meaningfulness of ‘It's me’in reply to ‘Who is the youngest professor?’, the meaningfulness of this being conditional on the possibility of distinguishing people.
To say this is to deny that ‘I’ gets its meaning through a speaker knowing, either by acquaintance or by description, something he calls ‘I’.
It is to deny what Russell and McTaggart assume.
WITTGENSTEIN ON THE MYTH OF MENTAL PROCESSES
Ludwig Wittgenstein, we are told, left a collection of fragments in a box-file, most of them cut from typescripts dictated from 1945 to 1948.
Some years ago professor Geach made an arrangement of this material, which the editors, professor G. H. von Wright and Miss G. E. M. Anscombe have retained with a very few alterations.
There are 717 numbered propositions.
Many of the issues discussed are ones raised in Wittgenstein's Philosophische Bemerkungen, Blue and Brown Books , and Philosophical Investigations .
The editors have supplied some footnote cross-references to the Bemerkungen and the Investigations , but none to the Blue and Brown Books .
If I had to describe the contents of Zettel as the answer to one question I think the question would have to be: What is the relevance, for our understanding of ‘psychological’ concepts such as understanding, thinking, expecting, intending, imagining, seeing, dreaming, knowing, believing, doubting, pretending, remembering, and feeling, of that account of meaning which distinguishes the later from the earlier writings of Wittgenstein?
This description covers most of the material in the first 675 propositions, but is insipid compared with the subtle and exciting working-out of the programme.
In what follows I shall endeavour to convey a few, a very few, of the ideas this book contains and suggests.
(Numbers refer to propositions.)
The meaning of ‘I meant…’(1–53, 231–48)
What is the meaning of the word ‘meaning’ in our talk of meaning someone (for example, ‘When I said, ‘Come here’I meant you, not Jones') or of meaning something (for example , ‘When I said, ‘Go to the bank’I meant the river bank')?
The question is: In saying ‘I meant…’, when one has been misunderstood, is one saying something about something one did at the time of saying, ‘Come here’ or ‘Go to the bank’?
If the ambiguity, the  misinterpretability, of ‘Go to the bank’ struck one as one said it, then one would be seeing the sentence ‘from outside’, so to speak (233–5, 287), in which case one's thought and the sentence would be distinguishable.
But for one to mean anything at all(and so, to think ), some sentence (picture or the like) must serve as it stands — that is , not need an accompanying interpretation.
‘But isn't it remarkable that we should say, ‘I meant…‘(that is, in the past tense) if there was only the sentence, ‘Go to the bank’ and no accompanying interpretation?’(39–40).
Yes, if you look at it in a certain light, as those philosophers are apt to who go on to say that there must (286) have been more than the sentence in my mind for it to be the case that I meant such and such.
But, remarkable or not, this is what we say; there is this language game in which what happens later (7–8, 14, etc., cf. 100) is the criterion (22) of my meaning someone, or something: asked whether I wanted Jones to come, I answer almost as I answer a question about my present sensations (7) and yet I say, ‘I meant you, not Jones.’
Moreover, even when there was an accompanying interpretation (say, in the form of the fleeting thought, ‘ where the wild thyme blows’) the use I make of ‘I meant…’ bypasses it (25, 41, 88).
But if, in saying ‘I meant…’, one is not saying something about something one did at the time of saying, ‘Come here’ or ‘Go to the bank’, what is one saying?
Compare: ‘But if, in saying ‘I promise…‘, one is not saying that one is promising, what is one saying?’
Both questions are symptomatic of a reluctance to accept a linguistic practice for what it is.
You may gather from my behaviour that I meant you, not Jones.
In saying ‘I meant you, not Jones’, I am not saying what I gather from my behaviour (though if what I say and what my behaviour seems to show seem to conflict, you will be justified in saying you do not understand me [67, 136]).
But, equally, I am not reporting on my state of mind (20–21, 26, 36, 41, 44, 47, etc.).
I don't go by anything at all(27).
One should no more ask what meaning someone, or something, consists in (16) than what one is saying in saying ‘I promise…’.
There is the linguistic practice of saying who, or what, one meant.
To ask, for instance, ‘Why can a person not doubt who, or what, he meant?’(7, 27), is to exhibit one's fascination by a few, favoured language games and one's wish to assimilate others to them.
The fact that ‘I'll return your umbrella’ is in the future tense does not mean that it must be a prediction, based on evidence.
Similarly, the fact  that ‘I meant you, not Jones’ is in the past tense does not mean that it must be based on something one remembers doing.
‘The harmony between thought and reality is to be found in the grammar of the language’(53–71, 284–91, 331–70)
This thought is directed against the Tractatus view of language, the picture theory of meaning, and so is partly expressed in the language of that theory.
That is, in the subject of proposition 55 ‘thought’ is opposed to ‘reality’almost as if a language game as a whole could be said to be justified by something outside it.
Then, in the predicate, there is the pay-off, which I should like to express, in terms derived from the preceding discussion of the meaning of ‘I meant…’, by saying that what is, from outside, a sentence is, from inside, what is thought (54, 290), where ‘from inside’ refers to the thought-symbol's actually playing the role (238) which characterises the reality in question.
Propositions 53 — 71 are the application of this thought to expectation (for example, 56: ‘If someone could see the expectation itself — he would have to see what is being expected’; 60: ‘Reality is not a property still missing in what is expected and which accedes to it when one's expectation comes about’); 331–70, to colours (for example , 331: ‘One is tempted to justify rules of grammar by sentences like ‘But there really are four primary colours.
And the saying that the rules of grammar are arbitrary is directed against the possibility of this justification, which is constructed on the model of justifying a sentence by pointing to what verifies it’).
Human agreement needed for the language game to work (332, 351–2, 357–8, 364, 417–36, 657–60)
John Stuart Mill (System of Logic , Book I) held that colour-words are, in the first place, names we bestow on sensations and, second, words we use to mark the resemblance of later sensations to those earlier, remembered ones.
Wittgenstein says (332): ‘Do not believe that you have the concept of colour within you because you look at a coloured object — however you look’ and (659)‘But when I say ‘It tastes exactly like sugar’, in an important sense no remembering takes place.
So I do not have grounds for my judgment or my exclamation.’
His point is that although ‘rules of grammar’ are arbitrary in the sense that it is a mistake to look for a justification of a language game (331), they are not arbitrary in the sense that ‘our language game only works, of course, when a certain agreement prevails’(430).
This is how nature makes herself audible (364).
A child acquires our concept of red through being trained to react as the rest of us do to certain things (things which we can specify only by using the language in question [cf. 432]).
This agreement is not agreement in opinion; the concept of it does not enter into the language game (430); it is a prerequisite of agreement, or disagreement, in opinion.
That such agreement underlies the working of the language game is likely to be overlooked until one comes up against a disagreement which it is difficult to regard as one of opinion.
(Remember the story of the small boy who asked why his French visitor called something a shoe when it was obviously a cabbage.)
If the necessity for the agreement is overlooked then so will be the necessity of the child's having been trained to react to certain things in a certain way for it to mean anything by ‘It is red’.
And so it may seem that a child, without having learned the technique of using the word ‘red’, might start by learning ‘That looks red to me’(418, 422).
But this language game (the concept of the red visual impression) is parasitic on the one in which one reacts, without more ado, to ‘What colour is it?’ with ‘Red’.
Are understanding, believing, knowing, hoping, thinking, intending, attending, things that go on in our minds (experiences [96], mental activities [123])?(72–154)
The wording of 72 (contrasting ‘states of consciousness’ with ‘dispositions’) reminds one of what Gilbert Ryle says in The Concept of Mind , and the wording of 101 (‘We cannot separate his ‘thinking’from his activity') of what he says in his contribution to The Human Agent but Ryle and Wittgenstein, it seems to me, agree only on the negative point, that thinking is not an accompaniment of speaking and acting.
Ryle's positive point, in his Royal Institute of philosophy lecture, that Le Penseur's thinking is to be understood in terms of that of the tennis player, is different from Wittgenstein's positive point, in 88 to 136 or thereabouts, but particularly in 100–103, which might now be expressed by saying that ‘I thought…’ is like ‘I meant…’(see above), though this way of putting it is really no more than a hint as to his meaning.
Wittgenstein's account of the source of the illusion that thinking is a stream which must be flowing under the surface of the auxiliary activities of making trials and comparisons, if these are not to be mere mechanical procedures (107), is particularly interesting.
The illusion arises because, while we learn the use of the word ‘think’ under particular circumstances, we do not thereby learn to describe  the circumstances (111, 114–16).
Hence we form a naïve idea of it that does not correspond to reality at all(111), based perhaps — I am now going beyond what Wittgenstein says — on some superficial resemblance between the grammar of ‘I thought…’ and ‘I felt…’(cf. 7).
I do not have to observe anything to answer the question, ‘Are you in pain?’: pain is a feeling.
Similarly, I do not have to observe anything (attend to, and interpret, verbal imagery, and so forth) to answer the question, ‘What do you think?’: so (we may think) thinking is like feeling.
‘Ever and again comes the thought that what we see of a sign is only the outside of something within, in which the real operations of sense and meaning go on’(140).
But, of course, thinking is not like feeling.
For one thing, thoughts do not have duration (72, 82, etc.).
A sign has meaning, not in virtue of something accompanying it, ‘thinking’, but in virtue of the part it plays in some ‘form of life’.
(If the expression ‘form of life’ is found puzzling, think of what life would be like if we never asked people to do or not to do things, never apologised for doing or not doing things, and so on.)
But is not understanding music, poetry, an experience that accompanies the hearing?(155–88)
Compare understanding a musical theme, a phrase, with suddenly making sense of a gesture, intonation, or facial expression (for example, a leer).
When I know how a lustful man may feel towards his neighbour's pretty young wife I can understand a leer, but if asked what it means there is nothing I can say.
Leering is part of my vocabulary of life, so to speak, in a way in which, being practically tone-deaf, musical harmonies are not.
Leers are accessible (158) to me, but I cannot explain a leer, unless by this is meant saying in what context talk of leering makes sense.
(Try to imagine someone leering at a cat, or at a Yorkshire pudding.)
Understanding music is like understanding leering.
I may talk of experiencing a sly, unpleasant look as a leer, but this is not a matter of some sensation  accompanying my seeing the look.
Wittgenstein says (165):
The understanding of music is neither sensation nor a sum of sensations.
Nevertheless it is correct to call it an experience inasmuch as this concept of understanding has some kinship with other concepts of experience.
You say ‘I experienced that passage quite differently.’
But still this expression tells you ‘what happened ’ only if you are at home in the special conceptual world that belongs to these situations.
(Analogy: ‘I won the match.’).
So, with music and poetry, as with ‘the language of information’(160), ‘it is wrong to call understanding a process that accompanies hearing’(163).
What makes the difference between seeing a picture as a jumble of meaningless lines, and seeing it as a picture of a landscape?(194–219)
Someone who thought there must be one thing that makes the difference might say it was an impression of familiarity.
Wittgenstein asks (198): ‘Can I think away the impression of familiarity where it exists; and think it into a situation where it does not?’
(Cf.
Mill asking whether the feeling of resemblance is separable from the resembling sensations.)
He says that in the case of a face one has recognised, talk of ‘separating’ the familiarity from the impression of the face does not have any clear sense for him.
(In the Brown Book , Part II, Section 1, he had written:
Now should we say that B on seeing the pencil after seeing instruments which he didn't know had a feeling of familiarity?
Let us imagine what really might have happened.
He saw a pencil, smiled, felt relieved, and the name of the object he saw came into his mind or mouth.)
He can understand imagining something (a cave, perhaps) as a dwelling; but cannot understand imagining a butterfly exactly as it is, but ugly.
But the point is: could he understand imagining an unfamiliar face exactly as it is, but familiar (or vice versa)?
Someone might say: surely he can imagine recognising (or having not recognised) the person.
This suggests that the difference between seeing a picture as a jumble of meaningless lines, and seeing it as a picture of a landscape, is that in the latter case an act of recognition, or of interpretation, takes place.
But Wittgenstein asks us to ‘consider well how we use the word ‘recognised’’(202).
In 208 he writes: ‘I want to ask: what constitutes seeing the figure now like this, now another way?
Do I really see something different every time?
Or do I merely interpret what I see in a different way?’
The relevant considerations are (1) that to talk of an interpretation may be to talk of something one consciously does, an action (in the Brown Book the corresponding question was whether ‘B derived that the object shown to him was a pencil’[my italics]); and (2) that the possibility of an alternative interpretation (using the word now not to refer to an action) may not have occurred to the person concerned.
If the person never saw the figure otherwise than as  he does now, to say that he interprets what he sees in a certain way may be taken — because of(1) above — to imply that all seeing involves (a) the immediate awareness of something uninterpreted and (b) the interpretation of it in the light of past experience.
But this would be a theory of seeing.
‘In philosophy one is in constant danger of producing…a myth of mental processes.
Instead of simply saying what anyone knows and must admit' (211).
WITTGENSTEIN ON PSYCHOLOGICAL VERBS
What do the following words have in common?
believe
mean
expect
remember
hope
understand
intend
wish
know
wonder
The Cartesian answer would be that they all stand for various kinds of mental activity, a distinguishing mark of the mental being that it is not extended in space like the other substance of Descartes's dualism, matter.
Franz Brentano was not satisfied with this answer.
Non-extendedness, he held, is not sufficient to mark off the mental from the non-mental.
Consider the phenomena of the senses.
Colours are apprehended as spatially extended.
But are sounds and smells?
If not, does it follow that they are not physical?
No.
So something more must be said about beliefs, expectations, hopes, and so on, than that they are not extended, if they are adequately to be distinguished from these other non-extended phenomena.
We need some further distinguishing characteristic.
Brentano found it in ‘intentionality’.
He wrote:
Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to a content, direction toward an object (which is not to be understood here as meaning a thing), or immanent  objectivity .
Every mental phenomenon includes something as object within itself, although they do not all do so in the same way.
In presentation something is presented, in judgement something is affirmed or denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired and so on.
This intentional in-existence is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena.
No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it.
We can, therefore, define mental phenomena by saying that they are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves.
With the qualification ‘though not wholly unambiguously’, Brentano recognised that the expressions ‘reference to a content’, ‘direction toward an object’ and ‘immanent objectivity’stand in need of further elucidation.
He later attempted such elucidation, as did other philosophers, notably his one-time pupil Edmund Husserl.
I mention Husserl because I think that it may have been via Husserl that Wittgenstein acquired his own interest in intentionality.
I shall return to the topic of intentionality.
First let us notice that in one respect Brentano is as fully in the Cartesian tradition as anyone else.
More so, if anything.
I mean, in respect of what he says about knowledge.
What sort of knowledge do people have of beliefs, expectations, hopes and so on?
Is it like the knowledge they have of material things?
We feel drawn to say that it is not.
We feel drawn to distinguish two ways of knowing things, an inward way and an outward way.
Thus John Locke distinguishes between ‘reflection’, the mind's turning inward upon itself, and ‘sensation’, the source of our ideas of external objects.
Apart from one being inward and the other outward, Locke regards reflection and sensation as being very similar.
He evidently regards sensation as being the more familiar mode of observation, for he explains reflection in terms of it.
‘Though it be not sense, as having nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be called internal sense’.
He accepts unquestioningly that both sensation and reflection are modes of observation: he refers to ‘our observation, employed either about external sensible objects, or about the internal operations of our minds perceived and reflected on by ourselves’.
Brentano draws our attention to a difference which seems to have escaped Locke, at any rate when he was writing Book II, Chapter I of the Essay .
Outer observation is inherently fallible: one may not actually be perceiving what one thinks one is perceiving.
This means that, strictly speaking, so-called outer perception is not really perception at all.
One does not perceive external objects; one infers their existence from one's ideas of them.
So, far from it being  appropriate to assimilate inner perception to outer perception, as Locke does, we must acknowledge that mental phenomena are ‘the only phenomena of which perception in the strict sense of the word is possible’.
In this, Brentano is more consistently Cartesian than is Locke.
Recapitulation.
We began with a question: What have certain words — believe, expect, hope, and so on— in common ?
So far, we have mentioned two possible answers, those of Descartes and Brentano: Descartes's, in terms of mental activity, a distinguishing mark of the mental being that it is not extended in space; Brentano's, in terms of a concept that needs further elucidation, the concept of intentionality.
And we have just been noticing that Brentano, like the British empiricist, John Locke, thinks of believing, expecting, hoping, and so on, as things — Locke called them ‘operations’, Brentano called them ‘phenomena’— as things we perceive in ourselves.
According to Brentano, mental phenomena are the only things we perceive, in the strict sense of the word ‘perceive’.
I have gone into this at some length because it sets the stage for what Wittgenstein says.
Wittgenstein explicitly rejects what Locke and Brentano unquestioningly accept, namely that there is a perfectly proper epistemological question, ‘How is it that a person can say what he himself believes, expects, hopes, and so on?’ to which the answer is that he must have observed in himself a mental operation, process, state, or whatever you like to call it, of believing, expecting, hoping, and so on .
However, before going on to consider what Wittgenstein says, let us look at one of the implications of what Brentano says about the knowledge we have of beliefs, expectations, hopes, and so on.
Since mental phenomena are the objects of inner perception, ‘it is obvious that no mental phenomenon is perceived by more than one individual’.
Two different people cannot have inner perception of the same thing.
Or, as John Wisdom was later to put it, ‘the peculiarity of the soul is not that it is visible to none but that it is visible only to one’.
Minds are essentially private  entities .
There is a problem with this.
If minds are private, how can I ever be sure that other people have beliefs, expectations, hopes, or whatever?
How can I avoid being a sceptic about other minds?
To a convinced empiricist it must seem that the only alternative is behaviourism: believing, expecting, hoping, and so on are not inner things, but outer things, things we learn about by looking at, and listening to, people — including ourselves.
But this means  that a person is not in a specially authoritative position to tell us what he believes, expects, and so on.
To be a behaviourist is to deny what Norman Malcolm calls the ‘autonomous status’ of self-testimony.
Now let us consider what Wittgenstein says.
Wittgenstein's answer to the question with which we began is that the psychological verbs, as he calls them, are ‘characterized by the fact that the third person of the present is to be verified by observation, the first person not’.
In other words, there is an asymmetry between the third person singular, present tense, use of the verb — for example, ‘He believes…’— and the first person singular, present tense, use —‘I believe…’.
That someone else believes something, expects something, and so on,is something I find out about by observation.
That I believe something, expect something, or whatever,is not something I find out about by observation.
Properly to understand this, one needs to spell out the counter-argument, even to the point of saying what ordinarily goes without saying.
(i) With some obvious exceptions, such as questions and commands, all linguistic utterances purport to be statements of fact.
They purport to describe what is the case, to report some state of affairs or other.
Anything else they do may be interesting, but is not strictly part of their linguistic role, to tell people things.
So (ii) someone who says he believes, expects, hopes, or whatever, such-and-such is stating that he believes, expects, hopes, or whatever, such-and-such.
That is what he wants to get across to the other person.
Now,(iii) for someone to be entitled to say that something is the case he must have some basis for what he says.
He must have observed something.
(iv) In the case of external objects the observations he makes may fall short of what he claims to be the case.
So what he says about external objects may be false in spite of being founded on observation.
But inner perception, as Brentano noted, is perception in the strict sense.
It is not fallible, like so-called outer perception.
So (v) what a person says, using the first person singular, present tense, of a psychological verb, is true or false precisely in so far as it is an expression of what he has inwardly observed.
Hence (vi) to say, as Wittgenstein does, that the first person utterance is not verified by observation is tantamount to saying that it has no truth-value.
But (vii) people do say things, using the first person singular, present tense, of psychological verbs, which are sometimes true, sometimes false.
Therefore (viii) Wittgenstein is wrong.
Let us begin with the first step in the above argument.
Wittgenstein refers to ‘the idea that language always functions in one way, always serves the same purpose: to convey thoughts — which may be about houses, pains, good and evil, or anything else you please.’
We need to make ‘a radical break’ with this idea.
But what does he put in its place?
He writes:
But how many kinds of sentence are there?
Say assertion, question and command?— There are countless kinds: countless different kinds of use of what we call ‘symbols’, ‘words’, ‘sentences’.
And this multiplicity is not something fixed, given once for all; but new types of language, new language-games, as we may say, come into existence and others become obsolete and get forgotten…
Here the term ‘language- game ’ is meant to bring into prominence the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity, or of a form of life.
Review the multiplicity of language-games in the following examples, and in others: Giving orders, and obeying them.
This passage raises a good many more questions than it answers.
What is Wittgenstein getting at when he says that the speaking of language is part of an activity?
Why does he italicise the word ‘speaking’?
How does the term ‘language-game’ bring into prominence the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity?
Wittgenstein imagines someone saying that the kinds of sentences are assertions, questions and commands.
Then, when he comes to give examples of ‘the multiplicity of language-games’, the very first is: giving orders, and obeying them.
Why?
What is especially revealing about that language-game?
Let us at least begin the exposition of Wittgenstein with some things which everyone knows and must admit.
And, since he seems to attach importance to the language-game of giving orders and obeying them, let us begin there.
There are two things that anyone must admit about orders.
(1) The first is that orders are orders, they are things to be obeyed or not obeyed; they are not assertions, things to be believed or not believed.
Admittedly there is a use of the word ‘order’, as in ‘the order in which the things are arranged’, but an order in the sense of something to be obeyed is not the expression of a belief that things are — or were or will be — in a certain sort of arrangement.
In saying ‘Do such-and-such’ I am not giving expression to a belief.
In the army, orders are sometimes given in sentences that grammatically resemble predictions: ‘D Company will parade outside the CO s office at 1400 hours.
Signed: the Adjutant’.
But someone who asked the Adjutant, ‘How do you know?’ would either be a stranger to the army, or be making a joke.
There is probably a relation between the two concepts of order, the order to be obeyed and the order in which things are.
But it is not such that we are obliged to interpret an order to be obeyed as an expression of a belief about the other sort of order.
An order to be obeyed is not an expression, in language, of something else.
It is, so to speak, purely linguistic.
(2) The second point follows on from the first.
One can read off what will count as obeying an order from the order itself.
As Wittgenstein expresses it, ‘if an order runs ‘Do such-and-such’ then executing the order is called ‘doing such-and-such’’.
It is no good the person who gave the order later complaining ‘But I meant you to do so-and-so’.
His order has been obeyed if the person to whom he gave it did something correctly described by the words of the order .
That is his obeying the order.
Putting it the other way round: there is no problem about how the execution of an order is ‘foreshadowed’ in the order.
In knowing that something is an order one knows all there is to know about its relation to its execution.
There is no mysterious ‘intentional in-existence’, of the execution in the order, to unfathom.
There is no foothold for Brentano and Husserl.
Now for something else anyone must admit.
It concerns promising.
One of the meanings of ‘promise’ is ‘give cause for expecting’, as in ‘He promised to be stout when grown up’(Daniel Defoe).
But to say, ‘I promise to meet you’ is not to put into words a promise of this other sort.
Nor is it the case that in saying ‘I promise to meet you’ I am merely giving expression to — or reporting or describing — an inward, mental act.
If that were so then what I say would be true if it had the appropriate backing, false otherwise.
But to suppose this would be completely to have misunderstood the business of making promises.
In this respect promises are like orders.
They are not true or false assertions.
Someone who says, ‘I know Germany invaded Russia on June 22nd’, unlike someone who says, ‘I promise to come’,is saying something that is true or false.
Does it follow that he is making a statement , reporting his mental act of knowing, as opposed to doing something?
First, is it false that he is doing something?
Wittgenstein says: ‘Instead of‘I know it’ one may say in some cases ‘That's how it is — rely upon it’.’
And he says: ‘Suppose Moore had said ‘I swear…’ instead of’I know…
‘.’ He is drawing attention to the fact that ‘I know’is sometimes used by a speaker to commit himself to the truth of what he proceeds to say.
In such cases someone who says ‘I know’ lays himself open to reproach if what he says turns out to be false in much the same way as someone who says ‘I promise’lays himself open to reproach if he does not do what he promised to do.
The reproach takes the form of ‘But you said you knew’ in the case of ‘I know’.
In the case of ‘I promise’ it takes the form of ‘But you promised’.
Perhaps if the word ‘avouch’ were in common use, so that the reproach would be ‘But you avouched’it would be more obvious to us that saying ‘I know’is doing something.
Second, is someone who says ‘I know’ reporting his mental act of knowing?
Is what was said earlier — what a person says, using the first person singular, present tense, of a psychological verb, is true or false precisely in so far as it is an expression of what he has inwardly observed — true of ‘I know’?
It is not.
A person can be utterly convinced he knows something, and be wrong.
For ‘I know p’ to be true,p must be true.
And if p is false then no matter how sure I am of p I do not know it.
A possible response to this may be that if we want to understand the concept of knowledge we must treat the use of ‘I know’(the activity of avouching) as the primary thing, but that there are other psychological verbs — such as‘I hope’— in which a speaker using the first person singular of the present tense does simply express his mental state.
The first thing to note about this response is that what is true of ‘I know’ is equally true of some of the uses of ‘I remember’.
In those uses remembering is a special case of knowing.
Consider the sentence, ‘I remember emptying the marmalade jar at breakfast yesterday’.
This is an avouching which is (a) about the past, and (b) not based on evidence (as would be the sentence ‘I must have emptied it yesterday’ uttered on finding it empty).
The second thing to note is that to say that someone who says ‘I hope’— for example, ‘I hope you'll come’— is simply expressing his mental state is to ignore the role of such utterances in human intercourse.
To say that ‘I hope you'll come’ is a description of a state of mind is to ignore the purpose of uttering the words.
Sometimes, at any rate, someone who says, ‘I hope you'll come’ is urging his hearer to come.
And to have failed to realise this would be not to have understood the use of ‘I hope’.
All right, it may be said, to say ‘I know’ and ‘I remember’and ‘I hope’is to do something; but nevertheless there are some utterances which are no more than expressions of mental states, namely when the mental states in question are simply sensations , such as aches and pains.
But Wittgenstein asks:
Why should I say the ‘expression’ derives its meaning from the feeling behind it — and not from the circumstances of the language game in which it is used?
For imagine a person crying out with pain alone in the desert: is he using a language?
Should we say that this cry had meaning?
The use of the term ‘language-game’ in this last quotation reminds us of the earlier quotation in which Wittgenstein says that ‘the term ‘language- game ’is meant to bring into prominence the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity'.
It reminds us of the question: how does the term ‘language-games’ bring this into prominence?
More specifically, why does Wittgenstein italicise the word ‘game’?
What is it about games that he regards as so important?
Consider the card games, whist and bridge.
It is a rule that one may not use a trump card if one can follow suit.
To break the rule is to revoke.
Let us suppose that there are characteristic feelings associated with trumping and revoking.
We can call them the ‘trumping-feeling’ and the ‘revoking-feeling’.
The trumping-feeling is one of triumph; the revoking-feeling is one of embarrassment — at least when one is aware that one has revoked.
Now for the question.
To understand what it is to trump and to revoke should we attend to the use laid down in the rules of the game for trump cards, or should we attend to the characteristic feelings of trumping and revoking?
If the latter, is it the case that we are acquainted with the concepts of trumping and revoking through attending to these feelings, and have somehow managed to devise a game with activities which are as perfect an expression of them as, say, Pablo Picasso's 1937 painting of a Weeping Woman is an expression of grief?
Are the feelings, in this way, an explanation of the game?
In short, do we get at the concepts of trumping and revoking  through attending to our feelings, or through attending to the use, in the game, of the trump-cards?
Which — the accepted practice with trump-cards, or the feelings — is primary?
The answer is that even if everyone playing cards always had a certain sort of feeling when they trumped an opponent's card and had another, different, feeling when they revoked, it would still be the case that to understand what it is to trump, and to revoke, we would have to look at the game itself, that is, at the use of trump-cards in the game.
The feelings are not part of the game.
The practice with trump-cards is not an expression of, an interpretation in terms of an activity of, the feelings.
Rather, the other way round.
The feelings may be regarded as an interpretation of the activity.
But a superfluous interpretation.
Questions about trumping and revoking are not questions about experiences — or, if they are, they are psychological questions, not questions about the concepts of trumping and revoking.
Whatever feelings may accompany trumping and revoking are not the meaning of trumping and revoking.
The meaning is embodied in the rules of the game: to understand trumping and revoking one needs to ask, ‘How do you use a trump-card, what do you do with it?’ psychological terms — like ‘the trumping-feeling’and ‘the revoking-feeling’— merely distract us from the thing that really matters.
What is important is the practice with trump-cards.
All this, but with examples drawn from chess instead of from whist and bridge, is what Wittgenstein has in mind when he says that the term ‘language-game’ is meant to bring into prominence the fact that the speaking of language is part of an activity.
He says such things as that ‘the question is not one of explaining a language-game by means of our experiences, but of noting a language-game’; ‘Look on the language-game as the primary thing.
And look on the feelings, etc., as you look on a way of regarding the language-game, as interpretation’; ‘We are not analysing a phenomenon (e.g. thought) but a concept (e.g. that of thinking), and therefore the use of a word’; ‘a concept is in its element with the language-game’.
His message is: If you want to understanding knowing, remembering, hoping, and so on, do not look at whatever experiences may go with the use of the words ‘know’, ‘remember’, ‘hope’, do not look at the phenomena ; look, instead, at the transactions of language, look at the grammar of the expressions ‘I know’, ‘I remember’, ‘I hope’, look at what is done with these expressions.
Wittgenstein is here opposing our natural inclination when we start philosophising, which is to say that what matters is not the use of the expressions ‘I know’, ‘I remember’, ‘I hope’, but a mental phenomenon — or process or activity — of knowing, remembering, hoping.
Our inclination is to say that language is not the primary thing, that we are analysing a phenomenon, and that what matters is the question, ‘What sort of a process goes on in your mind when you know, remember, hope something?’
We are inclined to think that the grammar of the linguistic expression is some sort of consequence of the process being of a certain kind; for example, that ‘I remember X-ing’ is true if and only if I X-ed because remembering is a process in which one somehow sees into the past.
Wittgenstein acknowledges that we have this inclination, and tries to account for it.
There are, he suggests, two contributory inclinations.
One is fairly general, the other is more specific.
The fairly general inclination is our inclination to treat the question, ‘What is the meaning of this word?’ as equivalent to, ‘What does this word stand for?’even when the question is a request for philosophical enlightenment.
The more specific inclination is our inclination to put a false interpretation on our own forms of expression.
For example, we have the form of expression ‘when I said ‘Napoleon was crowned in 1804’ I meant the man who won the battle of Austerlitz' and we are inclined to interpret the use of the past tense ‘meant’as meaning that the idea of Napoleon having won the battle of Austerlitz must have been present in the speaker's mind when he said that Napoleon was crowned in 1804.
This past mental act of meaning is a grammatical fiction, but it seems more like fact when it provides the material for an answer to the question, ‘What does the word ‘mean’ stand for?’
Another form of expression we misinterpret is, ‘Now I understand’.
The role it actually plays is that of an exclamation, or a signal to another person that he can now expect me to, say, continue a series according to a formula.
But we interpret it as though it is like ‘Now I'm sweating’, except that what is reported is a mental and not a bodily process.
And we feel confirmed in this interpretation by its enabling us to answer the question, ‘What does the word ‘understand’ stand for?’with ‘a mental process we have found to occur in ourselves’.
This answer, Wittgenstein says, is like the answer ‘an arithmetical object’ to the question, ‘What does the word ‘three’stand for?’
: ‘The word ‘process’ in the one case, and the word ‘object’in the other produce a false grammatical attitude to the word.’
The proper attitude to the word ‘understand’, as to the word ‘three’, is to be got by scrutinizing the use of the word.
Talk of ‘processes’ and ‘states’commits us to an inappropriate way of looking at the matter — as though the only difference between understanding understanding and understanding sweating is that in the case of understanding understanding our gaze is directed inwards.
It seems quite innocent to talk of ‘processes’ and ‘states’, but with such talk we blind ourselves to what really matters.
‘The decisive movement in the conjuring trick has been made, and it was the very one that we thought quite innocent.’
The ‘conjuring trick’— which, of course, cannot come off — is that of investing in a process those features of the use of an expression which constitute its grammar.
It cannot come off, but we aré such masters of philosophical self-deception that it can seem to, and then ‘it can seem as if the rules of grammar are in a certain sense an unpacking of something we experience all at once when we use a word’.
This is what Wittgenstein calls the ‘myth of mental processes’.
‘In philosophy one is in constant danger of producing…a myth of mental processes.
Instead of simply saying what anyone knows and must admit.’
Earlier Wittgenstein was quoted as saying that psychological verbs are ‘characterized by the fact that the third person of the present is to be verified by observation, the first person not.’
Afterwards, an argument was spelt out, having the conclusion that Wittgenstein was wrong.
More recently we have considered Wittgenstein's reply to this argument.
What remains to be done is to consider the relevance of what Wittgenstein says to the issues raised earlier in this paper.
One issue raised is that of ‘intentionality’.
The other issue is that of the choice between saying that believing, expecting, hoping, and so on, are inner things (mentalism) and saying that they are outer things (behaviourism).
Saying that they are inner things brings scepticism in its wake.
Saying that they are outer things involves the denial of the autonomous status of self-testimony.
If we are misled by our grammar into thinking that ‘I expect such-and-such’ is a report of a mental process then there will seem to be a problem: ‘What is it about a mental process which makes it an expectation of such-and-such?
How is what is expected foreshadowed in the process of expecting?’
But if we treat the use of ‘I expect…’ as the primary thing then there is no problem.
That ‘I expect such-and-such’ has ‘such-and-such’for its fulfilment  is as unproblematic as is the rule of grammar that ‘X does such-and-such’is the execution of the order to X ‘Do such-and-such’, or the rule of whist that the act of trumping has the consequence that the trick is won — provided one's opponent does not use a higher trump.
Wittgenstein's treatment of intentionality can be summed up in one sentence from the Philosophical Grammar : ‘It is in language that it's all done’.
About expectation, for example, he writes: ‘It is in language that expectation and its fulfilment make contact.’
Wittgenstein avoids both mentalism and behaviourism by saying that what matters for an understanding of psychological verbs is not anything phenomenal — either inner or outer — but their use.
To suppose that we have to choose between mentalism and behaviourism is like saying that we have to choose between saying that the words ‘trump’ and ‘revoke’designate feelings of triumph and embarrassment, and saying that they designate triumphant and embarrassed behaviour.
About joy, Wittgenstein writes:
‘But I do have a real feeling of joy!’
Yes, when you are glad you really are glad.
And of course joy is not joyful behaviour, nor yet a feeling round the corners of the mouth and the eyes.
‘But ‘joy’ surely designates an inward thing'.
No.
‘Joy’ designates nothing at all.
Neither any inward nor any outward thing.
It is easy enough to say all this.
To see it, is another matter — such is the hold on us of the myth of mental processes.
The myth?
If ‘There has just taken place in me the mental process of remembering…’ means nothing more than ‘I have just remembered…’then to deny the mental process would mean to deny the remembering.
No one, least of all Wittgenstein, wants to do that.
The myth is the idea that to talk of a mental process of remembering is to explain the use we make of the word remember.
What we need is a perspicuous representation of our use of the word ‘remember’, and of how we come to use words like ‘yesterday’.
‘We have only to put together in the right way what we know without adding anything, and the satisfaction we are trying to get from the explanation comes of itself.’
OTHER MINDS
There is a passage in Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations in which he compares an answer that may be given to a philosophical question about someone else's pain with an answer that may be given to a question about the meaning of ‘It is 5 o'clock on the sun’.
Wittgenstein does not compare other answers that may be given to the two questions.
And he does not compare the questions themselves in respect of what lies behind them — making them ones which we can, or cannot, easily ‘see through’— or in respect of how they should be answered.
Yet there is material in what he says elsewhere in the Investigations and in other of his later writings for a many-sided and, I think, useful development of the comparison.
Anyway, that is what I shall attempt in this essay.
AFTERNOON ON THE SUN
Consider the question, ‘How can I mean anything by ‘It's afternoon on the Sun’?’
To see what lies behind it, ask, ‘What is the explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’?’
We know very well what the correct explanation is.
I shall call it the fact-presupposing explanation.
The fact presupposed is that the Earth revolves on its axis so that places on the Earth have varying positions relative to the Sun.
Were it not for this fact of nature we wouldn't have our time-of-day language.
But, having it, it is a fact of grammar (in Wittgenstein's sense) that it is afternoon at a place on the Earth when at that place the Sun is past the zenith but not yet over the horizon.
Knowing that this is the explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’ we can see how we might use the term ‘afternoon’on another planet, such as Mars.
Mars takes a bit longer to revolve on its axis than the Earth, so a Mars afternoon would be a bit longer than an Earth afternoon.
We can imagine the following situation.
A spacecraft lands on Mars.
The never-ending dust-storms prevent the space travellers  from knowing, by looking out of their spacecraft portholes, whether it is a Martian day or night.
The outlook is equally black.
Nevertheless they note that the temperature regularly rises and falls, and they suppose that, as on Earth, when it is warmer it is daytime.
Knowing the meaning of ‘It is daytime on Mars’ they have used an argument from analogy to settle a question of fact , the question whether or not it is daytime on Mars.
Knowing the fact-presupposing explanation of ‘It's afternoon’ we can see through the question, ‘How can I mean anything by ‘It's afternoon on the Sun’?’
That is, we can see that the answer we should give is, ‘You can't, short of giving an entirely new meaning to ‘It's afternoon’, and why should you want to do that?’
We can see why we can extend the use of ‘afternoon’ to Mars but not to the Sun.
The Sun can't be past, or not past, the zenith on the Sun.
Suppose, now, that a different sort of explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’ had been given.
I shall call it an experiential explanation, because it is in terms of our experiences.
We can imagine someone saying: ‘We understand ‘It's afternoon’ from our own case, that is, from our experience on Earth of, for example , seeing the Sun more than half-way across the sky as we recline in our garden chairs after lunch.
What is to stop us from generalising?
Can't we at least suppose that we might have the same experience on the Sun?’
If someone who said this was asked, ‘But what do you mean by ‘It's afternoon on the Sun’?’ he might say, ‘I mean just the same as I mean by ‘It's afternoon’on the Earth'.
Challenged to explain how he could mean the same, since he couldn't conceivably experience the Sun in the sky on the Sun, he might, but very implausibly, produce the following justification for the generalisation of time-of-day language to the Sun.
On the Earth there is regularly more evaporation — effusions of water vapour from the surface — by day than by night.
But on the Sun there is something analogous.
There are, regularly, outbreaks of solar-flare activity.
(The composition of the Sun and the Earth being what they are it is natural that the effusions on the Sun should be of fiery matter whereas those on the Earth should be of water vapour.)
In view of the analogy it is reasonable to suppose that there are Sun-days and nights, and a Sun-afternoon when the solar-flare activity is past its peak but not yet entirely over.
If it were again put to him that he couldn't conceivably experience  the Sun in the sky on the Sun, he might, even more implausibly, say: ‘That is why I said ‘suppose’.
I agree, of course, that the supposition can't be verified.’
To this it might be replied that it is not simply the case that the evaporation/solar-flares analogy is not sufficiently strong an analogy to justify our using the term ‘afternoon’ on the Sun; it is no justification at all .
The situation is quite different from the one in which we say ‘It's afternoon’ on Mars.
On Mars the time-of-day language-game is practically the same as on Earth, and, given the language-game, we use an argument from analogy to settle a question of fact that arises within the language-game.
The fact that day-time and warmth are merely contingently related, provided it is a reliable contingent relation, does not affect the validity of the argument from analogy.
But when it comes to saying, ‘It's afternoon’ on the Sun the evaporation/solar-flares analogy is being advanced, not in order to justify an answer to a question of fact that arises within the language-game, but in order to justify an extension of the language-game we have on Earth to the Sun.
And we can easily see that an external contingent relation, no matter how regular a contingent relation it is, won't do the trick.
We can see this because we are in no doubt as to the fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’.
As I said, the Sun can't be past, or not past, the zenith on the Sun.
We are not tempted to give an experiential explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’, or beguiled by answers to the ‘Afternoon on the Sun’ question like ‘We mean the same by ‘It's afternoon on the Sun’as we mean by ‘It's afternoon’on the Earth'.
So in the way in which there is an ‘Other Minds’ problem in philosophy there is not an ‘Afternoon on the Sun’problem.
We can see through the questions and answers about ‘Afternoon on the Sun’.
That is why it is useful to compare questions and answers about ‘Other Minds with questions and answers about ‘Afternoon on the Sun’.
It is useful because our aim is to see through questions and answers about ‘Other Minds’.
OTHER MINDS
Consider the question ‘How can I mean anything by ‘There exist pains I don't feel, pains in other minds’?’, and compare it with the question about afternoon on the Sun.
What immediately occurs to us is not a fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language.
It is two, opposed, experiential explanations — one in terms of‘the feeling of pain itself’, the other in terms of people looking, sounding, and so on , as if they are in pain (‘pain-behaviour’).
The first of these is the more compelling.
We think: surely we learn concepts by having experiences, and surely the experience that matters in the case of the concept ‘pain' is the pain itself.
But since the pain I have to experience to learn the concept is necessarily my pain, this explanation leads to our asking ourselves the question, ‘What possible reason could I have to think that other people ever have what I mean by ‘pain’?’— a question which invites the answers, ‘None’(solipsism) or, alternatively ‘An argument from analogy’.
But solipsism is intuitively unacceptable; and nobody seems to be able to come up with an argument from analogy that will do the trick.
Hence our perplexity, the ‘Other Minds’ problem.
Wittgenstein's contribution to ‘dissolving’ the ‘Other Minds’problem has two sides to it: one negative, an attack on the experiential explanation of the meaning of pain-language in terms of‘the feeling itself’; and one positive, a fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language.
The fact that the negative side receives very much more attention from him than the positive side, and that the attack is pressed home on only one of the two experiential explanations, has had the unfortunate result that Wittgenstein can be mistakenly thought to be giving the alternative experiential explanation, in terms of behaviour.
But to read Wittgenstein as a behaviourist is to ignore the many passages in which he explicitly disavows that he is attacking one experiential explanation only to  embrace another, and to ignore his own fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language.
Since it is only by understanding his own fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language that we can hope to see through questions and answers about ‘Other Minds’, let us consider the positive side of his teaching first.
WITTGENSTEIN'S OWN EXPLANATION OF PAIN-LANGUAGE
The fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of ‘It's afternoon’ is in terms of certain things which happen naturally, such as the  earth's revolving on its axis.
Were it not for these things there would not be the possibility of the time-of-day language.
Similarly, Wittgenstein's fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language is in terms of things that happen naturally.
People moan and cry when they are in pain.
And other people react to their moaning and crying by tending the part that has been hurt.
This is something that happens naturally.
There are, we might say, natural or primitive ‘expressions’ of pain.
Wittgenstein says that a child learns to use pain-language ‘to replace its moans’.
The linguistic expression ‘stands for’, ‘is a substitute for’, the natural expression.
In my ordinary use of words to stand for sensations my words are ‘tied up with my natural expressions of sensation’.
If people did not naturally groan, grimace, or whatever, ‘then it would be impossible to teach a child the use of the word ‘tooth-ache’’.
‘The game we play with the word ‘toothache’ entirely depends upon there being a behaviour which we call the expression of toothache.’
‘The language-games with expressions or feelings are based on games with expressions of which we don't say they may lie.’
But to see what this talk of the linguistic expression ‘replacing’ the natural expression really means we must consider, in order to reject, the prevalent notion that if someone says ‘It hurts’or ‘I'm afraid’, and they are not lying, then what they say must be justified by some observation.
It is not justified by an observation of their own behaviour.
Therefore, it is thought, it must be justified by something else — an inner feeling of pain or fear.
They ‘intro-spect’ the feeling, and then ‘express’it in language.
When Wittgenstein says that the linguistic expression is a substitute for the natural expression, and that there is no sharp line between the linguistic and the natural expression of a feeling, he is attacking the notion that in the relation between saying ‘It hurts’ and being in pain there must be a justifying element of reflecting on how one feels (a ‘ground’for the utterance), an element which doesn't come into the relation between moaning and being in pain.
Consider the following sentences:
(a)
He had difficulty keeping his eyes open.
(b)
He said ‘I think I could do with a strong cup of coffee’(to keep awake).
(c)
He spoke irritably.
(d)
He yawned.
(e)
He said, ‘I expect you've got a busy day tomorrow,(as a hint to the guest that he should go to bed).
(f)
He made an elaborate pretence of yawning (as a signal that it was bedtime).
(g)
He stretched, sighed, and said ‘Oh, I'm so tired’.
(h)
He thought for a while, then said ‘You know, I think I'm getting a bit tired; I think I need a holiday’.
The words ‘because he was tired’ could be added to each of them.
What would it mean in the case of (g)?
Is the speaker in (g)describing his feelings ?
(In (b) is he describing his thoughts ?)
Or is saying ‘Oh, I'm so tired’, although it is a learnt, and not an involuntary, expression of tiredness, as natural a part of the tiredness-syndrome for someone in our linguistic community as yawning?
Is saying, ‘Oh, I'm so tired’ natural tiredness-behaviour for us, in spite of the fact that ‘I'm tired’, unlike yawning, even pretence yawning, can be said to be true or false?
I think Wittgenstein's answer to the last two questions would be ‘Yes’.
I think he would say that ‘because he was tired’, added to ‘He said, ‘Oh, I'm so tired’’, serves to distinguish the case in question from ones in which someone is, say, play-acting, or lying; but that it would be a mistake to regard saying this as an endorsement of the experiential explanation, in terms of feelings, of the meaning of tiredness language.
He writes, not of tiredness but of toothache, as follows:
Now what makes a ‘natural form of expression’ natural?
Should we say ‘An experience which stands behind it’?
If I use the expression ‘I have toothache’ I may think of it as ‘being used naturally’or otherwise, but it would be wrong to say that I had a reason for thinking either.
‘I don't just say ‘I've got toothache’, but toothache makes me say this .’
(I deliberately didn't write ‘the feeling of toothache’, or ‘a certain feeling’.)
This sentence distinguishes between, say, saying it as an example of a sentence, or on the stage, etc., and saying it as an assertion.
But it is no explanation of the expression ‘I have toothache’, of the use of the word ‘toothache’.
It is important to see, here, that Wittgenstein is not denying that people do have toothache (that it really aches!), or even that people sometimes reflect on their feelings and describe them, as  in (h).
What he is asserting is that ‘I have toothache’ has meaning in virtue of pain-language taking the place of moaning; and what he is denying is that saying this commits him to an experiential explanation of the meaning of pain-language.
For moaning is not describing, hence it is not the description either of behaviour or of feeling.
And so the verbal expression ‘I have toothache’ that replaces it, is not a description either — either of behaviour or of feeling.
It is, itself, behaviour.
We might even say that to call it a statement is misleading.
In the light of this fact-presupposing explanation of the meaning of pain-language, Wittgenstein can answer the question, ‘How can I mean anything by ‘There exist pains I don't feel, pains in other minds’?’ as follows.
The question arises only because you think of having learned the meaning of the word ‘pain' by some sort of internal ostensive definition.
You insist on giving an experiential explanation of the meaning.
But that is a mistake.
A child grows up in a community in which people moan and cry when they are in pain (as he does himself); in which they also use expressions like ‘I'm in pain' and ‘I've got toothache’; in which others react sympathetically to their linguistic, as to their non-linguistic, expressions of pain; and so he comes to use the linguistic expression himself in the place of the natural expression.
All this gives the word ‘pain' the meaning it has.
In its absence we wouldn't even be able to understand the question, ‘What possible reason could I have to think that other people ever have what I mean by ‘pain’?, let alone the answers that have been given to it.
COMPARISON
I said that Wittgenstein paid more attention to the negative side of his teaching, his attack on the experiential explanation of the meaning of pain-language in terms of feelings, than to the positive side, his own explanation in terms of‘It hurts’ replacing moaning.
There are two sides to his attack on the experiential explanation.
The first is an attack on the main element in the experiential explanation.
This is the idea that all words have meaning by being names of things referred to by them, and that learning the meaning of a word is a matter of finding out what thing it refers to, what thing bears the name in question.
(The subsidiary element is the idea that since ‘pain' is evidently not the name of a material object  it must be the name of an aethereal one, a personal experience.)
The second is what might be described as a pathology of the positions (solipsism, and so on) adopted by those philosophers who accept the experiential explanation.
Since it is an exposition of the second part that is aided by a comparison with the ‘Afternoon on the Sun’ question and answers, I shall devote my remaining time to it.
I have, in any case, written on the first part elsewhere.
Now for the comparison.
Earlier I said that we can imagine someone saying: ‘We understand ‘It's afternoon’ from our own case, that is, from our experience on Earth of, for example , seeing the Sun more than half-way across the sky, and so on .
What is to stop us generalising?
Can't we at least suppose that we might have the same experience on the Sun?’
Similarly, we can imagine someone saying: ‘We understand pain-language from our own case, that is, from our experience of pain.
What is to stop us generalising?
Can't we at least suppose that others have the same experience?’
I also said that if someone were asked, ‘But what do you mean by ‘It's afternoon on the Sun’?’ he might say ‘I mean just the same as I mean by ‘It's afternoon’on the Earth'.
Similarly, if someone were asked, ‘But what do you mean by ‘Someone else is in pain’?’ he might say, ‘I mean just the same by ‘pain’when I say someone else is in pain as I mean when I say ‘I'm in pain’.’
I said that challenged to explain how he could mean the same, since he couldn't conceivably experience the Sun in the sky on the Sun, he might produce an argument from analogy to justify the generalisation of time-of-day language to the Sun.
Similarly, challenged to explain how he could mean the same by ‘pain' in ‘Someone else is in pain' as in ‘I'm in pain', since he couldn't conceivably experience someone else's pain, he might produce an argument from analogy to justify the generalisation of pain-language to others.
It would go like this: ‘I've noticed that I regularly groan when I'm in pain.
Other people sometimes groan.
Surely it is reasonable to suppose that they have the same feeling as I have when they do so.’
If it were again put to him that he couldn't conceivably experience other people's pain, he might say, ‘That is why I said ‘suppose’.
I agree, of course, that the supposition can't be verified.’
Now, although the idea that whenever we see that someone is in pain we make an inference from behaviour to feeling is about as mythical as the idea that at some time in the past we made a Social Contract, the ‘argument from analogy’ line of reasoning seems much less implausible here than in the ‘Afternoon on the Sun’case.
Although it does not in fact provide a justification, we are much less inclined to say that it does not.
Why is this so?
There are a number of reasons.
Let me briefly mention just three of them.
The first is that we are not so tempted to think of the word ‘afternoon’ as having a meaning for us in virtue of being the name of an object, as we are to think of ‘pain' as having a meaning for us in virtue of being the name of an object.
We are much more ready to accept a fact-  presupposing explanation of the meaning, in terms of the earth's revolving on its axis, and so on, than to accept what Ryle would call a ‘Fido’— Fido' explanation.
In the case of pain, on the other hand, it seems to us to be a substantive and yet not to be the name of a material object.
And so we come under the spell of Descartes, for whom, since the mind is distinct from the body, a pain must be a mental, a private, object.
The second relates to what I said about the evaporation/solar-flares analogy being an external relation.
There is no connection between effusion, as such, and the time-of-day language.
But there is a connection between the moaning and the pain-language — namely, the one for which Wittgenstein argues, that ‘I'm hurt’replaces moaning.
Since there is a connection, it is understandable that we should think there is.
But this doesn't explain why we should think it is the sort that is invoked in an argument from analogy.
The third reason relates to the fact that whereas it doesn't make sense to say ‘It's afternoon’ on the Sun, it does make sense to talk of other people's feelings.
The reason why it makes sense is not because of an argument from analogy.
But since it does make sense we can employ arguments from analogy to answer factual questions that arise within the language-game.
For example, I can say that Jones is behaving just like Smith did, and we now know that Smith behaved as he did because he had feelings of being persecuted, so it is possible that Jones has feelings of being persecuted, too.
In short, whereas there is not the possibility of using an argument from analogy to answer factual questions about time on the Sun, there is the possibility when it comes to people's  feelings, and so, being predisposed by the second reason to think that there is some sort of connection between moaning and the pain-language, we naturally fall into the trap of confusing valid fact-establishing arguments from analogy with invalid meaning-establishing ones, and produce the well-known argument that I am, in general , justified in applying ‘mental’ language to other people by the fact that they behave as I do when I'm in a certain state of mind.
It takes a Wittgenstein to pull us up with a jolt, by saying that this is like translating a chair — not the word ‘chair’, but a chair — into French.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, is there anything of a general nature that can be said about Wittgenstein's treatment of the ‘Other Minds’ problem?
I think there is.
It illustrates, I think, three elements in his later philosophy of language.
The first is his idea that language is not a thing apart from the rest of life, and related to it only via what goes on in the mind of the language-user.
The second is that the components of language do not have meaning for us in virtue of standing for objects, of various ontological kinds, with which we become acquainted through some kind of ostensive definition.
The third is the application of the second to concepts like ‘pain': words like ‘pain' do not have meaning for us in virtue of standing for objects with which we become acquainted through an internal ostensive definition.
If all this had to be summed up in one sentence I suppose it would have to be that Wittgenstein's treatment of the ‘Other Minds’ problem is an extended illustration of a point in philosophical logic: namely, that the meaningfulness of some of the things we say is dependent on contingent facts of nature — such as that the Earth revolves on its axis, and that we moan with pain and react as we do to others who moan.
One reason why the ‘Other Minds’ problem was so important for Wittgenstein was because he could not dissolve it without revising the view he had taken on this point when he wrote the Tractatus .
The expression ‘facts of nature’ is one which Wittgenstein himself uses.
But I think I should, finally, draw attention to a difference between what might be called facts of physical nature and facts of human nature.
Wittgenstein uses the expression ‘form of life’ in the latter connection.
That the Earth revolves on its axis is, of course, a fact that has  very important implications for our lives.
But it is not itself a fact of our lives.
That we moan with pain and react as we do to others who moan, on the other hand, is a fact of our lives.
Wittgenstein writes:
The concept of pain is characterized by its particular function in our life.
Pain has this position in our life; has these connexions.
(That is to say: we only call ‘pain' what has this position,these connexions.)
Only surrounded by certain normal manifestations of life, is there such a thing as an expression of pain.
Only surrounded by an even more far-reaching particular manifestation of life, such a thing as the expression of sorrow or affection.
And so on.
We can imagine forms of social life which don't provide the necessary backing for sorrow and affection.
Jean-Luc Godard's film ‘Alphaville’, is about this.
In Alphaville a child is unlikely to see its father.
Natasha, the heroine, ‘speaks of her father as if being his child was a theoretical, not sentimental, relationship’.
A man who is so abnormal as to weep at the death of his wife is said to be behaving illogically.
They don't have the word ‘weep’.
Nor do they have words like ‘tears’, ‘tenderness’ or ‘love’.
When the hero, Lemmy, tells Natasha he loves her, she says ‘Love…love…what is that?’
He says, ‘This’ and caresses her.
But she says ‘No…that's something I know all about…that's sensuality’.
But eventually his loving concern for her evokes a response.
It reminds me a bit of Wittgenstein's account of how a child might be trained in the practice of ‘narration of past events’:
Natasha : You're looking at me in a very strange way!
I've the feeling that you expect me to say something to you?
Lemmy : Yes.
Natasha : I don't know what to say.
At least I don't know the words.
I was never taught them.
Please help me…
Lemmy : Impossible, princess.
You've got to manage by your-self, and only then will you be saved.
If you can't…then you are as lost as the dead in Alphaville.
Natasha : I……love……you…
I love you.
In the Original Treatment it says: ‘Natasha tells Lemmy that she loves him, but pronounces it as a child speaks its first words’
To say that Natasha has discovered how to express love is to miss the point.
It is the possibility of love itself that the film is about.
The logical possibility.