

7 November 1992 NEW MUSICAL EXPRESS Young, gifted and plaque Fair and loathing in America CURVE, MARY CHAIN and SPIRITUALIZED ride the US Rollercoaster Ultimate SMITHS/MOZ singles retrospective!
Cut the crop!
NEIL YOUNG's back!
THERAPY?
Gnash Street Kids Bite Back LUSH'S LOLLAPALOOZA DIARY * MARK LAMARR * JOHN LEE HOOKER * BIVOUAC THE ORB * STEVE ALBINI * MOONSHAKE * JUAN ATKINS * THE FRANK & WALTERS
NEWS
News Editor: IESTYN GEORGE
Nappy Mondays not in Continent
HAPPY MONDAYS' future is again in doubt following the sudden cancellation of the band's European tour.
Mondays' manager Nathan McGough told NME the band's November tour of Europe was abandoned as it clashed with the birth of guitarist Mark Day's first child, despite rumours that Shaun Ryder's drug problems are to blame.
However, the Mondays' tour manager Muzzer dashed these allegations: ‘Shaun hasn't touched drugs on this tour, neither on or off stage.’
Recent speculation suggesting that the beleaguered band is on the verge of splitting up was also denied by McGough.
‘Band morale is very high after the recent UK dates.
The Mondays are on their way to Japan to play a one-off show, after which they will return to the UK to begin writing new material.
The band will not play any further dates this year.’
Meanwhile, the Mondays' new ‘Sunshine And Love EP’ is issued through Factory on November 19.
The track, lifted from their recent ‘…
Yes Please!’
LP, is backed with a Paul Oakenfold and Steve Osbourne-produced cover of the Bee Gees' ‘Stayin' Alive’, plus an M-People remix of ‘24 Hour Party People’ on 12″ and CD formats.
THE LEVELLERS have announced details of a Christmas charity show and special guests at their Birmingham ‘Freak Shows.’
The band play a home town show in aid of local charities at the Brighton Centre on December 21.
Also appearing at the benefit, for Brighton Unemployment Centre, Adventure Unlimited and Anti-Fascist Action, are Back To The Planet and local band Pan.
Special guests confirmed to support the Levs' at the sold-out Birmingham Atrium Hall shows are African Headcharge and Senser, and Chumbawamba and the Moonflowers.
EMF announce a new single, featuring a galaxy of celebrity remixes by ORBITAL, FOETUS, BUTCH VIG, JOEY BELTRAM and D-REAM.
The single, ‘It's You’, lifted from the band's Top 20 ‘Stigma’ LP, is available in two individual CD formats.
The first carries three Butch Vig mixes of the title track, plus a Foetus mix of ‘Dog’, and is issued through Parlophone on November 16.
The second CD, released on November 23, features a re-working of the title track by Orbital, Joey Beltram's mix of ‘The Light That Burns Twice As Bright’, and a D-Ream overhaul of the band's last 45 ‘They're Here’, previously available on white label only in the UK.
DEICIDE's frontman Glen Benton has received death threats prior to the band's arrival in Britain.
The leader of the Florida-based satanic death metal quartet, who boasted of torturing animals during a recent NME interview, has been warned against coming to Britain in an open letter from the Manchester cell of the Animal Militia.
The letter, also sent to NME , said: ‘When you signed your contract to perform at Manchester's International 2 and London Astoria on December 16 and 17, you effectively signed your death warrant.
Not even Satan himself will protect you once you  step foot in England.’
Benton replied to the warning with the following statement: ‘Oh shit man, like I'm scared of a  f—ing bunch of woolly jumper, grass-eating animal lovers.
Man, the pussy christians give me a harder time.
Now I'm really looking forward to those shows, it gets better every day.
Tell them to bring their  f—ing furry friends with 'em; the bigger the better and we can really have some fun.
Satan lives.’
Nirvana say biog off to authors
NIRVANA have hit out at two women compiling an unofficial biography about the band.
The group issued an angry statement alleging that the authors are ‘obsessive fans misrepresenting themselves as the authorised biographers of Nirvana’.
NME understands that Nirvana commissioned an official biography from a London-based journalist last week.
A spokesperson for the band declined to comment on whether Nirvana are concerned about conflict of sales between the two publications.
Meanwhile, as previously announced, Nirvana's 15-track compilation LP ‘Incesticide’ is issued through Geffen on December 15.
The full track listing is: ‘Dive’(Sub Pop B-side), ‘Silver’(Sub Pop 45), ‘Stain’(Sub Pop B-side), ‘Been A Son’(Goodier session), ‘Turnaround’, ‘Molly's Lips’ and ‘Son Of A Gun’(all Peel Sessions), ‘(New Wave) Polly’(Goodier session), ‘Beeswax’(from the ‘Kill Rock Star’compilation LP), ‘Downer’(extra track on their reissued debut LP ‘Bleach’), ‘Mexican Seafood’(from the ‘Teriyaki Asthma’compilation LP), ‘Hairspray Queen’and ‘Aero Zeppelin’(demos), ‘Big Long Now’(unreleased), and ‘Aneurysm’(Goodier session).
Nirvana: obsessive fans?
Never…
Sex scandal hits Soho
SOHO claim to have become the targets of a mysterious spate of illegal surveillance, following the inclusion of a track on their latest album ‘Thug’ which alludes to a rumoured sex scandal involving a senior Tory cabinet minister.
Since the release of the track, ‘Claire's Kitchen’, the band's premises have been broken into and their possessions rifled through.
They also have reason to believe their phone is tapped.
Soho's Timothy Brinkhurst told NME the song was written after the band became privy to information concerning the alleged infidelity of a leading politician, unnamed on the track for legal reasons.
The lyrical content of the track refers to rumours concerning an affair between the Tory and a London caterer, which have been rife in media circles throughout the summer.
Talking exclusively to the NME about the background to the song, songwriter Tim London said: ‘Claire's Kitchen’ is based on an interesting rumour, but is really there to point out the hypocrisy of a political party that has championed so-called family values, whilst indulging in the biggest spate of shagging around since The Beatles.
These Chelsea-supporting, three-minute Johnnies have been taking the piss out of ordinary folk for too long, indulging their libidos at our nation's expense, laughing while communities crumble, hospitals are shut and the economy goes down the pan.’
Soho: unhappy chicks
Reg Wedge!
ELTON JOHN has announced a giant donation to AIDS charities, and is simultaneously suing a US TV show over an alleged AIDS-related slur against him.
Elton revealed last week that he has contributed £500,000 in personal donations and royalties from all singles since ‘Sacrifice’ to AIDS charities in the UK.
The singer also hosted a benefit for the Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation at Madison Square Garden in New York last month, which raised $580,000, and subsequently announced all profits from his US single are to be divided between American AIDS foundations.
Meanwhile, Elton is suing the American TV show Hard Copy for slander, alleging that a Hard Copy reporter claimed he moved to Atlanta to be near an AIDS treatment centre.
Elton alleges the reporter used a helicopter to spy on him at his Atlanta home, and threatened to run a negative story if he didn't agree to an interview.
Elton is seeking a minimum $15 million in damages and a restraining order against the producers.
Elton issues a new single through Phonogram this week, ‘The Last Song’, written about a man dying of AIDS who is reconciled with his estranged father on his deathbed.
Seven-inch and cassette formats are backed with ‘The Man Who Never Died’.
The track is also available as a limited-edition CD carrying a remix of his late-'70s hit ‘Song For Guy’.
Gus Van Sant, director of Drugstore Cowboy and My Own Private Idaho , has been commissioned to shoot a video to accompany the single.
KEITH RICHARDS has announced a rare UK solo date.
The Rolling Stones' guitarist and his five-piece band The X-Pensive Winos play London Town & Country Club on December 17.
Tickets priced £15, are available from usual agents.
Richards lifts a new single, ‘Wicked As It Seems’, from his recent Virgin LP ‘Main Offender’ to coincide with the show.
FAITH NO MORE and L7 have announced details of two extra dates on their forthcoming double-header tour, and new singles.
L7 reissue their ‘Pretend We're Dead’ single through London on November 16.
The track is backed with ‘Fast And Frightening’ recorded live at the Cult In The Park festival last June.
Faith No More release ‘Everything's Ruined’, lifted from their highly acclaimed ‘Angel Dust’ LP, through London on November 9.
Meanwhile, the tour takes in Cambridge Corn Exchange and a fourth night at Glasgow Barrowlands .
Exchangeways here we (don't) come
MORRISSEY's ticket swap operation, established to compensate fans who bought tickets for Morrissey's cancelled appearances at Glastonbury and Finsbury Park, has been dubbed a rip-off by outraged fans.
Applicants deluged the NME with calls claiming that promises of replacement tickets for Morrissey's December 19 shows at The Alexandra Palace had not been met by the organisers.
Press announcements at the time of the cancelled shows this summer claimed that Morrissey fans who sent ‘proof of purchase’ of Glastonbury or Finsbury Park tickets to a PO Box number would receive free Alexandra Palace tickets.
However, many callers to the NME claim they have been ‘fobbed off’ with ‘insulting’letters stating that the original tickets, rather than photocopies or credit card receipts, were required for the exchange.
A Morrissey fan said: ‘By sending the original tickets you're giving up the only proof you ever had of having bought them, which means they can just ignore you.
They also put a closing date on the offer which meant there was no time to try again.
They've covered themselves very nicely.’
Another distraught fan said: ‘I feel very strongly about this.
A big issue has been made out of the racism allegations, which I think people will make up their own minds about, but no-one's made a big issue out of the fact that a lot of people are getting ripped off here.’
The promoters of the Alexandra Palace show, Kennedy Street Enterprises, replied to fans' accusations this week, claiming that they had done everything possible to provide tickets for genuine applicants.
Kennedy Street head Nick Leigh said: ‘I have swapped over 2,000 tickets for people who wrote in as a result of the press release.
The grey area here is the matter of proof of purchase.
Ninety-five per cent of people sent in tickets or wrist bands but there were about 300 people who sent in anything from bank statements to photocopies, which is where the problem has arisen.
I have tried to deal with this in good faith, but if anyone feels they have a problem, all they have to do is come back to this office.’
The phone number for Kennedy Street Enterprises is:.
Meanwhile, a second overview of THE SMITHS' career, ‘…
Best II’, is issued through WEA this week.
The 14-track compilation includes seven Smiths singles:.
A Smiths video, ‘The Complete Picture’, is also issued this week through Warner Music.
The 50-minute collection includes promos for ‘Girlfriend In A Coma’, ‘Stop Me If You Think You've Heard This One Before’, ‘Ask’ and ‘Panic’, plus ‘The Queen Is Dead — A Film By Derek Jarman’and rare live/TV footage.
Moz: ‘Everything I do, I do it to you’
Sampled Notes
JOHN CALE, avant-garde elder statesman and Velvet Underground founder member, whose live panto, guitar and vocals album ‘Fragments Of A  Rain Season’ is out now on Hannibal Records, plays in his native Wales for the first time in almost a decade as part of his autumn tour, visiting .
THE AUTEURS, London laconic guitar pop trio, have ended speculation by signing to Hut Records.
The band plan to issue their Hut debut single, ‘Showgirl’, in early December, followed by a pre-Christmas mini-tour and album in January.
DAVID BYRNE's classical composition, ‘The Forest’, launches this year's Amnesty International Human Rights Day celebrations at The Royal Festival Hall on November 29.
The ex-Talking Head performs his 50-minute work with the Pro Arte Orchestra Of London, and Alison Moyet and The Balanescu Quartet also take part.
This year's Human Rights Day falls on December 10.
LOOP have ended two years of speculation by announcing that they have definitely split up.
The decision, regarded as inevitable due to the activities of Loop offshoots The Hair And Skin Trading Company and Main, puts paid to speculation that the band would reunite for a US tour.
Meanwhile, their label Reactor reissue Loop's ‘Fade-Out’ LP and their ‘Black Sun’and ‘Collision’EPs as a CD package entitled ‘Dual’on November 16.
KINGMAKER, who recently charted with their ‘Armchair Anarchist’ single, are giving away a free one-sided seven-inch flexi-disc to everyone who attends their ‘Armchair Anarchist’tour.
The track, ‘Stained And Sinking Fast’, was recorded with Pat Collier during the summer.
The limited edition flexi-disc can also be obtained on a first-come, first-served basis by sending 30 pence worth of stamps to .
CORNERSHOP, the Leicester-based Asian buzz-pop polemicists who recently signed to Wiiija Records, play two London dates at .
THE ROCKINGBIRDS have scheduled a pair of Irish dates and added further shows to their current British tour, which now includes .
TERRY HALL, ex-Specials front man and Fun Boy Three leader, has highlights of his career so far, ‘Terry Hall The Collection’, issued through Chrysalis this week.
The 18-track set charts the retiring Coventry boy's progress from The Specials' 1979 hit, ‘Gangsters’, through Fun Boy Three's collaboration with Bananarama, ‘It Ain't What You Do’, to solo work in the '90s.
ALTERN 8, MOBY, THE SHAMEN, SHADES OF RHYTHM, SL2 and SUNSCREEM are amongst the performers at this year's DMC Technics Mixmag Awards taking place at The Royal Albert Hall on November 9.
The annual DMC event is followed on November 10 by the Technics DJ Championship World Mixing Finals at London's Ministry Of Sounds, which is expected to attract over 1,000 DJs from around the world.
MANIC STREET PREACHERS follow their Top Ten cover of ‘Theme From Mash’, recorded for NME 's ‘Ruby Trax’ LP, with a new single next week.
The single, ‘Little Baby Nothing’, recorded in collaboration with former porn star Traci Lords, is lifted from the band's debut LP, ‘Generation Terrorists’.
The track is backed with the Manics' first ever single, ‘Suicide Alley’, originally issued as a limited edition of 300 seven-inch copies in 1988, plus two exclusive new songs, ‘Yankee Drawl’ and ‘Never Want Again’.
It will be issued through Columbia on November 9.
As previously announced the band play .
PAVEMENT release a new single prior to their December dates supporting Sonic Youth.
The single, ‘Watery, Domestic’, features four new tracks recorded in a waterbed storage room:.
The single, available as a limited edition picture disc in addition to regular formats, is issued through Big Cat on November 16.
THE POGUES play a brace of major Christmas dates with Spider Stacey as lead vocalist.
The group preview material from their forthcoming album, due out in early ‘93, at .
Tickets, priced £11 in Liverpool and £12 in London, are available from usual agents.
Rumours suggesting that Shane MacGowan is likely to make cameo appearances could not be confirmed.
Freaks seen
THE JIM ROSE CIRCUS SIDESHOW have announced details of their first ever UK dates, exclusively to NME .
The circus, an adaptation of the traditional Victorian freakshow, was an integral part of the US Lollapalooza II tour.
The show, described as a ‘human demolition spectacular’ by circus leader Jim Rose, features The Amazing Mr Lifto (pictured), Slug The Sword Swallower, Mat The Pharmacist (who practises non-incision hospital operating procedures on himself) and The Torture King, whose act includes sticking 40 meat skewers through his face, neck and torso, attacking a lightbulb to each skewer end, and wiring himself to an electrical generator to illuminate the bulbs.
The Jim Rose Circus Sideshow appear for two nights at London Astoria as part of an extensive European tour.
MERCURY REV have scheduled six Eire and UK dates, and the reissue of their acclaimed debut LP.
The 1991 album ‘Yerself Is Steam’ is packaged with a free additional disc, titled ‘Lego My Ego’, carrying four John Peel session tracks, the Jungle single ‘Carwash Hair’, a cover of Sly Stone's ‘If You Want Me To Stay’originally issued through Rough Trade.
‘Shhh/Peaceful/Very Sleepy Rivers’ recorded live at the Finsbury Park Cult In The Park show last June, and one unreleased track, ‘Blood On The Moon’.
The package is issued through Beggars Banquet on November 9.
Meanwhile, the band play  and Royal Albert Hall as special guests of House Of Love.
The show at London Harlesden Mean Fiddler has been cancelled.
HUGGY BEAR, hotly tipped buzz-pop group, have revealed details of their second single and four dates.
The as-yet-untitled new single follows the band's highly acclaimed debut, ‘Rubbing The Impossible To Burst’, and features four new tracks:.
The seven-inch is issued through Wiiija on December 7.
Meanwhile, the band play Oxford Jericho Tavern and Islington Powerhaus supporting The Pastels, London King's Cross Scala Cinema all-nighter with Stereolab, Mambo Taxi and Moonshake, and Bristol Rainbow, supporting Sonic Youth and Pavement..
THROWING MUSES issue a live album through 4AD on November 16.
The 18-track LP, titled ‘Curse’, features material spanning the group's entire career, recorded at their two Clapham Grand shows in October.
‘Curse’ is available on CD only and will retail at a mid-price of £7.99.
JOHN SHUTTLEWORTH,(right) Britain's fastest rising comedy star, has announced a string of major shows.
Shuttleworth plays London ULU supporting The Rockingbirds,.
Shuttleworth is also confirmed to appear as a regular on Jonathan Ross's new TV series, which begins in early '93.
BOB MARLEY's  posthumous Top Five hit, ‘Iron Lion Zion’, will be followed up by a new single next week.
The track, ‘Why Should I’, featured on the recent four-CD box set ‘Songs Of Freedom’, was produced by Errol Brown, Ingmar Klang and Trevor Wyatt, the same team responsible for ‘Iron Lion Zion’.
The Rebel MC's remix of the Marley classic ‘Exodus’ is featured on the flipside of the single, issued through Tuff Gong/Island on November 16.
US NEWS
JELLO BIAFRA has announced that he's considering issuing BODY COUNT's ‘Cop Killer’ on his own Alternative Tentacles label.
‘I don't care if we have to release it as a non-profit-making single.
‘Cop Killer’ has to remain out there,’said Biafra.
Meanwhile, ICE-T's new LP ‘Home Invasion’, the rapper's first release since the ‘Cop Killer’ furore, has been pushed back from its original November 10 release date to early 1993.
The delay has been made to avoid potential sales conflict with the soundtrack album for the Trespass movie, which features new tracks by the film's stars Ice-T and Ice Cube.
Daydream or fantasy?
MADONNA's new ‘Erotica’ LP and Sex book prompted MTV to make a one-off title change to their news programme,Day In Rock .
The re-titled Day In Madonna bulletin featured footage from the book launch party, a chat with genuine dominatrixes about their views on Sex , and an interview with a New York professor of psychiatry, who claims there is nothing ‘new or shocking’ in the book.
The dominatrixes denied they were influenced by Madonna, on the contrary, they claimed, the pop icon had been influenced by their ‘art’.
They agreed Madonna had ‘the right idea’, but suggested that ‘she could use a little training’.
Meanwhile, Madonna's first movie under her Maverick Productions deal with Warners will be titled Snake Eyes , co-starring Harvey Keitel.
A spokesman for Maverick described the film as a hybrid of The Player and Ingmar Bergman's Scenes From A Marriage .
HAMMER is being sued for $5.7 million in royalties and other damages by James Early, co-producer of the rapper's ‘Please Hammer Don't Hurt 'Em’ LP.
Early claims the money is owed to him for his work on the record, the biggest selling rap album of all time, having shifted in excess of 20 million copies.
BOYZ II MEN's ‘End Of The Road’ has become only the third single in 30 years to spend more than ten weeks at the top of the Billboard chart.
‘End Of The Road’ recently surpassed the 11 weeks Presley's ‘Hound Dog’/‘Don't Be Cruel’spent at Number One in 1956, and the Ink Spots' ‘The Gypsy’, which held the top spot for 13 weeks in 1946.
THE REPLACEMENTS' singer Paul Westerberg is about to begin work on his first solo LP, and has indicated that he has no plans to return to the group.
Two Westerberg tracks are featured on the soundtrack album for Singles , Cameron Crowe's film about Seattle.
Westerberg's solo debut is to be produced by Matt Wallace, best known for his work with Faith No More and The Replacements.
SPIKE LEE's new film Malcolm X , due for US release in November, will spawn two soundtrack albums.
‘The Malcolm X Score’ carries jazz trumpeter Terence Blanchard's instrumental score.
Meanwhile, ‘Music From The Motion Picture Malcolm X’ features material by Joe Turner, Jr Walker And The All-Stars, Lionel Hampton and Louis Jordan, recorded between 1930 and 1965.
The only contemporary group featured are Arrested Development.
THE ELVIS PRESLEY STAMP, issued by the US Post Office in January, is part of a series honouring music legends.
Other artists to be featured include .
RECORD NEWS
45s
BELLY: ‘Gepetto’ second EP by Tanya Donelly's new guitar troupe, featuring three original tracks, and coincidentally, a cover of the same track, ‘Hot Burrito £2’, also featured on the new Dinosaur Jr single 
BIVOUAC: ‘Slack’ hotly-tipped Derby-based subversive guitar three piece offer their second triple track EP to coincide with an extensive November tour
BREED: ‘Splinter’ feverish guitar trio follow their warmly received debut single ‘Shakin' The Bone’with three new tracks
GARY CLAIL: ‘Who Pays The Piper’ self-styled blunt, belligerent white toaster issues an Adrian Sherwood-produced taster from his forthcoming third LP, remixed by Paul Oakenfold and Steve Osbourne
JULEE CRUISE: ‘Summer Kisses, Winter Tears’ David Lynch protegé lifts her cover of the ballad made famous by Elvis Presley, from the soundtrack of the recent Wim Wenders movie Until The End Of The World 
EXTREME: ‘Stop The World’ American AOR studs split a track from their recently released triple album ‘III Sides To Every Story’
INXS: ‘Taste It’ third single lifted from the Antipodean funk rockers' Number One album ‘Welcome To Wherever You Are’.
CD formats feature Youth remixes
MARKY MARK AND THE FUNKY BUNCH: ‘You Gotta Believe’ honky hip-hop unit, led by New Kid Donnie Wahlberg's baby bro, issue a teaser from their forthcoming second LP
METALLICA: ‘Wherever I May Roam’ limited edition digi-pack CD format of the San Francisco speed metal pioneers' current single, featuring three exclusive live tracks recorded in Moscow last year
MOTORHEAD: ‘Hellraiser’ Lemmy splits a track from the recent ‘March Or Die’LP, co-written with Ozzy Osbourne and also featured in the forthcoming Hellraiser 3 —Hell On Earth soundtrack
ALANNAH MYLES: ‘A Song Instead Of A Kiss’ AOR, Grammy-winner best known for her ‘Black Velvet’hit, issues a taster from her forthcoming second LP
NAKED TRUTH: ‘Read Between The Lines’ Atlanta-based jazz thrash exponents offer a triple track EP to follow their recent mini-album ‘Green With Rage’
THE POOH STICKS: ‘The World Is Turning’ second cut from the Welsh fop pop supremos' new LP, due in January ‘93, to follow the quaint limited edition seven inch ‘Million Seller’
STRAIT JACKET FITS: ‘Done’ New Zealand guitar unit offer a triple track recorded live in the studio with Bad Seeds producer Tony Cohen, prior to their forthcoming new LP
SWEET JESUS: ‘Albino Ballerina’ /‘Your Baby Loves Me’West Midlands-based glamour pop four-piece follow their recent UK support spots with Pop Will Eat Itself with a double A-side
TABITHA ZU: ‘On Reality’ buzz-pop trio  led by Katie Jane Garside's sister, follow their headline spot on Jon Fat Beast's Strollercoaster tour with a second triple-track EP
LPs
ALL ABOUT EVE: ‘Winter Words, Hits And Rarities’ retrospective compilation, recently lambasted by Julianne Regan, featuring 19 gothic workouts recorded by the band for their former label
DAN BAIRD: ‘Love Songs For The Hard Of Hearing’ former Georgia Satellites guitarist issues guttural R&B solo debut
THE BEATLES: ‘The Beatles CD Singles Collection’ Liverpool beat legends' 22 singles and original B-sides, released on CD for the first time, and issued as a boxed set
RENE BERG: ‘The Leather, The Loneliness…
And Your Dark Eyes’ glam grandad and former temporary Hanoi Rocks bass player makes his solo debut, featuring guest contributions from Rat Scabies and Bernie Torme
DENIM: ‘Back In Denim’ paean to the '70s in the shape of a nine-track debut LP, by the rock unit fronted by former Felt leader Lawrence
GLORIA ESTEFAN: ‘The Greatest Hits’ former Miami Sound Machine leader offers a collection of her most successful singles, in addition to four new tracks
GARY GLITTER: ‘Many Happy Returns — Gary Glitter The Hits’ 22-track ‘best of’double LP to celebrate The Leader's 20th year in show business, including ‘I Love You Love’, ‘Do You Wanna Touch’and ‘I'm The Leader Of The Gang (I Am)’
GO WEST: ‘Indian Summer’ receding MOR duo follow their recent Top 30 comeback single ‘Faithful’with 13 new tracks
ROY HARPER: ‘Death Or Glory’ notorious '60s under-achiever issues another idealistically dubious LP to coincide with his ‘Ready For Love’winter tour of the UK
BARRY MANILOW: ‘The Complete Collection And Then Some’ monster four-LP box set featuring five previously unreleased tracks, demos, rarities, plus a free live video
2 LIVE CREW: ‘The 2 Live Crew's Greatest Hits’ controversial litigation prone US rappers, compile their finest collection of rhymin' expletives
THE TYRREL CORPORATION: ‘North East Of Eden’ Redcar based ‘reality poets’issue their keenly anticipated debut LP
VARIOUS: ‘Beverly Hills 90210’ soundtrack accompanying the foul teen soap, set in upper middle class California high school, featuring contributions from Paula Abdul, Color Me Badd and Cathy Dennis
VARIOUS: ‘Now Dance 92’ dance compilation featuring chart busting contributions by The Shamen, Erasure, Bizarre Inc and East 17 among 30 tracks
VARIOUS: ‘The Psychedelic Years Revisited’ three CD compilation featuring classics (1966 –'69); by The Byrds, Jimi Hendrix, HP Lovecraft and The Velvet Underground among 50 tracks
YELLO: ‘The Essential Yello’ Swiss electro-duo, godfathers of techno, offer a singles compilation featuring ‘The Rhythm Divine’, ‘The Race’and ‘Rubberbandman’among 14 tracks
ZODIAC MINDWARP AND THE LOVE REACTION: ‘My Life Story’ grebo pioneers stage a low key comeback, accompanying dates at Butlins with a six track mini-LP
HOUSE OF PAIN: ‘House Of Pain’ American Irish hip-hop exponents follow their September Top 40 single ‘Jump Around’with a keenly anticipated eponymously titled 16-track debut LP
DINOSAUR JR: ‘Get Me’ J Mascis and co's first release in over 12 months, a teaser from the follow-up to last year's ‘Green Mind’album, backed with a cover of Gram Parsons ‘Hot Burrito £2’
TOUR NEWS
BANG BANG MACHINE, Bristol-based indie guitar tunesmiths, play an extra show on their current tour at Bath Moles Club on November 10.
BIVOUAC, Derby trio who have just released their second single, ‘Slack’, play two extra dates on their current tour at 
BLAB HAPPY toast the completion of their new LP with a one-off gig at London's Bull & Gate on November 6.
BREED promote their latest Clawfist single ‘Splinter’, with dates supporting THAT PETROL EMOTION at 
CHICANE, touted guitar-nasty combo, precede next year's Faith Records debut album with autumn dates at 
THE CRANBERRIES precede the New Year release of their ‘Everybody Else Is Doing It So Why Can't We’ LP with shows at The Royal Albert Hall supporting The House Of Love on November 20, and alongside Drop Nineteens at Reading 
THE DEVLINS follow their support slots alongside Martin Stephenson and The Daintees with their own London show at The Borderline tonight.
DISCO INFERNO, weird-sound eastenders, whose current single ‘Summer's Last Sound’ is out now on Cheree, play dates at 
THE FALL play a one-off autumn date  with Cabaret Voltaire and The Wendys supporting.
FELA KUTI, Nigeria's political pop superstar, promotes his new album, ‘Underground System’ on Stern Records, when he arrives in Britain with a 45-piece band for his first shows since 1989 at 
BOB GELDOF AND HIS HAPPY CLUBSTERS play a headline show at London's Mean Fiddler on November 11 as part of the venue's tenth anniversary celebrations.
THE GRID, pop house boffins, accompany the release of their acclaimed LP ‘456’ with their first ever live dates, incorporating interactive video and computer graphics and banks of television screens, on show at 
HIT THE NORTH, a celebration of Scandinavian bands, takes place at London's Marquee with Eggstone, Poverty Stinks and Sharing Patrol playing the first night and Bel Canto, SS Sol and Inferno 5 playing the second night.
INTO PARADISE, who have just finished recording their new LP for Setanta, play two London shows at 
IRRESISTIBLE FORCE, THE GRID and ASTRALASIA are amongst the bands playing a ten hour ‘Shamanarchy At Whirl-Y-Gig’ festival, featuring didgeridoos, brain machines, massage services and a full range of New Age accoutrements at 
LUDICROUS LOLLIPOPS, sticky-fingered guitar popsters, have added extra dates to their current tour at 
MEAT BEAT MANIFESTO, dub house explorers who recently released their ‘Satyricon’ LP, play an extra date on their current UK tour at , with Sundial and Lunarci supporting
THE MEN THEY COULDN'T HANG play a second show at London's Mean Fiddler on November 30 for the last night of the venue's tenth anniversary celebrations.
THE MILLTOWN BROTHERS, who are set to follow their praised ‘Slinky’ LP with a new A&M album at the start of 1993, preview fresh material at a one-off show at 
OMAR, Talkin' Loud's young soul hopeful, promotes his recent ‘Music’ album with dates at 
RADIOHEAD, manic depressive Oxford rockers, who recently released their highly-praised ‘Creep’ single, take a break from guesting on the current Kingmaker tour to play their own headline show at 
ROBINSON, jolly indie popsters, lead up to the New Year release of their debut ‘Soup’ EP with shows at 
SENSURROUND, Manchester's atmospheric dance pop merchants, head towards the January release of their new single ‘When I Get To Heaven’ on Icerink with a show at 
GIL SCOTT HERON, Godfather of Hiphoprisy-style laid-back political grooves, follows his two recent sold-out nights at London Camden Centre , with an extra night at the same venue on November 7.
SHARKBOY play a series of London shows at 
SHEEP ON DRUGS, psycho-techno expressionists, who issue a new single, ‘Track X’, on November 23, lead up to the December release of their debut LP ‘Sheep On Drugs — Greatest Hits’ with dates at 
THREE & A HALF MINUTES, Bishop's Stortford-based snarling guitar four-piece, follow their recent support slots alongside Sultans Of Ping FC with dates at 
WISHPLANTS, Northampton-based popblast four-piece, lead up to the January release of their first EP on Absurd Records with London dates at the Powerhaus, Mean Fiddler supporting The Milltown Brothers, and The Bull & Gate.
GW ‘GRANT’ McLENNAN (below), Australian acoustic cult delinquent formerly of Go Betweens fame, plays tracks from next year's ‘Fireboy’album at a one-off show at London's The Orange on November 5, supported by Nan Vernon And The Partisans.
SEBADOH (left), touted Massachusetts slacker outfit, plug their new ‘Sebadoh Vs Helmet’ mini-LP with shows at 
THRILLS
EDITED BY STUART MACONIE
‘BIG MOUTH’
‘When you jumped on my dick/That's the one thing that I don't play/The jock-strap was too big for you anyway.’
Part of the lyric to ‘My Name Is Prince’
‘The object of masturbatory fantasies?
I love it.
Wouldn't you just love it if you knew guys jerked off just looking at you?’
Madonna — who else?
‘What I want to know is what's so interesting on the other side of that wall that Madonna has to see it before putting her knickers on?’
Paul Merton
‘I took Jimi Hendrix down to meet The Cream and as soon as Jimi started playing, Eric Clapton's hands fell off his guitar and I saw him kinda reel and leave the stage.
I later found him in a dressing room with a cigarette in his hand, but he was shaking so much he couldn't light it.’
Hendrix producer-manager Chas Chandler on the original unplugged Clapton
‘E is a prison.
Elitist tribal fascism.
Unhappy happiness.
Teach me to obey.
Skin up — we're all dead but we're too drugged to feel it.’
Richey from the Manic Street Preachers.
Richey: wake up, The Kids, you're drugged!
THRILLS BELIEVE IT OR NOT!
A new series of trendy Toby mugs are to be launched in time for Christmas.
The first three will be modelled on MICK HUCKNALL, KEVIN ROWLAND and SANDRA BERNHARD.
Despite the similar names, Swedish dentist cum chart star DR ALBAN is no relation to Blur's DAMON ALBARN…but he is married to Gladiators presenter ULRIKE JONSONN!
CAT STEVENS, or erstwhile Muslim YUSUF ISLAM, has become a convert to Catholicism under the name KENNY O'HARE.
BOB MOULD smokes 500 cigarettes a day.
NME 's SIMON WILLIAMS has sued the compilers of THE PENGUIN BOOK OF ROCK 'N' ROLL WRITING for ‘failing to include any of my work and thereby producing a totally unrepresentative collection’.
WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO THE CARRY ON TEAM?
NOW THAT the Carry On series has them rolling in the aisles once more with Carry On Imperialism ,NME takes a look at whatever happened to the original team.
SID FILTH: Born Johannesburg, 1893.
The gnarly-faced supremo of the Cockernee leer.
Starred in 42 Carry ons, including Carry On Tits ,Carry On Bigger Tits and Carry On Up The Bum .
Catchphrase: ‘Yuk yuk yuk look at them knockers.’
Current status: dead.
BARBARA BOSOM: Born Rhodesia, 1905.
The heavy-busted Cockney sparrer beauty of the team.
Real name: Mary Anne Hobnobs.
Appeared in 39 Carry Ons, including Carry On Doing That And My Dad'll Smack You In The Mouth ,Carry On Sexism and Carry On Num Nums .
Catchphrase: ‘Leave it out you  f—er , I'm a mate of the Kray twins.’
Current status: dead.
KENNETH WILLIAMS: Born British Gold Coast, 1873.
The camp king of British Radio Comedy.
Made 28 Carry Ons, including Carry On Homosexuals ,Carry On Once Again Homosexuals and Carry On Around The Horn .
Catchphrase: ‘I'm actually really talented but I can't be bothered to do anything better.’
Current status: dead.
KENNETH CONDOM: Born British West Africa, 1856.
The shy beaten husband of the team that probably goes to prostitutes when the Missus isn't around.
Appeared in 187 Carry Ons, including Carry On Phwoargghh!,
Carry On Nipples and Carry On Kinky Doctor Sex .
Catchphrase: ‘Mr Dinsdale!
Mr Dinsdale!’
Current status: appearing in Allo Allo as Henrie Condomme, ie dead.
HATTIE JUGS: Born White Australia, 1792.
The large-breasted camp king of British Radio team.
Appeared in 700 Carry Ons, including Carry On Naughty Nurses ,Carry On More Naughty Nurses ,Carry On The Same Character In Everything Else .
Catchphrase: ‘This uniform's a little tight for me doctor, could you loosen it?’
Current status: Tory minister.
JULIAN LEERY: Born British West Hampstead, 1955.
The naughty postcard camp king of alternative comedy.
Appeared in 22 Carry Ons, including Carry On With The Same Old Camp Jokes That Helped Make Gay People A Hated Minority .
Catchphrase: ‘That uniform's a little tight for you doctor, could I loosen it for you?’
Current status: hero of Channel 4.
CHARLES MORRISSEY: Born Sharpeville, 1962.
Real name: David Irving.
The camp king of the Fourth Reich.
Scheduled to appear in 38 Carry Ons but only appeared once by mistake when he walked through a shot by accident.
Catchphrase: ‘My lawyers are poised to strike, missus.’
Current status: in hospital have a coin-sized growth removed.
MICHAEL HESELTINE: Born Little England, 1935.
Real name: death.
Appeared in two Carry Ons:Helicopters and Miners .
Catchphrase: ‘I had no alternative.
OK then, I was wrong.’
Current status: resting.
That classic Carry On Sexism line-up in full 
THE FRANK & WALTERS
WHERE ARE YOU AND WHAT ARE THE VIBES LIKE?
Paul: I'm on Planet Jacinta and the vibes have gone fishing the dog ate my copy sir
Ashley: The tour van.
The vibes are slightly dented.
Niall: On our way to Canterbury and the vibes are kicking
WHAT WAS THE LAST THING YOU ATE?
P: A cheese sandwich
A: A very hard-boiled egg.
It nearly broke my teeth.
N: Strawberry and grape cake
WHAT WAS THE LAST VIDEO YOU RENTED?
WHAT WAS THE LAST GOOD BOOK YOU READ?
N: The book that teaches you how to drive by the Highway code 
FAVE SNACK FOODS
N: Essence of Mars bars
WHAT TV SHOWS DO YOU TRY NOT TO MISS?
WHAT WAS THE FIRST RECORD YOU EVER HEARD?
P: Honestly, I don't remember 
MOST EMBARRASSING RECORDS IN YOUR COLLECTION
PUNCHLINE TO FAVE JOKE
P: ‘Not if they're like the ones you gave me last week!’
N: ‘How do you start this thing up?’
NAME THREE GREAT SONGWRITING PARTNERSHIPS
ROLE MODELS
A: The boys from UNCLE
WHAT SPORTS ARE YOU GOOD AT?
P: Eating with forks
A: Leapfrogging, throwing the bow and arrow
N: ‘In That House There’ Remote control television channel changing
IF YOU WEREN'T IN THE F&W, WHICH GROUP WOULD YOU LIKE TO BE IN?
A: The childless parents awareness group
N: A supergroup
WHICH PUBLIC FIGURES TO YOU MOST DESPISE?
P: I love everyone 
WHAT IS THE WORST SONG YOU'VE RECORDED?
P: I love all their songs
A: ‘The Man With The Golden Jewellery’ from our ‘Basement Tapes’
EARLIEST MEMORY
P: I forget
A: Farmyard noises
N: Looking at my nappies hanging on a washing line in our kitchen
FAVE PUNK RECORDS
FAVE HISTORICAL CHARACTERS
N: The cast of Neighbours past and present
WHO'D BE THE GUESTS ON YOUR TALK SHOW?
N: The cast of the Crimean War
WORST LYRIC YOU'VE EVER HEARD
P: I love all their records
A: ‘How could you do the Anfield Rap when you're from just south of the Watford Gap.’
‘Anfield Rap’, Liverpool FC
N: ‘Song sung blue/Everybody knows one’
FAVE DEAD PEOPLE
WHO'S OVERRATED?
WHO'S UNDERRATED?
WHO'S SEXY:
All weathermen/women are sexy 
WHAT SCARES YOU?
A: The World Cup being held in the USA and giant frogs, Frank Murphy
WHAT BORES YOU?
CAN YOU QUOTE A LINE OF POETRY?
P: ‘I wandered lonely as a cloud/That floats on high o'er hill and dale’
A: ‘Here we go, here we go, here we go, here we go’(Anon)
N: ‘Hello, is it me you're looking for?’
WHAT CAUSES WOULD YOU SUPPORT WITH YOUR MUSIC?
A: The cause of the underdog, the common person, cleanliness, generosity and respect
N: The ‘People Have Feelings Too’ Society, The Old Cowboy Home, Kentucky
WHERE WOULD YOU LIKE TO RETIRE TO?
A: If you could move Cork to somewhere sunny, that would do nicely
N: My own private piece of sky in the pie
NAME A RECORD THAT CAN MAKE YOU CRY
RECORDS GUARANTEED TO MAKE YOU DANCE
WHAT CAN YOU COOK?
P: I can cook anything because I'm a Cordon Bleu chef
A: Bread and butter
N: I can cook all sorts of stuff.
It's eating it after that's the problem
WHEN WERE YOU LAST DRUNK?
A: Last night
N: Last New Year's Eve
WHAT WAS THE LAST DREAM YOU CAN REMEMBER?
P: I was coming home from a party with Robert Mitchum drinking cider when one of Shane's gang came out and stabbed me in the arm…(goes on for about ten more pages — Freudian Ed)
A: I was trying to convince my friend that he could fly
N: I had a dream, it was a great dream where everyone was one colour and all the same height and nobody could tell them apart
CURRENT CATCHPHRASES
A: She blew him at blow football
N: ‘They're only building the PA now, Dave’
WHO'S GOT GREAT HAIR IN POP?
N: It's not the amount but the quality.
Jim Bowen, Flipper.
MOST IRRITATING THINGS IN LIFE
P: Tour managers' wives
A: Boxer shorts
N: The best things in life are free but you can give them to the birds and bees
WHAT WAS THE LAST GREAT RECORD YOU HEARD?
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF NIRVANA?
P: I think they're brilliant.
Best album of the year in country.
Don't like the smashing of equipment.
A: I'm afraid for them because they're so huge
N: Good honest upstanding Christians
MOTTO
P: Hip hip hooray.
We are the people
A: It's not over 'til the ref blows his whistle
N: If I die before I'm dead, please shoot me in the head 
Those funny Franks 
ON ON ON
EDITED BY STEVE LAMACQ
All the way from Wollongong, Australia — new grunge garage heroes TUMBLEWEED.
All the way from another planet — jaunty pop rap glam kitsch funk folk eclectic types FREAKY REALISTIC
FREAKY SCENE
‘FREAKY REALISTIC is music for the future.
There's a secret message within our music.
A lot of dance music is using sub bass, subsonic sounds.
We're, like, sending messages on a subspace captain's priority channel to other galaxies beyond this one, beyond our dimension, to where there is no dimension.’
Well knock me down with a naked Klingon!
Are you reading the right page?
This isn't Vibes is it?
Dance music in the On page?
Well not exactly.
The Freakniks, as singer/songwriter Justin Anderson, rapper Michael Lord, and singer Aki Amori describe themselves, are hard to categorise.
As far away from bleeping techno ambience as they are from indie grunge guitars, their debut EP, ‘This Is Freaky Realistic’, strides boldly across four decades (from Dylan to Da Lench Mob), musical genres (funk, rock, folk, hip-hop and pop), and heads off into some hitherto uncharted dimension.
Nevertheless, their first single, ‘Something New’, a jaunty hybrid of spacey synths, unrepentantly catchy pop melodies and funk/rap, is rapidly becoming a clubland favourite with remixes by the likes of Happy Larry (aka Nick Harris) and The Rapino Bros.
This kitsch multi-cultural trio, who are to high fashion what Benny Hill was to feminism, hail from Peckham, Dallas and Tokyo.
Justin first met Michael in a South London club, the former fed up with being in ‘various no hope psychedelic funk bands’ and the latter having just left rap mob Nasty Groove.
Sultry chanteuse Aki came along much later, invited into the studio to lay down some backing vocals.
‘There was a chemical reaction,’ she giggles.
‘I find it interesting working with Justin and Michael because they're very different from me.
When I was a teenager I was in the middle of a techno revolution, listening to Japanese avant-garde, techno and new rave bands.
The whole '70s funk  thing is very new to me.
That's what makes us significant, three very different kinds of people able to work together in a band.’
So what about the retro space-cadet '70s image — hipsters and plastic zap guns, isn't it all just a bit comic-strip?
‘Part of the freakism philosophy is that anything goes,’ explains Justin.
‘To make yourself happy you just stick on a pair of flares, laugh at yourself, laugh with other people.
You don't have to be so serious, or part of some recognized youth culture.
Today culture is just mixing itself together…during the '80s everyone was so heavy, so dour, politically correct; now everyone's freakin' out, getting sexy…
The '70s thing is all over the place at the moment, it's when people of my generation were growing up, it's people's memories of classic pop imagery from their childhood.’
You probably won't be surprised to learn then, that those past masters of glam-drag dressing-up, Marc Bolan and Adam Ant, are two of Justin's heroes, whom he says came from ‘an underground scene but realised the only way to put their music across, to really entertain people, is to get right out there in the main arena.’
But wasn't that their ultimate downfall?
The inherent danger of standing in the centre circus ring of pop amid accusations of selling out to the mainstream?
‘Naa!
We can't sell out,’ cries the  frealistic kid.
‘We were never cred to begin with.’
In the strange world of Freaky Realistic, uncool comes full circle, credibility is crushed into atoms and Karen Carpenter is the only true icon.
As Bones himself might have reported, ‘It's pop, Jim, but not as we know it.’
Ring the alarm!
Freaky Realistic flaunt their dodgy ticker
WEED WILL, WEED WILL ROCK YOU
WITHOUT WISHING to divulge too many trade secrets, if you're ever called upon to interview an Australian punk rock band, the first question is a cinch.
It must always be: so what do you think of the Cosmic Psychos, Melbourne's Grandaddies Of Grunge and The Greatest Band In The World?
This is not my first question to TUMBLEWEED, but only because their punk credentials are such to make it pointless.
Formed out of demon long-haired noise gurus the Proton Energy Pills, debut single produced by Jack Endino, forthcoming debut album produced by Butch Vig's right hand man Mr Colson…
Hell, all this hirsute five-piece needs in these days of big-money grunge is a major record deal.
And they've got one of those, too!
‘Yeah, we're signed to Atlantic now,’ nods guitar fella Lenny.
‘Some guy flew out to Australia looking to sign a cool band and he got us instead!’
Legend has it that, during the obligatory pre-signing wine and dine sesh, The ‘Weed boys insisted they share the food, as there was more on one plate than they'd ever seen before.
This would not appear to be a wimpish attempt to curry favour with the new bosses, but rather an indication of these affable dudes getting their priorities right.
Together for 18 months, Tumbleweed formed when the Protons’ Lenny, his brother Jay (bass) and Richard (vocals) joined forces with Paul (guitar) and Steve (drums) from an outfit called the Unheard.
Individually, the two bands had been doing OK but nothing outrageous.
As Tumbleweed, their rise on the Sydney pub circuit has been meteoric.
‘The Protons were basically a punk rock band,’ Lenny explains, as the ‘Weed luxuriate in the compact and bijou confines of the third support band's dressing facilities at the London Astoria, ‘and these two guys were doing a '60s R&B thing.
What Tumbleweed are doing is more or less just putting the two approaches together.
And it's been uphill ever since.’
All the way to Pom-land in fact.
Drummer Steve is most looking forward to visiting Liverpool and seeing the relatives and friends he left behind when emigrating to Australia ten years ago.
Home now for this oddly accented ex-pat scouser is Wollongong, an hour or so's drive up the coast from Sydney.
‘It's an industrial place,’ says Lenny.
‘There's steelworks on one side of Wollongong and as you get to the other side, where we're closer to, it's all tropical rain forest and beach.
A lot of bands in Sydney don't like us because we live out there and don't have anything to do with them, y'know? but  f— ‘em.’
‘Wollongong is an Aboriginal word for ‘between the mountains and the sea’,’ adds Richard.
‘A very beautiful place.
And there's no need for us to move to the city.
I think it's probably better for us to stay away from all the  f—ing scenes in Sydney because it gives us original ideas on life.’
This last remark prompts some particularly scornful laughter from the rest of the clan.
No, Tumbleweed aren't dabbling with any radically new threads here — cool melodies blasting through the '60s garage and topped off with some neat psychedelic baubles — but there's such obvious songcraft at work that they burn new holes in some well-worn fabric.
The ‘Weed don't take themselves too seriously, either, as demonstrated by Lenny's sleeve artwork, which invariably depicts outrageously attired hippy freaks in various states of narcotic oblivion.
How does this home-loving boy explain that to his parents?
‘I say to my mum, ‘Mum, I'm an artist, it's what artists do.
And she goes, ‘OK’’.
She knows if we don't make it as artists and rock ‘n’ roll people we're not gonna make it as anything anyway, so she goes along with it.
She's cool as shit.
The neighbours don't like us, but our mum does.’
And what about the Cosmic Psychos?
‘The  f—ing greatest, man.’
Just like Lenny's mum — cool as shit.
Grunt!
Grunt!
Grunt!
Luscious, pouting Tumbleweed 
WHAT A TARPAULIN RACKET!
With their chainsaw guitars and lumber-shirts they roam the grebo villages of the Peak District, blissfully ignorant of the music biz caper, and dreaming of the Brighouse & Rastrick Brass Band…
For this is the Tetley Bitterworld of BIVOUAC, slightly inbred young Middle Englanders who would much rather plod their way to the top than dance with Nirvana, learns KEITH ‘Plodcore’ CAMERON.
Tents and nervous: MARTYN GOODACRE
Of course, it's that sound again…
Chainsaw guitars, bonecrusher drums, some bloke yammering on about serial killers…a sound that could only come from one place.
You know,that place.
The place everyone's been talking about lately.
The one up there, amidst trees and mountains, where they winters are long and lonely and do strange things to a man's mind.
Yeah, you've got it.
Derbyshire.
DERBYSHIRE??!!!
Well, Derbyshire with a bit of Yorkshire thrown in.
Um, and also Nottingham.
Could we settle for the Peak District?
At any rate, the sound belongs to Bivouac, a band geographically rooted in the southern bit of northern England, but so good that one has to demand they hand over their passports to allay the suspicion that here is yet another bunch of Americans with the route to amped-up melodic nirvana stuffed casually in their lumbershirts.
Bivouac: the first good band from Derby 
The accents, plus an ability to smell a dodgy London pint of Tetley's, confirm that, indeed, Bivouac hail from plain old England, as opposed to the New version over the pond.
Yet anyone who cocked an ear to their self-titled debut EP earlier this year will have been impressed by how un-English it was, both in its rough-hewn melancholic tangle — most obviously echoing both Buffalo Tom and the N-band, though not actually resembling either — and the absence of what has now become the standard English guitar-band attitude: jumped-up barrow boys jostling those same old post-punk moves, all looking out for the main chance and a quick route to the charts.
What Bivouac have is what bands forged in the white heat of the Brit music biz hype machine invariably lack, and that's soul.
With their brittle tales of lost innocence, broken hearts and serial killers (Ted Bunday and Charles Manson, in fact), they'd stand out a mile anyway.
But in such a climate they begin to look unique.
AND SUDDENLY, they're all the rage.
You can almost hear the Marketing Dept's collective brain cogs clunking slowly into gear: British Band…sound a bit like American Band…duh…
The British Nirvana!
Well, it was only a matter of time.
With ‘Slack’, the band's second indie release, nestling freshly in the racks, Bivouac find themselves the objects of slavering major label attention on both sides of the Atlantic.
Over here, it's MCA who have shown themselves more than keen to clutch them to the corporate breast, and have consequently raised the stakes uncomfortably high for a band who readily confess to their ignorance of this caper's day-by-day dealings.
‘We're still a bit naive with all that stuff,’ nods angel-tonsilled guitarist Paul Yeadon.
‘I didn't know press agents existed, didn't know what they were.
And thinking about it, it stinks, really.
You're paying somebody to like you and to encourage other people to like you, which is a bit of a bizarre concept.
It just brings it all back down to money.
We're getting more and more aware of how it all revolves around cash.’
So what's going on with MCA, then?
‘Er, we've just spoken to them, really,’ says Granville, who, along with Paul, represents the band's Yorkie element.
‘It's not as if they're poaching us or anything.
We've just spoken to a bloke who's into us and would be really interested in doing something.’
‘It's a bit weird you mentioning that,’ adds Paul, ‘'cos nobody's supposed to know.’
Common knowledge to those that are bothered, I'm afraid.
‘Well, that's it.
There are people who like what we do and are really enthusiastic about it, and you can't help that.
But we wanna stay where we are, 'cos it allows us to put records out, it allows us to plod along, which is the important thing for us at the moment.
To plod along.’
Hmm…this could be  the start of something big.
Plodcore!
Bands who don't wanna get rich quick!
Stuff the jacuzzi and send back the limo — Bivouac just wanna plod!
As far as Paul and Granville are concerned, they've already come an unfeasibly long way since they got together a couple of years ago at college in Derby.
After messing about for a while, they roped in drummer Anthony — Derbyshire born, now a Nottingham resident — and discovered common musical ground.
Of a sort.
‘Common in the respect that it's very varied,’ Granville considers.
‘There's stuff that I like that them two don't, and vice versa, but we've got enough in common and we respect each other .’
‘I'm more a prog rock man meself,’ beams an entirely serious Anthony.
‘Brought up on it.
I had brothers and friends’ brothers into it and it was just the village I lived in, it was a grebo village.
Bands like Atomic Rooster, Can, Black Sabbath (he pats his Sabs T-shirt proudly ), Gong, you name it.
There isn't any prog rock I don't like, really, apart from the noncey stuff.’
Disturbingly, this man is only 25.
Paul, on the other hand, is an improbably fresh-faced 22, who might just have to start shaving in time for the return of Halley's comet.
‘Frank Zappa as well, ‘Hot Rats’ is a good album.
Beefheart…’
Anthony continues his trawl through his elder brother's kaftan.
‘I sort've got stuck in the '70s.
I didn't like The Beatles or the Stones until a couple of years ago, 'cos that used to be drummed into me when I was growing up.
But now the ‘White Album’ makes me feel really good when I listen to it.
I always wondered, you know that ‘Bungalow Bill’ song?
Is that about the bloke that used to go out with Joan Collins?’
‘I think you're on the wrong track there, mate,’ sniffs Granville.
Aged 28 and every inch the tall, pragmatic bassist, Granville confesses his own particular field of expertise with remarkable candour, considering.
‘I was a Hawkwind fan for about four years.
Dave Brock used to go onstage in a lab-coat, so me and me mates used to finish school and still wear our lab-coats everywhere.
My first band was called The Original Cosmic Egg and we just did Hawkwind and Sex Pistols covers.
There were 15 of us, several guitarists, a dancer, a bloke on audio-generator and numerous other people who did bits when they felt like it.
Apparently they do a commemorative gig every year at the same pub where we were all based at the time.’
Which, for a man whose name is as Yorkshire as fractious cricket committees, was appropriately enough Brighouse — as in the infamous brass band.
Granville: ‘Although apparently all the Brighouse & Rastrick Brass Band are from Manchester.’
Paul: ‘It's a scam.’
Where is Rastrick, anyway?
Granville: ‘Next to Brighouse.’
Paul: ‘It's 'cos nobody's got enough fingers in Brighouse, everybody's got the same surname, y'see, so they had to look to Rastrick to help 'em out.
You try reading music with one eye.’
I think the boy's insinuating summat here.
‘This coming from a man who's got the same surname as where he comes from!’ splutters Granville.
‘Now if that ain't inbred, I don't know what is!’
Paul does indeed come from Yeadon.
And Anthony's grebo village goes by the name of Ambergate.
Ambergate, Brighouse, Yeadon…the question is, will Bivouac be the first famous band to come from Derby, even though they don't really come from Derby?
Granville: ‘Nah.
Anti-Pasti beat us to it.’
OK, THEN, the first good band from Derby.
And if that fails, there is always Bivouac's bona fide Nirvana connection on which to fall back.
For the whirling dervish performing the nifty onstage mosh aerobics with Kurt, Chris and Dave at the last two Reading Festivals was none other than Anthony.
‘Whenever I'd played their records I'd be dancing around me room, and to dance onstage to the music you like is just  f—ing awesome.
Especially this year.
Makes me hair stand on end just thinking about it.’
‘He's done us proud, as well,’ says Granville.
‘He had the chance to go to the States with them but he said, ‘No’.
Other commitments.’
But of course.
Who needs to dance with Nirvana when you can plod yer way to the top with Bivouac?
‘We wanna stay where we are, it allows us to plod along, which is the important thing for us at the moment’— Paul ‘Ambitious’ Yeadon
WHERE NOIR THEY NOW?
Contemporaries of Hüker Dü and Sonic Youth, Chicago's BIG BLACK were the nasty somethings in the woodshed of American independent rock.
Five years after they split, they are more influential than ever and their back catalogue is about to be reissued.
King Of Abrasiveness STEVE ALBINI blew in from the Windy City to talk grudgecore with DAVID QUANTICK
The very thin man with the very wiry glasses sits, bonily, behind a mixing desk.
He is playing some long-lost avant garde tape and he is scowling at his sandwich.
It has got cucumber in it.
‘English people put cucumber in their sandwiches,’ Steve Albini sighs.
‘And no-one else does.’
So where do other people put their cucumbers, then?
‘In salads !’ croaks Steve exasperatedly.
‘Huge slices in salads !’
Suddenly you know that this is the man who brought a new horror to rock.
The man who gave us Big Black's ‘Songs About F—ing’.
The man who stunned millions of students with his ‘punk rock’ group Rapeman.
The man who produced The Wedding Present.
Tremble, cucumber slices, tremble…
ACTUALLY STEVE Albini is someone you should know everything about, if only for Big Black, the Chicago-based hellcore punk terror band he formed in 1981 who had a parallel career of equal importance with the likes of Hüsker Dü and Sonic Youth, whose best records managed to combine an obsession with the eternally disgustingness of life with a guitar noise beyond punk, metal and, indeed, language.
More grudge than grunge.
Big Black ripped the heart out of several corners of music and were astonishing in their own right.
Southern are reissuing everything they ever did, plus an LP of their legendary sweat hell sex war last British gig (hey!
I know, I was there!
It was great!) so now we can prove that Big Black — like Old Mould and Moore, Gordon and co — were great and important and necessary even in these days when everyone is American and too loud.
And Steve Albini — slightly abrasive, direct and not one to compromise just to impress people — is here in this studio to remaster everything for the reissues.
‘I'll talk about anything,’ he drawls, so we talk about the strangeness of early Big Black — drum machines before they were sexy, lyrics about death, lust and decay (generally in the same verse), and Albini's acid guitar.
‘It still sounds weird to me, it still doesn't sound like anything that was released at the time,’ Albini declares.
‘I still get a kick out of listening to records that don't have an ingrained time period, records by people like The Cravats or Metal Urban or early Cabaret Voltaire.
They haven't dated because they were never really of their time.’
Big Black — by the time of their glorious ‘Songs About F—ing’ LP, with the line-up of Albini, guitarist Santiago Durango and bassist Dave Riley — moulded their scratchy rage into an extraordinary explosion Raymond Carver deadpan horror lyrics, crashing drum patterns and trepanning guitar.
Along the way they had paid tribute to a few likely progenitors with covers of Wire, Cheap Trick and Kraftwerk songs, acquired a growing fanbase and a rep for interesting humour.
But Big Black were the sort of band who, having invented a blueprint, worked within it rather than move away.
‘I definitely appreciate bands that know their limits and stay within them,’ says Albini, citing Kentucky's Slint as a particular favourite.
‘The first three or four AC/DC albums are amazing, even though they're fairly interchangeable in mood, style and tempo…
I'm a firm believer in trusting your initial response to something.’
Steve has a proverb for us: ‘There's a cliché about film criticism that says you can't talk your way out of a belly laugh or an erection.
If you see something and you explode with laughter, it doesn't matter what was going on, you laughed — it's funny.
And if you see a sexy scene and you get a hanger, then it worked, it was erotic, and there's not argument because, ah, the evidence is before us.
And that's how I look at music.’
As Big Black got better known, they acquired a reputation for oddness.
The lyrics were what glum people call sick, their sleeves were often Savage Pencil drawings of people's brains moving rapidly away from their skulls, and Albini's onstage aggression and general tenseness made many people see Big Black as bad evil frightening men.
‘Generally speaking, these are not people who have met us,’ drawls Albini.
‘I sort of pride myself on being a normal human being and not a rock caricature, not pandering to people's expectations of being psychopaths or cray-ZEE! people…’
Albini — unlike many — recalls '80s alternative rock as a time of goofiness.
You thought Sonic Youth and The Butthole Surfers were serious attitude bands?
It seems you were wrong.
They were ‘goofy’.
‘A lot of bands around then did have fairly serious personas, and a lot of them who didn't had fairly goofy personas,’ Steve asserts.
‘People like Swans, Lydia Lunch and Pussy Galore had attitude.
Bands like Sonic Youth and Killdozer and The Butthole Surfers were fairly goofy; even though Sonic Youth were serious and interesting, there was a joke element even then.
There didn't seem to be an artificial persona to Big Black…’
I suggest that, if Big Black existed now, they would inevitably have joined their goofy contemporaries on Geffen.
Steve becomes almost agitated.
Big Black: specky Godfathers of urgh! urgh! urgh! frash
‘That's not true at all,’ he says firmly.
‘Big Black had the opportunity to be on several major labels.
We were called by EMI, RCA, Arista, Warner Brothers and I hung up the phone on all of them.
I recognised then what had been made more obvious since, and that is that major labels have absolutely no value for a band that wants to  function independently.’
We'll return to this later.
For now, more chronology.
After Big Black parted company because they could do no more, Albini formed the evocatively-monikered Rapeman, named after a Japanese cartoon character.
Immediately controversy ensued.
Rapeman's brief British college tour was a shambles, every show either cancelled or picketed by irate student unions.
‘Huh!’ snorts Albini.
‘English people are weird!
Even English people must recognise that.
You people just love finding things to get upset about.
You get upset in the most florid ways, the most extreme hyperbole.
The only place in the world where the name ‘Rapeman’ was controversial was England; everywhere else in the world it was of trivial importance.
When I was in Rapeman, I can't say it really surprised me because I had been exposed to English people before, but I didn't think that people were being serious initially.
I thought they were pretending to be offended — but people were honestly upset by it and I was flabbergasted.’
Hmm.
Rapeman duly foundered — worldwide, it must be said — and then Steve moved into an area of similar controversy.
He shocked the world of rock by producing its prime purveyors of tuneless grunting, The Wedding Present.
To some, this was a worse crime.
‘That's pretty weird,’ says Albini.
‘I understand people associating me with bands I've worked on as an engineer, but I don't understand why I am the only engineer in the world who's expected to be discriminating about the bands he's worked with…’
Steve is pale with annoyance.
‘I don't endorse the bands I work with, I work with them because that's how I make a living.
I think it's ludicrous that there are some bands who are appropriate and some bands who are inappropriate for me to work with…
Although I don't want to work with people whose music I can't stand and people who are assholes.’
Pop fans will note that Albini has been fulsome in his praise for his next project, Polly Harvey.
Probably he also likes The Wedding Present.
In the meantime, he is not making any records of his own, which seems a shame.
‘The reason I don't have a band is that for the longest time I've been disgusted with the mode that the American independent scene operates in and I don't want to be associated with that.
Currently the independent music scene, with a few shining exceptions, is concerned with making a successful career, selling a lot of records, and that's never been a concern of mine.
It makes people do the most disgusting things in search of that and I don't want to be associated with people who think like that.’
But surely, in the caring '90s, The Man just gives indie bands space to, like, do their own thing and create and all that bollocks?
Steve shakes his lockless head.
‘Starting with Jefferson Airplane and The MC5 and going right up to Sonic Youth and Hüsker Dü, it's never worked.
In 30 years no band has ever come out the system alive.
They get signed, they get arm-wrestled into spending too much money on their records, they get into debt to the record company, they spend 18 months trying to get out of it, it doesn't work and the band breaks up.
That has been such a constant that I can't believe anyone still falls for it…’
Steve gazes calmly into the hell that is corporate rock.
‘It boggles my mind that everyone thinks they can pull the wool over the eyes of a company that's had 30 years experience in dicking rock bands.
Now that means that bands are being arm-wrestled into sounding like Nirvana; and the only record companies can imagine doing that is by hiring Nirvana's producer, so every band on a major label has been remixed by Nirvana's producer this year…and I just don't have any interest in being part of the continuum.’
STEVE ALBINI is the sort of person we have always needed.
He may be a little abrasive at times, he maya not come pre-packaged with a lot of safe rock attitudes, but he is one of the true independents.
His back catalogue is his best defence; go and listen to it (It is, incidentally, being reissued on vinyl ‘as archive material’ because Albini believes that the aluminium in CDs will oxidise in the next ten years and the medium — conveniently for record companies — will become defunct).
Albini thinks of Big Black and says, ‘We were a pretty good live band’.
To anyone in a band now, he advised, ‘Develop your aesthetic and execute it, you will find your audience, your audience will find you.’
And Steve Albini says about Steve Albini: ‘I really don't give a shit what people think of me, that's not an issue.
What matters to me most is the way I conduct myself.’
EBONY'S ARE GOOD
FIVE ALBINI MOMENTS BY ALBINI
1)‘LUNGS’— 1981 (45)
‘I GOT kicked out of my first band and that weekend I bought a guitar and immediately started recording the first Big Black record.
It was pretty horrible because it was pretty self-obsessed…
At that point I was just satisfying my curiosity about what it was like to make records.’
2)‘BULLDOZER’— 1982 (12″)
‘THAT WAS with the first line-up, Santiago Durango and Jeff Bazadi.
Oddly enough, a friend of mine played drums on that because the drum machine had become…unreliable.’
3)‘ATOMIZER’— 1985 (LP)
‘ATOMIZER’ WAS an OK record.
Having listened to most of that stuff for the first time in seven years yesterday, most of it is pretty embarrassing.
I was sort of trying to figure out a way to weasel out of re-releasing it.’
4)‘SONGS ABOUT F—ING’— 1987 LP/ ‘LIQUIDATOR’ 1992 LP and video of final British live show in 1987
‘WE MADE a splash immediately before we broke up; now a band starts shopping its demos to majors after its third rehearsal.
By the end, I think we improved; on the live record and video we were probably as good as we were ever gonna be.
That gig was exciting — there was this giant belch and everyone involved in this giant belch felt immensely relieved afterwards.’
5 RAPEMAN — group 1988
‘I COULDN'T take seriously a political debate about the name of a punk rock band; that seems to me to be an absolutely trivial issue, like the size of a shoe.
How can you say that one shoe size is better than another?’
Steve Albini, the sinister Mr Big behind, erm, the ugly grunge Weddoes
ANTICS ROADSHOW U.S.A.
LUSH'S LOLLAPALOOZA TOUR DIARY 1992
So what do you do if you're four mild-mannered indie people plunged into the fire, brimstone, rain, cross-dressing, bile-snorting, stage-diving, limb-breaking, male-bonding world of LOLLAPALOOZA ‘92?
You sing ‘The Show Must Go On’, get your bass player PHIL KING to write a day-by-day diary of events (abetted by your drummer CHRIS ACLAND) and wonder, in all seriousness, if alcohol had any part to play in it all…
San Francisco Shoreline Amphitheater, July 18
It's ten minutes to showtime on the first day of Lollapalooza, and the floorboards in the backstage enclosure vibrate with the approach of the humungous Boo Yaa Tribe.
They are here to escort Ice-T and to play a short set on the second stage.
They pass us en masse , their Calvin Kleins pulled up firmly outside their pants.
It's five minutes to showtime and a huge roar goes up as Ice-T announces the acts.
I retire to the toilets for the third time in the space of ten minutes.
And then it's time to go on.
After our set Chris Hunter, Lush guitar tech, encounters Otis, the bobble-hatted goliath of a man who's working for Ministry.
‘Do you know what's wrong with Lush?’ he says menacingly.
‘No, what?’ asks Chris innocently.
‘They don't do ‘Thoughtforms’.
If they don't play it by the end of the tour I'm gonna shit on your head.’
Fair enough.
Luckily for Chris, since we decided not to do this song at all on this tour, Otis disappears from the tour overnight.
Not knowing this, Chris tries to take his life later in the day bungee-jumping.
San Francisco Shoreline Amphitheater, July 19
Weird scenes backstage.
Lifto, from the Jim Rose Travelling Circus, is sitting eating breakfast, shaven-headed, wearing stockings, high heels and draped in a kimono.
Later on in the day he will be seen hanging unfeasibly heavy weights from various parts of his anatomy, in a freak show where fainting is considered a standing ovation.
Lesley and Fuzz from Silverfish turn up from New York, where they're sorting out a record deal.
They give us and Perry Farrell (who's God in these parts)‘HIPS LIPS TITS POWER’ T-shirts which we duly wear on stage.
Vancouver UBC Field, July 21
After the sun, sea and silicon of San Francisco, this is more how I imagined a festival to be.
Especially since Lollapalooza is based on the Reading Festival.
It's pouring down with rain, bitterly cold, extremely muddy and so far only half the PA's turned up.
We retire to the relative warmth of our caravan.
Luckily, by the time we get on stage the rain has stopped.
There's always one person in the audience who distracts your attention.
Even if everyone else is having a good time you tend to end up focusing on the one ASSHOLE!
And there he is, down the front with the 49ers baseball cap on, purple tinted Wayfarers and an All-American cheesecake grin.
‘Smile,’ he mouths, trying to attract your attention.
I eventually do ‘smile’ when his cap and sunglasses get knocked off accidentally by one of the security guards.
His cool quickly melts as his hands fumble to catch them.
Seattle Kitsap Country Fairgrounds, July 22
As we approach the site, coming off the freeway, we get caught up in a four mile tailback, as there's only one entrance to the fairground.
After waiting 20 minutes, not moving one inch and forced to endure ‘Sweet Home Alabama’ and ‘Rocky Mountain Way’in quick succession, we abandon the minibus and continue on foot.
A hundred yards up the road Howard, our manager, has the bright idea (which we pay him for) to ask a local sheriff for a lift.
He begrudgingly agrees.
‘I don't like your kinda music,’ he drawls, turning up The Beach Boys on the car radio.
I wonder if this guy is a Republican.
Howard sits up front with a shotgun grazing his earlobe, whilst Miki, Emma, Chris and myself are squashed in on the back seat, staring through the grating at the road ahead.
Not only does he take us to the site but he drives straight through the crowd, lights blazing, to the backstage area.
We hide our heads in embarrassment.
Once Pearl Jam start playing we find that we have no choice but to evacuate our Portacabin dressing room.
Literally everything in the room starts vibrating to the beat of the bass drum.
What's it going to be like when Ice Cube's on?
Don't ask.
Denver, July 24
It's raining again, yet the sprinklers are on the best mown lawns in the USA.
They win every year here, so our driver tells us.
He's taking us from the airport to what is locally down as the Darth Vader Hotel.
This is because somebody wearing the Star Wars character's outfit officially opened it recently, and also because it is a huge black obelisk which sucks the sun out of the sky.
As for my room, well, if I was Jimmy Page I would definitely say ‘Too rococo’.
Denver Fiddler Green, July 25
Waiting to go onstage we watch The Buddy Holly Story in a sub zero air-conditioned lounge.
The moment we walk out into the sun to play we all break out into a heavy sweat.
Unlike the audience.
St Louis Riverport Amphitheater, July 27
‘To riot or not to riot, that is the question,’ is scratched on the front-of-house mixing desk as a reminder of the Guns N' Roses concert here last year.
Early on in their set Axl Rose waded into the audience to pull a camera off someone and then stormed off stage.
The crowd then proceeded to pull the place apart.
Pieces of Marshall amplifiers were later found in the car-park.
But I digress…
We are all somewhat the worse for wear after a long night in the hotel bar.
One hundred and twenty out of 140 rooms were taken up by bands and crew.
The tequila didn't last long.
Turner, Ministry's heavily tattooed bone tech, was sitting next to me with a small sparrow's skull placed next to his beer on the table.
As one does.
The last thing I remember is Matt The Tube from Jim Rose's Circus Sideshow getting a loud cheer as he pulled a straw from his nose with a pair of pliers.
During Ministry's set tonight the earth started flying, along with the bodies.
Wrapped in blankets, they're tossed 20 feet in the air.
 Cincinnati Riverbend, July 28
Left soon after we played, but not before Miki and Chris did an interview with Tommy Vance for the Friday Rock Show .
Miki managed to slip in a few ‘wise words, matey.’
Cleveland Blossom Music Center, July 29
Miki's sitting in the corridor of the bus trying to reassemble her shorts, which somebody tried to pull apart when she stage-dived during Ministry's set.
Emma played guitar with them while nine ‘dancers’ dressed in Blake's Seven bikini outfits ‘vogued’at the front of the stage.
They had been recruited earlier on in the day after having been spotted out amongst all the mud, pulling shapes.
They are along for the duration.
Anthony — the ‘h’ isn't silent, you have to lisp it — from The Chili Peppers was seen hobbling around on crutches today.
He snapped his achilles tendon last night after jumping in the air and landing on his microphone stand.
The first of many casualties.
Detroit Pine Knob, July 31
If Perry Farrell's God, then that must make Eddie Vedder, singer with Pearl Jam, Jesus.
Preaching epistle to the apostles and  anointing them with water (still, not carbonated).
He came back with us, skateboard under-arm, to the hotel out in the suburbs near Troy, after their customary riotous reception.
He was pissed off about a cameraman who kept stalking his every move; filming for use on the large video screens positioned on either side of the stage.
He said it detracted from the band's performance to focus mainly on him.
Detroit Pine Knob, August 1
It's kind of eerie.
I'm sitting up on a hillside looking down on Lollapalooza, by a ski lodge which is shut down for the summer.
I can hear the ski lifts creaking in the wind and the sound of sand being dragged in gusts over the parked cars.
But not for long, as Soundgarden are due onstage any moment.
En route to Chicago, we stop at a truck stop and come face to face with Al Jourgensen, head honcho from Ministry and disciple of Aleister Crowley — and Dennis Wheatley.
Perhaps.
Sitting at a counter surrounded by the fulsome figures of the Boo Yaa Tribe, with his goatee beard and black stetson hat, he tells us about a party he's giving at his home in Chicago.
Outside when we look at his phone number it's got ‘666’ on the tail end of it.
As I say, it's kind of eerie.
Chicago World Amphitheater, August 2
Only one shower for the whole crew today, and just a curtain divides us from Pearl Jam.
It's a larger seated venue than usual, over 30,000.
During our set I notice a lot of pointing in Chris' direction.
It must be his famous open-mouthed drumming technique.
After we finish we have an interview with JBTV; a local cable music show which is broadcast all over the country.
It is hosted by a friendly Jerry Garcia-lookalike and a confessed self-publicist.
At any available space in the interview he name-checks himself and his show.
Stopping at the truck stop in Toledo we get the usual ‘Is there a circus in town?’ and the most popular, used by children of all ages, ‘Mummy, that girl's got red hair!’
Nice hot fudge sundae, though.
Saratoga Springs SPAC, August 4
As is the weather's wont, it literally pours down after our set.
All the seats down the front get totally wrecked in the crush to get to see Pearl Jam.
The crowd are held back by security guards as they try to divert a stream which is running across the front of the stage.
From our dressing-cum-locker room we can see the audience hopelessly running around with pieces of plastic sheeting over their heads, trying to stay dry.
On the other side of the perimeter fence there are groups of soaked souls attempting to climb over or under it.
Toronto Molson Park, August 5
A sunny day at last and our first field since Vancouver.
Normally playing seated  amphitheaters , our audience and the Mary Chain's tend to be up the back on the lawns.
That's why the response at these unseated shows is so much more positive.
Emma took us all on a bumpy buggy ride over to the second stage, until it was confiscated by security.
She and Miki took to the stage again with Ministry, Miki sporting a rockerific white flying V. If I can remember correctly, Howard our manager was by this time on all fours with a bottle of tequila clutched firmly between his mitts — but this is what we pay him for.
Lush's very own Samuel Pepys in action: Phil King and his memoirs…
Phil, Chris, Miki and Emma in their fem-power T-shirts
Top: Miki with Ministry head honcho and Crowleyite Al Jourgenson; Above: Emma shares a joke with ‘Looza's very own Jesus figure Eddie Vedder out of Pearl Jam
Boston Great Woods August 7
Miki and Chris took up the  challenge from the Jim Rose Travelling Circus to drink the bile!
Matt The Tube pushes a tube up his nose and down his throat into his stomach.
He then pours a concoction of chocolate sauce, tomato ketchup, beer and Pepto Bismol down it…and then he pumps it out again.
According to Miki and Chris the bile, a lurid green colour, had chunks in it.
Later, when The Mary Chain are asked to perform the same feat, Jim Reid says he'll only do it if members of The Travelling Circus snort his diarrhoea.
Funnily enough, there are no takers.
The Toxic Twins, Steven Tyler and Joe Perry from Aerosmith, were backstage, as were a greater part of the population of Boston.
You couldn't move for people.
During Ministry's set, huge clods of earth started to bounce on to the stage.
Off in the distance on the back lawns fires had been lit which the audience were moshing around.
Kinda tribal.
Kinda Lollapalooza.
Kinda figures.
Later on we found out the perimeter fence had been burnt down and the festival is banned here next year.
Long Island Jones Beach, August 9/10
What a dump!
Backstage, it's like Alcatraz.
A small concrete dressing room with a paltry view of the sea/harbour.
It's a seated venue again.
The second day here was certainly a lot more ‘interesting’.
During our set the sky grew gradually darker and darker, until by the last number the sky was as black as the ceiling of the Camden Falcon.
And that is black.
Before we launched into ‘Leave Me Cold’, Miki innocently said ‘This is our last song before it rains.’
The moment we walked offstage there was a clap of heavy metal thunder, of course, and the heavens opened.
From our dressing room we could see the typhoon winds drag most of the marquees, and the second stage, into the sea.
On the horizon there were huge cracks of lightning in the sky.
The audience had been told to disperse to their cars to take cover.
The stage was by now swimming in a couple of feet of water.
Al Jourgensen is running around backstage, shouting out such helpful commands through his megaphone as ‘Batten down the hatches’, and ‘Splice the mainsail’; stopping every minute or two to proudly show off his new tattoo.
It looks like most of Pearl Jam's equipment is ruined.
Somebody's been blown off the lighting rig — it's OK, it's only Richard Jobson's brother — and the road crew are running around trying to get all the remaining equipment covered.
It's chaos.
Within the hour the show is cancelled and everyone returns to the hotel to drown their sorrows.
Lush, however, are in a celebratory mood — we were the only band to be paid and boasted all night that we'd actually headlined Lollapalooza.
Pittsburgh Starlake Amphitheater, August 16
‘ARE YOU READY, LOLLAPALOOZA?
I SAID, ARE YOU READY LOLLAPALOOZA?!’
Marky Ray, Ministry's guitar tech and Lee, their sound guy, are introducing us onstage.
And it goes something like this.
In fact, it goes exactly like this.
‘Coming at you at a hundred miles an hour, all the way from the beautiful UK, 4AD recording artistes, LUSH!’
Bill, Ministry's drummer, has donned Emma's black dress, Miki's fishnets, put on some lipstick and shader, and is going to play guitar on ‘For Love’.
During our set I see someone in the audience wearing a Rush T-shirt.
Surely some mistake?
In return for Bill coming on stage with us, Miki and Emma, dressed up as men, looking like the Thompson Twins or as Chris said, Laurel & Hardy, joined Ministry onstage for ‘So What’.
It was the dancers' last night so they were doused by Turner, the bone tech, armed with a high-powered water pistol, and wearing diapers.
Ice Cube was spotted backstage playing basketball with members of Pearl Jam.
Charlotte, North Carolina, August 24
There are a couple of guys in the hotel lobby wearing boards around their necks, offering to show anybody f rom Lollapalooza the sights of the city for a gum.
There's talk of a naked volleyball competition involving Ministry.
We graciously decline, and instead go to the cinema.
Some of us to see Single White Female and others, well OK,other , to Night On Earth .
The only other people in the cinema are Jim Reid and his girlfriend.
Al Jourgensen is seen wandering around the hotel foyer hugging a wooden duck, used to frighten off local wildlife.
He is closely followed by the local police shouting, ‘Drop the duck and put your hands in the air.’
Later he is spotted standing at the edge of the swimming pool, bent double, taking bets on whether he is going to throw up or not.
I'm kept up ‘til early morning by the sound of people in the next room chopping up lines.
Snorting, coughing, laughing,ad infinitum , until finally…silence.
Charlotte Blockbuster Amphitheater, August 25
Venue owned by Blockbuster video.
Luckily Chris has his card from the Camberwell branch.
Access all areas.
Lots of problems today.
Jimmy, our monitor guy, fell asleep on the bus and couldn't be found at the start of our set.
So we had eight people huddled over the desk arguing about the sound.
The bass was booming, the vocals were feeding back, Emma's guitar kept cutting out.
And this was when Jimmy was there.
Chris had to stop ‘Nothing Natural’ as the beater fell off his bass drum pedal.
Crew left immediately after show.
1,200 miles to Minneapolis.
We're getting the plane tomorrow.
Pearl Jam trashed their guitars and threw them into the audience.
Who do they think they are, Birdland?
Atlanta, August 31
It's 10am and the Mary Chain's crew are having a quiet breakfast on the sun-drenched veranda of the hotel.
They are tucking into buttered scones and a huge pot of tea.
Out of nowhere an amplifier, a Fender amplifier to be more precise, whistles pasts them and smashes into the concrete concourse in front of the hotel.
They look up from their table to see what all the commotion is about, and then continue to eat.
Another ordinary day on the Lollapalooza tour.
The owner of the Fender amplifier had been Chris Cornell, singer with Soundgarden, who is a guest located on the 15th floor.
They say he expected his tour manager to catch it.
Well, that's what he's paid for.
In the evening we ate at an Indian restaurant opposite the hotel.
On the walls were photos of Mick Jagger, The Moody Blues, Ride, The Soup Dragons…and the Dalai Lama.
So what band's he in, then?
Atlanta Lakewood Amphitheater, September 1
Midway through our set there is a fight on the grass at the back.
Within seconds a huge crowd gathers, and from the stage we can see the police and security running towards the incident.
Everyone in the audience turns round to stare.
This must be what it's like to play a variety club on a Saturday night.
New Orleans, September 2
Expectations are running high.
It's the Lollapalooza end of tour party tonight (and there's still two weeks to go?!).
Judging by accounts of last year's knees-up it's going to be a night to remember — a carnival of flesh — a drink and drugs frenzy.
There's actually been a gig pulled to give everybody a day off to recover.
But don't count your chickens.
It's a pile of crap.
We've had better nights down the Rock Garden.
There's some really horrible strippers —which gives it the feel of a really grim hen party or stag night.
There's a heavy police presence inside the club, and NO FREE DRINKS!
Everybody tries desperately to have a good time, but it never really happens.
Emma puts her hand through not one, but two windows as a form of protest.
We retire to the hotel bar early in the morning and are met on arrival by Big Al Jourgensen wearing a George Bush mask and clutching a can of hi-fi contact clear.
He rushes up to us, sprays our T-shirts with it and then forces us to inhale the fumes.
We all start laughing uncontrollably.
So it's come to this; sitting in a hotel bar in New Orleans partaking in solvent abuse.
Dallas, September 6
It's come to the end of the tour — everybody and everything's getting a bid mad.
Ministry destroyed their bus last night.
They had a pyrotechnic display in the back lounge and set the whole inside of the coach alight.
There's a catalogue of injuries — Chris, our guitar tech, has broken his foot playing rock ‘n’ roll basketball.
Cath from T-shirts is on crutches after treading barefoot on broken glass trying to break up a skinhead brawl.
Fritzy, bleerk with Ministry, breaks his hand hitting someone in the same brawl.
And Mike from Pearl Jam has fractured his foot in the studio (the mind boggles).
There's more on the way.
Miki then dives offstage during Ministry's set.
It's a seated gig, and there's no-one to catch her fall.
Alcohol might have played some part in this serious miscalculation.
She's rushed to hospital on a stretcher in a neck brace.
It looks bad and everybody's worried.
Phoenix, September 7
Our red-haired chanteuse is propped up in bed.
She's got a corking black eye, a nasty gash…(oops) on her forehead which requires multiple stitches and has temporarily lost the use of her right arm.
There's a serious band meeting/liaison and we're seriously thinking about jacking it in and going back to Blighty until Emma sings the first verse and chorus of ‘The Show Must Go On’ by Queen.
There's a swift change of heart.
We fly to Phoenix and Bill, the drummer from Ministry, learns the whole Lush set in a matter of minutes; putting to bed the notion that all drummers are one-dimensional, unmusical saddoes.
Phoenix Desert Sky Pavilion, September 9
During our set Bill has to play sitting down because he has broken two fingers stage-diving during a Lush set.
Miki sings guitarless (that's a new song).
It's not the greatest gig ever and resembles a scene from Casualty , but it shows Lush to be a band full of spunk and I think Freddy would have been proud.
Los Angeles Irvine Meadows, September 11–13
There are three shows left in the same venue.
the curse continues.
We're in the hotel bar after the second show, when we hear the bad news.
Brad, bass player with The Mary Chain, has fallen down some steps and broken his ankle in three places.
We wonder in all seriousness if alcohol had anything to do with it.
Later that same night Gibby Haynes, singer with The Butthole Surfers, is roaring drunk and proves to Miki that the art of romance is not dead.
The silver-tongued fox saunters up to our singer and drops his bombshell.
‘How about we go up to your room.
You can suck my cock while I lick your pussy.’
Surprisingly enough, Miki is not won over by this subtle approach straight from the Nigel Havers School of Charm.
It's the last day of the tour, and it's chaos backstage.
The world and his wife are here (that's wife + 1) and Uncle Tom Cobbley's got Total Access.
Ivo, all the way from London, England, is discussing with Motley Crue the possibilities of working on the next ‘This Mortal Coil’ project — which will be called ‘This Motley Crue’.
Miki's mum — alias the hand in the ‘70s Denim aftershave advert (TRUE!)— is here looking for hairy chests to stroke.
Unfortunately, neither Chris nor Phil can oblige.
The bloke from Bill & Ted's’ Excellent Adventure thingy (not Keanu Reeves)…staggers into our dressing room asking if he can use our potty.
He is somewhat surprised to see Dave and Stone from Pearl Jam and Bill from Ministry dressed up as men's ladies; female attire and make-up obligatory if you want to play with Lush.
Even Al Jourgensen was threatening to.
Unfortunately he couldn't find anything large enough in his wife's wardrobe.
It's amazing how many hard rocking mothers are queuing up to perform this somewhat unrock and weedy indie task as soon as they find out it involves wearing things that girls wear.
Still, any excuse to get into Emma's tights.
Everybody plays with everybody else today.
In fact, there's so much bonding on stage that it would make the average punter slightly sick.
It's beginning to look like a deranged version of Live Aid.
The bonding continues after the show, where it's back to the Hyatt for one last booze-up before everybody goes their separate ways.
It's all hugging, tussling, kissing and naked wrestling.
‘You're my best mate, you are — I mean man I love you — Come and stay whenever — Come and live with me — if I'm not there the keys will be under the dustbin.’
And you really DO mean it.
Five am on the way to the airport the driver tells us that the Hyatt was evacuated in the small hours of the morning because of a fire scare.
We wonder if Ministry have anything to do with it.
AND THAT's it.
Regrets?
We had a few.
We never really got to hang out with Ice Cube, as initial exchanges did not bode too well.
(rap it if you like).
‘Yo you guys ain't really my cup of tea — just a tad too abrasive for me I like the more melancholic and breezy sounds of Slowdive — erm, everybody jump.’
And we never get to see The Jim Rose Circus snort Jim Reid's diarrhoea.
Still, you can't have everything.
We had a brilliant time and it's a pity you only get to do it once: Maybe we'll split up and reform under a different name — so we can have a crack at it next year.
Headlining, of course.
Miki makes no bones about her deep enjoyment of Ministry's set
A sneaky glimpse of what Miki does in her tour bedroom: she toys with her Gameboy…
An intimate Women In Rock moment featuring Emma and Lori from Babes in Toyland
Laurel & Hardy (aka Emma and Miki) and Bill out of Ministry in Emma's black dress
The view from the bass bin — spot the asshole wearing the 49ers cap in the front row…
SINGLES
REVIEWED BY STEVE SUTHERLAND
SINGLE OF THE WEEK 1
DINOSAUR JR: Get Me
If, like me, you thought ‘Green Mind’ sounded like J was just bollocking about in his pa's basement up to not too much of anything, rejoice!
‘Get Me’ is Dinosaur back to their ‘Freak Scene’best, and their grand contradiction has never sounded sweeter.
J actually expends energy on caring about not caring in a (non) attempt to kid us nothing' at all bothers him into action, no sir.
The voice is still languishing, wasted in its rumpled bed, but the guitar is up with the sun, out the window and scaling such dizzy heights that it manages to drag the chorus into a deliciously wounded country yodel.
Comparisons are obvious but well deserved.
Neil's ‘Nowhere’ Crazy Horse, ‘Another Planet’Only Ones, the Television of ‘Marquee Moon’— this record's up there with the very finest of ragged glories.
The B-side features a beautifully tortured live acoustic ‘Quest’ and an irreverent rattle through Gram Parsons' and Chris Ethridge's ‘Hot Burrito £2’with Matt Dillon on backing vocals.
So slacking finally gets to meet and influence people.
Weird shit.
Dinosaur Jr: Flying Burritos £1
8 STOREY WINDOW: I Thought You Told Me Everything
‘I thought…’ is the last record 8 Storey Window will make for Mad Minute.
From now on they'll be released through Ultimate, which makes perfect sense considering that Ultimate is the label that launched Levitation and The Belltower and this sounds like a wild cross between the two.
And then some.
Claiming they've found a balance somewhere between Jane's Addiction and Jefferson Airplane, 8 Storey Window are an unashamed, intense, jamming rock band who are happiest when the drums are doing their own Ginger Baker thing and the guitar is taking a stroll in the stratosphere.
That way chaos lies, but the Window are aware that the best tension is created from a structure being stretched and shattered, so they rein themselves into songs and mess that way.
They're good songs, too.
‘I Thought…’ is a monument to amazed betrayal while ‘Used Up’harnesses the kind of negative power that God Machine hit at their very occasional heights.
Or should that be depths?
Whatever, 8 Storey Window are star-gazing and they can see for miles.
BELLY: Gepetto EP
The second Belly EP and their anatomy is still one heaven of a mystery.
The title track is a sunny romp about gawd knows what.
It's pop, folks, but not as we know it.
‘So he's lyin' on top again/Just like Gepetto…’
What would Pinocchio have to say about that?
Well wicked and bright.
Gram's obviously the man right now because here's another cover of ‘Hot Burrito £2’.
This one's straighter than Dinosaur's, more faithfully bitter and pained with Tanya Patsy  inClined .
‘Sexy S’ is vertigo on a carnival wheel with Sonic Youth on the headphones.
‘Sweet Ride’ is surfing with Syd Barrett.
See?
Told you.
Belly are a gorgeous enigma.
They have brain and heart and imagination and they're off the life support after the Muses' separation operation.
Alive and enlightening.
DELICIOUS MONSTER: Power Missy
No-one could deny the lungs on the girl, but DM's ‘Dull Dull Dull’ was suspiciously bereft of dimension, as if the band were just stylishly filling the indie hair shirt.
This is another tangle of impulses altogether.
You'll spend the first couple of hours with ‘Power Missy’ trying to work out whether it's a tease or a threat and then, just when you decide you really can't decide whether they're all Polly Harvey bolshie or Sundays pliant, it may dawn on you that ‘PM’is, in fact, f—ing scary, like playing S&M games with a dangerous schizophrenic.
Even when she's begging, there's a sinister obsession to her naked desire.
Sadly, the rest of the EP still sounds like The Sugarcubes on a day off.
Strange how they can be so strange and then, quite suddenly, so normal.
Dinosaur Jr: Flying Burritos £1
Belly: Flying Burritos £2
BANG BANG MACHINE: Evil Circus EP
Everyone and their cat flipped over ‘Geek Love’ and BBM started getting mentioned in Brightest Hopes alongside Suede and Verve and the like.
Maybe this turned their heads, because the ‘Evil Circus’ EP sounds like a desperate scramble to cover all bases, to appear ultra-modern, to matter .
But these things can't  be forced and sweet as singer Elizabeth sounds double-tracked and on helium, she raps as crap as Mr C. And samples.
Use them when they're needed, when they enhance.
Don't just bung them in because everybody else is.
There are ideas here, some of them probably pretty good.
BBM just need to calm down a little 'cos when they do, like on the unsolved murder and injustice ballad ‘16 Years’, they sound sincerely committed.
Not hopeless.
Not yet.
THE POOH STICKS: The World Is Turning On
The jokers in the pack, Swansea's Pooh Sticks are always claiming they record in exotic places for some reason best known to themselves.
This kind of jiggery-pokery does them a disservice.
So does the sky blue vinyl, all of which screams, HEY!
GIMMICK! and  f—s up any chance they may have had of ever being taken seriously.
Which is a shame, because ‘The World Is Turning On’ is as dandy a catchy guitar pop record as anything the Teenage Fannies have concocted.
A mite more imaginative too.
The verse sounds like a madrigal, the chorus like a party.
The forthcoming album is called ‘Million Seller’.
I doubt it, but stranger things have happened.
Remember The La's?
PM DAWN: I'd Die Without You
There's a movie tie-in here (Boomerang , the new Eddie Murphy) so there's every chance ‘I'd Die Without You’ will be a hit.
Deserves it, anyway.
It's cool.
Gossamer, slinky, focused, unfussed — what a treat to hear a song that takes its time and doesn't give a toss for the bpms and the clubs.
What a treat to hear an understated vocal.
But then I liked that Boyz II Men thing so what do I know?
THE NIGHTBLOOMS: Starcatcher
There is a track on The Nightblooms' recent album (it may have been their debut, I don't know.
They're Dutch) called ‘Butterfly Girl’.
It may even have been a single.
I can't remember.
Anyway, ‘Butterfly Girl’ is this great, eerie, organic thing; a sort of childish chant infected with the macabre threat of some nursery rhymes.
You know, the ones about the bubonic plague and all that.
Anyway, ‘Butterfly Girl’ always reminds me of that bit in The Wicker Man where Britt Ekland is naked and writhing and patting suggestively on Edward Woodward's bedroom wall and singing a similarly spooky mantra.
Sadly ‘Stargazer’ doesn't remind me of anything very much at all.
Bummer.
SWEET JESUS: Albino Ballerina
Pity poor Sweet Jesus.
They could have been fully praised-up members of the Future Party by now.
They coulda been contenders.
They got the look.
They got the verbals.
They got the song titles.
They got the lot…except they sound like Edwyn Collins crooning along to MBV with his face pushed up hard against a plate glass window.
Not this year's thing, really.
Not any year's thing if we're brutally honest.
Bye bye.
STARCLUB: Let Your Hair Down
THE LEMON TREES: The Way I Feel
Starclub and The Lemon Trees are record company bands and these are record company records.
‘Let Your Hair Down’ boasts a Beatles riff and a Michael Hutchence vocal.
There are verses and choruses and chick backing vocals and a big Chris Hughes production to give it that radio-friendly oomph.
There is even a bit at the end where the singer metaphorically falls to his knees and testifies.
It's a load of trad old bollocks and kill anyone who tries to tell you different.
‘The Way I Feel’ is, unbelievably, worse.
It's like Squeeze.
One of The Lemon Trees used to be in The Waterboys.
Sometimes the world is a very sad place.
INXS: Taste It
You know that Michael Hutchence?
He's a good bloke he is.
Likes a drink.
Likes a smoke.
Knows his way around The Guardian crossword.
And there was all that Kylie business.
Like I said, good bloke.
So why he continues to work with these faceless muso halfwits is presumably a matter between his muse and his accountant.
You've heard this record before.
It sounds like all the others and you can't remember what they were called either, can you?
There's a Youth remix, too.
How original.
CELL: Fall
Don't you just hate being right?
I know Cell would sound like this before I even heard them.
It was obvious.
Their name.
The b&w Americana artwork.
The tour lined up with Sonic Youth.
Don't these people know predictability is the  f—ing enemy?
Suspiciously spot-on '92, Cell sound as if they were test-tube hatched to fill the vacuum should Kurt Cobain pop his clogs.
The guitars stagger all over the place, the singer hacks his throat raw and the song stutters to a halt in a welter of feedback.
It's OK.
But OK ain't nearly enough.
DROP NINETEENS: Your Aquarium
as if we haven't got enough of our own shoe-gazers facing redundancy or (at best) a future mini-cabbing, Hut have decided to import Boston's Drop Nineteens.
Why?
They don't appear to know their arse from their elbow, are neither sinister nor sugary, and even their ‘rockin'’ version of Barry Manilow's ‘Mandy’is really a homage to the Lemonheads and Teenage Fanclub, two bands who really know how to ruin a good song.
Drop Nineteens haven't a clue.
Send 'em packing.
MANIC STREET PREACHERS: Little Baby Nothing
By some miraculous quirk of fate, I have so far managed to get through life as a jobbing hack without ever once having to put my opinions on the preachers into print.
Sadly, people, that time is at an end.
I don't get the joke.
Sorry.
‘Little Baby Nothing’ is crap.
Is it supposed to be crap?
I'm told it's the 43rd single release off the album they said they'd split up after if it didn't outsell Guns N' Roses (or something).
See, I can't even get a proper handle on their mythology.
Maybe it's because they sound like a goat rammed down a foghorn.
Maybe they just broke too many promises?
Who really and truly and honestly gives a shit?
POPINJAYS: I'm A Believer
WHIPPED CREAM: Observatory Crest
You think you know your fellow man.
You figure you've got a handle on all but the most aberrant human behaviour.
And then this happens.
I mean, why would anybody cover a Monkees song that everybody in the world  f—ing knows off by heart and not do a damn thing with it?
I mean, what's the point?
As for‘Observatory Crest’, it's one of Captain Beefheart's least extraordinary songs, a kinda spacey ballad.
Whipped Cream are Scandinavian but even the odd accent doesn't drag this version far enough from the original to make it an interpretation rather than a facsimile.
WHY?
SINGLE OF THE WEEK 2
DENIM: Middle Of The Road
You'll find me banging on about how great the ‘Back In Denim’ LP is elsewhere in this issue so you can drop most of the theories there.
Right now I'm here to say that ‘MOR’ is cheeky and angry and much too big for its platform boots; in other words the single the Manics always should have made.
It begins: ‘I hate the Stones and I hate blues…’ and goes on to show the finger to the Hook and Chuck and Otis and Marvin and ‘Reetha and Dylan and just about everything yer rock fan holds sacred.
‘I hate coke and I hate spliffs…=’ This is rampant iconoclasm but it isn't wanton.
OK, so Lawrence is enjoying himself pissing in the Rock ‘n’ Roll Hall Of Fame but, as the tacky synth gurgles and the Glitter beat stomps and Jonathan's ‘Roadrunner’is dusted down and ‘Chirpy Chirpy Cheep Cheep’is sampled just to bring that blood to boiling, this uppity little Brummie is trying to liberate us from history, to open our possibilities, to help each and every one of us lay claim to our own personally honest musical heritage.
‘Force-fed your so-called heroes/Don't be told who to like/It's your choice…’
How gear is that when everyone is jumping everybody else's train?
Rock apologists know thy enemy!
 Starf—er Lawrence Out Of Denim
JOHN LEE COME LATELY
Balls-out bluesman par excellence JOHN LEE HOOKER is back with only his second UK hit ever, courtesy of another of those ubiquitous jeans ads.
STUART BAILIE meets him at home in San Francisco, and finds Mr Lucky's trademark suit — and sauce — thankfully intact
‘Boom, Boom,’ says the boogieman, as he coolly shoots his lady down, rams her into his car, steers off to his house, gets a bang out of watching her walking the floor, and then settles down for a bit of baby talk .
John Lee, you know, likes it like that.
And that's what it amounts to, this ‘Boom Boom’, this monster soundtrack for a jeans ad — relayed across TV screens and cinemas — this dirty, snatch-and-go story of carnal heat.
I mean, it's a pretty wild scene in that song, isn't it, John Lee?
Do you think it's a sexy record?
‘A very sexy record,’ says John Lee, proudly.
And you think about this for a while — how a 72-year-old man can get away with a storyline that rappers 50 years his junior would get a battering for.
That John Lee, in spite of his gentlemanly manner and his standing as the simpatico blues Godfather, is an unrepentant, woman-chasing rake at heart.
Dennis Hopper, who got John Lee to put some of his spooky moanings onto his soundtrack for The Hot Spot , figures that this singer ‘proves you can take a steady diet of fried chicken well into your 70s and still try to get all those pretty young things into a hot tub.’
Keith Richards tells with a mixture of jealousy and amazement the story that the guitar classes John Lee conducts at home are entirely made up of young girls.
I mean, you don't , do you, John?
‘Well yeah,’ says the guy they call Mister Lucky.
‘Women is the life of a man.’
Then he turns a little coy and giggly.
‘I love women.’
He says he doesn't take it to extremes these days, that he doesn't date them.
That he just likes their company, really.
But one thing that's definite about all this, as you step into the artist's comfortable home, with his admirers and relatives and his stacks of music awards and pictures of his celeb pals (Keith, Bonnie Raitt, Eric Clapton) all over the place, is that ‘Boom Boom’ is the punchline to a life that's been big and astonishing and bloody eventful…
IF YOU check out most of the serious blues books about the Mississippi players, you'll be pushed to find a lot of stuff in there about John Lee Hooker.
They all rave about Muddy, Charlie Patton and Son House — singers that came out of the same patch in Coahoma County — but they turn all reticent and confused when it comes to the act that's outlived and outsold them all.
One of the reasons for this is that John Lee's history and musical bent is just too weird to accommodate in their stories and theories.
Most of John Lee's old neighbours could be catalogued and connected.
Their music was a network of hand-me-down styles and words, like a system of waterways that was traceable back to this recognisable Afro-American source.
But that John Lee, he was always a devil of a thing to put a handle on.
While the others played raging bottleneck guitar and favoured rough, percussive voices, Hooker was onto another tip.
He would just ease up there and tap out his slow old rhythm with his feet — one leg knocking out quarter notes, the other eighths.
And he wouldn't follow any of those regular 12-bar song-shapes; John would follow his own droning groove.
Sometimes he'd ooze out all of those stream-of-consciousness words about bad women and liquor and death.
And sometimes he would just sink below the tune, beyond the words.
He'd just go himmaahimmahimm , and it would blow you away.
Even when John Lee quit the Delta for Detroit (most of the others steered for Chicago) he kept that unusual vibe about him.
When he changed from an acoustic to an electric guitar so overloaded that it made the windows of the little studios rattle, you could still sometimes hear his feet rapping on the boards and the irregular chord sequences and the trademark himmahimmahimm drifting through the air.
Sometimes he'd get more hyped up and ride along on a snaking king-boogie, or work out a streak of magical stop-time sleaze like ‘Boom Boom’(first recorded in ‘61).
Like Muddy, he went acoustic again in the mid-'60s to profit from the white-promoted folk revival, but mainly John Lee has stayed true to his Iron Man vocation.
‘Even when I was 14, I was determined,’ he remembers.
‘People would say, nothin' stops you John.
They said I was like a piece of steel …’
SO NOWADAYS John Lee does what he feels good about.
And he'd got lots of famous mates that want to play on his records, and he picks up a Grammy and releases records on scrupulous labels, instead of the 30 or more indie horsefixers he's had the misfortune to deal with over the years.
And the John Lee iconography has come with that — the thick shades and the cool suits from Honest John of Oakland, and the funky homburg and the loafers and the shiny rings.
And he's such a recognisable feature now that he's become this odd advertising totem — a symbol of endurance and authenticity in a sometimes crummy world.
Which isn't always a great thing.
The sight of a teetotal singer who's pushed a broom, been a cinema usher and an employee for a cess pool firm, advertising hyper-expensive cognac is a bit off, really.
And the TV advert in which John Lee seems to be endorsing ICI (who pump out a disgraceful amount of CFCs into the atmosphere) isn't so terrific either.
And now we've got ‘Boom Boom’ back in the charts off the back of a jeans ad.
You know the one — huge gantries are erected, trains throb past, lots of articles with ‘Lee’ in the title flicker out, and finally, the man himself is pictured ‘live’at the Paramount, singing his re-recorded, horny old song.
And is he wearing a pair of boring old jeans?
The  f— he is!
‘I'm not wearin' no jeans.
I told them I've got nothin' against jeans, I'm just used to wearin' casual and suits.
I've been doing that for a long, long time.
I always like to be well-dressed.
That's just my image.’
Oh well.
But at least the lure of some extra greenbacks hasn't made his recent records so disappointing.
‘Boom Boom’, the LP, differs from the last two parts of the John Lee comeback (‘The Healer’ and ‘Mr Lucky’) in that there isn't such a staggering amount of extras and celebrities blamming away in the background.
On a lot of it, Hooker's a loner once more, and he's plainly relishing the job.
‘I do it and I do it well,’ he figures.
‘I felt I could do it better with myself.
I could just be me .
It's going to do good, I think.’
Much of the stuff is rejigged versions of old Hooker numbers like ‘Bottle Up And Go’ and ‘I'm Bad Like Jesse James’.
While songs like ‘Sugar Mamma’ may not be especially wired the way they used to be, and he no longer sings about getting his sugar ‘three times a day’, John Lee is still alright.
But the real stormer from these sessions is a tune called ‘Hittin' The Bottle Again’, in which he just strokes his National Steel and sings this sad, lovely song about dereliction and bar-hopping.
It sounds fantastically timeless, like you just jumped into the Tardis and came out in another place and era entirely.
‘Yeah, you can go way,way , back with that,’ he chuckles.
‘Back to the '20s or '30s or somethin' like that.
And then you look back at it in 1992 and there it is.
The way I sing it, ‘hittin' every saloon in town’— back on those days, they said saloons .
They didn't say bars.
That's the way I put it — way back — like that.’
TALKING TO John Lee is a peculiar thing.
Sometimes you feel like Winston Smith in 1984 when he corners this old guy in pub and tries to find out what it was like in the days before the revolution.
And all he gets are these one-liner and bum steers and cheerful shrugs that may or may not be disingenuous.
So you sit down with The Hook and ask him about what it was like in the '60s in London, when he was lionised by Van Morrison, The Animals, Peter Green and all the gut-bucket R&B bands, but he just laughs and says it was fun.
And you want to know what it was like being fêted by the Stones and Led Zep, and how in ‘61 Bob Dylan got his first Greenwich Village pro gig with John Lee (and was apparently pissed off because the man from the New York Times was far more interested in rapping with the bluesman), but he just says it was nice to be able to put young Bob on the bandstand.
And besides, the ‘49ers are whipping the Falcons on TV as we speak, and John Lee is far more interested in that.
And his friend Rachel (‘She's a singer’) has just dropped in with some presents from her mom, and the bluesman tells us his old voice is starting to go, and our audience is finished.
But before we go, he wants us to see the video of his new record.
So we sit around the TV and watch John Lee on the screen, having this great party outside this very house, with his grand-kids and his ladyfriends.
And there's Rachel giving him a big kiss, and there's John Lee with a succulent piece of fried chicken, having a time.
And soon the house is breaking up with laughter and excellent vibes.
And as we quit the singer's house, I remember the words that Bonnie Raitt said to John Lee when they were on stage earlier this year in nearby Sweetwater.
‘He's looking good tonight, ain't he?’ she said to the audience.
‘You must be getting some on a regular basis, John Lee?’
And John Lee is still smiling, still looking good.
Boom Boom.
RUSTIC NEVER SLEEPS
From thrash grand-daddy Don QuiGrungio on ‘Ragged Glory’ and ‘Weld’, to love-lorn mellow troubadour on the brilliant new ‘Harvest Moon’album, NEIL YOUNG is always very much in a field of his own.
GAVIN MARTIN joins the queue outside his hotel room to tap the batty old buzzard's thoughts on love, marriage and the history and mystery of his new — and quietest — album.
Cut the crop: AJ BARRATT
‘Gee, it's like being in a waiting room, the doctor will see you now.’
Neil Young has just taken a three-minute break between the arrival of the NME and the departure of Radio 1's Johnny Walker.
Now he's back, ridiculing the sausage-machine interview set-up.
I heard him greet the Radio 1 man through the door 30 minutes earlier.
‘Are you related to the whisky?’ he wondered.
Young had spent all day here, moseying between the three-room Mayfair hotel suite, talking for 40 minutes at a time to every journalist lined up to see him.
He called a sudden halt to his crowded agenda at lunchtime and crashed out for a few hours in the adjacent chamber, throwing the timetable into disarray.
Understandable really — here he was jetlagged and put on a treadmill, a caged beast up for inspection, poked and prodded.
Hardly an appropriate setting for Rock's Natural Warrior.
Right now it's the end of a long day in London and the 48-year-old Young prowls the room with a stooped, rangy gait, the traces of a  roguish grin on his well-worn face.
He stretches and stifles a yawn, there's a few days stubble on his jowl, hair thin but shaggy, eyes peering briefly above the rim of his sunglasses, suede fringes swaying from his jacket as he roams the room before plonking into a chair.
He keeps mumbling and chuckling to himself; a likeably batty old buzzard.
Later I ask if the years of drug abuse — he made the lost classic ‘On The Beach’ using honey slides (lumps of hashish melted in honey), he almost didn't appear in The Band's Last Waltz movie because there was a massive, subsequently disguised, lump of cocaine hanging from his left nostril — are still wearing heavy on him.
‘Oh, I still feel the consequences of it one way or another.
Nothing's for free.
I don't know exactly how I'm paying for it, but I'm sure I am.’
I EXPECT something firm, manic, menacing, but the handshake is actually soft and warm, limp even.
Along with the good humour, it is a reminder that Young's personality, like his music, is prone to abrupt changes of mood and temperament.
Last time I tried to get to him he was accepting no callers.
He was on edge, engaged in flaming rows, head blasting music mayhem and internecine squabbling with his garage band compadres Crazy Horse.
That was on the 1991 ‘Don't Spook The Horse’ tour recorded for posterity on the ‘Weld’live double album, casting Young as a man driven to the limit, charging and stomping his ground, ready to explode.
Neil Young commands fear and respect in equal measure.
He is the Rock God with an ever-expanding kingdom, a man ambitious and flagrant enough to throw his lot in with punks on ‘Rust Never Sleeps’ and rekindle hippy homilies without sentimentality on ‘Harvest Moon’.
For all his wayward impulses and the much documented erraticism of his '80s career, this contradictory figure has — through cunning, imagination and sheer force of will — constantly reassessed and reasserted himself as the most focused member of the old guard.
A sussed practitioner of everything that was noble about rock 'n' roll in the past, he also presents myriad possibilities for its future.
Now the torrents and viperish fury that fired ‘Weld’ have subsided, it looks like a battle that had to be waged to get to the next stage — the calm, healing shores and sanguine odes of ‘Harvest Moon’.
For many Young fans this is the ultimate payback.
Filled with resonant references to his past, ‘Harvest Moon’ is a delicate but mighty work, a brilliant mirror image of the all-cylinders fire power of ‘Ragged Glory’and ‘Weld’.
‘Harvest Moon’ is the scourging sound warrior of ‘Weld’reborn as a light-fingered laureate, the decibel demonics giving way to hushed awe and thoughtful reminiscence.
Initially, the word was the album was a sequel to ‘Harvest’, his best-ever selling album from 1972.
‘I'm being very upfront about it, it's finally time, 20 years later,’ he told a writer as he prepared to record the album this time last year.
The idea of a sequel seemed odd, ‘Harvest’ was an LP he'd badmouthed over the years, and it was hardly his style to go into the Mike Oldfield school of repackaging old product.
Now that it's finished, he's keen to distance himself from the idea that it's a follow-up.
‘It wasn't really made like that, it's just after the record's over, it's a spin people like to put on it.
It is what it is, it's just another record that happens to have the same people on it as ‘Harvest’…
I started off the way I write every album — wrote a couple of songs, got a feel for the music and called up the musicians that I thought I could do the songs with.
‘It does seem on the surface to be a radical change of pace to go from ‘Arc’ to this, obviously there's huge differences between them.
But I don't feel…
I do what my instinct tells me to do.
At a point with ‘Arc’ I said ‘OK, we're off and we're flying, this is distorted and grunged out to the max’.
I felt like Don QuiGrungio or something up there with the horse and everything was great.
‘Then I kept thinking, aww, pretty soon I'm gonna think of something else or something else is going to happen.
As soon as I start thinking that I stop and I don't make any more music like that.
The ever-dapper Neil Young: ‘Relationships should enrichen with age.’
‘The physical thing with the feedback takes its toll on you when you play really loud.
You could talk over what we are playing now, and be louder than the music.’
‘The physical thing with the feedback, y'know, it takes its toll on you when you play really loud.
It's energetic, it's loud, it's physical.
This other music is still very physical, but it is very light, soothing and open.
When we were recording ‘Harvest Moon’ we had the settings up real high trying to pull the volume up because we were playing so quiet.
You could talk over what we are playing, like we are now, and it would be louder than the music.
Very, very quiet — the quietest record I've ever made.
‘I wanted to play something really quiet because my hearing at that point was so hyper that everything I could hear was loud.
So even playing quietly sounded plenty loud enough for me.’
Were you worried about your hearing?
You see Pete Townshend now and he's behind a screen when he's onstage.
It's a bit pathetic.
‘Yeah, I worry about it, but there's nothing much I can do about it.
I'm taking steps to make sure that I last as long as possible.
I stopped using the stack reinforcement I used behind my amplifier because my amps are very small.
But I don't use them anymore.’
Despite the contrast in sound, Young is keen to flesh out thematic links between ‘Ragged Glory’ and ‘Harvest Moon’.
‘Trying to get a little love on the subject, that's what I was doing on ‘Ragged Glory’, exploring this neighbourhood that's like a valley or something.
Every album has its own geographical kind of fantasy scene that exists in my head and that one had a lot of them.
You know, like, you'll have a book, like The Hobbit , and you'll have a map of all the places that are in the book, a fantasy kind of world.
‘This album here, it's about making things last, how to keep that interest, how to keep the fire burning.
Never get bored with the fact that you've been with someone for a long time, it's a good thing, not a bad thing.
Relationships should enrichen with age, that kind of thing.’
Neil Young, the love-lorn introspective warbler, has, like every other Neil Young, been through many changes.
Wistful and savage on ‘Cowgirl In The Sand’, winsomely chauvinistic on ‘A Man Needs A Maid’, a drop-down drunk on the honk laments like ‘Barstool Blues’ and ‘Too Far Gone’.
On ‘Harvest Moon’, images of women provide inspiration and sustenance.
From the hallowed memory-turned-myth of ‘Unknown Legend’ to the ripe reconciliation of the title track and the tender reappraisal of ‘You And Me’.
No marriages are easy, rock 'n' roll relationships are particularly fraught.
Placid and healing on the surface, ‘Harvest Moon’ doesn't try to deny the troubles and heartbreak beneath.
‘Pegi (his wife ) is the woman of my life, she's the main influence on my life from womanhood.
Womanhood in general, I think, has had a big effect on my life, women are very effective.
I've found them to be quite effective, actually,’ he sniggers in a lewd and rueful manner.
Sonic Youth, Pearl Jam, Jesus And Mary Chain, Teenage Fanclub, St Etienne, Pixies…the list of new bands who acknowledge Young as an influence is ever-growing.
Does he feel gratified, or like a grand-daddy?
‘Well, y'know, popularity comes and goes, it's a constantly changing dynamic.
It really has nothing to do with me.
I'm just kind of like part of it, caught up in it sometimes, left behind at others.
But I'm more concerned with what I'm doing and what I'm trying to do next rather than dwelling on my position with regards to other musicians and music in general.’
AT THE Dylan show in New York a week previously, he came on directly after Sinead O'Connor got booed off.
‘I heard she got quite a reaction, didn't she?’ he wheezes and chuckles slyly, disingenuously, before getting serious.
‘She knows what she is doing.
She does preconceived things to get people upset and get their attention and it's working.
I didn't feel any sympathy for her and I felt that…as for the booing, well, everybody gets booed.
It's part of the deal.
‘Last time I got booed by a lot of people was in '82, but this year I was booed a couple of times.
It doesn't bother me.’
Why were you booed this year?
‘For playing too many new songs, having no respect for the audience.
They pay good money and I'm not up there playing ‘Heart Of Gold’, so they start getting upset.’
So how do you react to that?
‘Generally, I ignore it, it's not a big deal, it shouldn't be a big deal.
If you're getting booed for doing something that you want to do, you should remember that you want to do it.
What the hell does the reaction matter if you want to do it?
If you're an artist preoccupied with what people think, you may as well give up.’
Some people would say there's a bit of a wind-up to what you do.
Those people who went along to hear you play ‘Heart Of Gold’ on the ‘Weld’tour got a blast of Sonic Youth, liberal idealists were shocked by your Reagan-supporting stance in the mid-'80s, your newly-won reactionary followers were soundly ticked off with the capitalist lambasting of ‘Freedom’at the close of the decade…
‘I like the idea of saying, have some of this, this is real too, y'know?
I like the idea of presenting Sonic Youth to my audience.
A great deal of my audience enjoyed them immensely even though they'd never heard them before.
A great deal of the audience didn't like them at all.
But that's OK, too.’
What's the weirdest thing you've ever seen in an audience when you've been onstage?
‘Well, the weirdest thing that I ever saw onstage was a murder, at the Stones appearance at Altamont.
I was onstage when that happened.’
Did that mark a specific shift in attitudes?
People talk about Altamont as being the end of the hippy dream.
‘It was the hippy nightmare, right there.’
That's something you documented in some detail in subsequent records.
‘It's been my life, y'know.
I watched things change and made observations every once in a while.
It's part of the deal, part of the information that we're given.
The whole thing's unfolding all the time.’
Are you really constantly reassessing where you've been?
‘Nah, I don't really like to look back too much.
The only time I do that is when I'm talking to journalists and they ask me questions about the past.
There's nothing wrong with it but that's when I do it.
Shit, after doing that I want to go out and see what's happening.
Like, right now I want to know who's on the street, what's going on.
Want to find out if I have any new feelings — about music, about life, about anything.’
GIVEN THE reflective nature of ‘Harvest Moon’ and the fact that Young has been engaged in putting together an ambitious retrospective over the past few years, his claim that he only considers the past when talking to journalists must be taken with a pinch of salt.
Such a project must give him some new perspectives on the guy at the centre of it all.
‘This guy, that guy, this guy…it's a whole bunch of guys, they're all there.
I've got a lot of stuff to do, got to put it all in order.
I've got three people working on it right now and they've been working on it for three years.
We're collecting all the information, all the reviews, every album review from all the periodicals, every piece of stuff, so you can trace it all chronologically; how things were received when they first came out.
It's interesting to see what it all looks like in the grand scope of things.’
What compels you to put all this together?
‘I figure if I don't organise it somebody else will organise it after I die and that'll be like, it won't be right.
I have a chance to put my mark on this, to do it the way I want to do it.
I don't know about other artists but I know I have this urge to chronicle everything.
I keep going, doing stuff for no reason, making films there's no buyer for.
I finish them and I put them away.
‘Muddy Track (the Young-directed documentary made on the fiercely argumentative Crazy Horse tour ) has never been released.
I made that and put it away.
By the time it comes out there'll be a demand for it and it will create its own market just by being where it is, by being what it is, a bold documentary.’
The image of Neil Young as the wayward eccentric doesn't tell the whole story, not by a long way.
There's a driven, even ruthless, business side to this dishevelled rock clown.
Over the years he's made extensive real estate investments.
‘Oh yeah, I bought a lot of land, all in the same place (California ).
I live there and I walk around on it all the time, it's a way of life for me now.’
‘Natural Beauty’, the ten-minute epic closing track on ‘Harvest Moon’, connects with other Young songs — the post-nuclear fall-out of ‘After The Goldrush’, the spectre of a lost civilisation on ‘Zumas'’ majestic ‘Cortez The Killer’.
But in keeping with the healing theme of the new album, ‘Natural Beauty’ is an ode to preservation over annihilation and extinction.
Inspired by his own private kingdom?
‘Well, that's part of it.
‘Natural Beauty’ is about survival in nature in general and survival in any situation really, there's many things in it.
The subject of the song is meandering, it's kind of a trip through space.
It's like I took a completed album of all kinds of different songs and threw it up in the air and it came crashing down.
I took all the pieces and put them back together again.
It's a live tape that I overdubbed on, added all kinds of acoustic instruments to.
‘Doing ‘Natural Beauty’ live in Portland and singing it right through, I nailed it right there.
I knew there was no sense in trying to do a better one.
I know I got it when I was doing things with the structure I'd never be able to do again.’
‘Harvest Moon’ comes out the same week as the new Bob Dylan album.
Like anyone who came of age during the '60s, Young owes an often acknowledged debt to Dylan, both as a songwriting influence and for showing how to turn questionable vocal talent into great singing.
But it's the difference between the wheezing, cracked, crumbling voice on ‘Good As I Been To You’ and the supine, delicate wonderment of Young's voice on ‘Harvest Moon’which marks the astonishing chasm between the two albums.
While Dylan's is the voice of death, despair, loss, wrack and ruin, Young's call, seemingly polished and matured over the years, speaks of hope, regeneration and humility, reaching a peak on the heartbreaking beauty of ‘Such A Woman’.
The finished product rests in a glorious pop tradition not usually associated with a wide-ranging career like Young's.
There's traces of The Beach Boys (‘Yeah, there's a real ‘In My Room’, ‘Surfer Girl’ feel to it,’he grins) and Phil Spector's work with The Righteous Brothers.
Much of that must be down to erstwhile Spector/Young arranger Jack Nitsche.
‘Jack's one of the modern-day masters.
His creations are on a par with Mozart and the composers of the renaissance.
I feel excited when I come up with something that I can have Jack to help me with, I'm always ready to hear what he has.
I've been working with him since ‘Expecting To Fly’ in 1968.’
A glorious, bombed-out ode to acid joy and misery, ‘Expecting To Fly’ was a sound collage from Young's final days with Buffalo Springfield.
Springfield were the first band Young formed when he came to California, driving there in a hearse all the way from Canada.
Over the years since then he has got together privately with all the surviving members for reunion jams but, unlike every other outfit he's played with (including his Canadian hometown high-school instrumental band The Squire), he's never gone public with a Springfield reunion.
‘There's never really been a reason.
We got together to  practise in 1985, and I wanted to do it then, but I don't really have a drive to do it now.
It might be fun to do, it depends how into it Stephen Stills is.
We go up and down together.
Right now the relationship's good; he's like an old friend, we've been through a lot of shit together.’
Neil's PR is now at the door, signalling frantically for the second time in two minutes.
Neil is reluctant to talk about the songs in any more detail: ‘Like my good friend Bob says, a song is just a thought; you can't really talk about a little part of it without taking the whole thing into consideration.’
OUTSIDE, TWO more journalists are waiting, a meeting is scheduled with video director Julien Temple and there's a Concorde to New York to catch for a possible date with Sonic Youth.
Manager Elliott Roberts has arrived with news that he's found a new room with a jacuzzi bath.
Shortly they'll both repair to the bedroom for another three minute interview break.
Polite but detached, Neil is tired.
Neil — the indefatigable road hog, tireless adventurer,tired .
It doesn't seem right.
He once sang, ‘I keep getting younger/My life's been funny that way’.
Say it's still so, oh Crazy Horse.
‘Sometimes, sometimes.
But sometimes I feel like I'm definitely going the other way.
It's a feeling that comes and goes.’
Neil Young sighs, stifles a yawn with a laugh.
Soon he'll be free again, back on the street, onstage with just his acoustic guitar or roaming his private kingdom at one with nature, able to find out how he really feels about things.
The dishevelled rock clown — today, at least.
‘OK brother, your time's up.’
VIBES
EDITED BY SHERMAN AT THE CONTROLS
JUAN ATKINS, Godfather Of Techno, returns in style, GUNSHOT calls the shots in UK rap, EON jumps in the Tardis, SHERMAN sifts through the releases, and there's a rocket-load of ORB stickers to be won
YOU'RE FIRED!
East Enders Gunshot are one of very few British rap crews to have developed a unique and unmistakable style.
Over backing tracks that sound like Nirvana with a brass section produced by the Bomb Squad, rappers Mercury and Alkaline throw down in distinctive London fashion, incorporating ragga chat into the quickfire rhyme brew.
Their self-produced 12″ back-catalogue on Vinyl Solution is this week augmented by single number four, ‘Killing Season’ /‘Nobody Move’.
After an opening sample of Bob Hoskins from The Long Good Friday , ‘Killing Season’ sees Gunshot calling time on their fellow UK crews.
There are beatdowns dished out to bands who waste their energy arguing with each other, and to a UK rap audience that prefers a ‘bad boy’ image to a dope track.
But what Gunshot have got over those they're criticising is that they don't give a shit who they upset.
Alkaline explains: ‘It's an angry track, just releasing the tension inside about how things are going with British rap at the moment, and how we're being treated as a rap group.
We're just saying what's been on our minds for a long time.’
DJ White Child Rix, the musical muscle of the band, has an imagination when it comes to arranging his source material that few can match.
‘Nobody Move’ incorporates samples familiar from ‘Chorus Line’by Ultramagnetic MCs and PE's ‘Night Of The Living Baseheads’, but imbues the sounds with fresh interest.
‘If somebody's already used a break it just means you've got to use it in a better way.
Too many British rap tracks try and copy American stuff, but our sound has evolved through time and we keep branching into different styles.’
This has as much to do with the aural texture of guitar-based rock as with funk or soul, and their records often fail to gain airplay on rap specialist radio shows.
But narrow-minded people are a good part of the reason for ‘Killing Time’ 's existence.
‘You're much more likely to hear John Peel play one of our records than Kiss FM,’ admits Mercury, ‘and the people that come to our gigs are more your typical rock fans.
But we're not complaining, we're happy to play for anyone.’
Gunshot: they just wanna get loaded…
ON JUAN
Like his protege Derrick May, ‘Magic’ Juan Atkins — the man commonly referred to as the ‘Godfather Of Techno’— has recently returned to the spotlight after a couple of low-profile years.
It comes as no coincidence that Juan, who first pioneered electro in the early '80s as part of Cybertron before making the first Detroit records on Model 500, took his hiatus from the arena when it had become an overcrowded circus.
‘Mayday’ says he was laying low ‘watching the dogs kill themselves’.
When pushed, the more modest Atkins will admit the same.
‘People asked me and Derrick what we were doing over the past two years and the answer that I want to give is that we were waiting for everybody to catch up.
In a way, that is what it is.
You can do things and be so upfront and so ahead that nobody can appreciate it.
‘At the end of the day all of us are in it to sell records.
This is all I do.
I do it for the love of music but I got to survive.
I got to eat.
So I thought I'd wait a year or two and let people get into the techno thing and get used to being more receptive to what it is, as opposed to what it was in ‘86, when nobody knew what the term was and everybody was scared of technology.
During his absence from vinyl, Juan travelled the world with his rock box spinning at techno hotspots in Europe.
He saw hardcore take the pure space-forging he had pioneered and construct the equivalent of ugly tower blocks on the moon's surface.
He never stopped recording, though, and never lost the Magic touch which made diamonds like ‘Ocean To Ocean’ and ‘No UFOs’such timeless classics.
Network has just released ‘The Passage’, recorded a year ago as part of a projected Model 500 album.
Juan also appears on the Indisc/33rpm compilation-collaboration, ‘Panic In Detroit’, has started remixing again (Eon's ‘Spice’ is an example ) and contributed a Martin Bonds track from his Metroplex label (currently reactivating ) to Infonet's upcoming ‘313 Detroit’album.
He is also in the process of clinching a major record deal.
‘Now I'm going to concentrate on my music and give my career more focus being with a company that understands what I'm doing.
‘Definitely I have some ideas.
There's things that I want to try that haven't been tried.’
Juan Atkins gave all the major Motor City movers their initial recording breaks — Anderson, May and Fowlkes were all released first on Metroplex.
Listening to the old Model 500 records now, you realise they haven't dated at all.
Atkins never sidesteps into someone else's sound.
His gaze has been fixed firmly on the future.
‘I've always been fascinated with science fiction…just that feel.
When Star Wars came out and Kraftwerk came out, that just did it.
I just wanted more.
There's more imagination and possibilities to me with things to come.
There's always hope because tomorrow is another day.
I'm always thinking ahead.
I've always got something up my sleeve.’
Everything's going for the Juan
EON aka Ian Loveday (right) releases his long-awaited debut LP on October 26 entitled ‘Void Dweller’(Vinyl Solution ) and features previous singles, ‘Light, Colour, Sound’, ‘Infinity’, ‘Inner Mind’,(featured in the soon to be released movie Buffy The Vampire Slayer) and ‘Spice’ amongst others.
It was Dr Who that provided the young Loveday with his earliest musical revelations, as he can remember being transfixed by the time travelling adventures and the theme music (an early outing into electronic music composed by the legendary Ron Grainer and the BBC Radiophonic Workshop).
The album, an 11-track journey through rave, techno and other strands of electronic manipulations, including covering ground that would have been too difficult in a singles format, ie ambient and floaty, and demonstrating Eon's influences that range from Pink Floyd and King Crimson to Depeche Mode, Juan Atkins and, erm, repairing stereos and making contraptions out of spare electronic bits.
‘There was a lot to do with telephones,’ says Ian, ‘like you could turn down the stereo as you picked up the phone!’
A taster single, ‘What Is Music’, mixed by Eon and Baby Ford, is out now and is backed by a Juan Atkins remix of ‘Spice’.
WIN ORB GOODIES!
Our old mates THE ORB popped round to Vibes central control the other day for tea and spacecakes and a quick intergalactic natter, and somehow they just happened to leave a whole box of ORB window stickers in the VIBES record cupboard — and would you believe it just as they were about to leave we couldn't find the key?
Incredibly, ten minutes after they'd left, we found the naughty little locking device and so, dear reader, for those that have failed to pass the Vibes club criteria test in the past, here it is, the competition eve YOU cannot lose!
We have 100 — yes, one bloody hundred — Orb stickers to dish out like there's no tomorrow and all you have to do to win one is tell us WHY you deserve one.
Is it because it's a Tuesday, your mother's gone shopping and there's only one banana yoghurt left in the fridge, or is it because Channel 4's new breakfast show is so bad!?
Tell us why oh why.
This really is too easy!
3 DECREES
TONY MARTIN (aka HYPNOTONE)
1)
CHARLES B ‘Lack of Love’‘Nostalgia time; off my nut, tears in my eyes, Hacienda 1989.’
2)
PEACE ‘Free Your Mind’‘Heavy, slow and groovy, live and direct from Detroit and not one of those formula tunes.’
3)
VISIONS OF SHIVA ‘Perfect Day’‘A brand new pounding house track straight out of Germany.’
GROOVE CHECK
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK (1)
THE BLACK DOG: Vantool EP
THE MOST prolific of any true UK techno act, the Black Dog once again deliver the goods and then run off and hide to make more.
‘Vantool’ is just the latest example of Black Dog's prolific nature.
Using the right kind of equipment and correct sounds doesn't automatically qualify for a techno prefect's badge, too many slip into the keep net just because of this, but The Black Dog always manage to create tracks with lasting presence.
Thoughtfully moulded, futuristic and mindscaping, ‘Vantool’ is a bit of a headphone gem, the mild-mannered title track lines up against the gentle caressing ‘Hub’and the mystical revelations of ‘Rainbow Bridge’.
With this you'll discover what true techno is really all about.
All I can say is give these people a film score to settle.
Timeless.
(NB.
When you buy this, make sure you purchase a copy of the equally impressive ‘Repeat’ 12″.)
MOBY: The Ultimate Go (Featuring Jam and Spoon Mixes)
JAM & Spoon are making a real impact on the remix front and they carry their ever-progressing (aaaarghhh!!) style ‘Age Of Love’ remixes.
With J & S's affection for shoving their (and other people's) music through a hallucinogenic Tardis, the collision with Moby's spooky, twisting chords borrowed from Twin Peaks is almost predictable really.
The ‘Delirium mix’ is as much as could be expected — but not at all disappointing — with the original ingredients rinsed out through stringy synths and a shipment of cosmic awareness (loads of that in our house) whilst the ‘In Dub Mix’works up through minimal effects before an unexpected dub bassline rumbles in and you realise you're travelling at half-speed.
Unfortunately, halfway through it loses the plot and its authenticity and sadly slips into excruciatingly painful white boy reggae mode.
Grab the CD with five extra mixes where you'll also be the proud owner of the most original mixes and a couple of new gems.
VOLUMINA: Alright
The more arresting flip side of this 12″ contains the real beef through ‘Volumina’, with its toyed-around Tranceporter vocal sample and the much more effective and piano cruising ‘Allround’, which lifts the basis of the pretty uninteresting A-side into a more dripping acidic romp.
ULTRAMARINE: Nightfall In Sweetleaf
THREE TRACKS selected from their outstanding debut LP and handed over to a bunch of no good acid housers for dancefloor enhancement.
The mixes are OK, but the whole thing about the Ultras is that their tracks are structured more in the song mode than club fashion, so they end up losing a bit of weight along the way.
Spooky illuminate ‘Lights In My Brain’, Co-Co Street & Lovebomb get to grips with the owl-hooting ‘Panther’ but Sweet Exorcist appear to struggle with ‘Geezer’.
The eventual release loses a Co-Co mix and has a re-edited Ultramarine one instead.
It also features Ultramarine's own intro and interlinking music in between.
EGE BAM YASI: Acid Indigestion
THE RETURN of Vibes hero Mr Egg in a gloriously multicoloured acid-induced cloud of techno ACID HOUSE! ushered along by what appears to be the sampled, gentle whispers of Cocteau Twin Liz Frazer mysteriously lost in infinite hyperspace.
Side A's ‘Bubble’ comes bursting out of a 303 clutching more acid popsicles and there are other seggxy mixes from the likes of Darren Emerson and D-Code.
We love Mr Egg, we do.
But isn't it funny how people who are now well and truly ‘progged up’ are willing to accept this sort of thing which a few months ago they'd have left well alone?
Live dates imminent.
JJ: Feel It/You Stole My Heart
FULL-ON UK House that just managed to lose the ‘P’ word from in front of it.
‘Feel It’ is a saxed-up mid-evening floorboard damager with a property-damaging bassline, housed up with dub shades in its roots.
‘You Stole My Heart’ carries a weighty US feel, amplified by  complementary female vocals and gentle house-style strings in appropriately titled ‘Before’and ‘After’mixes.
Buzzing.
CORAL WAY CHIEFS: Release Myself
LATEST GEM from the relatively new Murk label from Miami.
US house with a distinctive sound of its own.
Robert Owens-ish vocals with a champion bassline.
DIGI DUB: Aliens in the woods
Bad Boys/ The Love of/
Rougher Than A Lion
DIGI DUB serve up a welcome listen of techno ragga, electro and dub, blending them to such a degree that they still remain hard to categorise, dealing in each style with equal authority and adeptness throughout and as inventive as anything you'll find plagiarising these genres.
‘Aliens In The Woods’ comes couple with a mix by the original dub houser, Moody Boy Tony Thorpe, which takes the digital element into interstellar sound system territory.
The ‘Bad Boys’ 12″ continues the theme of ‘The Love Of’and ‘Rougher’, peddling further fundamental electro thrills, dubbed and scratched out without a care for a hookline.
A more clubby brand of On-U sound thoughtwaves.
THE INFINITE WHEEL: Lake Of Dreams
NATURE BOY: EP
TOMATO CONTINUE to impress with a pair of releases that may be label mates but, in relationship to each other, go no further than holding hands.
The Infinite Wheel present four UK harmonised house cuts loosely gathered together under the same title, the ‘Dream Of Dreams’ mix holding the dancefloor tactics whilst the epic and trippy ‘Big Blue Mix’and ‘Bay Of Rainbows’melt into each other to create a floaty yet still club-viable waxing.
Nature Boy, on the other hand, funks along in a pleasant style and a vocal that my flatmate swears says ‘funky nibbles’, but then he's mad.
Something to do with the Thai he's got on, I think.
Wicked Tobago mix.
CHESTNUT: Mixed Moods EP
FOLLOW-UP to their club congenial ‘Pot Of Gold’(there's a remix around well worth picking up ), ‘Mixed Moods’ contains four variations on a theme crafted around a gorgeous string-infected format, of which some will be more effective earlier in the evening whilst the remainder will nurse any wounds left open from the evening's proceedings.
RAMIN VOL 2: Brainticket
BLISSFUL FLOWING, butter-melting hypnotism from Ramin, emphasised with all manner of swirling effects and a rumbler of a bassline and as trancey as anything down our end of the road.
A division of Frankfurt's Planet Core Productions.
SUBTLE HOUSE: Controversy EP
‘HEMISPHERE’ AND ‘The Traveller’are more hard house than the usual techno artfulness that Container have become renowned for, and will fit into any set for DJs on the current UK house tip.
Simply crafted out of dreamy space-flavoured blips and acidic sub-plots, with three New York-ish house choons cut out in a uniquely teutonic fashion on the other side.
WILDCHILD EXPERIENCE: The Wildtrax EP Vol 1
TODD ‘TEE’ Terry-sounding, New York-style house dipped in dub and produced on home turf.
Hard and Hacienda-friendly.
TRANSLUCENT: EP
PURE UK produced techno through Brighton's Jelly Jam shop/label.
‘Ambient techno’ suggest that the label and if there is such a thing, then it's definitely all here.
From the glowing and imperceptible ‘Inheritance’ to the moon-dusted Detroit persuasions of ‘Spadang’and ‘RR-We’.
Piping hot.
ROTTERDAM TERMINATION SOURCE: Poing
AS ANNOYING as ‘Sesame Street’ but funnier when you've been to Amsterdam and seen an ocean of techno heads pogo-ing like Zebedee on amphetamines.
Basically it goes POING-POING-POING-POING a lot and you'll know it when you hear it.
Christmas Number One.
EAGLE'S PREY: Tonto's Drum
MONSTROUSLY EPIC, hypnotic UK hard house due out in a few weeks.
don't know any more information other than it's mesmerisingly brilliant and will damage a few shoe leathers.
VIBES SINGLE OF THE WEEK (2)
‘VISIONS OF SHIVA’ Perfect Day
I ALREADY reviewed this back in July but  now that it's finally been given a British release ‘Perfect Day’ will, in time, be seen as a perfect moment from MFS's classic period, alongside excursions from Cosmic Baby, Microglobe and Mind Gear.
This has been a much sought-after track since a few of the more adroit DJs discovered the ripe fruits cultivated within its grooves.
And you'll see why.
When a rampant piano breaks out of the ecstatic trance midway through we're two-nil up before the record's even half way through and, with the arrival of a melancholy eastern vocal further up the touchline, it's turning into a whitewash.
Stanley knife the UK Intuition remix (actual A-side ) as  it's a  f—ing disgrace, should have stayed with the original MFS mixes, so go search out the import.
Now is the time for other labels to take a look at the rest of the treasures that MFS are hoarding.
HAPPINESS IS A WORN GUM
Nurse, the screams!
The days of being forced to get out of it on cough medicine are well behind Irish grunge superstars-in-the-making, THERAPY?
With a Top 30 single — featuring a gross-out gum shot on the sleeve — in the bag, and America ready for the taking, STEVE LAMACQ jumps aboard their tour bus and tries to convince them everything isn't really a big, strange dream.
Sick Transit glorious: KEVIN CUMMINS
Two blocks away in New York's Greenwich Village, Creation's Alan McGee is one of the invited guests at the star and leather-studded party which marks the launch of Madonna's Sex.
What an astonishingly long way he's come, eh readers?
I imagine him sliding over to Madonna herself with the words: ‘I see, right, you and Bobby Gillespie, right, remaking ‘Like A Virgin’, totally naked with a 36-piece orchestra, right.’
Meanwhile, less than a mile away, Therapy? are happily getting as drunk as newts in a British style pub bar celebrating yours truly's latest bastard birthday.
The wine and beer flows as guitarist Andy Cairns talks openly and without embarrassment about ‘77 punk bands like Eater and Sham 69 (‘I wanted to do a Sham medley at Reading but the others wouldn't let me’).
The scenes are chaotic, to say the least.
The band's guitar tech, Mole — so named because of the way he squints through his rounded spectacles — punches a continuous barrage of Ramones hits into the jukebox, and drummer Fyfe Ewins models a beret he's liberated from Lord knows where.
Therapy? 's latest game is ‘Whose Round Is It Anyway?’ in which contestants from the band and crew have to go to the bar and order a drink in the manner of a named personality.
Picture guitarist Michael McKeegan jerking his way back to the table in the style of Gary Numan!
Little do we know that this drink will shape the course of the rest of the tour.
But that comes tomorrow.
For now, Therapy? are at the start of their first proper American jaunt, glad to take a break from the pressures of Britain and their debut major label release, and swap them for the promotional chores of the States.
My key word for the next three days is born here out of a conversation with the increasingly vocal and 45-degree angled Fyfe.
‘Significance’ is the order of the day.
I keep coming back to the idea that everything can have some significance attached to it.
Right from indie godhead McGee's Madonna invite to the fact that Therapy?— once a hopeless band from Belfast — are on the verge of becoming one of the three most important new bands in Britain.
Therapy?, biting the bullet in the Bronx
The new Cure?
They are a significant great rock hope.
Not just because their popularity has grown naturally and without cartloads of bullshit, but because they've wheedled their way out of Northern Ireland with a snarling guitar sound that benefits from an invigorating spread of influences — from techno to rap and ambient house to reggae.
The way they joke about their LP going to 207 ‘with an anchor’, the way they break down the myths of the American Dream and the Troubles back home…
Everything about them is significant .
Right down to the question mark at the end of their name, right?
‘Erm, well no.
We've lied and said it is, but we'll tell the truth for once,’ says Cairns.
‘On the sleeve of the first record it was meant to say just Therapy, but I started the logo too far over to the left — and we only had enough money for one sheet of Letraset — I couldn't start again, so I just added a question mark to make it fit.
‘And then we thought, well maybe we can bluff our way through when people start reading into it.’
‘We've told people, journalists in Europe, that it's really deep,’ adds Michael, ‘that we're trying to ask people a question: ‘DO YOU NEED THERAPY?’
But that's a lie.
It just looked good.
‘The worst thing was that there was a poster for one of our gigs which said ‘Coming Soon: Therapy?’
And someone said he didn't go because he thought it meant we weren't confirmed!’
DO YOU need Therapy?
Of course you  f—ing do!
The new single is a surprise Top 40 record, and Monday sees the release of their latest album ‘Nurse’— their most well-drilled LP to date.
Significantly, it's their first album for A&M, who they signed with in the summer, and sounds not so much sterilised and clean, but better laid-out.
Instead of the grunge-led holocaust of their previous two LPs, ‘Baby Teeth’ and ‘Pleasure Death’(still both good records), the new LP brings out more of Therapy? 's subtleties.
It is a long way from the post-punk Big Black noise of old that first did the rounds of Ireland, which they confirm themselves the following day when, nursing Alps-sized hangovers, the threesome spill out stories of their past as we head through New York to the photo-shoot in the Bronx.
At one gig in Cork they were so skint they couldn't afford to buy beer, and instead took the crusty way out and raided the local mixture.
(Fyfe: ‘We couldn't finish the gig because we were hallucinating!’).
At another, the resident thrash fans accused them of ‘being too clever’ because of all the stops and starts in their fledgling hardcore sound.
It's also ironic, I guess, that as our hired mini-bus travels through Harlem, the Belfast-bred trio should feel so intimidated by the possibility of violence.
At one point Andy says: ‘I'd rather walk down the Falls Road with a Union Jack wrapped round me than I would get out here.’
The driver of the bus, meanwhile, cheerfully informs us, as we pass the theatre where Malcolm X was assassinated, that round the corner ‘there's a good hospital you can go to if you ever get shot’.
We're also buzzed by two cops in a police car who spot our New Jersey number plate and think we've come down to score crack in Washington Heights.
Back in Manhattan, after the photo, erm,shoot , the mood of the day begins to change.
While doing some promotional work at the A&M offices.
Cairn's left arm becomes paralysed.
A doctor is called, and he's diagnosed as having a minor case of blood poisoning, caused by drinking too heavily (a three-day stint which started on the transatlantic flight and ended in the White Horse Tavern).
He has an injection of concentrated Vitamin B so he can play that night's gig at CBGB's, but he is put on a special diet for three weeks — with strictly no drink.
Soundman and producer Harvey Birrell is another casualty — this time with a stomach complaint, at least partly brought on by overwork in the last six months.
None of this, however, can spoil the gig, which sees Therapy? uncomfortably sharing a bill with former Blake Babies frontgirl Juliana Hatfield.
To a fascinated crowd, who loosen up midway through the set, they construct 40 minutes of provocative noise-pop, culled from all three LPs.
The most noticeable aspect of Therapy? now — as opposed to a year ago — is that the anger and tension of their sound is mixed with a fresh waft of cool and poise onstage.
The music, instead of becoming overly contorted, has moved into more malleable areas too — confirming their own identity with tracks like ‘Neck Freak’, the rifling beat of current single ‘Teethgrinder’ and the retching grunge of ‘Nausea’.
They finish with ‘Potato Junkie’ from the ‘Pleasure Death’album with its now immortal, guttural  refrain of ‘James Joyce is  f—ing my sister’.
From the live show — and the lyrics — you imagine Therapy? to be obsessed with the menacing recesses of the brain that even some horror writers would baulk at.
They could be serial killers, joyriders, arsonists or hitmen.
Significantly , they are really pussy cats.
Or at least pussy cats with attitudes.
‘HONESTLY,’ SAYS Cairns, soberly gathering up speed again, as the Therapy? tour van departs the next day for Boston, ‘you can't take yourselves too seriously.
A lot of people think we're going to be these po-faced people talking about the dark realms of the psyche.’
‘And in reality,’ adds Michael, ‘we're talking about Gary Numan and skinny ties.’
There is no doubt, though, that Therapy? 's chief fascination is with people and their characteristics.
It's one of the most rewarding attributes they possess — discovering and articulating the weird mutation in the human race.
The single ‘Teethgrinder’ was born out of a programme called American Conversations , which in one episode dealt with a girl who ground her teeth down to her gums in her sleep, while ‘Nurse’also features ‘Accelerator’, the tale of a joyrider which was written after seeing a police chase in Manchester — and later recalled images from the film The Driver .
Cairns and co focus on the oddities of human nature with a certain morbid curiosity.
Fyfe: ‘It's not exactly studying people, that sounds too calculated.
At the end of the day, we're just fascinated by people in general.
People-watching is great fun.
I hate the tube in London, but the one redeeming feature is staring at the faces…
We all do it.
And standing in lifts wondering what people are thinking and watching how they carry themselves.
It's all to do with the way different people's minds work.
That's what we talk about all the time.’
Andy: ‘Like there was this man I know in Ireland who swears this story is true.
This guy used to be a skinhead and sniff glue in Green Island, which is just outside where I used to live.
He was out in a field one day sniffing glue and after he'd finished he stumbled home.
‘Over the next couple of months he got his life together and he met this girl and they got engaged.
Then a few months later he got a job with a trucking company, moved into a new house and eventually got married.
He'd been married about two months when he went to bed one night and woke up the next morning and he was back in the field and 17 again.
‘But he swears he lived those 18 months.
And that they were actually real.’
Another great Therapy? story revolves around a character called Eddie Faith, who found religion at a Christian meeting one night, and the next day walked into the local police station and confessed to 24 robberies he'd committed in the previous year.
Andy: ‘In the same series where we got ‘Teethgrinder’ from, there was this American girl who snorted so much cocaine in the ‘70s that now, when she breathes in deeply, it sounds like a gust of wind blowing through a haunted house in her head.
I'm fascinated by these small traits.
‘Like, I love vacuum cleaners for some reason.
If I put on a vacuum cleaner and lie beside it, I go into a complete trance because the one note ringing inside the machine seems to relax me and hypnotise me.
When I was young I used to spend hours lying beside a vacuum cleaner.
Seriously.
James Johnston from Gallon Drunk is the same.
‘And Spacemen 3 tried to make a career out of it.’
SIGNIFICANTLY, AGAIN, Therapy? 's diverse new sound shows their individual characters emerging through the previously influence-heavy sound.
This is one of the reasons why they're already far more interesting and demanding than the wave of both American and British post-Nirvana types.
The mixture of sounds and ideas comes from Fyfe's vehement defence of dance music, now moving from techno to Consolidated; Michael's travelling CD collection, which finds Carcass nestling next to House Of Pain; and Andy's belief in a belligerent guitar sound, tempered with tunes (a throwback in part to his early teen encounters with punk and new wave).
The resulting clash of styles has resulted in a forthright, moody range of sensations certainly capable of setting your teeth on edge, if not grinding away in your sleep.
At times they can be nightmarish — screaming and hollering through Side One of ‘Nurse’— and elsewhere they have the ability to make a laid-back sound without ending up horizontal like Teenage Fanclub.
All this brings us —significantly — to the conclusion that the potential of Therapy? is huge and frighteningly unpredictable.
Who knows where future tangents might lead them, but for now ‘Nurse’— which will surprise and confuse even their most ardent fans — is a very fine record.
Andy: ‘We never wanted to be the U2 it's OK to like — like Nirvana are the Guns N’ Roses it's OK to like.
That's why on the new album we did the ambient song and the dub reggae number.
We wanted to experiment with different sounds and all kinds of music.
We could never understand why were being compared to Nirvana — OK, there's three of us — but we're nothing like Nirvana .’
I start wondering out loud about the irony of Therapy? being in the States, when one of their new songs, ‘Disgracelands’, deals with the cracks in American culture.
Fyfe: ‘Yeah, but it's not that we hate America.
Most of our favourite music, literature and films come from here.’
Andy: ‘The whole song is an observation about the way everyone seems  f—ed up, like the line, ‘Mickey Mouse needs speed’.
Mickey Mouse is the symbol of healthy American children, but underneath that there are kids — like yesterday on the TV news — who are shooting their teachers in school.’
Fyfe: ‘And the opening line ‘ f— Columbus, he was lost’.
 People embrace him as an all-conquering hero, but they miss out the fact that a lot of native Americans were butchered along the way before old Whitey took over the country.
Allegedly, I read somewhere that the killing of native American Indians was the biggest genocide in world history.
‘And there's all this under the surface of America.
The way it works these days is just so divorced from everything we're familiar with back home.
I mean New York never stops, but Northern Ireland never starts, let alone stops.’
Funnily enough, hailing from Belfast has actually done them some good, I believe.
Despite the initial problems of having nowhere to play and no real contact with the industry, outside of listening to John Peel, the space and time to manoeuvre and mature outside of the media's glare has given Therapy? a concrete foundation to work from.
It was first spotted by Gary Walker at Wiiija Records — currently championing Huggy Bear and Cornershop and one of the ‘90s’ most underestimated talent scouts — who flew to Belfast with the last of his money to sign them in the early days.
However, Walker — and Southern Distribution's — lack of cashflow finally left Therapy? with no option but to accept the financial massage of a major.
So far so good.
A&M have left them to it, stumping up the money for recording and a sampler along the way.
They even seem keen on a new pop-art piss-take EP which the band are planning for February.
In the meantime, the band themselves will be pressing up a limited edition single in December for their two Irish dates in Dublin and Belfast.
The first 500 lucky people through the door at each gig will — if they get recorded in time — receive a free seven inch featuring mutated covers of ‘Teenage Kicks’ and ‘With Or Without You’.
Part of the idea is to encourage the audience to arrive early to see Irish supports like the sand-storming In Dust.
And if that sounds very magnanimous, then don't forget we're dealing with another in the line of self-deprecating Irish bands, who have about as much fashion sense and arrogance as The Undertones.
They are ‘nice’ blokes, if you like.
Michael, at a push, will admit to being the most sensible of the three; Andy, Mr Agreeable and Fyfe, Mr Invisible (‘I was sitting in a cab with someone from the record company and they turned round to Andy and said ‘Where's your drummer?’)
The trouble with presenting Therapy? as such is that you can paint too damp a picture of them.
The most significant point here is that, whilst being ultimately sharp, quick-witted and astute, there is an alarmingly modest side to them as well(maybe to be expected seeing as they've barely put a distance between themselves and their former life in factory jobs and college courses).
The Boston gig re-emphasises all their widely engaging, amazingly LOUD qualities.
Playing the same set as at CBGB's, there's less of a crowd reaction in terms of dancing, but they have the crowd spellbound, with Michael jerking his frame back and forth while Andy ends — first by starting ‘Potato Junkie’ with the opening chords of ‘Paranoid’and Stiff Little Fingers' ‘Alternative Ulster’and then by putting his guitar through the ceiling.
Harvey has managed to drag himself from the van, still clutching his stomach, to add extra effect to the barrage — and the audience features members of Screaming Trees and Dagnasty.
We put this one down as a result.
BACK AT the hotel, the soul-searching goes on.
Much of it would be out of place here, but something Andy says is typical of their down-to-earth outlook.
‘I don't like getting myself get too wound up in all this.
I love making music, and I've always wanted to travel, but in the end I'm like the Glueman.
I could wake up tomorrow, and I'd be back where I started, working in the tyre factory trying to save up the money to release a single.’
Somehow, Andy, I think you're safe.
Do we need Therapy?
With a difficult and at times exceedingly shallow 1992 drawing to a close — I think we need them now more than ever.
The agony!
The agony!
Gum ho!
Therapy? grin and blare it
FILM
EDITED BY GAVIN MARTIN
EIRE JORDAN
After a few Hollywood flops, NEIL JORDAN is back in Ireland and London with his smart new IRA thriller, The Crying Game.
NICK HASTED sits back and shuts up while the rejuvenated director talks…and talks…
‘YOU WANT me to talk about Irish history, you want me to go back that far, do you?’ asks Neil Jordan, not wanting to believe it.
‘Jesus.
OK.
Oh dear me.
OK…’
The quietly-spoken, 42-year-old director of Mona Lisa and The Crying Game , amongst others, is one of the most accommodating interviewees it's possible to imagine, seeming to feel under sentence to talk until someone makes his stop.
So he steels himself and starts on about Ireland and exile, beginning with his journey from Dublin to work as a navvy in London in the ‘70s.
It's a route he has just retraced for the character of Fergus, the IRA man who attempts to re-make his life in The Crying Game ], an experience Jordan understands well.
‘London's a place you lose yourself, isn't it, for Irish people?’ he suggests.
‘As a kid, when you wanna vanish from your parents and environment, you know you can barrel off there and hide yourself quite effectively.
If you think of the environment Gerry Conlon was in when he was wrongfully arrested — that world of squats and lodging houses and casual labour — that's the world I knew when I was younger.
London has always been a place where Irish people lose their innocence.’
Jordan's first look at London on film was in the Soho-based Mona Lisa , where it became a world of greasy neon and corruption.
The Crying Game sees the city from a fresher, less knowing perspective, as Fergus arrives there from a disastrous kidnapping in the Irish countryside and views everything in a daydream of sun and strangeness.
‘Well, Fergus wants to lose himself,’ Jordan explains.
‘He doesn't want to know the whole picture anymore.
He sees the world in little details.
The entire city represents to him the place where a dead man he's obsessed with lived.
His entire focus is to see the city through another human being.
‘Do you remember the Polanski movie Repulsion , where all you see of the city is a tiny little street outside Catherine Deneuve's flat?
If you're that spare about the images you choose to show of a city, you can create a feeling of an entire world just seen through very limited vision.
You can create an emotional picture of a city.’
Fergus' London also remains haunted by his IRA past, which Jordan shows as a conflict not between factions, but between different kinds of humanity — with Fergus himself seeming shockingly sympathetic after the media black-out on real-life terrorists.
‘I decided to smack into those issues head-on,’ Jordan agrees.
‘It annoyed me that you can't examine those dilemmas and those characters in human terms.
I think it is important to realise that there is an emotional and political logic behind the face of what people characterise as psychopathic terrorism.
If the world never tries to understand that, or even have a dialogue with that, they'll never solve the problem anyway.’
Another link between The Crying Game and Mona Lisa is in the characters of Fergus and George, Mona Lisa's would-be good, inescapably violent ex-con.
Both films seem to ask if their heroes can get their innocence back.
‘Well…we're all fallen beings, aren't we?’
Jordan chuckles darkly.
‘If you look at traditional Catholic theology, it tells us we're all fallen beings, but within us all is the capability for redemption, you know…?’
So George can be redeemed?
‘Of course he can.
Read Aquinas.
Mm?
Aquinas'll tell you that.
He can be redeemed, he can confess his sins, he can expiate his guilt.
As can Fergus.’
Is that expiation required?
‘Is it required ?
Only in my movies is it required, hah-hah!
Not in life in general it's not, no.’
In between projects allowing such personal statements as this, of course, Jordan has also worked increasingly in Hollywood, where he's so far seen High Spirits cut to shreds and We're No Angels ignored.
With even low-budget pictures like The Crying Game proving difficult to finance, is there really anywhere left to do the work he wants?
‘Well there has to be a place.
I have to make myself a place, you know?
In many ways, that's what the process of making films is, you have to convince people that the world needs it.
If Los Angeles falls into the Pacific, I'll go to Moscow, I don't know…
I'll go to Hong Kong.’
Jordan the exile brightens.
‘They're making great movies in Hong Kong now, you know…’
Neil Jordan focuses his thoughts on The Crying Game
THE CRYING GAME
THE IMPACT of Neil Jordan's seventh film relies on shocking transitions, from Northern Ireland to England and from one character, ideology and gender to another.
It snuggles up to something familiar then pulls the rug out and dares you to keep your balance.
It begins as the story of a black British soldier, Jody (the excellent, accent-perfect Whitaker) and his IRA captors, in an isolated Irish farmhouse.
Jody forms an instant bond with sad-eyed Fergus (Rea), a friendship made in the knowledge that Fergus must kill him.
As Jody observes, ‘It's in your nature.’
After years of media blackout, Rea's humanity as an IRA man seems somehow wrong , Jordan's first attack on our assumptions.
This low-key start is abandoned for Rea's attempted new beginning in an alien Tottenham of wine bars, building sites, half-glimpsed cricket and a golden-dressed magical karaoke burst by the soldier's girlfriend Rea has come to find (debutante Jaye Davidson).
The Crying Game 's characters become fine, instructive company, before a final, bloody Mona Lisa -like meeting of all its sexual and political strands in Fergus' bedroom.
The Crying Game is disappointing only for falling well below the levels of magical beauty and horror of its apparent model, Jordan's own Mona Lisa .
It is still a thoughtful, finely acted and daringly all-encompassing film, suggesting that no-one has a fixed nature.
It also suggests Jordan's Hollywood-strangled talent is breathing again, and ready to improve.
Cry babies Forrest Whitaker and Stephen Rea
REELING AROUND
HOFFMAN's Benjamin returns…
DE NIRO dreams on…
OLLIE STONE's Vietnamese Gone With The Wind
Dustin Hoffman has confirmed plans to remake The Graduate almost 25 years after he first did the wild thing with Mrs Robinson and her daughter.
Dustin has been meeting with original director Mike Nichols hatching plans for a table-turning sequel which will feature the ageing Hoffman having an affair with his son's 16-year-old girlfriend.
The dirty dog.
With no suitable British actor available, production on Shakespeare In Love , the biggest movie project scheduled to shoot in Britain this year, has stalled.
Leading lady Julia Roberts was keen to make it with a British actor, namely Last Of The Mohicans Daniel Day Lewis, but is reluctant to go ahead with the replacement suggested by producer's Universal, her former boyfriend Jason Patric.
Back on top form, the new Robert De Niro starrer Night And The City , a remake of the 1950 Jules Dassin film noir , is a wickedly funny look at urban dreamers.
De Niro, in his funniest performance since Rupert King Of Comedy Pupkin plays a small-time New York lawyer keen to be someone, to make his mark by taking on the local crime boss/boxing promoter as well as tangling with the local barman's wife played by Cape Fear co star Jessica Lange.
The film, directed by Guilty By Suspicion director Irwin Winkler, is released here at the end of January ‘93.
Oliver Stone is in Thailand shooting the final instalment in his Vietnam trilogy Heaven And Earth .
Based on the autobiographies of Le Ly Hayslip, the movie traces a woman's 30-year old odyssey through Vietnam's French, civil and American wars.
Although some footage has been shot in Vietnam, the film has been hampered by a US embargo and complex negotiations with the Vietnamese government.
Stone, a man who has a strong sense of his own importance if nothing else, has told Premiere magazine that he hopes the film will be a ‘Vietnamese Gone With The Wind ’.
Newcomer Hiep Thi Le, recruited from some 16,000 Vietnamese auditioned, stars in the lead role with Twin Peaks Joan Chen,JFK 's Tommy Lee Jones and Debbie Reynolds lending support.
THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS
PREVIOUSLY FILMED at least four times, James Fenimore Cooper's 1826 novel is one of those cornerstones of American literature no-one actually reads.
A stodgy mix of colonial history, racial paranoia, wet hankie sentiment and rough-hewn myth-making, it laid the ground-work for the Western even before the frontier had advanced much beyond the west of New York State.
In the character of Natty Bumppo, aka Hawkeye, it created the ideal of American visionary heroism that persists in popular culture to this day.
Part of the considerable achievement of Michael Mann's imaginative but faithful treatment is that it manages to make acceptable for the 1990s some of the outmoded attitudes of its characters, and yet refuses to go for that eco-trendiness that will make Dances With Wolves look dated by the turn of the century.
We first find Hawkeye demonstrating his skills by gunning down a fleeting deer, whereupon his Mohican adopted father Chingachgook (Means) and blood brother Uncas (Schweig) apologise to the spirit of the valiant animal, neatly establishing relationships and characters.
Then, set against the incredibly complicated French and Indian Wars, the actual story has Hawkeye falling in with the Brits as he falls for the daughter (Stowe) of a Scots officer.
After the fall of a fort to the perfidious French (Patrice Chereau), Hawkeye has to protect the girl from Magua (Studi), a vengeance-crazed Huron.
Cooper's theme of the dying-out of the Mohican tribe is somewhat muted although it emerges very powerfully in the finale, and the whole Indian business is somewhat sidetracked by the romance, the spectacle and, most of all, the chase.
Cutting down on the slush and the philosophy Mann plays almost the whole film as a breathless series of attacks, escapes, sieges, fights, battles, deaths and triumphs.
The Last Of The Mohicans has romance and Lewis' bare torso for the girls and action and Stowe's wind-blown hair for the boys, history and literature for the high-brows and yards of bloody violence for the yobs.
Therefore, healthily recommended for everyone.
‘GERONIMO (or something)!’
Daniel Day-Lewis goes on the rampage
VIDEO
FATAL ATTRACTION
A NEW version of the modern-day witch-burning tosh starring Glenn Close as the woman with the hots for slimeball Michael Douglas.
Director Adrian Lyne guides viewers through the never-  publicly -seen original ending.
THE FAT SLAGS
VIZFAVOURITES in rude rubberised puppet performance.
A cross between Postman Pat and Confessions Of A Driving Instructor according to comic editor Chris Donald.
Oh dear.
SID THE SEXIST
IMPOTENT, HARD drinking Geordie wanker leaves comic confines to swear on screen.
Includes the voice of Bob Mortimer as Sid's sidekick and Spender star Sammy Johnstone as Sid himself.
THE LEFT HANDED GUN
INTRIGUING TAKE on the Billy The Kid legend adapted from Gore Vidal play.
Paul Newman plays The Kid as a social outcast looking for a father figure.
Taken in and taught by rancher Turnstall, he turns into a raging avenger when Turnstall is shot.
Killing two men at his friend Pat Garrett's wedding, The Kid is turned into a hunted prey, cast aside by those he looks to for affection and Newman becomes a psychotic outsider.
Arthur Penn's movie is a study of teenage trauma and repressed sexuality masquerading as a Western; Newman's pained performance is a slightly heavy-handed but compelling version of the Marlon method.
Top gun Paul Newman
SCORSESE X 4
CRYPTIC, QUICKFIRE and ghoulish, the student shorts that started the most magnificent career in modern Hollywood.
Also the 45 minute Italianamerican where Marty interviews his ma and pa in their Little Italy apartment and tales of the old days abound.
HOOK
LAVISH BUT lame costume drama from Hollywood's oldest infant Steven Spielberg.
Vanity casting presents Julia Roberts, Dustbin Hoffman and Robin Williams in the lead roles.
A Great Ormond Street Hospital benefiting release.
BOYZ N THE HOOD
ICE-CUBE — shambling, dolorous and extreme rapper — turns in an assured, moving debut performance in finely observed tale of South Central ghetto heartbreak.
THE PRISONER VIDEO COMPANION
MUST FOR fans of the now re-showing cult telly series.
Behind the scenes documentary answers the teasers and questions posed by the series.
Released for the first time in the UK; first new Prisoner material for 25 years.
THE DAMNED
DEPRAVITY NAZI-style, orgies with Brownshirts, dope-addled transvestites, young boys in leather and genuine, honest to goodness  mother-f—ing .
The aptly-named Howard Griem joins Dirk Bogarde and Charlotte Rampling in a dress rehearsal for The Night Porter .
THE SMITHS: The Complete Picture
THOUGH, INITIALLY at least,The Complete Picture will be welcomed automatically and without irony by multitudes of intellectually challenged Smiths-buffs, even their seemingly endless capacity for sub-standard product should be sorely tested by its content.
All but one of the 12 videos (‘Stop Me’) are so dull one requires tentative electric shocks to the eyelids to keep awake, while five (‘What Difference’, ‘Heaven Knows’, ‘Shoplifters’, ‘Boy’ and ‘Sheila’) aren't even proper videos at all, just Top Of The Pops appearances dusted down from the BBC archives.
Cute enough, but when you've seen one clip of Morrissey wriggling like an over-the-hill belly dancer as Marr glares sourly at the baffled provincial audience, you've seen them all.
Derek Jarman's rather lame kitsch efforts (roses, angels, Union Jacks, bare breasts, walls of fire etc) prove beyond a doubt that not only can art fart, the result is anything but silent and very deadly.
The collection's freshest, best piece (the aforementioned ‘Stop Me’) is a surreal challenge directed by Tim Broad to spot the real Moz amongst the clones (a game you can amuse yourself with at most Moz gigs, incidentally).
The remaining three (‘Girlfriend’, ‘How Soon’ and ‘This Charming Man’) merely underline the fact that even the most valium-addicted manic depressive would be wasting his/her bullets on this sordid cash-in.
How soon is the end of this video?
SIMPLY RED: A Starry Night With
ALREADY TELEVISED documentary intercut with clips from a live show in Hamburg.
Why Hamburg?
Because it's a wild and crazy town, says frontman Mick Hucknall.
You may think of Simply Red as being more hollow at the centre than wild and crazy guys, but this shows neat exuberance and Hucknall's increasingly inspired songs.
THE JOHN LENNON VIDEO COLLECTION
NINETEEN SONGS from the top Beatle's solo years, ‘Instant Karma’ from Top Of The Pops , ‘Stand By Me’from The Old Grey Whistle Test and many never before released tracks from the private Yoko Ono collection.
THE WHO: THE KIDS ARE ALRIGHT
LETHAL INCENDIARY grade performance on and off stage (Keith Moon brings chat show host Russell to the edge of a Harty attack, terrorist Townshend smashes guitar through a club roof).
Mayhem, madness and musical brutality are the keynotes in a superior rockumentary, the group's golden era, only slightly spoiled by obligatory fantasy sequences.
THE ROLLING STONES: STONES IN THE PARK
TWO DAYS after Brian Jones drowned in a swimming pool, Mick Jagger was wearing a dress, reciting Shelley (Percy not Pete) and releasing thousands of white butterflies to 300,000 assembled in Hyde Park.
Still the biggest ever audience for a free gig in Britain.
Not classic Stones, but it sure beats the recent Pavarotti bash.
TV—RADIO
WORD PUP
Stand-up comedian MARK LAMARR has done the Christian thing and joined The Word as its new presenter.
GINA MORRIS joins him for a big breakfast.
THIS, SOME would say, is how it is.
The British Broadcasting Big Wigs have lost the plot.
They've fumbled their grip on ‘youth’ culture and let it slide into their bottomless pockets.
Where once we had Tizwas and The Tube , we now have Bob and Paula's Big Breakfast and The Word .
One man who, seemingly, likes to stare a prospective flop in the face, is suave comedian Mark Lamarr, the common denominator and inadvertent saviour of quick-witted spontaneity.
Mark Lamarr is The Man On The Street, a meet 'n' greet 'n' then humiliate kind of bloke.
He's the chap who knocks on your door at unholy hours of the morning and invites himself in for a Big Breakfast .
He's the fellow who you will see wandering backstage before, during and after The Word goes on air, fraternising with the celebrity guests and chatting to the audience.
He is also the guy you will see spark off The Word 's sister show,Access All Areas .
A sort of ‘people's choice’ overlap of all the out-takes, plus a public opinion angst section and all the latest ‘entertainment’releases.
‘For the first three weeks or so, I won't be on The Word much,’ Mark explains, casually kicking his feet up on to his agent's gleaming mahogany desk.
‘I'll be concentrating on Access .
They'll be easing me on as the new presenter so as not  to put too much pressure on me.
I mean, people get slagged off just for being on The Word , whether they're any good or not.
I don't really want to be seen as part of the team and it's not because I don't like them — they're all nice people — it's just that I don't want to be The Word 's latest wanker.
‘I think I'm a really  f—ing good comedian and so, even if people think I'm shit on The Word or Access , it doesn't matter — I'm a  f—ing good comedian.
And I don't feel I'm moving away from comedy.
This came up, it's good money, good fun and good experience, but as soon as these two shows finish I'm back doing my stand-up.’
Lamarr is a natural performer, half his stand-up routine depends on his improvised observations and sharp retorts; he says what he likes, when he likes — which means that when he interviews a stroppy guest he'll win.
and he's realistically in touch, always out watching new bands playing grim local hovels.
Added to which, he's also the best-dressed, most charming and sophisticated cockney you're ever likely to see on the box.
‘I hate all that ‘you're the big star and we're going to have a really seemly chat’ bollocks,’he spits, while setting fire to yet another Silk Cut.
‘Those showbiz interviews are so terrible, they're really reverential and why be reverential to people you're not interested in?
I mean, personally I don't think Terry's very good at interviews, I think I'd be flying in the face of public opinion if I said he was.
On the other hand he has a lot of strengths.
Maybe I'm being a bit more tolerant towards him than I would be if I hadn't met him.
When I used to watch it, I'd sit there screaming at him, ‘Oh don't say that you  f—ing idiot!’
John Lydon is one of Lamarr's first scheduled confrontations.
Even scarier considering Mark is opposed to pre-planning his interviews, he likes to take them as they come.
If you told Lydon he was a wanker what would happen?
‘I don't care, I'm not going to change my attitude.
If they asked me to say thank you very much at the end of a shit interview I wouldn't, and if they didn't like it, I'd probably leave.
I don't think it'd happen, they didn't employ me as a scripted puppet.
It doesn't mean I'll be completely outrageous.
When I got the job everyone said, so are you going to  f— Terry up then?
Are you going to destroy Terry?
But that's not the point, if Terry said something really stupid I would say ‘Terry, that was a really stupid thing to say’, but if he said ‘Hello Mark how y'doing?’
I wouldn't say, ‘Oh look that was Terry, what a wanker!’
So there will be no compromise?
‘Well, I won't be putting on a different voice or anything like that,’ he smiles, another fag clamped between his teeth.
‘But when you go on telly there has to be some compromise, like I swear all the  f—ing time, but that doesn't bother me, I don't feel like I'm selling my life away just to get on the telly.’
Mark Lamarr hears a vicious rumour that Amanda De Cadenet is returning to The Word
SOUND AND VISION
WEDNESDAY 4
STAR TREK , Spock turns mutineer in the first half of a two-part caper.
Then MARK GOODIER clangs along with The Wedding Present, Number Six escapes to London — or does he?— in THE PRISONER and America's finest living poet and ‘reformed’ coke head storms Las Vegas in SMOKEY ROBINSON IN CONCERT .
THURSDAY 5
Hey wow!
The ‘kids’ get to air their ‘views’to the ‘programme’makers in THE WORD: ACCESS ALL AREAS .
Rowan Atkinson seeks out German spies in BLACKADDER GOES FORTH .
Meanwhile, Dwight Yoakam twangs his way to Hammersmith Odeon IN CONCERT before Robert Palmer chills out in the sardonic surroundings of LATER WITH JOOLS HOLLAND .
FRIDAY 6
Sploosh!
It's that STINGRAY again.
Krungggg!
More SOUNDS OF THE SIXTIES , including the Bonzo Dog Doo Dah Band.
Boom!
Last helping of comedy carnage from BLACKADDER GOES FORTH .
Chortle!
Topical laughs on HAVE I GOT NEWS FOR YOU?.
Vom!
Execrable presenters get in the way of Shonen Knife and the Stereo MC's in THE WORD .
Chuckle!
JOHN PEEL remains wry and quizzical with session guests Fundamental and Small Factory.
SATURDAY 7
Get up get up, get out of your lazy bed for always diverting ITV CHART SHOW .
JOHN PEEL tinkers away into the small hours with only Loudon Wainwright III and Jacob's Mouse for company.
Some bright spark has decided to import top US comedy SATURDAY NIGHT LIVE — good call, Garth, while the ubiquitous Jools Holland introduces homegrown music and comedy in THE HAPPENING .
SUNDAY 8
Fifteen minutes with Genesis, Bon Jovi and E17 make up today's O ZONE before THUNDERBIRDS confront atomic peril and devilish misdeeds.
Mister Happy Lou Reed marks Remembrance Sunday with his suitably sombre masterpiece MAGIC AND LOSS .
MONDAY 9
Yonks!
Mike Pickering, Gary Clail and Urban Hype erupt straight outta Trumpton at Normski's DANCE ENERGY HOUSE PARTY .
Then MARK GOODIER plummets into a seething charnel-pit of noise with loud Americans Drop Nineteens and Sonic Youth.
TUESDAY 10
It's big, it's loud and it wears an ill-fitting suit: more ‘youth’ telly inanity on REMOTE CONTROL before NME 's own kings of pestilence Collins and Maconie perform more of their light-hearted haircuts, sorry, comic turns for MARK GOODIER .
Wolfie puts his political struggle on hold to join a US grunge-rock outfit in another vintage CITIZEN SMITH , then this year's anti-traveller precautions are finally exposed on SHOW DOWN AT GLASTONBURY .
LONG PLAY
EDITED BY STUART BAILIE
TASMIN ARCHER
Great Expectations
HOW DO you follow up your first single when it's been a Number One?
To do so means having kept back something special in reserve and therein lies the whole problem with ‘Great Expectations’— Tasmin threw out her finest first.
‘Great Expectations’(a worryingly hubris-tinted title if ever there was one) is an album full of perfectly competent, if uninspired songs about love, decay, child abuse and space travel.
While she should be applauded for tackling such diverse subject matter — sadly, there is nothing really unique to mark her out from her peers.
The one thing you can't quibble about is the voice.
Tasmin is something of a vocal find, her strong, pure tones can imbue even the limpest tune with pathos.
It's when she lets rip with the ballads that she really shines.
‘In Your Care’(one of the album's best tracks) explores the thorny subject of child abuse in such a from-the-heart manner that the pain and confusion simply leap out and hit you in the tear ducts.
Where she scores is when she manages something which is different, such as the haunting ‘Sleeping Satellite’, otherwise the rest of the album is so much Bryan Adams in a skirt.
She's obviously talented — but she needs to  curb the tendency to start swaying into hideous Rock Chick territory otherwise it surely will be a case of when-you've-had-a-Number-One-the-only-way-is-down.
HOUSE OF PAIN
House Of Pain
FIRST, THE good news: House Of Pain aren't the one-hit wonders some had feared; their first album contains some creative and accomplished rap music.
But they're not hip-hop messiahs come to lead a supposedly stagnating genre out of the dark ages.
They're shamrock-toutin', Guinness-drinkin', short hair-havin', tattoo-wearin', shit-kickin' American-Irish  motherf—ers who drop rhymes off the top of their domes and shag a lot.
And their record sounds like it.
Everlast has made much in recent interviews of HOP's lack of meaning — they're just regular guys who enjoy a few bevvies and like to get laid, they don't pretend otherwise, and no-one should come to them expecting anything else.
And he's intelligent enough to know that HOP aren't gonna get off that easily.
‘Jump Around’ isn't the only track to denigrate women through the use of the words ‘bitch’and ‘ho’.
There are lines like ‘The House Of Pain is kickin' up dirt/And if we're inside the jam you know we're liftin' up skirts’.
There's also some amazingly casual usage of terms as abusive as ‘fag’ and ‘dago’.
This bullshit becomes particularly irksome when the lyrical twists and turns are neat or clever, as many of them are, or when the LA street law of ‘Life Goes On’ display more than a glimmer of a social or political consciousness.
The music is excellent, but the best tracks are those produced by Cypress Hill's DJ Muggs.
And in rap, ‘produced’ might be translated as ‘writes the music’.
When DJ Lethal gets a look in, he seems to be trying to emulate Muggs' style, choosing breaks from blues or rock-based material rather than funk or soul.
Lethal will probably be a top-notch producer in another album's time — Muggs already is.
To further emphasise the gulf between the leaders and the followers, Cypress Hill rapper B-Real steals the show on the album's best track, ‘Put Your Head Out’.
House Of Pain are pure frustration.
They represent a racial minority, they inhabit a riot zone, they have a huge reserve of latent talent and they can shift records by the ton.
Maybe now they've proved they've got ‘the skills to pay the bills’ they can get down to the serious shit they're obviously capable of.
POWER SERGE
DENIM
Back In Denim
THEY SHOULDN'T make 'em like this anymore.
They shouldn't need to.
If everything was hunky dory on planet pop, Suede and the Manics wouldn't need to worship Bowie and Lydon, Bjorn Again would have aborted in some outback bar down under and Denim simply wouldn't exist.
But whether all this back-to-the-future stuff is the final, futile, heroic twitch in the corpse of pop music bludgeoned near to death by metal and techno, or whether this instinctive return to flamboyance and sexual ambiguity really signals the first stirrings of a full-scale revolution, the fact is that 1992 desperately yearns to be 20 years younger and ‘Back In Denim’ is New Glam's most articulate manifesto so far.
This is Nostalgia With Attitude, a monumentally kitsch LP painstakingly reconstructed from the disillusion of an arch idealist.
Lawrence, as you must surely know by now, used to be in Felt.
But he gave up on that to tell us this — things ain't a patch on what they used to be.
And somehow, from the warmth we all feel for the soundtracks of our adolescence and the prevalent loathing some of us feel for the current torpor of the charts, he has managed to fashion something comically incendiary.
From the opening stomp of the title track, a joyous collusion of The Glitter Band and M's ‘Pop Musik’, to the final rip-roaring ‘I'm Against The Eighties’, ‘Back In Denim’ is such a labour of love, so insanely, often painfully personal that it raises a smile even as we're being made to feel ashamed that we allow our music to be hijacked and controlled by them .
What ‘Back In Denim’ is really saying as it launches spiteful attacks on Duran Duran and mourns David Cassidy's retirement, is that Pop Music Is Important, as much a part of our lives, our personalities as the polluted air we breathe and the clothes we choose to wear.
And much of ‘Back In Denim’ supersedes the sermon because it actually is great pop about pop.
It's all there in ‘The Osmonds’, a hilarious, emotional eight-minute trip down memory lane that wistfully lists the IRA pub bombings next to Blackfoot Sue.
The imaginary pastiches are superlative too.
‘American Rock’ is Lawrence's own little West Side Story as reinvented by a Jonathan Richman fan.
As he says in ‘The Osmonds’, ‘I soaked it in, now it's all dripping out’.
And that's the point of ‘Back In Denim’— not that we should all go retro and rediscover the pre-punk '70s, but that we should do what Lawrence has done and just get back in touch with our own musical roots.
Beyond this LP, Denim are doomed.
They have No Future.
Lawrence has done what he set out to do.
That's the beauty of Denim; they will never grow old or threadbare or fade.
They are disposable heroes and we can be too, just for one day.
Nostalgic With Attitude, Lawrence (right) celebrates his teen requiem
THE SAWDOCTORS
All The Way From Tuam
IN IRELAND, The Sawdoctors are demi-gods, the stuff of opinion columns and radio documentaries, a bunch of decent skins who play plain tunes for plain people.
Respected journalists wax lyrical about the band and how they represent certain groups: the young rurals, the young abroad and other such baloney.
All of this amateur sociology only disguises their music; dated, boring, yellow-back brands with little sparkle or shine.
‘All The Way From Tuam’ is more of this.
In the past they've had their moments (the irritating ‘I Useta Lover’) but these could never combine to create an hour or so of recorded glory.
Live, amidst whiskey and tribal chanting, every come-all-ye is a glorious moment, a Celtic Rock brew with the promise of the mother of all hangovers to follow.
There's no chance of this occurring here as the Doctors continue on their premeditated way to becoming this generation's Wolfe Tones (dreary Irish folk re-pub-licans from the '70s).
All the signs of this malaise are here, strewn about like empty Guinness cans on a Sunday morning.
There's the stirring up-ya-boya numbers like ‘Pied Piper’ and ‘Never Mind The Stranglers’, closing-time anthems for a thousand pubs over the coming months.
‘FCA’ and ‘Hay Wrap’are embarrassing stabs at a crude stage Oirishness.
The Sawdoctors claim (or it's claimed for them) that they're the voice of a young, rural Ireland.
As a member of that constituency, I disagree.
The Sawdoctors and their music say nothing to me about my life.
THE SMITHS
Best…
II
OOH!
OOH!
The Smiths on a major label!
Ooh!
Ooh!
A compilation!
Ooh!
Ooh!
How awful, eh?
I mean, it's not like they were compiled to pieces on Rough Trade or anything, is it?
And it's not like Morrissey signed to a major label within ten seconds of leaving the Smiths, is it?
And of course, ‘Bona Drag’ wasn't an opportunistic grab bag of B-sides and stuff from ‘Viva Hate’, was it?
No, it was a ‘welcome collection of otherwise hard-to-get material’.
Hard to get, that is, if you lived on the ocean floor and had been locked in a safe.
The Smiths had their day, made the '80s safe for ironic excitement and indie pop that wasn't crap, and are now as much a part of the nostalgia industry-chart museum as The Rolling Stones.
Any compilation is going to be a shallow thing redeemed only by the actual songs on it.
With The Smiths, the songs are likely to be pretty good.
‘Best…
II’ had, of necessity, a little more imagination than ‘Best…
I’ and so in amongst ‘Heaven Knows’and ‘Bigmouth’and the like, we get the loping ‘Headmaster Ritual’, the Beatley ‘Last Night I Dreamt That Somebody Loved Me’— one day I will publish my essay proving that ‘Strangeways Here We Come’was the ‘Let It Be’of the '80s — and, of course, the glorious single that never was (at the time), ‘There Is A Light That Never Goes Out’.
Songwise, then, a top album, even if‘Girl Afraid’ and ‘Shakespeare's Sister’are still pretty hopeless (‘Dear NME, how dare you say that ‘Girl Afraid’and ‘Shakespeare's Sister’are still pretty hopeless!!!!
Yours, The Boy With Shit For Brains In His Side’.
Etc)
In the end, though, we are reminded that The Smiths' four proper albums represented these songs in far more forceful contexts, from the arrogant hesitation of ‘The Smiths’ through to the extraordinary confidence, wit and power of ‘The Queen Is Dead’and onwards, we notice that things like ‘Reel Around The Fountain’just don't sit comfortably in the middle of a Fun Corporate Pop album, and in the end we say ‘Are you too idle to buy the proper original records rather than fork out for ‘Best…
XIII’?’
And so this album gets an unsexy (4).
MADNESS
Madstock
REVIVAL REVIVAL revival revival — oh God, doesn't it make you sick?
I really don't care how great Madness were, this smacks of Batley Variety.
Good luck to them, I say, but excuse me if I don't stick my hand down my trousers and smile.
Is this what we're reduced to?
Live fast, die young and then come back and haunt us for ever.
It's POP MUSIC.
You're meant to do it once and then PISS OFF.
Got it?
This is a lumbering recording of the Finsbury Park's bash which fails to capture any of the orgasmic rapture which allegedly surrounded the blokey get-together of 36,000 sad 30-year-olds.
Where's the oomph?
Where's the solid thunk of the 50p bit bouncing off old Eli Formby's quiff?
Eh?
They are, for the most part, great songs.
And they all sound better on other recordings.
Buy this and then bugger off and read Q , we don't need you any more.
(Bugger all)
JAY OWENS
The Blues Soul Of Jay Owens
JOHN LEE HOOKER
Boom Boom
TOTALLY UNKNOWN US bluesman comes to Britain and gets schlepped into a studio to record with a bunch of locals who wish they'd been born in America's Deep South.
The scenario you know.
Usually the upshot of such shenanigans is an album that proves to be a yawn-provoker of Horlicks-shaming proportions.
But something obviously went wrong with the scenario this time around because ‘Blues Soul’ is, whisper it not, the CONTEMPORARY BLUES ALBUM OF THE YEAR.
Florida's Gibson-toting Owens, who, along the way, has worked with Stevie Wonder, Bobby Womack, Al Green, OV Wright, Aaron Neville and Bill Withers, proves to be a considerable talent, a songwriter who can miraculously create multi-shaped compositions within the constrictions of his chosen genre; a singer with a voice that can pacify purists yet woo those who like to gather round the pop jukebox; plus a guitarist of great feel and fluidity.
That rarity, an album without a filler — admire every aspect as Owens finger-flicks his way through the Stax-happy, gospel croons on a couple of things Sam Cooke would have loved to  wrap his larynx around, and opts for the more brooding approach on the let's do crunch of ‘Why You Treat Me This Way?’—‘Blues Soul’ is remarkable not only for the performance of its outfront star, but also for that of the Pete Wingfield-led back-up squad, which nary places a quaver in the wrong place, along with Mike Vernon's knowing production.
The only surprising thing about Hooker's hit-single spawning album is that, after all these years, he can render the title track in a fashion that's unbelievably fresh, though some of the credit for this particular achievement must be down to guitarist Jimmie Vaughan, who delivers an array of licks in a manner that must have Stevie Ray beaming way up in plectrum heaven.
Formatwise, Hooker has stuck rigidly to the formula that turned ‘The Healer’ into a Grammy-grabber, with a miscellany of guests — in this instance Vaughan, John Hammond, Robert Cray, Charlie Musselwhite, Albert Collins etc — effectively fitting into selected niches while producer Roy Rogers creates an aura that, while allowing Hooker to be his usual minimalistic down-homey self, provides an urgency guaranteed to have the rock generation continuing to hang on the 72-year-old's every ‘uh uh’.
And though the Hook and Cray maintain, in traditional 12-bar manner, that it's the ‘Same Old Blues Again’, in truth, something more is on offer, especially when John Lee picks up his National Steel to weave an eccentric neo-Nashville way through ‘Hittin' The Bottle Again’, a song that surely dropped out of George Jones' back-pocket one hazy, half-forgotten night.
(8) and (7) respectively.
Boom and, inevitably, boom
GNASHY AS THEY WANNA BE
THERAPY?
Nurse
THERAPY? 'S DEBUT LP shot for their new major label opens up with a curse and a taunt.
‘Here I am, motherf—er !’ snarls the sampled voice of an inmate from the soundtrack of psycho prison movie,Ghost Of The Civil Dead .
Therapy? then slam into ‘Nausea’ which sounds as though it could have been sampled from the Nirvana songbook.
Goddamn that tune, it sure as hell sounds familiar!
Much ballyhoo has recently been written up about how this power trio from Belfast could easily be next in line should that other power trio from Seattle topple from their throne.
Not that Therapy? give two hoots about that, but you can be your prized original copy of ‘Love Buzz’ that A&M are simply drooling with anticipation that such a miracle might happen.
That said, Therapy? 's move from minor to major has reaped well-deserved rewards.
No expense has been spared in making their record look the business, with an orb-arresting eyeball graphic on the cover upon which is floating a minute ‘?’ like a speck of grit.
The message seems to be that Therapy? irritate the sensitive parts that most other bands can't even reach.
‘Nausea’ is toe-tappingly pleasant enough, but the real meat, the real  motherf—er , is yet to come!
‘Teethgrinder’(their current 45) which follows is more like it.
Around a surrealistic voice sampled from some US TV slot (where a female patient is explaining her habit of grinding her teeth down to stumps in her sleep) and a garbled vocal, Therapy? build up a wall of solid playing that only they can eventually tear down.
The idea behind ‘Teethgrinder’ is so simple, yet so strange, that it fascinates and thrills every time it is played.
If Therapy? feel they need their own ‘Teen Spirit’ icon to fling into the fray, t hen here it is with both barrels blazing.
The real action, however, begins on Side Two with ‘Perversonality’, an adrenalin rush of murder and hate which spits straight in your face.
Even better, and on a completely different level, is ‘Gone’, which is this record's masterpiece.
‘Gone’ puts the brakes on temporarily, shifts into a slower gear and allows the hidden menace that lurks in most of their work to uncoil like some venomous snake and rises above the ruins.
‘Gone’ pulls the listener into the bad brain of someone who is obviously deeply disturbed and very dangerous, someone who is hungry for the thrill kill.
It would be easy for Therapy? to fling back the prison door and let this crazy loose to wreak havoc but, to their credit, they resist this temptation and push your nose even closer to the bars, where the full extent of their character's madness is revealed through a wiry guitar drone and, especially effective this, a sudden swarm of string arrangement.
Splendid.
Also fine is ‘Deep Sleep’, where Therapy? use drum ‘n’ bass dub effect as the foundation for more rat scratch guitar work and drowsy vocalising.
This use of dub is no mere prop either, they play with an edge that's as sharp and as clean as a surgeon's scalpel.
The perfect tool to slice, peel back and lay bare the beating blood pump of their music and ideas.
Therapy? kick off sounding like Nirvana and end with a final guitar stroke that imitates The Beatles.
In between, ‘Nurse’ is solid Therapy?
Pure and simply staggering.
COME
Eleven-Eleven
UNDERSTANDING COME dawns when disorientation sets in, and you begin to succumb to their dizzying realm.
It's similar to staggering shell-shocked in alien territory occupied solely by  foreboding empty skyscrapers.
If you don't take necessary steps, chances are ‘Eleven-Eleven’ will communicate nothing but grey miserablism to you.
You'll stand outside their zone and miss the point, which would be a shocking waste.
Getting to grips with singer Thalia Zadek early on is also crucial.
Fascinating by name and nature, this woman, a vacant-eyed, still-waters-run-deep type enigma.
She instills awe and fear and probably devotion in similarly disaffected souls.
Comparisons to Janis Joplin are not way out.
Both ravaged inside and out, but defiant symbols of ambiguous sexuality, both tainted by self-loathing, both torch-hearts with rivers of blues running through their veins.
Come blues , of course, find expression through raw urban rock juices rather than standard muso stodge.
The Codeine link shouldn't be ignored either.
As well as sharing Chris Brokaw — Come's guitarist and Codeine's drummer until recently when the umbilical chord was reluctantly severed — both  envelop you in bleak vulnerability, put you under mild anaesthetic.
‘Fast Piss Blues’ guitars spiral around the brain as Thalia's caustic howl strips bare feelings of alienation, but also injects an element of defiance, a lusty show of resilience.
My stomach pit can't stop churning during ‘Dead Molly’, its cascading guitars somehow dreadful yet icily gripping, while ‘Willow’ is a real passion inferno, tailor-made to get hearts in a tail-spin.
‘Eleven-Eleven’ contains all three tracks from Come's recent single, as well as one from the ‘Car’12″, but that's my only quibble.
It's simply one of the great debuts of the year.
Worship them.
Come: eight out of 11
ACR
Up In Downsville
ACR ARE a frustrating lot.
Whilst they are very good at what they do, they've also been riding the same horse for a very long time and the old nag's starting to show signs of wear.
To their credit, ‘Up In Downsville’ is trying hard and although there is an indisputable one-dimensional groove to much of this album, they do muster a bit of sparkle as with the chugging ‘Tekno 4 An Answer’and get out of their muso strait-jackets.
Some of ‘Up In Downsville’ is so laid-back that it simply wafts around your ears like tobacco smoke and they have an irritating habit of pulling their potential punches for fear of treading on someone's daisies.
Subtle is something that ACR understand only too well.
When they do really get going and out of their comfortable fog, like during ‘Turn Me On’ when Denise Jonson's sweet soul vocals contribute to a track that simply wipes the floor with anything that Soul II Soul have put out in the last three years, that's when they're really worthwhile.
The remix of ‘Mello’ serves as a reminder as to just how funky ACR can be when they p ut their minds to it — and effortlessly so.
It's just a shame they still don't seem to want to take any real risks because as things now stand, they're still guilty of merely coasting.
HEADCLEANER
Au  Fou 
WHO KNOWS what petty grievances fester in the dark recesses of Martin Willis' imagination, but on ‘Au Fou’ there seems an endless stream of negative subjects he can roar and screech about in snivelling, tired and emotional voice, rather like the Incredible Hulk moaning ‘I don't wanna go to school’.
The most effective track lyrically is ‘Exxon’, a refreshingly blatant swipe at multinational corporations and the atrocities their profit-making causes.
But the most bizarre is ‘Song For Megan’, the vocal performed with consummate professionalism by a hiccoughing five-year-old girl.
What makes this album such a monstrous listen, though, is the way disgusting guitar noises of all descriptions are packed into jabs, upper-cuts, sucker punches and knock-out blows to batter you dizzily around the room.
Where so many of their hardcore contemporaries are merely blustering brawlers, Headcleaner are boxers par excellence , capable of teasing, tormenting and confusing you into a daze with unusual rhythms, grinding groups, spine shuddering thrash, strange sound effects, brutal industrial hatecore and a brain  pummelling rhythm section.
All told, ‘Au Fou’ is a super-heavyweight debut that will take some beating.
SWANS
Cop/Young God
LISTENING BACK now to Michael Gira's  agonised wailing combined with N Westerberg's non-guitar, Harry Crosby's deep-seated bass and Roli Mosimann's drum thunder, you feel transported to the future — not nostalgic for the mid '80s.
You feel punished for all the sins you never committed; you're supplicated and invaded.
The slow-crawl music they produced might've been linked with hardcore, but it was really ‘the end of rock, the dying throes’.
The dodgy S & M imagery of ‘Raping A Slave’(actually a meditation on power and work) and other included tracks form the ‘Young God’ EP and the still-withering power of ‘Cop’(‘Nobody burns your skin off like a cop’) amidst the all-powerful monotony show that we've lost something along the way.
By the time ‘85/'86 came around, Swans were untouchable and starting to show sings of a belated accessibility.
The subject matter and imagery was still extreme, but there was something more human in these meditations on power, work and our relationship to money (the sleeves of both ‘Greed’ and ‘Holy Money’— released separately then, but now twinned with ‘Time Is Money (Bastard)’as an addition — featured the dollar sign).
‘A Screw’ savaged the dancefloor, ‘Fool’showed how masterful the new line-up could be and ‘Coward’(‘stick your knife in me’) transgressed boundaries even the sketch on amnesia (‘Another You’) only hinted at.
Swans wanted to strip away all the layers you protected your desensitised self with and make you feel again.
They still do.
BETTIE SERVEERT
Palomine
CLANGING NETHERLANDERS Bettie Serveert named themselves in tribute to '70s tennis ace Bettie Stove and bash out their raw chunks of crude guitar pop in tribute to the Pixies, Throwing Muse, Cocteaus and everyone else on parent label 4AD.
Happily, their reading of Anglo-American art-noise loses its teeth-grinding momentum in translation and gains a wonky melodic sensibility.
Singer Carol Van Dijk tries to get all mournful and bittersweet in an Edie Brickell vein, but her English-as-second-language lyrics and mellifluous mouth-full-of-marbles phrasing give each composition a fragmented, disclosed aura.
None of which is helped by the unruly belches of guitar and stacks of sonic crockery which crash around her with alarming frequency…
Challenging themselves to fashion something beautiful from their desolate lot, they score with the crunchy hymn to friendship ‘Palomine’, here included as both clenched-fist stomper and much more approachable strung-out slowie.
They also soar above their surroundings with ‘Brain Tag’, a sobbing and swooning sprawl, strangely only included on the vinyl version as a free seven-inch single.
Everything else aims for the clatter-pop classicism of Velvet Crush or the Lemonheads — guitar, bass, drums,wallop — but lacks sufficient focus or emotional impact.
Scrawly tunes, cloudy observations, open-ended sentiments ultimately leading to an unsatisfactory half-digested aftertaste.
Nothing is actually bad , but nothing sets the heavens aflame and sends you screaming for the toilet with its bowel-opening magnificence.
Promise unfulfilled.
MANURE ABOUT THE HOUSE
THE FARM
Love See No Colour
NOBODY EXPECTED The Farm to make anything other than a bad album.
And it is a bad album, disastrous even.
The surprise here is that they did it with the best, very purest intentions, poor lambs.
Indeed the main problem with ‘Love…’ is its ambition.
It desperately yearns to be perceived as, amongst other things, ‘Great’, weird, unsettling, a threat to contemporary pop culture, a little dangerous, unbalanced, a touch psychopathic perhaps…
At the very least NOT THE KIND OF THING YOU'D EXPECT FROM THE FARM.
Unfortunately, its anorexic attractions are exactly the kind of thing you'd expect from people who only formed a band in the first place to get off the dole.
The music, though laughable, isn't the main downer.
For once.
OK, if you want to get picky guitars should purr, destroy and rejuvenate, and dance beats should prowl, pace and threaten.
The Farm's efforts merely cringe sullenly in their cages like musical battery fowl, but it's the lyrics that actually sink this tugboat Titanic in the end.
Hooto (TM) may, even now, be congratulating himself on the risks he's taken, the frontiers he's conquered.
To think that he, a mere footie fan whose main worry used to be which trainers to don for the teen-mag centrespread, should bravely take on lyrical biggies like politics, passion, life, death, apathy, religion, hope, irony and despair.
The sad truth is to tackle these subjects you have to be more than just willing, you have to be shite-hot.
These are balls too big and important to juggle carelessly and Hooto (TM), earnest, needy, industrious but essentially an intellectual featherweight, doesn't even manage to lift them off the ground.
Believe me, dear readers, never before have I been as relieved, as tearfully grateful to get to the 14th song on a 14-song album.
The songs are consistent in that they are uniformly as confused as an Asian skinhead, as profound as a boiled egg, and as lifeless as a dick in a refrigerator.
Even the much vaunted Mick Jones collaboration sounds like Mick Jones used to be in The Alarm not The Clash.
And Phil Oakey must have eaten his own fringe when he heard what they'd done to his malevolently provincial classic ‘Don't You Want Me’.
Here an exercise in yobbo train-announcing.
The Farm have not only made a record fit only for hurling out onto the M25, they have exposed themselves as humourless, directionless THICKOS.
Which is exactly what some of us have always suspected.
(1)— for the satisfying crack the CD's sleeve gave as I snapped it over my knee.
VARIOUS
Naive
NOTTINGHAM'S DEATH metal moguls Earache are diversifying, and they trumpet the fact they are doing so.
It could be that, with so much self-parody and saltiness riddling their core genre, ‘Naive’ presents their seeds for the future, displaying some key maverick black hearts leading noise into different pastures.
Satanic and necrophiliac obsessions, the meat and potatoes of death-metal, don't so much take a back seat as miss the bus altogether thankfully.
The contributors here seem instead keen to zoom in on and ferment nihilistic tendencies, through bleak but listenable insights.
The kick-off is ‘SRT’, a sludge monster from Fudge Tunnel, who are quickly rivalled in the snarling stakes by Scorn, dub grind curios into pounding fury and spiralling guitars.
The vocalist of thrashers Old on ‘Mazuraan’ sounds like a garotted moggie, but theirs is a fine handle on melody nonetheless.
The set teaser is ‘Black Chamber’ by jazz noise chaos theorists Painkiller, who almost out-weird Sabbath-wracked Sleep, gloom warriors in their own stoned nightmare.
Screamingly conspicuous by their absence are Godflesh, but that's because Pitch Shifter make the pack, snorting and growling, attempting to disguise the fact they're pussycats underneath it all.
Altogether a hopeful collection from the US/UK sonic terrorism brigade, likely to ensure Earache remains Britain's prettiest hate machine.
Grind!
Clank!
Moan!
It's singalongaSwans time
Love see no points — well, one actually
Fudgetunnel: the violence is deafening
SHORT CIRCUIT
Fearless as ever, our man with the weirdest record collection in Britain, EDWIN POUNCEY, dives into this week's bundles of scariness and salutes the magic of Faust, Fun With Mushrooms, Japanese hardcore…and Smashie And Nicey!
Hey ho, let's go!
BEAT HAPPENING: You Turn Me On BILLY CHILDISH AND THE BLACKHANDS: The Original Chatham Jack
WITH NOT a greasy mop of hair in sight, Beat Happening look too neat ‘n’ tidy a bunch of boys to be a real Sub Pop band.
They do, however, have that guitar-played-as-bacon-slicer slam approach that (too) many of this label's acts adopt at the drop of a record contract.
These Beats play it slow, sloppy and simply.
I know I should like ‘em, but I don't.
For his umpteenth record this year Wild Billy Childish slinks into a buggered-up sounding jazz groove that features a decidedly booze-driven trumpet.
The atmosphere moves from hard bop to cajun crunch and, for once, Billy boy has come up with a record that justifies all the praise that has been heaped on his shoulders.
CHRIS & COSEY: Muzik Fantastique!
FORMER THROBBING Gristle members Chris Carter and Cosey Fanni Tutti apparently had a hand in remixing ‘SOS’ from Erasure's ‘Abbaesque’project.
‘Muzik Fantastique’ is another example of their hidden talents, a set of pulse beats and Nico-esque purrings that subliminally salute the work of such high-tech masters as Kraftwerk, Devo, Eno and Giorgio Moroder.
Ambience meets ethnic techno rock to produce a refreshing departure from the usual death beat that can be heard pounding out of today's club scene.
COIL: How To Destroy Angels/Stolen And Contaminated Songs
COIL'S CURIOSITY with the way sound and vision copulate is what makes their music and ideas always a thrill to bump into.
Both of these recent releases from the duo's Threshold House label tinker with material that has long since gone out of print in an attempt to create something else.
By remixing and adding new parts to certain sections they have successfully managed to reinvent themselves.
For here is trance dance grooving at its highest level, a silver drug for the senses that allows you to enter into another dimension of sex and sorcery.
Why stay rooted to the spot while some shaman with a drum machine picks your pocket when you could be flying high with Coil?
FAUST: The Faust Tapes/Seventy One Minutes Of…
JULIAN COPE's favourite Krautrockers in all their weird and wonderful glory.
Jools was spot on when he said in NME recently that ‘The Faust Tapes’ was their best.
It is a dark and brooding sprawl of clutter and squawk which, magically, unravels into a jaw-dropping listening experience.
Although it costs more than 49p to pick up a copy today, ‘The Faust Tapes’ represents money well spent.
More experienced Faust lovers will take ‘Seventy One Minutes Of’ in their stride, a more fragmented and dissected side of the band's genius that has to be heard to be believed.
Virgin's timely reissue of ‘Faust IV’ is also to be welcomed.
A chance to reassess a record that, at the time it was first released, was considered their least worthy effort.
‘Faust IV’ has improved with age, a mixture of mad songs and delirious electronic experiments which suggest that not all improvisations or ‘difficult’music has to be incapable of rockin' out.
SHOCK HEADED PETERS: Several Headed Enemy
DARK MUTTERINGS and murderous mechanical edged folk song from ex-Lemon Kitten Karl Blake and his comrade in crime David Knight.
You know you're in for a rough ride just by gawping at their photos for this package which show Knight hunched up against some slum wall and Blake glowering in true Exorcist 2 style from within a storm of locusts.
The music and lyrical ideas are the stuff of nightmares, foam-flecked poetic rantings that go for the throat and refuse to let go no matter how hard you may plead.
Keep this away from the children!
JOHN TAVERNER: The Whale
AN ODDITY from The Beatles' Apple label which was put out because Ringo Starr was so impressed by the work of the composer.
‘The Whale’ is an orchestral piece with choir that incorporates percussion, spoken word extracts and long passages of silence that are suddenly illuminated by shafts of brilliant ascending orchestration.
This, believe it or not, is a collector's item (due to the fact that Ringo can be heard yelling through a megaphone at one point) and…
I guess I could use an original if anybody out there has one going spare.
TELEVISION PERSONALITIES: Closer To God
EPIC SOUND TRACKS: Rise Above
THE TVP's crank-driven DIY rock ‘n’ roll may sound dated in these wearing, uncaring times, but that said they still haven't lost the knack of pulling a good tune from seemingly nowhere or coming up with an idea that will tug at your sleeve for attention.
This time they mix guitars with sitars for ‘We Will Be Your Guns’ and encourage residents of Death Row, Tennessee to join in with them on the title track.
A good time is had by all.
Epic Soundtracks has played with Swell Maps and written a definitive (sadly unpublished) discography of Sonic Youth.
This, his first solo LP, pays tribute to such stylists as Alex Clifton, Brian Wilson and early Todd Rundgren.
Epic is ably assisted here by a galaxy of stars including Sonic Youth's Lee Ranaldo and Kim Gordon, Dinosaur Jr main man J Mascis and Rowland S Howard, who add extra weight to an already sturdy set of moody, occasionally magnificent, pop songs.
VARIOUS: Fun with Mushrooms
PAPERHOUSE: Spongy Comestibles
NEW AGE psychedelic salvation from Delerium, who brought us last year's insanely good ‘A Psychedelic Sauna’ collection.
‘Fun With Mushrooms’ unearths even crazier material, a whole fresh batch of seething invention and stoned immaculate lunacy.
Of note this time round are cosmic headhunters Mooseheart Faith Stellar Groove Band and Praise Space Electric, the twisted 14th Wray who invite you to a ‘Yuppie Deadhead Party’ and the mutilated shriek of Boris And His Bolshie Balalaika which is bad drug craziness at its frothing, wild-eyed best.
Where on earth do Delerium find such characters?
Paperhouse are pretty spaced out too!
With their heads in the sky and their sights set beyond our world, Paperhouse let rip with a slab of space rock that lovingly recreates the cosmic glide of Hawkwind and ‘Lemmings’ -era Amon Duul.
They also slam a shot of dub into this heady brew just to keep you guessing where their collective heads are really at…man!
VARIOUS: Smashie And Nicey Present Let's Rock VARIOUS: Blockbuster!
The Sensational '70s
THE USUAL ‘As Seen On TV’ pot luck collection of ‘oldies but goldies’that grease the wheels of the recording industry when times are (rock) hard.
Smashie And Nicey's selection is the most solid and best entertainment, with the Harry Enfield Show 's gruesome twosome in rocktastic shape and raring to go.
Steppenwolf, Blue Oyster Cult, Jo Jo Gunne and Alice Cooper join forces with the predictable (but great) Bachman Turner Overdrive, and what crawls out sounds like the best hard rock compilation of all time.
‘Blockbuster!’ is less satisfactory, however, a bunch of platform-heeled plodders that try in vain to get you on to the floor and dance round your handbag.
No thanks.
VARIOUS: Tokyo Flashback 2
KEIJI HAINO: Affection
ZENI GEVA: Nai-Ha
JUST A sample of the full frontal lobe assault that Japan has hidden up its kimono.
The label to watch for pure Banzai beat has to be PSF (Poor Strong Factory), which issues a steady stream of sonically sound releases.
PSF's ‘Psychedelic Sampler’ features most of their stable with High Rise, Ghost, Marble Sheep and Kousokuya blowing hardest.
An awesome introduction to the Japanese underground scene that proves Shonen Knife are only the tip of the iceberg.
Keiji Haino is a guitarist whose music is described by his label as being, ‘full of dark and beautiful atmosphere’.
That just about sums it up, although there is much more to Keiji's vision to be discovered here.
Giant vistas of haunting guitar strum looms out of the speakers and the feeling of being lost on the moon is hard to shrug off.
Quite captivating.
Zeni Geva, meanwhile, hooks up with Big Black/Rapeman leader Steve Albini to produce a guitar assault that is certainly not for the faint of heart.
If Painkiller were to dump John Zorn's sax squawk and turn their Marshalls to the max then they might just be edging close to what Zeni Geva and Albini have cooked up here.
A horrible noise that you've just got to call your own.
These, and more, are available from:
AUDIENCE: Unchained
EDGAR BROUGHTON BAND: Edgar Broughton Band
MICK FARREN & THE DEVIANTS: Partial Recall
THREE HOARY and hairy monsters from the '70s UK ‘underground scene’.
Audience were the brainchild of Howard Werth, a band whose art rock attracted such luminaries as David Bowie, Led Zeppelin and Pink Floyd enough to invite them to join them on tour.
Yet apart from Werth's strong vocal and Keith Gemmell's muscular sax playing, it's hard to be too enthusiastic about Audience today.
A judgment that could never be applied to either the Edgar Broughton Band or The Deviants, two fabulously freaky bands whose message was delivered with all the subtlety of a Molotov cocktail.
I really think you should go for the Broughton's ‘Wasa Wasa’ masterpiece instead of this, but for a quick fix it will suffice.
Especially worth playing here is ‘Out Demons Out’, a rabid chant against the system that (if we all sang loud enough) could just work today.
Drop Out's Deviants collection, however, is a bit of a sham.
If you are expecting to hear tracks from their ‘Ptooff’ or ‘Disposable’classics here then be prepared to be mightily disappointed.
What you get is Mick Farren's (admittedly excellent)‘Mona’ LP sandwiched between a couple of tracks from his ‘Vampires Stole My Lunch Money’record and a taste of ‘Deviants Third’.
Disposable.
FRANK ZAPPA: Playground Psychotics
FRESH GARBAGE from Frank Zappa's bulging tape archive which takes us on a trip to the heart of greasy rock ‘n’ roll in the company of his much-maligned Flo & Eddie ensemble.
Unlike past live efforts, however, this is massively entertaining, a rare treat to eavesdrop into a world that is festooned with ugly and crazy behaviour.
Best of all is the chance to hear Zappa and his Mothers jamming with John Lennon and Yoko Ono at New York's Fillmore East.
A meeting of minds that produced the deliriously demented ‘Scumbag’, where Yoko sounds as though she is having a demonic possession as Lennon bellows out ‘SCUMBAG!
SCUMBAG!…’
A truly magical moment that (although it originally appeared on the pair's ‘Sometime In New York City’ epic) makes this mess necessary.
The truly neat Cal Schenkel cover is an added bonus, by the way.
Let's rock!
Those drop out Deviant boys strut their generous stuff
The original playground psychotics, the Mother Of Invention, relax away from Yoko Ono
A Happening thing
Gee, Mr Treacey!
The TVPs edge ever closer to God
ELECTRONICALLY TESTED
The NME team's pick of the month's best LPs
PRINCE AND THE NEW POWER GENERATION: Symbol
PRINCE'S MUSICAL vision is positively hallucinogenic, but also achieves fruition via a mixture of deranged endorphins and a huge amount of technical talent.
This ‘Rock Soap Opera’ has the usual self-indulgent moments, but there are lashings of high points to make up for it.
Prince is deepening his enigma.
NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN: Are You Normal?
BY THE sound of ‘Tantrum’ and ‘Intact’, these people have been through some murderous, futile relationships.
This is the Neds venting their frustrations but finding order through catharsis — a chaotic way of feeling better.
And somehow you catch that feeling.
TYRREL CORPORATION: North East Of Eden
TONY BARRY and Joe Watson have woken up house from its drug-induced stupor, given dance music back its structure and neatly picked up a thread left dangling behind by Marvin Gaye and Otis Redding.
Tyrrel Corporation are driven by an electro pulse, yet are irresistibly drawn to the seedy side.
JULIAN COPE: Jehovakill
THIS IS Cope's best LP since 1985's ‘Fried’, the fan-club totem.
Cut through the Arch Duke's sleevenotes and poems (a bit hippy) to discover that he is funnier and more inventive than at any time in the intervening years.
A 16-track testimony to the everlasting worth of ancient ruins, excluding Charlie Watts.
MADONNA: Erotica
THE REALLY good stuff is scattered across the record like the trail of Smarties in ET .
Being a Madonna devotee has always involved having a selective memory.
For every ‘Like A Virgin’ there's a ‘Hanky Panky’.
And ‘Erotica’ continues this erratic tradition.
THE FRANK & WALTERS: Trains, Boats And Planes
IT'S A hippy-dippy crazy world and Cork's finest are currently turning National Treasure on us.
It's just that the preceding F&W's EPs have already lured us to bed with wine and roses and five of the tracks are here; familiar as those passport photos you keep forgetting to chuck out of your wallet.
 Call this ‘EP5’ and we'll move on.
NEIL YOUNG: Harvest Moon
ON THE ‘Freedom’ and ‘Ragged Glory’albums, Neil's voice often sounded desperate and enfeebled — a symbol of ranging helplessness.
On ‘Harvest Moon’ he's cosy, crooning along with the whine of a pedal steel, an organic element in the back-room reflections.
The calm before another storm?
CABARET VOLTAIRE: Plasticity
NOWADAYS, CABARET Voltaire aren't drastically trying to open up new vistas. they just run the gamut of electronic dance music — techno, acid, ambient, the trancey bass-driven hypno-grooves — letting themselves be influenced by the most exciting period dance music has seen since ‘87 –'88.; 
VARIOUS: Ruby Trax
‘TUNES FROM pop's age of innocence,’ writes John Peel, ‘visited by a charabanc-load of brawling E-generation brats.’
NME 's excellent birthday celebrations turn ruby ripe with this gigantic harvest of pop heroes and the unique readings of famous (and sometimes weirdly forgotten) Number One hits — all in the name of ‘charidee’.
Get some in, pop-kids!
THE JAYHAWKS: Hollywood Town Hall
THE RENEWED interest in country rock obscures the fact that, almost more than any other, this feels timeless — a strain of white urban soul.
Mark Olson and Gary Louris sound like two halves of the one voice, a split personality effect that heightens their tales of broken hearts, dreams and lives.
LIVE
SPHERE OF DESTINY
THE ORB
ANY GIVEN weekday night, the 8.00 from Coventry to Birmingham carries a cargo of young gig-goers from the smaller city to Brum, all in search of cheap thrills, sexual gratification, spiritual uplift and all this at the Smashing Pumpkins' gig at Aston University.
It's a diverting little game in itself; stencilled shirts and girls in bras — the Manics must be in town.
Champion ski-hats — possibly The Shamen.
And if it's plaid, it must be Soundgarden.
Tonight, it's more difficult.
The Orb are bringing their futuristic ambient techno jamboree to the second city.
And, for sure, this train must be crawling with Orb fans, all desperate to chill out, to surf that glorious tube of astral spume, to get loaded and have a good time.
But…how will we know them ?
What does the average Orb fan look like?
To get ‘UF Orb’ to Number One in the albums chart, even in these days of meagre sales, means you're shipping a hell of a lot of units.
The Orb's popularity has gone way beyond a club coterie now, way beyond a clique of space cadets and opinion leaders in darkened rooms at dawn.
The Orb's appeal has spread silently to the high street.
And, in true Invasion Of The Body Snatchers style, they look just like ordinary people now.
Forewarned, I don't even show up at the Institute till gone 11.
I'm still way too early.
Outside, the punters mill about, largely your average indie kid, but there are all kinds of strange people on the margins; bikers, rastas, boffins.
Inside, what people used to call ‘the disco’ is pumping out relentless spartan techno grooves for the wide-eyed masses.
Then, some time after midnight, the music suddenly stops.
And out of the silence comes a few fragile, eerie notes.
A kind of icy pastoral romanticism.
The shift is clever and appropriate.
This is The Orb.
This is a different kind of fun.
The Orb live are largely two blokes behind rafts of state-of-the-art equipment and stage projections featuring moonshots, landscapes and disjointed historical footage.
But The Orb are much more than the sum of their parts.
In the '70s, people would say that in the future, pop music would be chiefly a matter not of songs, but of strange space-age bleeps and fizzes.
Amazingly, The Orb have proved this exactly right.
The Orb have taken the underground music of previous decades (Floyd, Tangerine Dream, Can, etc) and welded it with the fall-out of dance culture to come up with something very strange and potent.
Rumour has it The Orb play a different set every night.
I can believe it.
I hardly recognise a thing but it doesn't matter.
It's a collage of delirious sound things you understand.
And being a sad old fart, I do recognise the samples — old BBC Radiophonic Workshop snatches and bits of dialogue from the Moon landings (‘We're behind you guys all the way’).
The Orb's first tune goes on and on; a kind of broken, haunting sonata for new technology that builds with enormous subtlety.
Of course, not everyone agrees.
I manage to earwig a conversation between, and I kid you not, two members of Napalm Death.
After about seven minutes of this ambient fugue, one turns to the other and says, ‘They're taking the piss now.’
Suddenly The Orb make perfect sense.
The audience are caught in a state of flux.
After four hours of banging rave tunes and a whole consignment of illegal drugs, they're in the mood to party.
But The Orb's idea of a party is a strange one.
Fortunately, the vast majority of them seem to love it.
They shuffle about in a rapt way to these radiant arches of sound, punctuated by the thunder of dub-style percussion.
Sometimes the tunes are ethereal and somnolent like Brian Eno after a whole bottle of Actifed.
Other times, they sound like a more clued-up Tackhead.
The throb of dub with a ghostly, futuristic elegance.
To rock diehards, The Orb may well represent the unauthentic, trivial voice of the faceless ‘It's all done with mirrors’ culture.
But they're wrong.
This is a music of extreme gravity and import.
The average guitar band is achingly banal in comparison.
It's a truly revolutionary music.
It's departed from the old form and structures.
It isn't playing by the rules, it's sometimes beautiful, sometimes energising, sometimes soothing and often funny in its own way.
It's apolitical and agnostic but full of hope and optimistic modernism.
It also goes on for bloody ages.
We leave with the milkmen.
It's a testament to how captivating The Orb's music is that I got off on this so much, completely alone and without recourse to anything stronger than the Institute's lukewarm lager.
Maybe next year, we'll wonder why we ever liked it, but today it's one of the queerest and most exciting things in pop.
The Orb — they're taking the piss now.
We're behind you guys all the way.
‘Are you ready to rock, Birmingham?’
‘This one's for all the ladies in the house!’
‘And on drums…’
SPITTLE AND LARGE
METALLICA
SO WE'RE here in the snakepit, the triangular enclave towards the rear of Metallica's (by any standards remarkable) stage-set in which the chosen few can stand a sweat's breath from their heroes and risk a perforated eardrum from the pyrotechnics that are periodically unleashed just over one's left shoulder.
And the burning issue is…
How much of a sex god is Kirk Hammett?
Why does Jason Newsted get a bass solo spot and does it really have to go on forever?
Is Lars Ulrich getting a beer-gut?
Actually, no.
The main brain-boggler from this vantage point is without a doubt whether James Hetfield's spittle will drip down through the metal grille as he stands above our heads.
That, and my, what big feet he has!
But there was really no need to worry.
Even the Metallica frontman's copious saliva emissions seem precision-directed and as rehearsed down to the n th degree as much of this marathon three-hour performance as obviously is.
And it's precisely because Hetfield's gobbing has been taken into the equation, along with every other possible eventuality, that makes the truth of Metallica's latest swagger towards that Biggest Band In The Known Universe mantle all the more remarkable: for this is fabulous, vital entertainment, far more than stage-managed hyperdrome  extravaganzas ever deserve to be.
The reasons are pretty self-evident: no band could keep this up for three hours every night for nearly a year without having sold their souls to the rock ‘n’ roll devil long ago.
For all his doubtless well-worn quips —‘Is there anyone here who doesn't have the new album?
Yeah?!
Well  f—in' steal one then!’— James Hetfield is clearly enjoying every sweat-streaked, hi-decibelled, loadsaswearwords minute.
And why shouldn't he?
A thrilling squeal goes up from the mid-teen moshers who comprise a high proportion of the audience when they see Hetfield striding to the stage-front for the opening ‘Enter Sandman’guitar in hand , after everyone had been resigned to the quaint prospect of their fave leonine frontman reduced to a vocals-only role due to his injured left hand.
But with the damaged paw encased in a thin see-through cast he was like a man unleashed.
If Hetfield's on top form, the rest of the bunch seem to take care of themselves.
The solos still grate, but at least you can get the beers in at this point without fear of missing anything serious — although Hammett has included an axe-trashing coda to his widdly-widdly section; that's what you get for hanging out with Nirvana.
The highlights are many and predictable, with the late-in-the-day rendering of ‘One’ as dramatic and poignant as rock theatre is ever likely to get, and the Anti-Nowhere League's Animal lending lead vox and mirth-factor to the encore of ‘So What’.
That's Metallica for ya: even at this outrageous level, still favouring spit over spandex.
James Hetfield: Got saliva if you want it
25TH OF MAY
25TH OF May are enough to make the most rabid Trot of a pop fan feel like an enemy of the people worthy of a vicious kneecapping, since their political stance is laudable to the n th degree in such grim times as these.
But, as victims of the cultural hegemony we have heard lots of hip-hop and lots of indie-dance.
Since their brand is stuck firmly in 1989, and not very inspiring at that, it's difficult to get excited about their music or their politics.
25th Of May are graduates of the EMF school of exaggerated jumping about onstage and seem desperate to convince us of their streetwise-raver-hardcore-homeboy credentials.
Not only through the cavorting about but by excruciatingly pretentious rave-speak between songs, a few pointless samples, a few pointless keyboard squiggles and a bit of pointless scratching from the sadly redundant DJ.
For about a song and three-quarters they are quite exciting to watch — they've got rhythm, they've got lightning-fast political raps, who could ask for anything more?
Well, I for one rapidly lost interest in the one-dimensional, monotonous rapping and the constant ‘Homelessness blahblah AIDS blahblah Poverty blahblah’ polemic, to say nothing of the music, a nondescript blur of indie-danceisms which needs some offensive noise of the guitar or techno variety to really hit us where it hurts.
A second rapper causes batted eyelids for a time, and the addition of a second guitar during an encore of ‘Go Wild’ suddenly give the sound the extra bite it's been missing all night, but if 25th Of May are going to appeal on musical merit as a vehicle for their politics, they'll have to update their sound, experiment and hit harder than this.
PLUG
PIG 64
PLUG ARE a cheerful four-piece with a singer who likes to think he looks like Morrissey but actually bears a closer resemblance to a slightly wobbly Eddie Tenpole Tudor, and reveals an easy to spot Cud fixation.
This is because they sing songs with titles like ‘Love Girdle’, which, so the singer tells us, ‘is about being in love with, well, a fat girl.’
And all five of their cheap, swinging guitar songs, played on cheap — and, indeed, swinging — guitars sound just like Cud tunes.
Which is no bad thing, in a back-room-in-a-pub kind of way.
Pig 64, on the other hand, are as difficult to pin down as a greased pig on rollerskates.
Singer Matt is backed by two girls on drums and bass who look, at a glance, as if they've walked off a Robert Palmer video shoot.
But that's just because they wear black and the bass player glides in synch with the disaster area that is the guitar player.
The first couple of songs are effective but so-so, the only real interest being the size of Matt's guitar.
Smaller than a snail's winkle.
Matt eventually replaces it with an electric violin, deep on echo and reverb, swelling and rolling like a full orchestra, pitching the sombre melodies into the realms of classic film soundtracks.
The vocals sway between Nick Cave, Marc Almond and the drunken psycho outside the chip shop on a Friday night, adding a human edge to the pock-marked texture of the songs.
As uplifting as a gallows, maybe, but a rewarding experiment in instrumentation nonetheless.
DELICIOUS MONSTER
DELICIOUS MONSTER are, as the name suggests, something of an enigma.
From the gently misleading acoustic opening chords of ‘Power Missy’ to the final screaming guitar frenzy of ‘Peace’nothing is as it should be.
Gentle jangles careen into psychedelic guitars, snowflake vocals turn into furious howling blizzards.
Oh, and Rachel's dress falls off.
But a mere broken zip does not prevent this little Missy from delivering a powerful performance of ‘Best Babe’ with its mangled chords and thumping drums, or scaling the octave-hopping ‘In You In Me’with a squeaky/husky hurtfulness.
Elements of a Sundays-style understated Englishness peek through occasionally, but Rachel has more in common with a manically abrasive Kristin Hersh than a rose-tinted Harriet Wheeler.
With more musical U-turns and body swerves than Tory party policy, DM manage to be completely unpredictable in their attempts to defy categorisation.
‘Secret Place’ is where pain and passion rub naked shoulders with new innocence and fiery aggression, and Rachel's dress gives up trying to hold on and flops off her shoulders all together.
‘Dull Dull Dull’ with its compulsive pop melody is as bright and straining as Rachel's plainly visible bra.
Then, just as you are seduced into believing all is Cocteau-calm, the tempo jumps up a gear, the guitars rev into psychedelia and pure white noise signals that it's time to go and get dressed.
Tonight is a clear case of life imitating art.
The further down her back the zip runs, the more tangible and at odds with the world is Rachel's vulnerability.
Not only exposing her soul in her music but, unwittingly, her underwear as well.
MEAT BEAT MANIFESTO
DESPITE RECENTLY making a rather fine album, confounding widespread suspicions that frontman Jack Dangers' forte was only as a producer (Consolidated, Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy), Meat  Beat Manifesto live are a dull experience.
Everything that made the album interesting and enjoyable (quirky samples, ambience, humour, diversity) has disappeared into the ether, replaced by mind-crushingly tedious, minimalist techno and weedy industrial wankcore.
Maybe I'm out of touch or incredibly uncool, but the sight of three rather ugly individuals beavering away like physics teachers doesn't turn me on.
Not that this would necessarily matter in itself, but the music they're producing is dour, grey monotonous and generally about as much fun as a dose of the clap and a tenth as infectious.
They try to compensate with meaningful ‘images’ of monkeys, presidents, kitsch ads and microwaves, presumably to show us that we're all brainwashed sheep controlled by the media and the fascist state.
Living proof of this point are tonight's audience, who have come here hoping for some of the screaming industrial hardcore MBM used to play, but nevertheless 90 per cent of them would do their unintentionally amusing Maori rugby player dance to a series of sampled farts if they thought they should.
But to be fair, entertainment is evidently well down MBM's agenda tonight — they've got more weighty topics to contemplate, like their own navels, for example.
But may I politely suggest that in future they beat their meat in the privacy of their own studio instead of soiling our evening with such toss?
DROP NINETEENS
‘SHOO-GAAY ZERRS!’ a baying lad cries.
Oops.
Perhaps not the most welcome greeting for the Drop Nineteens tentatively stepping out for their long overdue UK debut.
Oh God, how must it feel, arriving in the fad pop capital of the world, a round year after said green and pleasant land dug early graves for your close spiritual cohorts, the Home Counties fey brigade?
Bloody strange, and a little unnerving I should imagine.
Measuring by the impressive stint of ‘Winona’ in the indie charts, luck and genuine love is with Drop Nineteens, so maybe by staying away  they've just been incredibly clever, holding back 'til the slaying's stopped .
But one look at the wall of guitars on this bunch of  cutesy college kids and memories of Chapterhouse flood back instinctively.
Trusting this stuff doesn't come easy to me.
‘Delaware’, with its ice-melting bass licks, warmingly thrills, and ‘Winona’ blazes beautifully, but pool US and UK white, middle-class, narrow-vision indie pop minds and anaemic strains are bound to surface.
A few guitar scorch-squeals here, a lash of vocal venom there, can't wipe out my suspicions.
‘Reberrymemberer’ stuns the crowd rigid, but seems pointless noise squawl.
Singer Paula Kelly cuts a curious sight cross-legged on the stage-floor for ‘Happen’, head bowed to her knees, screaming to herself, but Courtney or Kat she ain't.
She emerges pleasantly flushed, rather than exorcised.
But these niggles pale when up against the infuriating fact that Drop Nineteens aren't given real room to perform, their potential smothered by a relentless stream of diving dickwits, sloshed on half a pint of coke.
Male disco boppers who, judging by their blank faces as they endlessly crash-land nose first at bemused singer Greg Acknell's knees or into mic stands, simply couldn't give a flying toss about the band.
Given moron-free attention at a proper gig, no doubt they can shine.
Can't say I'll be around, but this is certainly no grave-digging time either.
Can't make the mistake so soon again.
TAKE THE GOLDFISH BOWLING
INSPIRAL CARPETS
SINCE THE Inspirals first wowed us with their heady mixture of growling pop, sensitive poetry and bad haircuts, much on the Planet Carpet has changed.
For starters, they've witnessed a marked shift in the make-up of their audience: though there's a sprinkling of residual bagginess in tonight's crowd, the lion's share of the faithful fit the dishevelled, T-shirted stereotype of the diehard pop kid.
As the pre-gig DJ's preference for tunes by the likes of Carter and Senseless Things attests, the Inspirals have stowed away on the bus reserved for hardworking merchants of no-nonsense, boys' own indie-rock, and their new home seems to suit them.
Of course, there've been other, less welcome alterations to their public persona.
The Carpets' presence on the cider-swilling student circuit is a far cry from their (brief) spell marching up and down the stages of places as big as Manchester's G-Mex centre, not to mention their almost-forgotten headline slot at Reading.
However, as the epitome of laddish nonchalance, the Inspirals seem unconcerned: Tom says he's simply grateful that they had an experience — however fleeting — of life as arena-rockers, while bassist Bungle is sure that the pared-down stuff on ‘Revenge Of The Goldfish’ is far better suited to compact places like Rock City than cavernous concert halls.
Anyone with a slightly cynical bent would have initial difficulty being convinced by the Inspirals' contentment with their shrunken market — as someone who last saw the Inspirals dwarfed by a wealth of pyrotechnics and gargantuan lighting at Reading, your correspondent can only assert the view that their new scaled-down persona does them more than a few favours.
Rock City is packed, the moshpit is brimming with zealous Carpets devotees, and from the moment things explode with ‘Generations’, the band and their sweaty surroundings combine to create an impression of rounded excellence.
Despite the ‘Britain's ugliest group’ tag that's hung around their neck since the start, the Inspirals are a better band to look at than they were a few years back.
Bungle and guitarist Graham now manage to animatedly throw themselves into proceedings instead of looking like they're queueing in a pie shop.
Tom, meanwhile, has binned the thigh-slapping choreography that made him look like an excited primate and opted instead for more engaging shapes akin to those thrown by a boxing kangaroo.
Not that their slightly geekish demeanour really matters in the light of much of tonight's set.
‘She Comes In The Fall’ comes over like a claustrophobic, filthy-sounding sibling of its recorded equivalent; their dark reading of ‘Tainted Love’sounds heart-stoppingly desperate; and album cuts like ‘Saviour’, ‘Bitches’Brew’(the new single) and ‘Disappeared’show the Inspirals seizing on their punked-up strengths to impressive effect.
At the heart of the urgent appeal of such songs are Tom's strident vocals, which sound every bit as doomy and forceful as the material demands.
Unlike so many of the tone-deaf clods fronting today's indie outfits, he can sing — an old-fashioned point, perhaps, but one that needs underlining.
Twice.
Despite the over-arching presence of a sizeable clutch of masterstrokes, the Inspirals manage to deliver a few turkeys —‘This Is How It Feels’, for all its anthemic pretensions, still sounds like cloying Radio 2 fodder, and arty pieces like ‘Flood’ are prone to descend into unseemly pomposity.
A good 70 per cent of the set, however, warrants nothing but praise.
The Carpets may have tumbled from grace with those anxious to keep pace with fashion, fallen victim to a mid-career plunge into the realms of prog rock and put out the odd dodgy single, but they're currently looking like people whose revived self-belief is entirely justified.
Oh, and anyone with continuing misgivings about their Sid The Sexist humour may be relieved to know that the post-gig conversation is only punctuated by one harmless knob joke, which is — dare I say it — quite funny.
Outside the venue, the Inspirals climb into their cramped tour van and head back to the hotel exuding quiet satisfaction.
Small(er), in this case at least, really does seem to be beautiful.
Tom Inspiral: smaller than life
LIVE FAUST, DIE JUNG
FAUST
FOR THEIR first UK appearance in 20 years, Germanic rockers Faust chose London's notorious Marquee club as the venue to strut their stuff, surely the nearest equivalent they could get to the bowels of Hell!
Maybe Faust liked the Marquee's decor, a strictly black-painted warren with — in time-honoured fashion — toilet facilities that backed up and flooded the floor with rivers of lager piss.
To be honest the atmosphere was one of secret intimacy where most of the audience were still in a state of suspended disbelief that this was happening.
Onstage are a set of eccentric instruments, a bank of valve-powered electric equipment and a clumsily daubed monolith that blocks out the familiar Marquee logo on the stage back-drop.
After a long interlude that features some unrecognisable classical piece, Faust troop onstage and proceed to twiddle knobs, hit their strange percussion devices and strum on an acoustic guitar.
A feeling of warm-up is definitely in the air; a flexing of muscles that have not been stretched in public for some time makes up the first few minutes of Faust's extraordinary set…and then all hell breaks loose!
Lead/bass guitarist Jean-Herve Peron unstraps his double-necked guitar monster (an apparatus that allows him to play both styles with minimum effort) and holds up his hands in joy.
‘I'm so happy to be here,’ he enthuses.
‘With no product to sell and just to play the music.’
He then picks up a chainsaw, revs it into action and proceeds to carve the single word ‘RIEN (NOTHING)’ out of the fake Berlin wall that towers behind them.
His comrades, meanwhile, get to work with power drills and grinders, showering sparks into the front row and creating an industrial cacophony that mixes mysteriously with the piped classical backing track they've picked to accompany their hellish instrumental.
In the wake of Einsturzende Neubauten and, more recently, Disposable Heroes Of Hiphoprisy (both of whom swing a pretty mean power tool) Faust's hardware assault of the senses could easily be yawned off as nothing new.
The thing to remember, however, is that Faust were first .
After a flexing of strained digits, Peron announces ‘The Sad Skinhead’ from ‘Faust IV’.
‘It's basically against violence,’ he explains.
‘When you're violent you become very lonely.
That's why I call this song ‘The Sad Skinhead’.’
Faust plug back in and put the boot in with a vengeance.
Equally fine is a snippet from ‘The Faust Tapes’, the section that has words that go, ‘shake my buddah…’ or something.
this soon tangles itself in a web of white noise and frantic improvisation which eventually has a hypnotising effect on the audience.
Improvisation is what Faust do best, their understanding of how this most complex, interesting and beautiful music works is a sheer delight and wonder to behold.
Soon the fog of freedom is so thick that it is difficult to remember just what song they were supposed to be playing in the first place.
as if anybody cared.
After the dry ice had cleared for good, however, grumbles of disappointment could be heard rumbling from the Faust faithful.
If tonight's exhibition was anything to go by, they moaned, Faust haven't been up to much during their long absence and have sadly allowed lesser talents to steal much of their thunder.
‘We'll be back,’ promises Peron after a closing bout of chainsaw frenzy.
If Faust return to creative hibernation this means it won't be until 2012 before they return.
I can hardly wait.
THE GOD MACHINE
ISLINGTON'S SAN Diego transplants The God Machine are quitting Britain for a while.
But not before singer Robin tells us what freeloading, slouch-happy scum bums we Londoners are.
‘If you paid to get in tonight you don't know the right people,’ he snaps, in a litany of barbed missiles that sting hardened fans and industry leeches alike.
It's uncomfortable listening, but TGM have clearly decided London life is choking them and it's time to spew, whatever the consequence.
He's forgiven because it's in their essence never to hold back, and all their pent-up frustration is, if anything, a guiding focus for their supercharged spirit.
Over a year on from the hurricane blast of ‘Purity’ they still petrify, the blustery emotional gales of their live outings still taking me to the brink of a seizure.
A fact especially true of ‘Commitment’, always a time for Robin's sorrowful unshackling.
‘I like it better when you sleep, cos you're a  f—ing hypocrite,’ he mutters in a dream-state mantra, agonisingly stretching the tension.
‘Ego’ stalks like a predatory metal monster, rivalling ‘She Said’as their heaviest offering, but ‘Home’still ranks as their darkly majestic trump card, sounding like it wrote itself.
Encore time, and Robin's thunderous mood hasn't lightened.
‘We're doing this for Fudge and Roz down here.
The rest of you can  f—  off , you can  f—  off ,’ he snarls.
Shuddering tribal fury shakes KLF's ‘What Time Is Love?’ into life, baptised with fresh anguish.
An unsettling, memorable night.
The God Machine blow minds for a living.
NO MAN
CROCODILE TEARS
CROCODILE TEARS' desperate stab at the Christmas Number One spot looks doomed to failure.
With three band members who look suspiciously like drunken sociology lecturers, an array of plastic crocodiles, lampshades, gloves and popcorn as props and a set of ludicrously twee nursery protest songs about Noddy…commercial oblivion is assured.
Either that or a one-hit wonder, an eventuality the Crocs are clearly banking on.
But they promise solemnly to retire forever if it ever happens, so you can enjoy their sharp and amusing little ditties in the secure knowledge that you're not creating a Barron Knights for the '90s.
Laughable in an altogether more tragic sense are No Man, who now have the dubious claim to fame of featuring three ex-members of Japan (Steve Jansen, Richard Barbieri and Mick Kam) in their backing band, though to the uninitiated they come across as three craggy muso casualties looking more than ready for the knacker's yard.
Most comical is Mick Kam, whose eyebrows, once shaved off in an unfortunate moment of artistic folly, are now growing outwards in the style of a neanderthal Denis Healey.
The whole band is dressed in black (cue Twilight Zone theme music) in front of a painfully pretentious backdrop featuring a 20-foot high sheet of Letraset (!) with a set list reading like a top ten of pomp-rock buzzwords (eg ‘Ocean Song’, ‘Painted Paradise’).
And the drummer wears headphones.
BAN THIS FILTH!!!
Then the music starts, and proceedings plunge from terrible to worse as Mick turns up his five-string fretless ego-bass and it farts rudely into our ears, followed by sickeningly bland streams of wah-wah guitar, scratching, torturous violin and pseudo- ‘passionate’ vocals all ‘awash’(© Tosspot Session Musician's Handbook , 1972) in bloated keyboard atmospherics that would make ELP sound like The Lurkers.
What an evening.
From the surreal to the ridiculous, stopping off in pomp-rock hell.
Laugh?
I nearly slit my  f—ing wrists.
BJORN AGAIN
THE '70S were fantastic, weren't they?
Everyone was sort of daft, really.
They ate all this weird food like Salt 'N' Shake crisps.
They wore stupid clothes and did stupid dances.
They watched really good TV programmes like Logan's Run and Swap Shop .
And they made records that were so crap they were, like, brilliant.
It was all dead funny, wasn't it?
Well, no, not really.
A lot of people were making pretty serious music about how bad life was in Urban America, and there was this thing called punk rock that tonight's retro-head DJ seems to have forgotten about.
Not to mention a massive oil crisis from which we've never really recovered and…
Oh, forget it, Bjorn Again are onstage.
They belt out ‘Waterloo’ and ‘Does Your Mother Know’and ‘Money Money Money’and divide the audience in two for a big singalong.
Midway through ‘Summer Night City’ Bjorn and Benny perform THE SKIRT TRICK and leave Agnetha and Frida to do the rest of the gig in metallic hotpants.
They steam through two strident, intelligent covers of songs by Erasure that show just how great Clarke and Bell's debt to Abba has always been.
And they do a 30 second version of ‘Smells Like Teen Spirit’ that was funny at Reading but betrays a shortage of new jokes.
Not surprisingly, Bjorn Again get an ecstatic reaction.
They play weepies like ‘Fernando’ and every smoker present hoists a lighter into the air.
‘Take A Chance On Me’ sends everyone (and yes, I mean everyone ) into paroxysms of bliss, and they're clever enough to end the set with ‘Dancing Queen’, which sounds like three minutes of glittery, soft-focus sex.
Then Bjorn Again say ‘thanks’ in accents that make them sound like the chef out of The Muppet Show , and an Australian voice tells us to hurry up and spend our money on tickets for their next gig in Manchester, which, due to overwhelming demand, is happening next week.
Anyway, where were we?
Oh yeah.
Things were pretty bad in Northern Ireland as well, and don't forget that it was the middle of the Cold War and everyone was dead scared about the nuclear weapons and…never mind.
The DJ's playing ‘YMCA’.
I'm going to have a dance.
SUNSCREEM
SUNSCREEM ARE about as far removed from rock music and spurious notions of ‘cutting it live’ as it's possible to get, but as one of the few rave-oriented acts around who actually play live they could teach a lot of aspiring indie acts a thing or seven about live entertainment.
Anyone acquainted with the ethereal, blissed-out dance pop of Sunscreem's two chart hits, ‘Love U More’ and ‘Perfect Motion’, might be surprised to learn that live they are an adrenalin-soaked, all-singing, all-dancing, all flame-throwing event with the omnipresent thumping beat determinedly UP.
It's so refreshing to see a motley crew of urchins, trendies and ravers like Sunscreem making total unself-conscious idiots of themselves on a stage instead of prancing and preening like twats.
The focal point is vocalist Lucia, who succeeds with some finesse in playing keyboards, singing, jumping, clapping and attempting several triple somersaults with twist and pike at the same time.
Sunscreem tonight seem to embody everything that's great about rave culture — the unashamedly joyous vibe, the communal atmosphere, the relentless, hedonistic beat, the blissful ignorance of tossy purist ideals of genre and cool, and the sky-scraping melodies.
But live performance gives it ten times more urgency and energy than the usual hollow rave PA, mimed to the record.
Live performance seems to encapsulate everything about Sunscreem effortlessly.
‘If rhythm's a drug I'm hooked on you/Show me every move/We've got perfect motion’— just like Madonna or Betty Boo at their best, this is pure and damn-near perfect pop, and for once it's even better in the flesh.
RIDE A WHITE SWAN VESTA
ADORABLE
THE FIRST thing you notice about Adorable is Piotr Fijalkoski's outfit; he's dressed completely in white.
Even his leather jacket is a pigment-free garment, lending him the ghostly appearance of a rockin' Marty Hopkirk, deceased.
This is significant in the Adorable gameplan because, you see, Adorable want to be NOTICED!
Not content with the dull stage shows, and even duller songs, that have clogged the nation's more modest venues over the past couple of years, Adorable are determined to resuscitate the long ignored notions of ‘stardom’ and, gulp, ‘entertainment’!
So Piotr looks fabulous, garrotting himself with the mic lead, slamming his guitar into the floor and manically shaking his Damon Grant hairdo while running through the directory of rock poses from A to Z and all points in between.
The emaciated guitarist balances precariously on legs thinner than a pair of whittled Swan Vestas, which is fine, because a painfully thin member is essential if the glam card is going to be successfully played.
But to win this game takes more than just knowing the right moves, donning the groovy gear and asking Mr Barber for ‘a dishy pop-star cut, please’.
And Adorable know this.
They know that behind the posing, the lippy interviews and Piotr's cocky, and somewhat questionable, backstage assertion that ‘music only began in 1980, everything before was just rubbish,’ at the core of all truly great bands are, well, truly great songs.
Which is where the true worth of Adorable shines through the grey indie morass.
Distorted guitar sounds collide with surging melodies on the likes of ‘Sunshine Smile’, ‘I'll Be Your Saint’ and the enormo new single, ‘Homeboy’.
Adorable's favoured method of song construction is to start with a slow, dreamy melody and then accelerate to Warp Factor 11 with very loud, sharp and combative peals of guitar swooping in to rough up the tune and kick it momentarily off course, before Piotr grabs hold of the melody again.
It's a trick they repeat often, but it works every time.
Piotr brings the succinct set to an encore-free close by introducing ‘Sistine Chapel Ceiling’: ‘This is the last song you'll ever hear from us, it's called ‘Derek’,’ he mutters, before once more riding that line between raging noise and delectable tunes.
At the song's end, he casually tosses his guitar over his shoulder and into the drum kit.
He's showing off, of course, but with good reason.
Adorable?
Well, yeah.
It'll be all white on the night!
Piotr practises those poses
WRITE SAID FRED
EDITED BY THE INFO-MOUS FRED DELLAR
SINGLE YOUR LIFE
A RECENT post provided a note from one Neil from Birmingham, who wrote: ‘In a recent Thrills section, there was a piece in which it was claimed NME had made Moz's 45s Single Of The Week on ten occasions.
Can you list these singles, please?’
The answer is that Morrissey has never quite achieved ten such desirable plaudits, even with his Smiths output chucked in.
In all probability, the Thrills piece was penned by our Bob Holness expert.
Even so, the task of trawling through Steven Patrick's tally of NME singles reviews seemed a fascinating one.
So, after hours in the vaults, the Write Said Fred team (just me, actually) came up with the COMPLETE MORRISSEY SINGLES REVIEW FILE!— now offered for your delight and dissection.
In particular, note Swells' review of ‘Everyday Is Like Sunday’ and marvel at the man's Nostradamus-like powers.
Normal service will be resumed next week.
THE SMITHS
‘Hand In Glove’
‘THE SMITHS ride up ‘Hand In Glove’ to knock me from my own gallows.
With a paucity of effects they seem to piece the cool of a Julian Cope/Teardrops sensitivity with a certain vigour that only us young ones can adopt.
 Morrissey's (sic) voice invocations just rice above the fuzz of treble.
Truly a new Bunnyman.’
(David Dorrell 11/6/83.
The single was reviewed as just part of a threesome, along with Seona Dancing's ‘Move To Lose’ and The Orson Family's ‘You Shake My Soul’)
‘This Charming Man’
‘THIS IS one of the greatest singles of the year, a poor compliment.
Unique and indispensable, like ‘Blue Monday’ and ‘Karma Chameleon’— that's better!’
‘What Difference Does It Make’
‘NOT SO good as ‘Charming Man’ say some, but I'd say better.
A wailing, wordless hook from your man Morrissey hovers ghost-like over a rubbery rockabilly beat.’
(Paul Du Noyer 21/1/84 — who made it a joint Single Of The Week along with Cyndi Lauper's ‘Girls Just Want To Have Fun’ and Echo And The Bunnymen's ‘The Killing Moon’)
‘Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now’
NO REVIEW, since the NME was in the midst of a lengthy NUJ strike!
‘William It Was Really Nothing’
‘THE SMITHS are impossible to love unless you wish to mother Morrissey.
The main man-child's self-adoring ennui sticks in the craw once you realise that this is what he's going to be doing on his death bed.’
‘How Soon Is Now’
‘FOR THE most part, Morrissey is the Hilda Ogden of pop, harassed and hard done-by.
I guess what seems like meat to one man sounds like murder to another.’
‘That Joke Isn't Funny Anymore’
‘MORRISSEY TRIPS out again on mellow folkiness, while Johnny Marr plays with a plectrum plucked straight from heaven.’
‘Shakespeare's Sister’
‘A BRIEF, brusque Diddleybuzz, a determined disturbing of the air after the balmy psychedelic fog that was the beauteous ‘How Soon Is Now’.
All this and Pat Phoenix on the cover.’
‘The Boy With The Thorn In His Side’
‘SEEMS LIKE Morrissey himself gives up the songs half-way through when he stops the vocal and uses up the rest of the needletime with yodelling.’
‘Bigmouth Strikes Again’
‘IT'S AS disappointing as baked beans for Christmas dinner.
OK, so the main parts are all present and correct, but does the light of Sandie's life still expect us to swallow it whole?
‘And now I know how Joan of Arc felt,’ he oscillates mildly.
On the evidence, Joan Collins seems more likely.’
‘Panic’
‘THIS IS the first Smiths single that uses a different tune and manages to avoid both ropey introspection and clever-clever adolescent poetry.
Now it seems my goading has borne fruit.’
‘Ask’
‘THE WORD is gnomic.
Perhaps I should join all you thousands in pondering those inscrutable epigrams.
‘Ask’ sounds lovely in the kinda-folk, kinda-high-life manner we know and love so well and that's enough for me.’
‘Shoplifters Of The World Unite’
‘THIS RECORD might be the stuff of tragi-comedy, but the funereal tune with cumbersome guitars and world-weary singing kills any irony that may be hidden in the lyrics.’
‘Sheila Take A Bow’
‘AN ADEQUATE rather than a particularly inspired Smiths single that still shreds the rest of the week's pop dross.
With Candy Darling on the cover, this is, as always, the sleeve of the week.’
‘Girlfriend In A Coma’
‘HIS GIRLFRIEND is hovering between life and death, but Morrissey's catch vocal seems non-committal about the whole thing, while the overall feel evokes shadows of The Beach Boys and other early '60s teen vocal groups.’
‘I Started Something I Couldn't Finish’
‘THIS IS a fairly pointless bit of posthumous whingeing with some horrible guitar playing from Johnny Marr.
Morrissey ought to get himself a string section and stop swanning about pretending to be Melvyn Bragg.’
‘Last Night I Dreamt Somebody Loved Me’
‘A SINGLE taken from The Smiths’ worst LP, ‘Last Night’reaches no new ground whatsoever.
A melodramatic, almost operatic, intro slides into an average Morrissey-Marr number that is two and a half minutes long and a ton too light.
The Queen is clearly dead here and Johnny Marr's not looking too bright either.’
‘This Charming Man’(reissue)
‘IT'S A truly magical song, one of the greatest records ever made.
It's incredibly idiosyncratic but incredibly self-confident within that.
It's a bit unfair to make single of the week because it isn't new — it's a piece of history.
We'll call it Single Of The Decade instead.’
(Guest reviewer Brett Anderson of Suede, 8/8/92)
‘How Soon Is Now’(reissue)
APART FROM‘Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now’, this was the only Smiths or Morrissey newie or reissue not to receive an NME review.
It had to happen some time.
‘There Is A Light That Never Goes Out’
‘ONE OF the best records ever made.
But you knew that already…’
MORRISSEY — SOLO
‘Suedehead’
‘STEPHEN STREET'S music has a crispness to it that The Smiths never managed.
As Morrissey sings: ‘I'm so very sorry…’ his vocal hits a pitch that turns your stomach with queasy delight.
It makes you feel vulnerable and provides emotions you've forgotten about.’
(James Brown, 20/2/88 who made it Single Of The Week along with The Wedding Present's ‘Nobody's Twisting Your Arm’)
‘Every Day Is Like Sunday’
‘WATCH OUT Stazzer.
What with writing about burning people at the stake, skinheads and killing disc jockeys and such like, you've got to be careful that you don't attract a Sham Army style of following and end up like Jimmy Pursey.
Think on, lad.’
‘The Last Of The Famous International Playboys’
‘A HESITANT rock pastiche.
‘Panic’ without the magnetism and the blinding self-confidence.
Lyrically it either castigates or canonises the Kray twins, I can't tell which.
I would still chain myself to a disused railway line in Bacup for him, but the lad can do better.’
(Stuart Maconie, 4/2/89 — who rated it as ‘Enigma Of The Week’)
‘Interesting Drug’
‘I STILL ache with a longing to know just what Morrissey's minions see in the man, what special stardust quality does he possess to endear him so closely to their palpitating hearts.
It's a finely crafted pop single, of that there can be no doubt— but that's all there is to it.’
‘Ouija Board, Ouija Board’
‘THIS IS the sort of thing that '60s pop stars made when they wanted to go serious after two flawless years of smiling in Mandarin jackets and Cuban heels.
A dull, fey whine that would never see release unless the singer had a track record.’
‘November Spawned A Monster’
‘LIKE ALL great pop acts, Morrissey repeats his one tune endlessly.
To have one flopped single, Mr Laughaminute, could be considered unfortunate.
To have more suggests a distinct drying up of the ol' creative gastrics.
There's an upturn on the way, Mobbydor, and sad and whining, masochistically melancholic grey canvasses of wangst ain't going to cut it anymore.’
‘Piccadilly Palare’
‘THE BLUSHY, double-jointed dandy flirts with under-age prostitution, more interested in social despair than the everyday details.
He's much better at this than belly-dancing in the desert, covered in clay.
With Suggs on guest spoken vocals and production credits to Langer and Winstanley, Moz has at last found his true cellmates in Madness.’
‘Our Frank’
‘A PLEASANT surprise.
Mr Misunderstood's freshest vinyl confection since ‘Suedehead’, a similarly streamlined pop gem.
The tune is jaunty and unfussy, scooting around strange sitar-sounding violins, crashing through Lennon-esque reverb for the chorus, before diving into fathomless melancholy, when His Master's Voice spirals to a bonkers Billy MacKenzie-style finale.’
‘Sing Your Life’
‘I'D MAKE this Single Of The Week if it didn't seem such a wilfully perverse thing to do.
‘Sing Your Life’ is one of the most toe-tapping moments from the rather lumpy ‘Kill Uncle’set.
Morrissey has a lovely singing voice and even a Cure roadie will find the tune charming.’
(Stuart Maconie, 6/4/91 who actually did award the Single Of The Week plaudit)
‘Pregnant For The Last Time’
‘BLIMEY!
JOE Orton arm-wrestles with Gene Vincent and Morrissey wins!
A lovely little music-hall ditty, courtesy of Mark Nevin, knocked into shape by Boz Boorer and his rocka-rocka-rocka-rockabilly guns.
The diehard Smiths fans who've been turning their backs on Morrissey over the last couple of years would be wise to give this a spin and do jerky, twisty, dancing type things in their front room.’
‘My Love Life’
‘CATCHY, ROMANTIC, endearing.
The best one he's made in a long time, I'd say.
I've not cared for the last few at all, but this one I'd definitely play on the radio.
I mean, it sounds like a Smiths song, which is no bad thing.’
(Guest reviewer )
‘We Hate It When Our Friends Become Successful’
‘START YOUR sobbing, this is by far the ex-Smith's WORST single.
Played alongside it, ‘Ouija Board’ sounds choppy and inspired.
Sure, the ambiguous title allows 30 seconds of salacious conjecture, but that double-bluff ‘Ha ha ha ha ha ha’ non-chorus scores a direct miss, and the sound of five men bashing around in the darkness in search of a tune merely drains you of the will to live.’
(Andrew Collins, 2/5/92, who actually made it Single Of The Week — Not!)
‘You're The One For Me Fatty’
‘MORRISSEY IS not a musician, he patently doesn't even like music.
Nor is he a particularly smart lyricist; just an Alan Bennett fan who got lucky.
If he's really clever, he could do a Quentin Crisp and get a gimmick (like refusing to wash his cutlery and groin for a decade).
Just a suggestion, and surely preferable to his current state of living death.’
Marr watches ‘Ouija Board’ go down for the last time
A CHRISTMOZ GIFT FOR YOU
HOW WOULD you like a nifty, highly collectable Morrissey promo single for Christmas?
Daft question.
Of course you would.
Mozzer promos usually come with natty retro labels with sleeves to match.
And the new single, ‘Certain People I Know’ /‘Jack The Ripper’, will prove no exception to the rule, coming in a special promo sleeve which, so the Parlophone press office reckons, ‘Has artwork similar to that which we used to use on T-Rex singles.’
We have some 20 copies of these promos for disposal, so if you feel life won't be the same without one, just jot down the title of Moz's latest solo album on a postcard and wing it to: Maybe one of the first 20 correct entries to be drawn from the office Christmas sock will be yours!
DO THE ‘SHAKE 'N' JACK
There are eight million stories in the big city…and MOONSHAKE know all the grisliest.
As their ‘Eva Luna’ album gathers plaudits for its unflinching portrayal of urban life, London's eclectic revolutionaries take DELE FADELE round the East End to see Jack The Ripper's old haunts.
City poisoners: STEFAN DE BATSELIER
Nick Cave assumed his persona in a dead-end relationship song.
LL Cool J bragged about how other rappers would be treated like his victims.
Murder By Decree had Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson hot on his heels.
And yet, over a century after Jack The Ripper's grisly murders — so foul that simple descriptions would make you puke — no-one is any the wiser about his identity…
The plan is simple enough.
Meet Moonshake, one of the blessed few remaining non-conformist independent groups, at Aldgate and be taken on a guided tour of the Ripper's murder-sites.
But, with typical Moonshake logic, this turns into an expedition t o soak up culture in London's East End by visiting other, less haunted, landmarks.
Between stops we can try and find out why their debut LP, ‘Eva Luna’, is such a welcome anachronism that gives a shock to the nerve-centres of the techno ‘n’ grunge consensus, why rhythm is omnipotent once again and why they've finally broken the apathetic silence by taking us all to task with some bold statements on matters of importance, instead of indistinct paeans to various objects of desire.
Slide through an alleyway that seems to have history inscribed on its cobbled stones and we've reached the first stop.
Freedom Press.
As befitting an anarchist bookstore, action posters and right-on graffiti fill the walls.
Subversion is being cooked up inside, and it's heartening to know that, even if misguided, some people are ready to lay their beliefs on the line as the Tories continue dismantling the state.
Dave Callahan (vocals, guitar), Margaret Fiedler (vocals, guitar, samples), John (bass) and Mig (drums) are in high spirits here, posing for photographs and chatting about the history of non-violent ‘refusal’ in these environs.
And so they should be — only a week away from making their American live debut, when the natives will undoubtedly be left wondering exactly what's hit them.
It's been a short, obstacle-filled but fruitful struggle for Moonshake to realise their potential.
They formed early last year, when Margaret relocated from New York City and became the perfect foil for Dave's abrasive muse, to be augmented by a ready-made rhythm section arising from the demise of The Wolfhounds.
Moonshake's ‘First’ EP was a warning of things to come.
Stung by My Bloody Valentine comparisons and having fallen out with Creation Records, 1992 picked up with the glorious ‘Secondhand Clothes’ EP and patronage by Too Pure (where they remain).
The distinctiveness now shown, combined with a penchant for dub-style work-outs, has come to full, almost jazzy, fruition with ‘Eva Luna’.
City slickers Moonshake 
OUR SIXTH and final stop on an eye-opening tour to make you realise why East Enders are so proud of their heritage (and, sadly, why the more extreme inhabitants want to remain insular and have the place ‘unsullied’) is a Brick Lane curry house.
Here we  attempt to understand what makes Moonshake so different.
‘The whole ethic about Moonshake,’ Dave states, ‘is not to be happy with what you've done, to always try and better yourself.’
‘I had problems listening to ‘Eva Luna’,’ Margaret continues, ‘I don't know if those problems will translate into the average record buyer's problems with it.’
David: ‘The listener's supposed to have some problems with it anyway.
It's supposed to involve listening, not something you can sit back to…like the wallpaper music a lot of people make.’
At the penultimate stop, in the midst of Brick Lane, lies the site of one of Jack The Ripper's most gruesome murders.
Ironically, when we get there we find that there's no plaque or sign of commemoration or acknowledgement: a brewery has been built there instead.
The doorway of number 22 no longer exists.
This is probably a good omen, as our fourth stop was to sup a pint each at The Blind Beggar, the infamous public house where Reggie Kray shot someone for making a homophobic comment.
‘The Sun Ain't Gonna Shine Anymore’ by The Walker Brothers was allegedly playing on the jukebox.
We decide against putting it on.
Morbid.
‘We're a model independent band, in that we're slightly outside the norm,’ Mig offers.
‘The new Too Pure signing (which hasn't been unveiled yet) is much more extreme than we are.’
‘Eva Luna’ works on your senses on a variety of levels, not the least of which is the insistence on capturing pertinent situations lyrically.
From the pro-vegetarian tract on ‘Tar Baby’, which updates the story of Brer Rabbit in Margaret's hands, to her sad tale of a friend changed by drugs into a criminal (‘Bleach And Salt Water’), through the observations on unwanted pregnancy (‘Little Thing’), the LP brims with insights.
And politics of a sort come into the fray with David's contributions: ‘Seen And Not Heard’ comparing family values to government; ‘City Poison’assessing urban decline; ‘Wanderlust’presenting Johnny Vagrant, made hollow by the system.
‘That's the thing about going outside of yourself,’ Margaret explains.
‘This time around I tried to write things that weren't just about me and my relationships.
I've not been in the situation ‘Little Thing’ describes, but everyone's gonna assume I have.
Everybody's gonna assume that, because I'm female, I've had an abortion.
I haven't.
It's about a friend of mine's girlfriend, that's all.
‘But everybody's gonna assume, so, forget it.
No, it's not autobiographical.
I'm just pre-empting other people…
There's less of a history of women writing outside of themselves, writing from other points of view.
There's more of a male history.
It's sort of the way things have regressed.
With all the freedom people have been given to write, women are still finding their own voice.
They've yet to find other people's voices as well.
Women are still primarily self-obsessed, I'm not gonna say completely …
But the songwriters I rate and the novelists I enjoy reading have gone beyond that.
Like people saying PJ Harvey will be amazing when she gets outside herself…what they don't realise is that she already has.
It's all assumptions.’
Swimming defiantly against the tides of the times, Moonshake place much emphasis on their lyrics and thus run the risk of being seen as old-fashioned.
But this is immediately dispelled when you hear them, when you know they're taking the temperature of the times.
John stirs: ‘When times are hard, being artistically creative is not necessarily important, it's putting a meal in front of you on the table.
If you've got no money, then it's quite hard to do anything exciting.
When society's going well, then it gives you something to rebel against, but if life is crap you've got to look after yourself and the people around you in order to survive.’
THE TWO other landmarks we visit, while dodging a giant Madonna billboard, go even further back in time than the others.
The Bell Foundry, which was established in the 16th Century, is where the bells for Big Ben were made.
And, not too far up the road, we come across The London Hospital, which played host to The Elephant Man.
Although deformed and treated as a spectacle, he was adopted by ‘high society’ at the height of his ‘fame’and later abandoned by them.
It's a tragic urban tale and ‘Eva Luna’, although not always tragic, is shot right through with urban images, especially on ‘City Poison’ and the dubby, aggressive and curiously structured ‘Beautiful Pigeon’.
‘Obviously, it's not about a pigeon,’ Margaret decides, ‘there's definitely an urban theme to the album.
I know it's really silly, but it's a love song.
I find love songs really soppy and sweet and I live in the city and…
I dunno…
Love isn't, like, running around a field in the country for me.
Love is, like, holding hands in a dirty, piss-smelling street.
When you fall in love in London or New York or whatever it's a different experience.
And a pigeon is just about the only wildlife you get in the city.’
Dave: ‘Human beings, rats and pigeons, they're all survivors, they're the only things that live in the city.’
But the dark side of the city is also excavated by moonshake, especially in David's pity-filled lament for a prostitute murdered at King's Cross, ‘Mugshot Heroine’.
‘Again, it's going back to that preponderance of modern guitar bands,’ he admits.
‘A lot of them write songs with thrashy noise guitars singing about how great it is to kill someone…
Halo Of Flies, Big Black…
And then there's this big thing about artistic separation; you're allowed to sing about these things in a completely gratuitous manner because you're a singer in a group and you can just stand back from it.
I think the best songs, books and paintings are partisan, they're not separate from those things.
What's so cool about not feeling any emotion about killing?’
There's compassion here.
And long debates on escapism, The Gulf War and irony.
Names like Heaven 17 and Scritti Politti crop up, the former favourably (for being one of the first groups of their ilk to give black singers centre stage) and the latter not.
Moonshake don't like irony.
They think it's destroying music.
First, it enabled clueless people to quote ‘soul’, then it allowed intelligent people to get away with expressing fake emotions.
And Moonshake lay theirs on the line.
right now; today, not yesterday.
The naked…and the dead interesting
WHITE KNUCKLE SANDWICH
My Bloody Valentine and Blur got stranded at the airport, but thankfully CURVE and SPIRITUALIZED were on hand to step in…
Add the JESUS AND MARY CHAIN masterminded ROLLERCOASTER package takes to the highways and student halls of America, what was once a moulding musical chrysalid on its underpowered UK outing earlier this year has verily pupated into a sun-blocking butterfly of excellence — or so reckons a well and truly won-over ANDREW COLLINS.
Roll ‘em: ED SIRRS
‘I wanna die like JFK/I wanna die in the USA’ The Jesus And Mary Chain
‘Most people go to their graves with their songs still in them!’
Ed Foreman, inspiration behind the Health, Wealth & Happiness ‘life-enrichment program’
Chicago, Chicago — so good, they named it after some onions.
Fifty-three museums!
Twenty-nine miles of shoreline!
In 1871 it burned down, 17,000 buildings were consumed, and a third of the city lay in ashes.
It's  f—ing windy, too.
That fire never stood a chance in hell.
‘I WILL’, boasts an elegantly calligraphed message on the side of a subway train.
This is ‘THE SPIRIT OF CHICAGO’, apparently.
I WILL thrust splendidly into the cut-glass sky, flanked on the east by Lake Michigan, a convincing fake beach if ever you saw one; I WILL inject the Indian summer glare with a brittle but somehow reassuring fake coastal wind; I WILL present a clean front, a scrubbed facade for the city's countless visitors, and at least one vegetarian take-out that's just big enough to accommodate all of Consolidated.
I WILL by your kinda town; I WILL host the first leg of this year's most significant ‘alternative’ rock event, and I WILL send my splendid, scrubbed, windswept children to worship at the feet of its various missionaries.
Rollercoaster USA.
Roll up!
Roll up!
Oh yeah, the onions.
Chicago is named after the Indian word for the wild onions that flourish on the banks of Lake Michigan —Checagou .
Now wake up, it's time to cry…
Godammit!
You've already been denied access to two travelling rock circuses called Lollapalooza as they wound their weird and wonderful way across The Land Of The Free (sic ).
And now, as if to add injury to insult, America's getting treated to a cleaned-up, reshuffled, supercharged version of April's truly disappointing UK Rollercoaster tour.
Rollercoaster USA takes in 23 cities from DeKalb to San Diego, mostly hallrooms and ballrooms, until the end of November, and it is, quite simply, the finest piece of rock theatre I have witnessed in 1992.
I hate to say you should be American, because of course,no-one should, but this one single evening of Great British Music — Spiritualized, Curve, The Jesus And Mary Chain, in that fixed order — is three and a quarter hours that compounds and crystallises everything that is vibrant and clever and downright sex-mad- filthy about what squares call ‘alternative’.
And you should be American, because there is no God and only Americans get to see it.
Remember the awful time, you had at Rollercoaster UK?
Blur, the Valentines and Dinosaur Jr on in the wrong order, at the wrong time, in the wrong place, before the wrong crowd, using inappropriate equipment, and putting you in the worst mood you could hope to be in for the Mary Chain?
Forget it.
The combined forces of Curve and The Jesus And Mary Chain — ie the sex-mad-filthy bit of Rollercoaster USA — on the banks of Lake Michigan .
Inset: that lovely pass in full I've had my reservations about all three of these acts at one time or another, but, standing here, gripped and pulsing, in Chicago University's Mandel Hall, my veins pumping nothing but Dr Pepper and fatigue, it become obvious that I WAS WRONG ALL THE WAY.
Over three and a quarter hours, in almost medically precise measures, about 800 Windy kids and myself are, by turn, massaged, soothed, picked up and shaken, sexually aroused and punched repeatedly about the face.
There's a Chicago joke in here somewhere — we are blown away.
Killed dead and reborn.
And you thought Curve were contrived goth nonsense, Spiritualized corduroy dullards and the Mary Chain old bastards in young trousers…
You talk a lot of wind.
You talk an awful lot of wind.
FORGET IT!
We are stowed away on Curve's tour bus — for YOU, for death, for glory, for kicks — for a brace of early Rollercoaster rides, and, in a very short time indeed, we have become disfigured by the spirit of rock ‘n’ roll — which isn't I WILL, it is I KILL.
As the news of ‘that’ exclusive Sinead O'Connor interview is wired to me from London, England, it becomes diamond-bullet clear that Sinead is a mere music biz appendix — surplus to requirements, but potentially very painful in the side — and the three bands that comprise Rollercoaster Mk II are its guts.
‘I wanna die on a sunny day.’
WIL-MAAAAAHH!
A vagrant jazz trio have set up their tattered equipment on a grassy knoll and are tearing into the theme from The Flintstones with commendable gusto.
Coins are chucked, shoe-shined toes are tapped, we have a gay old time.
This is just what I thought it'd be like on the streets of Chicago.
Two hours later, I pass by the exact same spot on Michigan and East Walton and they're still playing The Flintstones !
Perhaps it's the only tune they know.
Perhaps it's an encore.
Perhaps their set is two hours long.
You can't expect too much of music.
The fools that we are, we expect everything of it.
We demand that it changes, we beg of it to alter our lives, we leave it for two hours and assume it will be different when we get back.
Here we are now, entertain us, music, you bastard.
We complain if a band stays away too long; we complain if they outstay their welcome.
And then, occasionally, once in a blue moon, music gives us what we want, and we quite complaining…for about, say, three and a quarter hours.
They tell us it's one of the rougher districts of an otherwise antiseptic-looking Chicago, but the flat, green, well-lit area that surrounds Mandel Hall on 57th and University (dontcha just love American addresses?) belies such hysterical briefing.
Once inside the auspicious building, an eerie, closed-shop sense of something-not-quite-right hits us.
The foyer is abuzz with joshing studes and the final doof !—doof !—doof !—doof ! of Spiritualized's late soundcheck filters through from behind the main hall's heavy oak doors.
Normal.
And then the last item on the NOTES pages of Curve's itinerary comes back to me: ‘At a few shows, mainly the universities,alcohol is going to be a problem ’.
Ouch!
It's a ‘dry gig’!
Diet Kool-Aid Lite all round!
The place is devoid of alcoholic recourse, even the bands' riders are untroubled by hard liquor, shit, we're all going to have to take crack instead!
Perhaps this alc-free atmos is pertinent, when you consider that the auditorium is your classic Dead Poets Society assembly hall, all carved balconies and high arches, church-like to the point of intense God-fear!
So, this is where we come to be anointed, is it?
As sober as judges and as reverent as pilgrims, we are gathered here today to witness the marriage of disco and rock, the funeral of Sinead O'Connor, the birth of cool.
Take a pew.
Downstairs, in the crypt, Toni Halliday is carefully painting a red dot on her forehead while Curve guitarist Alex regales us with unlikely tales of cockroaches the size of dachshunds in his flat at home after spotting a standard one moving about their dressing room ‘john’ and a dead one upturned next to the lockers.
We consider smoking it — no, really — and there is a good joke about ‘roaches’.
Across the hall, Spiritualized huddle.
Jason Pierce has a rotten throat infection and has been forced to lay out $70 on antibiotics, drummer Jon Mattock has spent half an hour going round the college with a marker pen, adding Spiritualized's name to the day-glo posters.
I wondered why it was spelt correctly.
This Pepsi tastes like Brasso with Canderel.
When does the ceremony begin?
‘HELLO, CHICAGO!!!
ARE YA READY TO NOD MOROSELY?’
‘YEEEAAAHHH!’
‘ALL-RI-I-IGHHTTT!!!
LET'S OSCILLATE!!!!’
Strap yourself in; the Rollercoaster is off.
Naturally Spiritualized crank the whole shebang into life without a word.
Row upon row of Alternative Youth give the barely visible figures onstage a rousing reception just for (virtually) existing.
It is truly — and intellectually — heart-warming that music as hook-free and unfeathered as Spiritualized's could elicit such a sporting,involved response from a bunch of lumber tops and nose-pin rebels.
It's chamber music, to all  intents and purposes, and they're receiving it like a home run.
Pivot and glummo Jason Pierce says nothing; he doesn't even look at his adoring audience.
What's going on behind the long face and the short, practical crop is nothing we're going to see through his eyes.
That music is the window to Jason's soul, that gently rippling, occasionally magnificent music with its brazen synth chords, its complex, geometric drum patterns and that methodical, weeping guitar.
Jason's cracked voice, too, rises like smoke from a smouldering heart into the spotlight above him, pained and pin-pricked like a distressed choirboy.
One can't help but see Jason, stage-right, and keyboard empress Kate Radley, left, as Shakespearean lovers kept apart by some imaginary sea, pining poetically for one another…alright, alright, I used to think Spiritualized were horsewank.
I could never bear to imbibe; I damned their seated oeuvre as a clutch of mere self-conscious, cerebral doodlings in the margins of rock's phone book.
I found it my calling to be the one in the NME office who flinched at the very sight of their wibbly-wobbly figurines and pretend four-track album which was really 12 tracks, the over-educated jessies!
But that was then, and this is…the future.
It's Jon's drums that drag me in initially — precise, soft-stick, cymbal-heavy, to-the-letter and oddly hypnotic.
Fingers of light poke about in the back of the hall, casting Spiritualized's five members (plus Will Gregory on sax) as shadow puppets in an incredibly static play.
Slow and hefty strobes challenge the eye, the incredible heaving breast of a number like ‘Medication’ or ‘Shine A Light’lifts and separates your (all too bloody sober) mind.
‘Run’ provides the trad R&B relief (as close as you're going to get), elsewhere, it's black sheets of pain, laser guided malady and genuine, heart-tearing beauty.
All aboard the Travelling Sonic Cathedral Medicine Show, then!
If corporate rock is the disease, then this is the cure.
And Spiritualized are the preparatory aromatic balm.
Mmmmmmm.
Take me, Lord, I have seen the lightshow!
I am a convert!
I am walkin' with Jesus.
Pierce on earth and goodwill to all men!
Now, all we need is some glamour, some sex, some amphetamine…
Hmmm, let me guess.
A single shoe is thrown into the air.
Human bodies, apparently etherised on a sturdy table of outstretched arms, are passed across the throng like courses at a great Medieval banquet; no surreptitious groping of tits occurs whatsoever .
Curve do this to folk.
That phenomenal five-piece you still insist on calling ‘false’.
Well, get a load of their new, de-sampled sound and run it through your Real Music computer, because, unveiled here for (ah well) the Americans, it requires no wind machine to create a storm.
Curve's new lighting designer, Lawrence, is soon to join the police force.
The band and crew have a month to talk him out of it.
In the meantime, just look at those gigantic revolving blue lights!
This band will not go to their graves with their songs still in them.
Their music is, as David Lynch described Eraserhead , ‘a dream of dark and troubling things’.
Pitch and enveloping, it still manages to thunder along now that Dean Garcia has binned a large chunk of the previously dominant rhythmic backing tracks, thanks to drummer Monti, whose role in the group was always criminally hidden before.
‘Doppelganger’ and ‘Fait Accompli’pummel and pound, Toni's scarlet voice twinkling and cutting above the sex dream noise terror, Dean and twin guitarists Debbie and Alex scuttling about the stage like possessed arsonists fanning a terrible flame.
Dressed down in T-shirt, torn jeans and thermal long johns, Toni keeps disappearing between songs, agitated at one point actually scolding soundman Kevin over the mic.
They can't hear themselves, we discover afterwards.
They missed out.
All part of the perfect prescription, Curve's set is a dose of Temazepan — on a drip — a series of electric spasms and inner highs that courses through your body like dry ice, vodka and fear.
Hold a candle to that , all-comers.
More Coke.
More Dr Peppers.
More Snickers.
I love these products.
I'll tell you about the Mary Chain tomorrow.
I'm split into fractions, and I need to pull myself together.
‘I wanna die/I wanna die/I wanna die/I WANNA DIE!’
HANG ON.
We lost a day here somewhere.
Yesterday, Friday, a Rollercoaster day-off, Curve, Ed Sirrs, myself and PR Phil went on what you might — in a Curve piece — call a bender .
Halloween approacheth, you can tell by the plethora of promotional Budweiser pumpkins and bats hung from every spare bit of Pippin's ‘pub’ on Rush St, so we drowned our mortal fear in the spirit of Chicago (I WILL!) and said a dozen Hail Bloody Marys until we could feel the city's chill wind no more.
Daisy Chainsaw and Therapy? played the Metro Club, but I don't remember them at all.
I've got this bit of hotel notepaper upon which Toni has kindly reviewed Rollercoaster for me —‘The Mary Chain are the greatest pizza ever served; Curve are the greatest sex; Spiritualized are sugar being licked by Sylvia Plath’.
How pleased she'll be to see that in print.
Tonight, Sunday, a Rollercoaster day-on, the gig is at a 2,300 theatre called the Riviera, where blue-satin-coated bouncers rather unsportingly separate the punters into two queues outside the venue, one for guys, one for ladies.
Cheers.
Spiritualized go onstage at the vibeless hour of 6.25, but miraculously manage to turn their truncated 30-minute slot into a further mindblast, five songs only, one brand new, untitled and spectacular, the closer ‘Smiles’(very old) rendering the term ‘epic’ a spent match.
Jason is still surly, ill and suspicious, as any quiet genius might be.
Toni unveils a new look for the show unforgiving black Vivienne Westwood bodice and Calvin Klein knicks hoist to her armpits.
Debbie sports a Medicine shirt, to remind us that the difficult West Coast noiseniks were once to play Rollercoaster, but would've had to go on at about three in the afternoon to meet some venues' childish curfews.
Shame.
The Curve sex metaphor holds up, with a daring quiet passage mid-set (‘Sandpit’, ‘Today Is Not The Day’) that expertly separates from the furious foreplay and the steaming climax.
Excuse me…
We view the Mary Chain's victorious headline cure-all from a royal box with the Smashing Pumpkins, D'Arcy looking every bit the ghost of peroxides past, Billy Corgan a grim-faced soul in terrible cardie whose utilities have been cut off in his apartment.
No fashion statements with the Mary Chain.
Jim and William Reid don't dress for dinner.
It's been seven long years since they ran the riot act, but there remains a threatening air of petulance and possibility about their onstage demeanour that throws a star-spangled spanner into the works.
Jim just sort of leans intently into the mic stand, gently thrusting.
Red lights bleed from behind wire mesh, ankle-height, like the burning eyes of something in the sewer out of a John Carpenter film.
‘In A Hole’, ‘April Skies’, ‘Reverence’, ‘You Trip Me Up’, ‘Kill Surf City’— homogenised, inevitably, by the mechanics of a touring five-piece band, these stark moments of tortured soul music form the final stage of Rollercoaster's treatment.
this is just sweating it out in your bed, the simplest remedy of all.
Film of a speeded-up supermarket trip and Clockwork Orange puts us in the mood — a kind of delirium, happy when it pains — and William is our entertainment for the 60-minute duration.
Master of his own hardware universe, pedals and effects spread before him like an airline pilot's bewildering cockpit or the useless junk at some bum's feet on a New York sidewalk, this little lot transforms him from frizzy-head potato face misery into a full-blown magician.
If his guitar is his lover,watch as he beats her, caresses her and apologises to her in one fell swoop of his arms.
It's bloody and frightening, but no-one gets hurt.
Down in the photographers' pit, a battalion of WWF security gentlemen keep the writhing, crowd-surfing mob back by redirecting those two-minute messiahs that get passed too close to the barrier.
From above, this is a surreal sight — a dozen Canutes holding back a flesh ocean.
During ‘Sidewalkin'’, when the song is reduced to just a bare skeleton and Jim repeats ‘Chilled to the bone/Chilled  o the bone’ with a single frozen blue light painting the backs of his jeans from the sewer, the world stops.
Can't ask for much more than that.
ONLY ARCH professionalism and a lack of clean underwear dragged me home after Chicago.
I wanted to die in the USA.
If the first two days were this good, what of Denver's Gothic Theatre, New York's Roseland or Salt Lake City's 20,000 capacity Delta Center?
This flawless, cork screwed white-knuckle ride should roll and roll into 1993 and your back yard.
Write to your MP.
Burks & Hare are on the road with the Addams Family and the cast of Macbeth — all the funeral of the fair!— and you're stuck with the Inspiral Carpets, The Real People and Family Gotown.
There is an alternative.
It could take your breath away.
Toni ‘Sex Dream Noise Terror’ Halliday: scary…
Merlin William Reid and his amazing guitar universe
‘Possessed arsonist’ Debbie, fanning Curve's
Pierce on earth…
NME GIG GUIDE
KINGMAKER, recently returned from their first major US outing, load up with their current ‘Armchair Anarchist’ single and launch into their UK tour with a live assault visiting .
Support on all dates comes from Radiohead.
NME CHARTS
The new Stones: ‘Mineral’ collectors Buffalo Tom
The Shamen: a load of old Boss
Gurn to be wild: AC/DC's Angus — live
Get Happiness!
Nightmares On Wax come over all dreamy
Mouldy old Lieutenant Pigeon: from when pop stars really looked the part
FRED FACT
SO THE US Presidential Election is over and The Dick Nixons are grieving once more.
For those not au fait with the aims of the Dick-Nixs, they're an LA band whose purpose in life has been to see their namesake Tricky Dicky re-instated to his true position in life.
But even they feared the worst, for, in the run-up to polling day, they released an album called ‘Paint The White House Black’ which rued the possibility that the man ‘who brought the boys back home from Vietnam ’would remain unappreciated by America.
In an attempt to get America dancing they launched ‘Do The Dick Nixon’ instructing the sons of Uncle Sam to ‘Bug Watergate just for fun /Bomb Cambodia ,don't tell no-one .’
But despite this and other anthems of our time, like ‘N-I-X-O-N’, ‘Tricky Dicky Was A Rock ‘n’ Roller’and ‘Plot Against The Prezident’(correct spelling has never been a Dick-Nixs essential), when the time came, America turned its back on the band's hero.
Not that The Dick Nixons were indulging in a new pastime.
Americans have been saluting Presidents by means of song since George Washington's time, one Philip Phile composing ‘The President's March’ which was supposedly played at Honest George's inauguration.
The greatest of 'em all, Abraham Lincoln, received a belated musical nod during 1968, when songwriter Dick Holler linked the 16th President's name to that of the Kennedy's and Martin Luther King to provide Dion with a three million seller in ‘Abraham, Martin And John’, while Ulysses Simpson Grant, the next Republican to be called to office in Lincoln's wake, was hailed by Patrick Gilmore's ‘President Grant's March’, which still gets played at the White House during various ceremonies, though far older is ‘Hail To The Chief’, a ditty based on a poem by Sir Walter Scott, which was first played at the inauguration of James Knox Polk, in 1845, and has been retained to announce the arrival of presidents ever since.
Play Elvis Presley's ‘Teddy Bear’ and you're paying an oblique tribute to the memory of the 26th President, Theodore ‘Teddy’Roosevelt, after whom the Teddy Bear was named.
Think of Woody Guthrie and you're back in the presidential alley once more, for America's folk hero was named after Woodrow Wilson, the man who took the USA into World War I after attempting to keep his country neutral, a 1916 song claiming ‘He Kept Us Out The War’, though a later ragtime hit contained the lyric: ‘We're going to celebrate the end of the war in ragtime — be sure that Woodrow Wilson leads the band.’
And afterwards, Norah Bayes (the singer who provided the memorable US Number Three ‘The Man That Put The Germ In Germany’ in 1918) came up with ‘We Take Our Hats Off To You Mr Wilson’, underlining the popularity of a two-term winner.
In more recent times, Al Stewart has donated ‘Here's To Warren Harding’, recalling how the 29th President was ‘Alone in the White House, watching the sun come up on the morning of 1921’; Elvis Costello has resurrected bluesman J B Lenoir's ‘Eisenhower Blues’; Tom Paxton advising that ‘Lyndon Johnson Told The Nation’; while, only a week ago, U96 released ‘I Wanna Be A Kennedy’, just another of the scores of Kennedy songs that have proliferated through rock since ‘62.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Herbert C Hoover, Harry S Truman, James Abram Garfield and several others, were all regaled in song long before Sinatra and Monroe began serenading Kennedy or Streisand warbled for saxman Clinton.
And as for Ronald Reagan, who among us can forget the words that so blew our minds on ‘The Wit And Wisdom Of Ronald Reagan’ album, a release which made Stiff's Magic offshoot a legendary label overnight?
Presidential pop.
Dontcha just love it?
‘Here's To Ross Perot!’
Al Stewart salutes the, erm, new leader of the free world
ANGST
EDITED BY IAN McCANN
MADONNA — CONFRONT HER SOFT UNDERBELLY!…
WHO SAYS WE DON'T LIKE MONDAYS?…
THE '70S — WHAT STALIN WOULD'VE SAID…
A RIGHT CICCONER
Gavin Martin's breathless ‘exclusive’ on Madonna and her, gosh golly, bedroom, raved on at length but revealed sod all.
Except, of course, that the Mistress of All She Perv-eys is an arch media manipulator (witness the airbrushed photos — an erotic, or should that be Sex-y , product plug, yah?).
As anyone who hasn't been in a coma for the last ten years knows as much anyway, why bother?
Because you, along with every other media lapdog, know Ms Muscles sells, ‘shocking’ nipples and all.
OK, so it's your business to flog copies and you've got a ‘large and loyal readership’ anyway, but is this peroxide pin-up above being challenged?
Like laughing at her po-faced pronouncements on the ‘artistry’ of throw-away tunes such as, well, you name ‘em, she's got ‘em.
Following your excellent exposé of our ambiguous one, and Danny Baker's candid assessment of the Boy In The Bubble, I had hoped for more than the arselicking articles printed.
But given your slobbering sentiment towards SexKylie (sic )— Stuart Bailie, respect to you, excepting — I should be so lucky.
In bed with Madonna?
No, in her pocket.
Many at NME think Maddie is crap, but that doesn't mean we should refuse an interview.
If, however, Gavin had stomped in and told her she was a piece of shit, would the audience with the Goddess Of Tedium have lasted for more than one sentence?
His detached look at the phenomenon and at his feelings at the proximity of such a western icon were as much as you could expect.
As for NME 's opinion of her work, you should know how much we love Madonna by how much we love Ice-T, Suede and all the other insolent wasters we praise to the hilt each week.
Our interest in Madonna is as a phenomenon and almost academic.
As anyone who hasn't been in a media-induced coma over the last ten years knows, her trite ditties are irrelevant to the story — IM
YES PLEASE
Thanks.
Once upon a time it would have been unthinkable for a band, especially one with such a reputation as Happy Mondays’, to apologise for their remarks without some sort of legal action being taken against them.
Stuart Bailie did a good thing in letting Shaun and co explain things.
It is horrifyingly plain to see that the Mondays are in a tragic state, and the excellent photographs highlight this tragedy.
If Shaun is telling the truth, he must be pitied for the situation he has got himself into.
If he is lying, however, they deserved all the shit they've been put through — and a lorry load more.
Bez, I'm afraid, cannot redeem himself.
He is an unfortunate misfit — but we've always known this, haven't we?
We've tolerated misfits in the past.
In the same way I felt compelled to write an angry, ranting letter after the band's last appearance in NME , so I now feel compelled again.
Not only to advocate the giving of second chances but also to say that I hope that Shaun and the rest manage to get themselves out of the rut they've dug for themselves.
Thanks for one of the most thought-provoking unsensationalist articles I have read.
Thanks to you, Tom.
What article were you talking about?
There are several thought-provoking, unsensationalist articles on my mind today.
Among their number is a plastic whisk (one blade slightly eggy), something for removing radioactive worm casts from the mechanism of a Sturmey Archer three-speed bicycle gear-change system, and an item my dear departed grandfather left me which is yellow in parts and very old.
Unfortunately I don't know what it is.
If any readers have an idea what it might be and how it may be put to good use, please let me know — IM
SHAUN OF HIS DIGNITY
Piss off!
And leave the Mondays alone.
Judge them by their product and not their individual personalities.
They sure as hell don't need your paper and even less journalists like Steven Wells with his repetitive, egotistical comments!
I've never looked forward to new stuff from any band as much as I do from the Mondays.
We've not been let down once since ‘Wrote For Luck’; danceable with brilliant lyrics, every one.
Just sit down (I thought the idea was to dance — IM) and listen to ‘Yes Please’ a few times until you realise that Shaun's lyrics and the band's music together still mean something to all their fans who follow a band purely for their music…so what were you doing talking to the stupid old Happy Mondays after all?
Pills, Thrills & Bellyaches, Aberystwyth
Who us?
Talking to the Happy Mondays?
Perish the thought, pal.
We didn't know it was them.
These funny-looking blokes just turned up on the doorstep with rolls of carpet over their shoulders asking if we wanted to buy them.
Next thing we knew, they'd pushed past us, blagged a cup of tea (three sugars) and sat down with their dirty hobnail trainers on the shag-pile.
They talked for half an hour and suddenly upped and went.
Then stone me, we opened the NME the next week and it seems we'd ‘interviewed’ the Happy Mondays.
Just goes to show you can't trust anyone these days — IM
NO THANKS
What a joke Shaun Ryder is!
Smokes a couple of joints, swallows a couple of tabs and can't wait to tell the world ‘I was a drug addict’.
I wouldn't have thought there was anyone left out there dim enough to still want to embrace the seedy ‘glamour’ of the Keef Richards ‘elegantly wasted’image.
I reckoned without that dummy Ryder.
Oh, what a buzz it must give the dolt to have the impressionable whispering ‘ooh, there's that Shaun Ryder, he was a DRUG ADDICT.’
Not for Shaun the simple taking of drugs, he was an ADDICT.
What a preposterous ninny.
Drop the image, because that's all it is.
The NME want  f—ing for reporting your tripe.
Ryder, you wouldn't have the bottle to put a needle anywhere near your arm.
A little smoke and a couple of pills doth not a junkie make.
 Yeth Shakeshpeare, you're right.
 It dothn't.
 Oth courth noth — IM
DOUBLE DILEMMA
Have you noticed the similarity between Shaun Ryder's Gaultier jacket and the jacket worn by Patrick McGoohan in The Prisoner ?
Why did Manchester resign from being happening?
Be seeing you…
The New Number Two, Linlithgow, West Lothian
Shaun had his first.
He just didn't wear it before now, that's all.
In fact, Shane ‘Patrick Number Six’ MacGowan and Shaun used to be in a group together at school long before The Pogues and the Mondays were formed.
In case you're wondering why MacGowan is called Number Six, it's because he was particularly fond of that brand of cigarettes.
As for Manchester's resignation, it was inevitable.
It had already received three written warnings (one for fighting, one for being under the influence of drugs while in charge of a wood-turning lathe, and one for lateness) and either had to leave or face the sack.
Sensibly, it chose the dignified way out.
It is now in a dole queue alongside 30,000 miners, Fergie and John Major (soon)— IM
SWEET HART
Believe me, no-one is more chuffed about Bob Mould's renaissance than I (what about Bob Mould himself ?— IM) and the accompanying kudos bestowed upon him and Hüsker Dü.
As one who has listened to nothing as often as BM's solo albums these last two years (OK, you've established your credentials, now come to the point — IM) I cannot speak highly enough of the man (try a step-ladder — IM).
For all that, it disturbs me to see him portrayed as Hüsker Dü's creative force when Grant Hart had at least an equal hand in writing their material.
In your otherwise excellent article you referred to Bob's evasion of ‘the sad dank dustbin of memory’.
Is this to be Grant Hart's fate?
PS: If anyone thinks that I may be overstating the Hart boy's case then listen to his blindingly good solo album, ‘Intolerance’.
I'm amazed that you thought the Bob Mould feature was excellent.
We were only joking.
Really we think Bob Mould and Sugar Sugar are soppy and silly.
We like Extreme.
Especially their new record, which is everything that a modern rock CD should be.
It's great.
Who are Husky's Doo-doo and Grant Hart?
We've never heard of them, unless he's a student Grant.
But that's unlikely under the present government.
Perhaps he should change his name to Loan Hart, it would be more modern.
Move with the times, Grant, you oldster — IM
CENTRE POINT
Whilst shimmying through your mag one sunny afternoon, I noticed that the centrespread contained an advertisement.
Might I suggest that this space would be far better utilised with a large picture of Terry Christian?
A Man In Belfast, Erm, Belfast
Suggest what you like, we don't care.
We've just purchased Sex by Jon Beast and we're having a wa…erm, busy.
You'd be amazed what he looks like sucking a dog's toe.
As for him snogging all those top models in hot lesbo action, well, I never thought that an Airfix kit of HMS Invincible could ever be so arousing — IM
'70S RETURN: A LOON PANTS
Please NME don't do it!
(What!
What!— IM) Don't drag us back to pop's godawful stack-heeled era (Oh that — IM).
Just because out-to-lunch Morrissey is dropping in references to ‘Ride A White Swan’ and because Pulp's singer wears David Essex-type attire and lampoons a ‘camp stance’and just because the current guitar rock scene is useless (except Sugar), do not fob this glitter-rock crap off on our gullible pop nation.
I remember the '70s too well.
It was awful.
For every ‘Cum On Feel The Noize’ there was a mountain of ‘Long Haired Lover From Liverpool’-type shite.
Also, I remember ‘Tubular Bells’ the first time around.
It sucked then and sucks now although,voilà !, it is excused by the New-Age tossers who dig ambient stuff.
This Stalinesque approach to pop's short history worries me.
Next, we'll have an article that exposes the virtues of The Rubettes.
Or perhaps, Showaddywaddy as Prole Art Threat?
The past is gone.
As for the '70s, good riddance.
A Person With A Life, No Fixed Abode
I dusted off the cobwebs from good old Stalin On Pop Music (Icepick University Press, 1979), always the perfect volume for settling arguments of this type.
And I'm afraid, comrade, you couldn't be more wrong.
Indeed, Stalin records that as part of his ten year plan for the 1990s, glam rock will return ‘for the positive benefit of the proletariat’.
He goes on to say that ‘Bands shall be named Pulp, Suede, The Spangles and the Eight-Track Cartridge Family, and Party organ NME shall lament the demise of the Aztec bar in its pages.’
Showaddywaddy, however, are dismissed as ‘revisionists, taking the revolutionary music of the workers’ collectives of Memphis in the 1950s and subverting it with a horrible crepe-sole cabaret act.
Even though they had an ideologically correct black drummer.
But so did Orange Juice, and they were bollocks.’
Readers might also be interested to hear that Stalin proposed signing a treaty with Morrissey when the time was right, only to renege on any agreement, later resulting in the bloody battle of Stalingrad and the division of The Smiths.
I trust this settles your mind — IM
 EUTHANASIA AT 19?
Whilst browsing through a copy of NME (October 10) I came across an article, ‘Ziggy Stardust Memories’.
I was disgusted to see Pink Floyd heading the ‘Go Away’ list.
I also discovered an uncomplimentary mention of Mike Oldfield's ‘Tubular Bells’.
I myself work for a newspaper (Gulp!— IM) and believe in individuals having their own opinions (Why work for a newspaper then?— IM).
Therefore I do not take kindly to slander that Pink Floyd or even Mike Oldfield are unwelcome icons.
I am 19 years old and much prefer listening to the great Pink Floyd than most of the modern day trash (Gulp again — IM).
If anything, Pink Floyd should be admired for their dedication and musical skills in the music industry as their music is appreciated now as it was then.
Which, I stress, is more than can be said for the one hit wonders of the '90s, which sound more like nursery rhymes than anything else.
As a faithful NME reader I thought you would have had better things to do than badmouth good groups, such as improve on your public relations, meaning, I wrote to you about three months ago regarding Pink Floyd to find out if they would be doing any concerts.
Not surprisingly, there was no reply.
Also, I was interested in any information you could give me on working in advertising or public relations on a music journal.
There was also no reply.
Please show some respect to us faithful readers, as this is surely a perfect example of bad business practice!
Thank you for calling us a perfect example.
No-one has ever said that about us before.
As a faithful reader you should know that NME has a somewhat irreverent attitude towards Pink Floyd and Mike Oldfield.
I apologise.
I can only stress that when we return to our dingy little squats after a hard day baiting rock gods and ignoring letters from readers, there's nothing we like better than a long listen to Pink Floyd's ‘Animals’ or Mr Oldfield's ‘Ommadawn’while soaking our horny feet in a scalding bowl of mushroom chow mein.
KERB THE GUTTER PRESS
Was Simon Williams really at the Pavement gig (NME , October 17)?
I seem to remember the support band was Eugenius, not Moonshake.
As for Pavement, do you know any of the songs they played?
Have you listened to the album?
For those who didn't go, they started off with a rather perfunctory ‘Summer Babe’, trawled through most of the album and then went through two shambolic encores.
Is this what we pay you for?
So it's you that pays Simon Williams.
We knew it wasn't us and we'd been wondering who it was.
Simon was at a Pavement gig, but it wasn't necessarily featuring the band of that name.
He remembers a man with a guitar and a hat on the ground but everything else is a bit hazy.
He's not been feeling himself lately.
Evidently he needs Jon Beast's Sex — IM
Dr. Crawshaft's World Of Pop
The Sundays' ‘Difficult Second Album’ Fails To Excite
They are merely reproducing the same wistfulness and dreamlike melodies of their first album.
There is little sign of musical progression.
There is no overtly political comment, and hardly any mention of social evils such as racism and sexism.
The production is adequate, but by concentrating on tight arrangements, spontaneity is lost, and there is a subsequent lack of immediacy.
It's a major disappointment.
PUBLIC NME
It's that time of year again.
Party Fever hits Public NME with a vengeance.
This week, in the sad aftermath of one party too many, it's a rather tired and emotional litany of crimes and misdemeanours that we have to recount for your delectation.
Oh, it's a dirty job…but someone's got to do it!
However, it's not all free wine and beer.
At this week's party for the new Neil Jordan film The Crying Game , partygoers were forced to dig deep into their leather trouser pockets if they fancied supping vino instead of the free washing up liquid which was on offer.
The more seasoned liggers, of course, simply went around nicking  everyone's else's drinks.
Held at the delightfully seedy SW1 Club in Victoria, much of the action was going on in the partitioned-off VIP enclosure.
Sequestered within were Pet Shop Boys NEIL TENNANT and CHRIS LOWE — who earlier had the hair-raising experience of being mobbed in the cinema by ticket-buying fans who, in their rush to obtain autographs with menaces, completely ignored a squirming BARNEY from NEW ORDER/ELECTRONIC who was sat next to them at the time.
Must be his fatal charm.
Spotted lurking in the gloom at the après-premier party were KYLIE MINOGUE, most of the Crying Game cast, all of NEW ORDER, NATHAN from BROTHER BEYOND (who?),
PAULA YATES, SUE from Brookside , MIRANDA RICHARDSON, BOY GEORGE and his recently unceremoniously dumped-off Virgin MORE PROTEIN posse — EVE GALLAGHER and MC KINKY — neither of whom seem to have been adversely affected by their recent trauma.
Meanwhile, over in Soho, THE CHRISTIANS were burdened with that most arduous of tasks — the record company showcase.
Celebs were scarcer than their hits, but sat right at the front was famous toe-sucker ANTONIA DE SANCHA.
Say no more.
Having more than his fair half-pennyworth is POGUES supergroupie MATT DILLON, who, we gather, has just directed the new video for DINOSAUR JR.
Whether this means that it's full of nubiles we've no idea, but Matt does get his vocal chords out on the single's B-side and contributes to the chorus of the band's cover version of the old GRAM PARSONS chestnut ‘Hot Burrito 2’.
Let's hope that's all he gets out.
While the nation mourns (not) over the sudden cancellation of the SHAKESPEAR'S SISTER mega-tour, it would seem that the reason behind the decision had little to do with SIOBHAN's nervous exhaustion and more to do with the fact that hubbie DAVE STEWART wants to spend more time with his wife and less time on his Jack Jones, staring at his fibre-optic carpet.
More domestic bliss ahoy.
Many congratulations to LLOYD COLE who became a father for the first time when his wife recently gave birth to a baby boy Billy, in New York.
Closer to home, BARNEY from NEW ORDER and long-time girlfriend SARAH became the proud parents of a very healthy baby boy called Dylan.
Barney, of course, is currently struggling his way through the next set of fabulous lyrics for the upcoming New Order album which is staggering to completion.
Another casualty who bravely acted out that old maxim ‘the show must go on’ was ROSS — ex-postman and avid raver — from K-CLASS who after falling through a plate glass window whilst horsing about with some mates in a local Liverpool pub, gritted his teeth, 30 stitches notwithstanding, and gamely did his bit on Dance Energy less than 24 hours after being sewn up.
‘Well wicked’ we say.
Not wicked but definitely off with the fairies earlier this week was ALEX, bass player and chief hair-shaker from NED'S ATOMIC DUSTBIN.
The band are currently continuing their quest for world domination and furthering the cause of crimped hair in the US.
Seems he got left behind at JFK Airport in New York, sitting by the baggage claim with his headphones on, and two hours later, still hadn't realised that no-one had come to claim him.
The rest of the lads got a fair distance down the freeway en route to Toronto before they realised they'd lost him, went back, and found him still sitting there like a tit in a trance nodding away to his Walkman.
And we thought that sort of IQ was usually reserved for drummers…
Obviously inspired by MADONNA's example,(and it seems that she's about to be millions of dollars richer as over half a million copies of Sex changed hands last week) CURVE have decided to come over all raunchy and are releasing a Stateside compilation which goes under the provocative title of ‘Pubic Fruit’, although whose pubes are involved we are not informed.
There's more SEX PISTOLS tomfoolery afoot.
After last week's boat debacle, the tale takes a stranger twist with a mysterious telephone advert placed in last week's NME asking ‘Who's Taking The Pistols?’
Callers to the line are entertained with a plug for a dubious album of so-called ‘daring ditties’ by unknowns THE EX-PISTOLS.
The company behind the scam, Mandela, are refusing to fill in any more details, however, so we can only assume it's another cash-in wind up.
Avoid.
Those soggy, limp-dicked Mancs the INSPIRAL CARPETS have finally met their match.
After recently ditching their long-time manager ANTHONY BOGGIANO, they somehow managed to attract the attention of self-styled svengali SIMON NAPIER-BELL (better known for managing MARC BOLAN and WHAM! among others).
Anyway, Napier-Bell flew out to Dublin to court the band and immediately launched a speech enthusing wildly about how much he liked ‘both’ the Inspirals albums.
An apoplectic CLINT BOON immediately got on his case and the ill-informed impresario was sent away with a rather large flea in his ear.
We hear that guitarist GRAHAM made a rather large faux-pas only the week before.
As you may know, FAMILY GO TOWN have the unenviable task of warming up for the Inspirals on the current tour and in an effort to be matey, after the Nottingham gig, Graham started chatting away to a bunch of people he took to be the support group.
Launching into a big spiel about the merits of Hammond organs and '60s rarities, he was greeted with baffled looks all round.
Eventually someone put him out of his misery and told him, between guffaws, that he was in fact conversing with has-been '80s saddoes CURIOSITY KILLED THE CAT.
And let their fate be a poignant lesson to him…
Fate took a turn for the worst as far as fellow-Mancs NEW FADS were concerned when they had to cancel their headlining London gig this week as guitarist DOLAN has temporarily lost control of his right hand through over-use!
Ho ho ho!
Seriously though, the gig should be rescheduled for later on in the year and in the meantime, ticket holders should return to the point of purchase for a refund.
Dolan, in the meantime, has been told to give it a rest otherwise the upcoming European tour will have to be called off.
More news from casualty corner: this week's cover stars THERAPY? compromised themselves just a tad during their KEVIN CUMMINS photo session when drummer FYFE calmly excused himself, walked out of shot mid-click and proceeded to chuck his guts up for about ten minutes.
Having blown his lunch, he then strolled back on set and got on with the matter in hand.
‘It's never happened to me before,’ gasped an incredulous Cummins.
Noisy Californian roustabouts PAVEMENT are currently getting into a bit of a lather as some upstart garage band from Sacramento called SPIRAL STAIRS are laying a claim against Pavement's guitarist of the same name, saying that they have an ‘entertainment copyright’ on the name and want some compensation.
Of course, they are being treated with the contempt they deserve and you have to wonder why they don't just get a life…
Unlike sometime TERRY STAUNTON birthday party backing band DODGY,(they'll do anything for publicity) who have decided that life in London needs a bit of a boost, Dodgy-style, and are all set to re-open their ‘Dodgy Club’.
They're relocating from the wilds of Kingston and are taking up residence in swinging Carnaby Street.
The venue is the enticingly-named Ruby's Dance Hall and the fun (!) starts on November 5, when Dodgy will be playing the opening night.
They've also come up with the quaint idea of having a T-shirt recycling stall in the club where you can take your old T-shirts and get a new Dodgy one in exchange.
The catch is, however, that the joint is yet to be licensed, so it's bring your own hooch or just get drunk on the atmosphere.
Rather like us lot here, really…rock 'n' roll (hic!).
OUT AT the Lollapalooza tour's MASH unit, MIKI from LUSH finally reveals just where the rock ‘n’ roll in her blood comes from.
Clutching the sleeve for Lush's next single, the Ice-T remix of ‘Shout It Out Soft’, she reveals that she is, in fact, Gene Simmons' long-lost daughter, a fact only discernible by examination of her tongue.
Why was she in the MASH camp?
A bad case of Millerus Liteis, as doctors would say: she was having the ever-present pitcher of beer surgically removed from her hand.
Next week in Tongues and Bottoms corner: Russell from Moose waits for his colonic irrigation.