

ENGLAND EXTRA inside Hong Kong 7's FIJI FLOOD ALERT!
LOW-DOWN ON THE LAWS WIN a trip for TWO to the Lisbon 7's
contents
HONG KONG SEVENS
•Fiji flood alert!— Nick Cain reports on a rain-drenched but enthralling event
Ireland — sick man of Europe?
David Walsh looks in vain for encouraging signs
Pummelled at the Parc
France v Ireland — Irish suffer record defeat
Buck's Broadside
Wayne Shelford says talent takes precedence over patriotism
Laws Low-Down
Chris Thau on conflicting views about proposed Law changes
Whitbread/Rugby World Awards
Win two seats at rugby's gala luncheon
Nobody likes us — we don't care
Steve Bale sheds light on Neath's unpopularity
Fair Cop — Wales scrag Scots!
•Wales v Scotland — Dragons deserve success in poor finale
Who will be the masters of Arms?
Phil Bennett analyses the fight for Schweppes Cup honours
Winters — a man for all seasons
Mick Clearly talks to the England flanker with the ice-cold stare
Cream of the Crop!
Bill Beaumont looks ahead to the Pilkington Cup final
Townsend — a touch of class
Bill McLaren talks to Scotland's 18-year-old prodigy
Whitbread Player of the Month
Mickey Skinner, England's charismatic flanker
OVERSEAS
•SOUTH AFRICA — Bedford's Blast and John Robbie's review
•AUSTRALIA — Farr-Jones back to face the 'Boks
•CANADA — Norm Hadley hits the Tokyo trail
•UNITED STATES — Olympics or bust says Randall Lieberman
•ASIA — New Hong Kong coach George Simpkin
Win a Lisbon Sevens Trip!
Another chance for four days of sun and sevens
PLUS •ON THE AIR •POSTBAG •ROUNDABOUT •IRISH REPORT •WHISTLE STOP •SCOTTISH NOTES •INTERNATIONAL CROSSROADS •CLASSIFIEDS  
Reigning Champions.
The floodgates opened for the third successive  year as Fiji swept all before they with a breathtaking display of almost faultless sevens despite a downpour which reduced the Hong Kong Sevens venue to a quagmire.
Come rain or shine, the Fijians have become the world's undisputed sevens kings.
On The Air…
WITH NIGEL STARMER-SMITH
It never rained on Fiji
At last I made it — to Hong Kong that is, for the 17th playing of the Cathay Pacific Hongkong Bank Sevens.
Never had anything been so well trumpeted to me; surely there had been an element of hyperbole from so many colleagues and friends who had been going to the jamboree for years?
Well, I can honestly say it lived up to every good word, every tribute, for despite the event being played out in an unrelenting, warm, monsoon-like downpour, with the playing area akin to one great mud-wrestling arena, it was a superb spectacle.
I find it extraordinary (sour grapes?) that the law adjustments made for reasons of safety in the later rounds should be considered a matter for enquiry by some absentees from the event.
But it was so very much more than a great show.
In addition to the competing 23 national (plus Barbarian) teams having an appropriate will to win, there exuded a true rugby  camaraderie from amongst the players of a kind that other global rugby events have failed to match.
That has much to do with the bringing together of all participants in the one place — all staying in the same hotel, all competing at the same venue, all joining in the same events, culminating in the Barbarian Easter Tour-style tradition of each nation providing a ‘cabaret’ turn at the farewell banquet.
Such things help to strike the ideal balance of intense competition, good fun and true rugby friendship.
Certainly the ambience did nothing to diminish the quality of performance, especially from the Western Samoans, Koreans, and, above all, the Fijians.
In summing up the wet-weather skills of the South Sea Islanders, American journalist Ed Hagerty put it better than anyone, ‘It seems to rain for everyone except Fiji’.
That an event could provide such top quality entertainment and performances, enthralling a capacity 30,000 crowd throughout the 45 tries over two days, speaks volumes for the success of the formula.
It is hard to believe that a World Championship event, which will inevitably lack the close communion of teams, could cap this one.
I salute the HKRFU (whose own representative seven brought the house down in winning the Plate); the sponsors, whose far-sightedness and faith has been amply rewarded; and the participating unions — with the ‘minnows’ as important a part as the ‘big fish’.
Like everyone else who has attended the Cathay Pacific Hongkong Bank Sevens, I can't wait for the next one.
Would that the same could be said for another competition that takes place at this time of the year — England's County Championship finals.
With players left in limbo, pulled, as Orrell have been, between club and county loyalties, the event has degenerated into farce.
It now falls between all stools and cannot be allowed to suffer a lingering death any longer.
Cornwall has kept the Championship flag flying for the last few years and has continued to emphasise my own view that such a competition could have an important place.
The current position, of varying regional support, represents the worst of all worlds.
Rugby POSTBAG
Fervour not xenophobia
I DISAGREE with some of the points made in the March 1992 issue's editorial, entitled ‘Fear of xenophobia’.
Firstly, the examples of what you see as excessive zeal in Welsh preparations for a recent home international match — male-voice choir, song-sheets, operatic soprano and pre-match player introductions — are surely symptoms of something other than nationalist fervour.
They reflect added commercialism in the game, and the fact that in Wales various means are being sought to re-kindle public support lost in recent years.
Making an international match more of an occasion for spectators in the above ways seems to me to be a legitimate means to this end, and should not be confused with more negative developments in the game.
Secondly, I  disapprove of the use of the term xenophobia, which is too strong for what is being conveyed.
What I have noted within rugby circles over the years is, rather, a strong tendency towards small-mindedness and chauvinism, which continues unabated.
The most recent examples of these aspects at international level have come from Brian Moore, the England hooker, with his outburst about non-English journalists during the World Cup and in his inflammatory media comments prior to the England v France match in this season's Five Nations Championship.
What is most worrying about these two episodes is that they smack of an orchestrated campaign on the part of the English rugby powers-that-be to create added tension between nations, for which Brian Moore is singularly well-equipped to be the aggressive mouthpiece.
In conclusion, I fully endorse your desire to avoid confrontational behaviour surrounding international rugby.
However, I question your choice of examples and your over-negative and therefore different from patriotic feelings, which you unhesitatingly classify as positive.
Is Brian Moore a patriot or a nationalist?
I think we should be told.
Excessive Francophobia
HAVING just read the letters section in the April edition of Rugby World & Post , I feel that I must support the opinions expressed by Mr. Schwabb and Mr. Porter.
The current attitude in England towards French rugby, which is mirrored by the biased reports that have been regularly appearing in your magazine, is regrettable and should be deplored by those who really enjoy the game of rugby.
As you may infer from my name and address, I am a person of Irish origin who is currently living and working in France.
However, having been born and raised in England by an Irish father and an English mother I believe that I understand English attitudes quite well.
Furthermore, since I only recently arrived in France from England I am not exactly out of touch with the news from ‘home’.
While I am in agreement with the opinion that during recent rugby contests involving England and France many irresponsible and regrettable actions have been carried out by individuals, I refuse to accept that the French players are always the villains and that the English team are as innocent as the colour of their jersey suggests.
Many of the incidents, especially in the most recent games, were precipitated by a mixture of factors.
Inept handling of the match by the referee ensured that the game would not pass without incident.
However, putting the referee's performance aside, pressure from the media both in England and France and the current ‘Francophobia’ in English rugby circles (and among English people generally) were largely to blame.
During the World Cup , when an ‘Anglo-Saxon conspiracy’ was talked about in France, I noticed that most people in England laughed, dismissing the claim as the words of a bad loser.
However, I recall with equal clarity the cries of ‘Anti-English’ behaviour when England were defeated at the hands of Scotland in Murrayfield two  seasons ago, partly because the Scottish chose ‘Flower of Scotland’as their national anthem.
Evidently, these hot-headed phrases are coined haphazardly in the aftermath of important defeats and should not be taken too seriously unless there is an underlying cause for concern.
In the case of the ‘Anglo-Saxon conspiracy’ I do not believe that the majority of international referees would intentionally take biased decisions in favour of one side simply because they happen to speak the same language.
On the other hand, I do believe that English speaking referees who are exposed exclusively to the opinions of a mischievous English press are likely to be adversely influenced.
Therefore, I am in agreement with Mr. Porter in that I believe referees from other rugby nations, such as Fiji, Australia, Argentina etc., should be selected for the Five Nations Championship.
With regard to the misdemeanours of the English press, I am especially disappointed by the attitude of your magazine.
I am becoming increasingly agitated when I read articles like the one entitled ‘In the Dock’(January 1992, page 44) in which the foul play of individual French players in the domestic league was highlighted.
Let us not forget that players such as Wade Dooley have found themselves in much the same position as the Frenchmen described!
It is a pity that a magazine, which is purchased by many who are not supporters of the English rugby team, must print articles that serve only to stir primitive xenophobic sentiments in the reader.
The article ‘Anglophobia — fact or fiction’(January 1992, page 42) was written with unnecessary vehemence by somebody who clearly dislikes France and her people.
Please put a stop to this rubbish!
This month I will also be  embarrassed to allow my father-in-law, who is a Frenchman and a rugby enthusiast, to read a magazine that has again disgraced itself by using a humourless title such as‘Frog March’(April 1992 page 20) which would be more at home in The Sun newspaper.
Hopefully, in the future English rugby followers and respectable sports writers will rediscover the much talked about ‘English sense of fair play’.
Warlike Shakespearean speeches have no place in the rugby locker room and the xenophobic message within is not one that should be transmitted to players and spectators alike!
Futile exercise
THERE has been much comment recently suggesting the current England team is better than the Welsh side of the seventies.
I believe this is a futile exercise.
The game is different, far more scientific today.
What would Wales have achieved 20 years ago if they had had endless squad sessions, trips to Lanzarote, 2–3 days a week off to train, personal fitness plans, etc.?
It is absurd to compare Webb with JPR, Halliday with Gerald Davies, Carling with Dawes or Gravell, Andrew with Bennett or John, Dewi Morris with Edwards, Richards with Mervyn Davies, Skinner with Dai Morris, Probyn with Llewelyn or Price.
Need I continue?
Different eras, different games.
This current England side is excellent and, yes, England did complete a back-to-back Grand Slam which Wales did not.
But would the Welsh 1971 side, perhaps the best of all, have achieved it in 1972, the season that Wales and Scotland did not play in Ireland.
Let's see if England can win four Triple Crowns in a row and win six Five Nations titles outright in the next decade.
If they can, maybe they are a better team.
Until then, I need to be convinced that they are truly superior.
Turn pro!
FOLLOWING the massive increase in the popularity of rugby union as a result of the World Cup , and the demands that our top players now endure, surely it is time for British rugby union to go professional.
The game is now professional in South Africa at most levels, and this has not affected their game in a negative way whatsoever.
The wages of players would be a private matter between them and their clubs/unions, and the appearance of players in advertisements will benefit the game by increasing its profile.
Also the defection of players of the quality of Jonathan Davies, Martin Offiah and David Young to rugby league would also be less likely.
The present situation where players from different countries and unions are bound by different rules and standards is unsatisfactory to say the least.
How can part-time British players compete against professional overseas players in terms of standards of fitness and attitude?
British ref shortcomings
HAVING watched M. Desclaux's performance at Cardiff I am not surprised that the French are always complaining about referees.
After all British referees:
1.
Know the law — for example they know that a charged down kick does not constitute a knock-on.
2.
Play advantage — for example they do not award a penalty kick to a side which is about to score a try.
3.
Are normally able to speak at least one of the languages of the competing teams.
4.
Do not charge down kicks.
5.
Do not stand between the giver and receiver of a pass.
6.
Are at least able to make an educated guess as to who is collapsing the scrummage.
7.
Referee the line-outs.
Until British referees are able to overcome the above faults and also stop sending off players for youthful over-exuberance the French will continue to believe that there is an Anglo-Saxon conspiracy against them.
The referee at Cardiff cost Scotland a game they did not deserve to win.
London's rotten apple
I HAVE taken my wife and daughter to two games in London this year, Bath v Wasps, and Bath v Harlequins.
The reception for visiting supporters was so different that I would like to comment.
Sufficient has been written in your columns about the latter match so I will not repeat the facts.
The Wasps stewards, however, were very helpful.
As we arrived very early we were told that stand transfer tickets could be obtained from the office.
There, the message was slightly different.
Stand tickets would not be issued to non-Wasp supporters until after 2pm.
When Bath members mentioned that a third of their stand was kept for non-club members, the stewards disappeared, returning several minutes later with tickets which were then issued.
This change of heart was very much appreciated.
Other facilities were good and we had an enjoyable afternoon.
Now we come to the serious part of this letter.
How can a league be run properly when a side like Harlequins allows their players to pick their games, thus devaluing the points systems?
Only a part of the regular team turned out against Northampton, Bristol and Saracens, but I am sure that they will all appear in the Pilkington Cup Final.
It is time that players realised that if their club had not given them their chance they would not be internationals.
You do not see the same happening at Northampton, Bath, Orrell or Gloucester.
In fact, Orrell players have had to drop out of the County Championship to back their own club.
Obviously there is not a club atmosphere at Harlequins, and in most other sports they would be fined or disciplined for the unfair competition they are setting up in the league, both from the top and bottom sides.
I feel that one of the top clubs in the country is close to bringing the game into disrepute.
LITRE LETTER!
Defence of the dummy
UNDER proposed law changes, I understand that the scrum-half dummy is seriously threatened.
May I offer the case of the defence!
I fully appreciate the argument against the scrum-half who dummies from the base of the set-piece for the sole purpose of obtaining a penalty.
But let us also remember that the opposition have an obligation to stay behind the off-side line.
The dummy is nonetheless a vital element in the scrum-half's armoury in order to buy that odd half-second of time; for example, in a scrum where a flanker or scrum-half is set to pounce as the ball lies at the opposing no.8's feet, a dummy for the no.9 would (1) remind the players where the off-side line is, and (2) buy him an extra second of time to distribute the ball, and (3) avoid potential injury from being flattened by his opponents and, controversially…(4) earn the chance of a penalty.
So what's the solution?
I suggest the answer lies in the refereeing.
If a player steps off-side from the scrum-half's dummy and he does not interfere with the course of play, he should be allowed to return immediately to an on-side position without being penalised.
If he remains in an off-side position or affects play while caught off-side, he must be penalised.
Obviously this applies to backs as well as forwards.
In the World Cup matches against France and Scotland, Richard Hill was being hounded at the base of the scrum.
He dummied and immediately pointed out to the referee his opponent's falter (whether he actually stepped off-side or not!).
As his opponent re-checked his position, Hill whipped the ball out to Rob Andrew having brought himself that extra second of time.
No penalties, the ball safely in the stand-off's hands, no injuries — surely the perfect scrum-half dummy!
Buck up Beeb!
COULD you tell what the BBC has against rugby union?
I refer, or course, to the pitiful coverage of the Five Nations Championship provided by the corporation.
During the Rugby World Cup, ITV provided us with up-beat, detailed match coverage.
Each programme had exciting graphics, instantly identifiable signature tunes and a competition.
Not to mention the informative highlights programme at the end of each match day.
What do we get during the Five Nations, which in itself is one of the great institutions of British sport?
We get down at heel match coverage, slotted into Grandstand.
Yes, we do get Rugby Special on a Sunday, at a time when most of the rugby fraternity are spending time recovering from the previous day's actions, catching up with family life and preparing the next week's work.
I think we'd all like to see a highlights programme the same night as the match, when emotion is still running high.
After all, Twickenham only holds 65,000 people, so what about the other fans throughout the country?
As ITV's coverage proved, increased exposure results in increased participation and interest, resulting in…increased viewing figures and revenue.
Had the BBC realised what a gem it was holding, the deciding match of the tournament (as all others) could have been turned into real money spinners; but, no, it was a lost opportunity.
Furthermore this match marked the end of an era in English rugby for a record-breaking team which will never play together again.
It was the last match for Underwood and Halliday and maybe others — and what about Jonathan Webb's two personal records created during the match, or the potential for Championship records for Morris and Underwood?
And then there were personal cap records and the new Championship records for points amassed by any one team.
This match was not just a game, it was a landmark and to all intents and purposes one ignored by the BBC.
The people of England should have been made aware of the significance of the match.
It is, of course, the RFU's responsibility to promote the match but the BBC could have helped — unless the RFU, despite the massive popularisation of the game during the World Cup, still wants the sport to be an elite minority game.
March 7th was one of the most momentous days in British sport during the last 50 years and, when our English team achieved the first back-to-back Grand Slam in almost 70 years, we are snatched away to watch highlights of Scotland v France.
I've nothing against these two teams, but to be deprived of the euphoric English faces after only a few minutes of joy and achievement was an insult.
Kiwi contradiction
REFERENCE the letter ‘Unbiased opinion…’ in respect of the Five Nations game (Hilditch v France?), which appeared in your April issue, may I nominate A.D.J. Porter for an award for producing the oxymoron of the year —‘An unbiased New Zealander’?
British  hypocrisy ?
AN extraordinary number of words were spoken and written following the France v England game in Paris slating the French for their rough and perhaps dangerous play.
Two members of the French side were given their marching orders and have since received substantial suspensions.
On March 7th, against Wales at Twickenham, we all witnessed at least two acts of complete thuggery when not only were English players stamped on but it was their heads which came in for rough treatment.
In my opinion, these acts were equally if not more severe than the ones we saw in Paris, but there was no sign of any dismissal by the referee.
Surely something must be done to rid the game of conduct of this kind.
We should not criticise the French when the rough and dangerous play on this side of the Channel is rife in games from the very top level downwards.
Big Wade's example
I FIND it sad that certain players feel the necessity to change clubs for the furtherance of their rugby careers.
Can they not take the example of Big Wade who, in the Grand Slam match, gained his 50th England cap playing part-time for the so-called junior club of Preston Grasshoppers?
Nick Cain's ROUNDABOUT
The shape of things to come…
The bulldozers moved in immediately after this year's Hong Kong Sevens to dismantle the old Government Stadium (capacity 28,000).
The new 40,000 Hong Kong stadium, a huge artist's impression of which loomed, floodlit, above one of the old stands (above), is due for completion by 1994.
Not only is the venue about to change, but so might the whole basis of the competition.
The proposed arrangements are designed to produce a more competitive first day by doing away with the mis-matches.
But not everybody is keen to see the changes implemented.
‘Why mend something when it isn't broken’, was New Zealand coach Wayne Smith's argument.
No disagreement here.
Not only does allowing the so-called minnows to play the bigger teams provide their players with the highlights of the rugby lives — but it also means that sides like South Korea, conquerors of the Barbarians, get the exposure to top level competition.
Top tipster
THIS season's top tipster in the Ladbrokes Five Nations competition was Peter Jackson of the Daily Mail who, along with John Inverdale of the BBC and Barry Newcombe of the Sunday Express (the early front runner), had eight correct forecasts.
On a tie-break (Peter had Wales to win by four points) victory went to the Mailman and to him goes the Tipster Trophy plus a cash prize of £500.
The competition was extremely close with no fewer than five tipsters having seven correct selections and only one failing to make 50 per cent in the markings.
A shot in the arm
Will Carling (left) and Rory Underwood give blood samples for the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust.
The England players took time off before their Grand Slam match against Wales to join the fight against bone marrow disease.
They have also managed to persuade most of the England squad to join the campaign, which already has some 225,000 donors on record.
Underwood and Carling's tissue types will be stored on computer until they can be matched up with somebody who needs them.
The campaign, which aims to raise £500,000, was originally set up in memory of a seven-year-old Kent boy who dies in 1979.
If you want to be on the register and are aged between 18 and 40, and weigh at least 8 stone, you can write to: The Donor Department
Naas Class
OPINIONS differ as to how good the Springboks will be after years in isolation, but one man who seems to be as good as ever is 34-year-old fly-half Naas Botha if an invitation match in Hong Kong before the main sevens is any guide.
Playing for the New Zealand Barbarians in a 23–13 win over a strong Public School Wanderers side, Botha ended a superb personal display in soaking conditions with his shorts as pristine white as when he had started the game, during which he had given a cultured demonstration of the arts of reading the game and tactical kicking.
Confidence trick?
THE England ‘B’ tour to New Zealand could prove to be a mixed blessing thanks to an insufficiently competitive provincial itinerary leading up to the two ‘tests’ against a New Zealand XV at the end of the tour.
The build-up games do not include the likes of Wellington and Canterbury let alone Division One champions Otago and record-breaking Ranfurly Shield-holders Auckland.
Instead this aspiring England squad, many of who will be hoping to fill the gaps left by the ‘Dad's Army’ veterans as well as challenge for British Lions places next summer, will be cutting their teeth for such momentous challenges on lowly provincial opposition like Wairarapa-Bush and Wanganui.
Nurturing confidence is one thing, but  cosseting them from the harsh realities of top provincial competition could prove totally counter-productive come the two games the count against the New Zealand XV, who themselves will not include any of the All Black tourists in Australia for the Bledisloe Cup series.
North-Side divide
THE Southern Hemisphere drive, outlined in our Laws Low-Down feature on page 28 , to make the game more spectator-friendly is a laudable goal — but one that could change the game for the worse.
The Aussies and Kiwis, threatened by rugby league's aggressive marketing Down Under, want a faster game with less emphasis on set-pieces.
The thin end of the wedge is that this chips away at the core of what makes union unique: it is a game for all shapes and sizes.
For instance: emasculate the scrummage and where are you going to accommodate the short, squat no-neck brigade?
The answer is that they will become superfluous, to be replaced by a new prototype that looks remarkably like a rugby league player.
The Selection Splash…
NEW ZEALAND's symbiotic relationship with Western Samoa is fast making international selection an exercise in flying flags of convenience judging by Pat Lam's appearance for them in the Hong Kong Sevens.
It is just six months since Lam and Timo Tagaloa, both of whom were included in the current All Black trials, wore the blue of Western Samoa with such distinction in the World Cup.
A sense of common purpose and identity is essential to building teamwork.
What hope have Western Samoa got of developing that if a conveyor belt of their top talent is forever being diverted into All Black hands?
Equally significant, the one-year-on, one-year-off approach adopted by the Kiwis and Samoans is in danger of turning the World Cup into a lottery.
Spraying it about!
Pat Lam back in New Zealand colours as one of his former Western Samoan teammates hurtles in to tackle him during their recent Hong Kong Sevens quarter-final.
Wishful thinking?
THE Springboks will be a fixture at the Hong Kong Sevens next year — as this South African and his friend seem keen to point out.
But the biggest catch of all, the 1995 World Cup, may have slipped off South Africa's hook.
The word is, just as predicted by RW&P in January, that its political volatility has made it untenable as a venue.
The new front runner is New Zealand, co-hosts of the inaugural 1987 World Cup.
John Howe
THE TRAGICALLY early death of 28-year-old West Hartlepool lock John Howe during his club's Division Two game at Morley has cast a sad shadow over West's promotion celebrations.
A gutsy and popular player, Howe ignored medical warnings despite previous heart tremors.
He suffered a heart attack early in the game.
The 6ft. 7ins. giant played for Hartlepool Old Boys, Hartlepool Rovers, Saracens, Sale and West Hartlepool, as well as representing Durham, London, The Barbarians and England U23.
Fylde's Bill Beaumont paid tribute to the charismatic Northerner: ‘John will be sorely missed.
He was a true unsung hero’.
Daddy's boy
THERE were all sorts of celebrities at this year's Hong Kong Sevens, ranging from Miss South Africa to Roger Moore.
But few famous folk attracted more attention than Neil Bush, in town to launch a sports channel and to root for the Eagles.
Unfortunately having the son of the most powerful man in the world didn't seem to do the Eagles much good — they stumbled against Argentina and finally fell flat on their faces when they met Tonga in the Plate quarter-final.
Stitched up
NOT only did the Kiwis get blown off the park at the Hong Kong Sevens by Fiji, but three gnarled members of their supporters club got taken to the cleaners in a local hostess bar.
A round of drinks — and two for the ladies — cost nearly £500.
The moral of the story: always fill in the total box on your credit card slip.
Bloody disgrace
‘IT'S A bloody disgrace’, was the reaction from one HKRFU official on hearing the RFU immediate past president Mike Pearey's pronouncement at a pre-sevens team manager's dinner that England still no feel it appropriate to send a national side to Hong Kong.
England will no doubt pay the price when it comes to next year's World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield.
SEEN & HEARD…
‘Everest will always be there but I might never get a chance to play at Twickenham again ’—WILL KEFFORD (Harlequins and Middlesex Colts full-back) who cancelled a trip to join his father's Everest expedition to play in the Colts Final at Twickenham which Middlesex lost to Lancashire (19–15).
‘It is much easier to learn from mistakes if the team is winning ’—ALAN DAVIES (Wales coach) after Scotland were beaten in Cardiff.
‘A couple of weeks in New Zealand will get people tuned in to the type of rugby we want to play ’—PHILLIP DANAHER (Ireland captain) after the debacle in Paris.
‘We need to realign tours with the World Cup…we really need to think about the demands on players.
Employers are not as co-operative as they used to be and players can't afford to throw up a job with the employment market as it is ’—GEORGE SPOTSWOOD (Irish RFU technical officer).
‘If the injury clears up and I feel I have something to offer I will play again ’—MIKE TEAGUE (Gloucester and England no.8).
‘There was still apprehension going into all of the games.
We didn't take anything for granted.
But I never felt we were going to lose, even in Paris ’—WADE DOOLEY (England lock) on the Grand Slam success.
‘You can't guarantee anything.
Even after the selection of this team I went home, switched on the television news, only to find that the weather forecast predicted blizzards in Scotland.
Here we go again I thought!’—ROGER BIDGOOD (Newport centre) on being given his first cap after losing his original chance five years ago thanks to bad weather.
‘We would prefer to have a year's grace to try some of these experiments ’—DON RUTHERFORD (RFU technical director) on the proposed new law changes.
‘He's matured incredibly, he now believes he's a key man ’—DICK BEST (England coach) on lock Martin Bayfield.
‘We have to go to New Zealand with the objective of coming back with half a dozen players who will be able to take the final step up next season ’—JOHN ELLIOTT (national selector) on the ‘B’ tour.
FIJI FLOOD ALERT!
HONG KONG 7
Talk of lightning strikes in rugby bars normally conjures up pictures of a nifty piece of front-row footwork, usually attributable to the troglodyte located in the middle of the dark tunnel.
On Hong Kong this year it took on a slightly different connotation.
Let's put it this way: because of the occasional lightning strike and buckets of water from the celestial quarter there was little opportunity for sevens hookers to ply their ancient trade.
Rain stops play?
No way!
The troops crack on as the storm sets in over So Kon Po.
When the storm hit, it hit hard.
The stormclouds that had been threatening to unload for most of the week finally opened their hatches on Saturday afternoon.
Down came the rain, thunder and lightning, providing nature's primeval accompaniment.
A deluge.
It didn't relent until Sunday evening.
Three in a row!
Waisale Serevi and Viliame Rauluni gun down New Zealand's Paula Bale, a fellow Fijian, as he tries to mud-glide between them during Fiji's emphatic 22–6 triumph in the final.
Murphy's Law had exercised its jurisdiction and the weekend of the Hong Kong Sevens had, inevitably, been on the receiving end of its ruling.
The Government Stadium at So Kon Po was swamped.
Torrents of water sluiced through the stands, drowning pitch, players and spectators.
The torrential downpour initially proved to be a great leveller, putting the skids under the big seeds as well as the minnows.
Irrespective of size, status or skills everyone was brought down to earth with a splash — the difference was that as Saturday's play unfolded the seeded sides invariably proved to be the more adept in the art of ‘aquaplaning’.
There were two exceptions to the rule.
One was the American Eagle Andy Dujakovich who set a new aquaplane world record when he slid, in a curtain of spray, from just inside his own half past the opposition 10 metre line in an attempt to swoop on an errant Puma.
The second was the Fijians.
Fiji stood tall while all about them went slip-sliding away.
The holders were immaculate in Saturday's pool games, brushing aside Sri Lanka (34–0) and then Japan (38–0).
Their brilliant playmaker Waisale Serevi, ‘Small’ to his mates, whose balance and timing in sevens is reminiscent of that Pele used to display with the round ball, did most of the damage with six tries and ten conversions.
A small contribution of 44 points.
As the rain continued to pelt down into the Sunday, Fijian confidence hit hew highs as they went in search of a record third successive title.
Having seen last  year's giant-killers Canada get a taste of their own medicine in Pool F, losing to the impressive Koreans (16–12), Fiji soon realised that the other seeds were going to struggle to live with them on the rice-paddy pitch.
The deck of cards was stacked even further in their favour when HKRFU chairman Don Watson and his organising committee decided, in view of the waterlogged pitch, to replace scrummages with a tapped penalty going to the side getting the put-in.
With the ball often in need of a team of scuba-divers to dig it out of the muddy waters, the decision made sense.
Otherwise every scrum would have ended with the scrum-halves and both sets of forwards wallowing in the mire with little chance of the ball every seeing daylight.
A meeting of team managers endorsed the HKRFU decision.
When they were asked whether they wanted to abandon the  tournament if the rain did not ease the managers unanimously voted to continue.
Making a splash: a Tongan tackler puts a hold on Hong Kong's Kevin A ‘Hearne in a pulsating Plate final, with the Crown Colony taking the honours 12–8.
‘They said the conditions were the same for all teams and that they wanted to stay on and entertain the crowd’, said Sevens rules committee chairman Dave Crosbie.
Hippos at play?
No.
It's New Zealand's Eric Rush shaking the ball free from Western Samoa's Filipo Saena (with Paula Bale the grateful recipient) during NZ's 18–12 win.
As it happened, the conditions were not quite the same for all teams…
Umbrellarama…a forest of umbrella's brightens up the Hong Kong stadium's cloak of grey as the rain sets in on finals day.
Revealed Serevi: ‘It is very wet, but we have often played in worse than this back in Fiji.
We are used to it’.
First onto the Fijian chopping block were France, captained by their legendary centre Philippe Sella.
At times it was like watching a cat toying with a mouse, so complete was Fiji's mastery in a 22–6 win.
Next up were Australia, complete with Willie Ofahengaue but minus former sevens stalwarts Lynagh and Campese.
Bob Dwyer's boys may be kings of the 15-a-side code but they haven't had a sniff of a sevens title in five years.
And the Fijians weren't about to let Tim Horan and his new-look side get a look-in in the semi-final.
The huge lock Mesake Rasari, one of the fastest men on show, set the scene when he motored home from halfway.
Rasari, a soldier with the Fijian contingent in the UN Peacekeeping Force in the Lebanon, had flown back to Fiji specifically for trials in preparation for this title defence.
Puk, Puk!
French skipper Philippe Sella is snared by a Papua New Guinea tackler during their one-sided (22–0) Pool B encounter.
According to Fijian coach Ratu Kitione Tuibua, the giant forward was indispensable to their plans.
‘We needed him’, said Tuibua of the man he described as ‘one of the best sevens players in the world’.
Magnificent though Rasari was, you were left wondering just how much they needed him when newcomer Ratu Sakeasi showed Tim Horan and Jason Little a clean pair of heels in a 60-metre chase for the line.
With Serevi swivelling on a sixpence and winger Seru's speed the Wallabies were wiped out (28–4) paving the way for a third successive showdown with New Zealand.
The Kiwis had an altogether harder slog to get there.
They scraped past Western Samoa in a cliffhanging quarter-final (18–12) with a little help from an ostentatious refereeing display by Tony Spreadbury.
In the semi-final they met Korea.
Where, you may ask, were the Barbarians?
The answer: soundly beaten in the quarter-finals by a Korean side which, inspired by skipper Kim Yoen-Ki, were worthy victors.
Anyone patronising the Koreans should beware.
They are neither small nor slow.
More importantly, they adapted to the conditions far more effectively than Gavin Hastings' band of teetotallers.
The Barbarians, having been sworn off the demon drink by their skipper three days before the event, were certainly short of a wee dram of inspiration.
Predictably the Koreans were unable to sustain their bid for glory in the face of the New Zealand machine fielding sevens stalwarts Dallas Seymour, Pat Lam and Scott Pierce and featuring quicksilver North Harbour winger Glen Osborne.
Before the main feature, however, there were a couple of important sideshows to set before the drenched assembly in the shape of the Plate and Bowl finals.
In the third tier competition a  beleaguered group of Romanian students, with little more than £30 spending money for a week in Hong Kong, still had enough brass to beat Papua New Guinea for the Bowl.
Local boys Hong Kong made good their pledge to bring home the bacon for retiring coach Jim Rowark.
They even gave him a Plate to carry it on — silver, that is — when they beat Tonga in a pulsating second-tier final which saw Gareth James power over for the winning try in extra time.
On a Plate!
The boys from the Crown Colony lift the prize:(l-r) coach Jim Rowak, Gareth James (bun in the oven?),
Stuart Krohn, Craig Pain, Stewart Brew, Chris Spowart, Chris Jones, Kevin A ‘Hearne, Gary Cross.
If the sheer grit of Craig Pain's men in wresting victory from Tongan grasps filled the Crown Colony cup with good cheer what was to come next sent if cascading over the brim as the Fijians opened the floodgates to drown the New Zealand assault on their sevens citadel.
They produced a stunning array of wet-weather skills.
This writer will be lucky to see its ilk again.
In twenty minutes of sublime running and handling they dropped the proverbial ‘bar of soap’ just once.
The hero was the 6ft. 4ins.
Rasari who ran in a hat-trick of tries to compliment Serevi's bag of tricks.
Seru completed the Fijian try-count while Scott Pierce clawed one back for the bemused Kiwis.
Pierce, having bowed the knee once, decided to do so again after the game when he proposed to girlfriend Jane Harris under the posts.
The question, which had been popped earlier on the stadium's electronic scoreboard, got the thumbs up.
What better consolation prize!
As for the rest, well, the Fijians had left us singing in the rain.
Flying the flag: The Fijian team celebrates as it retains its grip on the Cup for the third year in succession:(l-r) Fijian supporter, Waisale Serevi, Tomasi Cama, Vesito Rauluni (captain), Mesake Rasari, Viliami Rauluni, Filimone Seru, Ratu Sakeasi (front).
Best and Fairest: Fijian hat-trick hero Mesake Rasari getting into his immense stride against Japan in their Pool A clash.
Korean giant-killers!
Springbok fullback André Joubert (below), finds that his Barbarian team mates have gone AWOL…
Taiwan terrors!
Chane Chyi-Ming heads for a try in their 24–0 Pool E victory over the Bowl-winning Romanians.
Splunch!
Santiago Meson of Argentina catches the full force of a Willie ‘O’ tackle as Australia triumph 28–0 in the quarter-finals.
IRELAND
IRELAND — SICK MAN OF EUROPE?
Ireland survey the wreckage of their worst ever Five Nations campaign as they prepare to leave for New Zealand.
DAVID WALSH argues that Ireland can no longer rely on fire and fury to paper over the cracks in a country where there are fifteen gaelic footballers for every rugby player.
After the latest tango in Paris, there is a very real sense of a rugby nation in crisis.
Late night investigation on television, page-long analysis in the newspapers, massive defections from the forthcoming tour to New Zealand, an assistant coach sacked, a World Cup hero jettisoned.
Even a freshly conceived joke to ease the pain.
Two lads in a Dublin pub, discussing the fall and fall.
First guy tells his mate the IRFU should pay the players.
Knowing his friend to be a rugby man of the old school, the second man is incredulous: ‘After Paris’, says he, ‘you're saying the Union should pay the players?’
‘Yeah, the players should be paid redundancy’.
It is a poor crisis that doesn't generate some humour.
On the flight home from Paris, Paul Dean sat next to me.
Dean, as Mullin, Kiernan and Irwin would tell, is a good man to have beside you.
The crisis, of course, consumed most of our flying time.
An hour or so after the game, Dean had been interviewed for Rugby Special at the Parc des Princes.
What did he think of the game?
The French?
The Irish?
Blah, blah, blah.
Then the interviewer asked what needed to be done to turn things around.
That threw a man who is by nature unflappable: ‘I don't remember what I answered’, said Dean, ‘but I know what I felt like saying: ‘You tell me’.
Yes, you tell me.
You see everybody casts their tuppence worth into the pool but nobody details the route to a better future.
This may be for the very simple reason that, just now, nobody envisages a better future’.
Hardly the kind of sentiment to galvanise an inexperienced squad a few weeks before its departure for an eight-match tour to New Zealand.
But there you go!
It is necessary to get things into perspective before the long haul to the Southern Hemisphere, though.
Through the last five seasons Ireland has played 20 matches in the Five Nations Championship: three wins, one draw, 16 defeats.
Wales travelled to New Zealand five years ago and were crushed.
Eight matches: two wins, six defeats.
Fifty-two points conceded in the First Test, 54 in the second.
Physically battered as well: Wales summoned six replacements onto the short tour and were constantly replacing injured players in matches.
Wales went to New Zealand as Triple Crown Champions.
The Irish head south after their worst season in the Five Nations.
Many factors underpin Ireland's descent into the basement.
By far the most significant is the evolution of the game itself and Ireland's inability to move with the flow.
Greater levels of fitness and better team organisation are two of the more obvious modern achievements.
It is true that the Irish have not genuinely embraced the fitness revolution and the real impact of the fitness factor is witnessed in the unpleasant sight of what fit teams are doing to Ireland.
It was after the 1990 England v Ireland game at Twickenham that Paul Ackford casually mentioned to one of the Irish players that his team knew it had only to withstand Ireland's 20 minutes of blood and guts to win easily.
That was the game in a nutshell.
England won without fuss.
And it has been that way for five seasons.
There are background details worth reasserting.
Ireland's playing pool is small because, amongst the team sports, rugby ranks a distant fourth behind gaelic football, hurling and soccer.
Gaelic football attracts many that might otherwise have been useful to rugby.
This isn't solely because of gaelic football's roots in the traditions of the island.
Constant discussion with my nine-year-old son on the merits of the gaelic version as opposed to rugby have been illuminating.
He plays both but his preference, and by a long way, is for gaelic football.
I watch him play both and quietly agree that for a nine-year-old  gaelic football offers a more interesting challenge; more skills, more individual expression and less opportunity for what nine-year-olds call glory-hunting.
Afterwards I continue to argue for rugby, feeling ever more like the devil's advocate.
For Irish rugby, the problem is that so many play gaelic football.
There may be as many as 15 gaelic players for every one rugby player.
Older folk will tell you that it was ever thus; that Irish rugby has always had to contend with the primacy of gaelic games.
True.
But rugby has evolved.
In previous eras Ireland could depend upon longevity of service from its best players; Mike Gibson, Syd Millar, Tom Kiernan, Willie-John McBride, Fergus Slattery all battled on into their mid-thirties.
Their kind of experience was incalculable.
Now the game beats to a more pressurised drum and Brendan Mullin exits at 28.
As things changed, the IRFU remained pretty much the same.
As administrators they did just fine, but they were never truly committed to spreading the game.
Accepting the exception of Limerick, rugby has steadfastly remained the preserve of the middle-class in Ireland.
Neither did the IRFU spot the train coming.
When England turned to Tom McNabb in 1986, Ireland smirked.
An athletics coach, rugby forwards jumping hurtles, throwing javelins, bounding along like kangaroos.
Into the jargon of rugby came blip tests, VO maximums, plyometrics, aerobic and anaerobic.
Six years ago Ireland wasn't ready for this; it is not certain it is ready for it today.
Down and out?
Ciaran Fitzgerald's dishevelled and disheartened foot soldiers (l-r) Halpin, Smith, Popplewell, Rigney, Galwey and Fitzgibbon, reel from the French onslaught as they go down by a record margin in Paris.
At the time Brendan Mullin was two years into his international career and combining rugby with serious athletics (Mullin is a former Irish record holder for the 110m Hurdles).
Guided by his longtime athletics coach Jim Burns, Mullin's physical preparation was always of the highest quality.
And yet the penny never dropped.
Nobody associated with Irish rugby put one and one  together and decided that Mullin's preparation was the training of the future.
In fact the beginning of the great fall was being acted out in Irish rugby.
After two successful seasons under Tommy Kiernan, Willie-John McBride was brought in as coach at the beginning of the 1983–84 season.
Ireland lost all four Championship matches in ‘84 and it was generally felt that McBride had not achieved a good relationship with his players.
At the time Mick Doyle was coach to a successful Leinster side and he believed he could do a better job than McBride.
At the end of McBride's first season as coach, Doyle contested the re-election and won a surprise victory.
Doyle talked with the fervour of a preacher and generated enough enthusiasm to fuel 10 teams.
He said Ireland would play attacking, 15-man rugby.
Expectations were created.
And, in that first season, delivered upon.
Ireland beat Wales, Scotland and England, drew with France.
More than that, it played attractive rugby.
Doyle became a hero.
But that Triple Crown and Championship of ‘85 came at a terrible price.
What it did was implant the notion that Messiahs worked.
Doyle had taken over from an unsuccessful coach and in no time had turned everything round.
Of course, when the time came, Doyle became a victim of an attitude which he had helped to foster.
When his Ireland team was whitewashed in ‘86, attention  focussed on the coach.
If McBride had been the problem in ‘84, why couldn't it be Doyle in ‘86?
It didn't matter that all of the important issues were being ignored.
Problems are more interesting when personalised.
Doyle's team won two out of the four Championship matches in ‘87 (in hindsight, a herculean achievement) but the team lost its way at the World Cup.
At the time it was genuinely believed that he was a significant factor in the unsatisfactory World Cup performance.
Jimmy Davidson, coach to the highly successful Ulster side, was given the job and everybody expected serious improvement.
Davidson won his first match in the Championship and then just two from the following 11, both victories being achieved against a Welsh side deep into their crisis.
Long before Davidson was ushered out, he was perceived to have failed.
Too theoretical, too rigid, too whatever-negative-description-you-can-come-up-with.
Yet, through this entire period, we were missing the point.
Irish rugby was the problem, not the poor coaches burdened with too much expectation.
There is a story told against Jimmy Davidson which, in fact, should be told against the game in Ireland.
Davidson was discussing, well, let's say athleticism, with the overweight but useful Connacht second row Aidan Higgins.
Deciding that discretion was the better part of valour, Davidson began: ‘Aidan, you probably like a few pints?’
‘I loves them, Jimmy’, replied the second rower with an innocence that was touching.
London Irish coach George Hook, who has, in fact, made a player out of Higgins, believes there is a cultural problem: ‘I don't think our players drink very much but I imagine they drink more than their counterparts in other rugby countries.
And our players would have a very low appreciation of the importance of diet’.
Ciaran Fitzgerald was last in the line of coaches who were going to solve our problems.
Fitzgerald came into the job with a playing track record which suggested he had a real talent for leadership.
He is, by nature, an organised man and it was expected that his teams would be well organised.
Fitzgerald's teams have played eight Championship  games so far; seven defeats, one draw.
Although Fitzgerald has struggled as coach, nobody now believes the problem is simply one of which coach to choose.
That is about as much progress as has been achieved.
For the Irish squad to tour New Zealand will not be fit enough — the IRFU decision to send fitness advisor Eddie O'Sullivan with the team was made at the eleventh hour.
Under siege.
Just as McBride and Doyle before him, Ciaran Fitzgerald has suffered from the Irish notion that Messiahs work.
Neither is anybody convinced that the Union has any ideas about bringing about genuine improvement within the game.
A recent decision tightening up the laws relating to overseas players will greatly restrict the flow of foreigners to Ireland.
Most rugby people in Ireland believe this a retrograde step and it was taken against the expressed  wishes of a sizeable majority of the clubs.
Maybe it is true that it will take something more than a 44-points thrashing by France to force the IRFU into serious action.
A couple of losses to countries like Canada and Italy (easily conceivable just now) is probably what Irish rugby needs.
One feels a certain sympathy for those selected to carry the torch in New Zealand.
Criticism of the team and its management has been stinging through the season and much of it has come from former players.
People like Tony Ward, Mick Quinn, Fergus Slattery, Moss Keane, Mick Doyle and Willie-John McBride are regular commentators on the game.
Doyle, a passionate man who says pretty much what he thinks, has upset more than a few with his assessments.
Some of this season's squad played under Doyle in the mid-'80s and they especially resent his criticisms.
But there is a peculiar Irishness about the controversy which has come with this; the focus of attention has been a sideshow — an interesting sideshow, but a sideshow nonetheless.
The forthcoming New Zealand tour presents a very difficult itinerary: Auckland, Canterbury, two Tests and four challenging midweek games.
Irish teams do tour well and it is certain that the new assistant coach Gerry Murphy will improve the quality of Ireland's back play.
But this is a squad short on senior players and vulnerable in critical positions; most obviously fly-half.
When Brendan Mullin retired from the game he received many messages of appreciation from rugby enthusiasts.
One struck a particular chord with the player: it wished him well in his retirement and pointed out that rugby had given Mullin a PhD in travel.
Most of those who will go to New Zealand have yet to take their primary degree in the subject.
It would be foolish to expect anything other than the worst from this tour.
Wales' two wins out of eight may be the relevant benchmark.
Just now the tour stands before the players as an Everest.
Never has the challenge to Irish players been greater.
IRISH REPORT
with Sean Diffley
The Irish management team of manager Noel Murphy, captain Phil Danaher and coach Ciaran Fitzgerald will slip into New Zealand hoping the All Blacks will be so concerned with their tilts at the World XV, the Australians in the Bledisloe Cup and the South Africans on their August tour that they might just be caught a bit unawares when Ireland arrive.
The tour to New Zealand is an intimidating affair by any criteria, with Canterbury, Auckland and the All Blacks on successive Saturdays.
But, even if the All Blacks are subconsciously tempted to relegate the Irish to an after-thought, it might not make a bit of difference.
Throughout the past Five Nations series it was said that Ireland had reached rock-bottom, particularly against Wales and Scotland, and the only way they could go was up.
But in that horrendous final game with France in Paris they revealed that they could, after all, manage to plumb even greater depths of ineptitude.
The old adage that the Irish are at their most dangerous when they are at their lowest ebb has been consigned to the dustbin as a forgotten tradition.
It was certainly far being in evidence in 1992, the season that the Fighting Irish of old became the Docile Irish.
And adding to the problems for the Irish tour to New Zealand — an expedition that captain Phil Danaher referred to as ‘a learning experience’— is the list of ‘unavailables’ which has almost rivalled the list of those chosen.
For various reasons — business, injury, examinations etc. — the list excludes 13 of those originally invited.
They include Philip Matthews, the London Irish trio of Simon Geoghegan, David Curtis and Rob Saunders and experienced campaigners like Donal Lenihan, Keith Crossan, Brendan Mullin and Ralph Keyes.
The last time Ireland toured in New Zealand was 1976 when Tom Grace led a party of no-hopers.
But that side didn't do so badly at all.
A referee's mistake lost them the match against Auckland and they were in with a chance for a long time in the Test — there was only one — before being beaten 11–3.
Only Canterbury beat them convincingly.
Still, Phil Danaher, the new Irish captain, knows the mountain that will have to be climbed.
Danaher is a fighter, a hard tackler who showed, as he led Garryowen to All Ireland League success this season, that he has the gift of leadership.
Danaher's is a rags to riches story.
A rough diamond in his earlier years, he has now become a sophisticated centre who was drafted into the Irish World Cup squad, although he languished on the bench and was never called upon.
But after three disappointing Five Nations games, Ciaran Fitzgerald drafted him into the side — as well as making him captain — for the game in Paris.
it wasn't a move calculated to arrest the awful trend but, most people agree, it was a step in the right direction.
The surprise choice for the New Zealand tour was Michael Bradley, a scrum-half who has been completely out of international reckoning over the past few seasons.
Bradley, who played in the first World Cup in 1987, was still in the Irish team the following season but, apart from an appearance against Wales when Gus Aherne was injured in 1990, he became the forgotten man.
But a few days before the squad was chosen, Rob Saunders, of London Irish, who had just changed jobs, informed Fitzgerald that he would have to change his mind and refuse the invitation.
So the night before the squad was picked Bradley was approached and accepted.
‘It was’, he said ‘right out of the blue.
I didn't even think I was in contention’.
It could prove an inspired choice for New Zealand.
Bradley is not the world's fastest passer, but he is a durable warrior, a highly intelligent and brave footballer who could be just the man for the All Blacks.
The problem position, of course, is fly-half — the berth that has given Ireland the greatest of difficulties over the past few seasons.
Ireland will go to New Zealand with Derek McAleese the first choice and Peter Russell the back-up.
McAleese, who has a mighty powerful boot, has appeared only once for Ireland — in Paris this season.
Russell has also made only the single appearance in the green jersey — against England at Twickenham in 1990.
IRELAND's New Zealand tour marks the end of Ken Reid's tenure as manager and chairman of selectors with Noel Murphy taking over the reins of office on Reid's retirement.
The Belfast headmaster was highly popular, both with the players and with the media, but the Murphy appointment will mean a definite change of emphasis in the driver's seat.
While Reid, a member of the executive committee of the IRFU, concentrated on administrative affairs with the Irish squad, Murphy's experience and expertise is much more in the coaching sphere.
Capped 41 times at flanker, he played eight Tests for the British Lions in New Zealand and Australia in 1959 and 1966.
From 1978 to 1980 he was Ireland's coach and also coached Bill Beaumont's 1980 Lions tour to South Africa.
So Murphy, a man with a deep knowledge of the game, will be a help to the beleaguered Ciaran Fitzgerald as the whitewashed Irish take on the All Blacks.
5 NATIONS ROUND 5
PUMMELLED AT THE PARC
Short on ideas, short on fire and short on pace, Ireland were outclassed and outgunned as Berbizier's men let rip with a display of smooth running rugby that steadily gathered momentum.
Outscrummaged and outjumped, Ireland were harried by Tordo and Cabannes in the loose.
The Irish backs missed tackles while Penaud was authoritative, Sadourny incisive and Viars electric as he clocked up a record 24-point haul.
Run off their feet and beaten by a record score, it was a good job the players couldn't hear one Irish journalist in the stand: ‘My God!
There really isn't anything good to say this time — not one thing’.
Stopped in his tracks.
Ireland prop Nick Popplewell (on floor) is turned over and dispossessed by Laurent Cabannes as his captain Phil Danaher (left) tries to lend a hand.
‘IT'S been disappointing coming here for the last 20 years — so let's not get carried away with this defeat’.
So spoke Irish manager Ken Reid as he tried to dismiss Ireland's record defeat at the Parc des Princes.
As Ciaran Fitzgerald's charges bombed for the fourth time in succession to comfortably claim the tournament's Wooden Spoon.
Quite where Ireland will go from here is impossible to predict; it will be enough just to avoid the maulings at Wales — as Triple Crown winners — suffered in New Zealand on their ill-fated two-test tour in 1988.
If the Irish are to prosper Down Under, they will certainly have to improve their ball retention in contact situations, where Cabannes and Tordo were constantly able to rob ball on the deck.
Their forwards will also need to scrummage far better than they did against Armary, Genet and Gallart, who had them under the cosh from the second minute.
For the French, under little or no pressure it was back-to-business as a display of clinical finishing when faced with feeble tackling lead to a record score.
Viars' record 24-point haul attested to their domination and the wing's superb form.
All eyes.
Scrum-half Aubin Heuber collects more clean possession as (l–r) Cecillon, Robinson, Roumat, Rigney and new cap Paul Hogan look on.
BUCK'S BROADSIDE
ONLY IN RUGBY WORLD & POST
The history of the game is littered with talented players who were never capped and so defected to league.
So why not give the obvious candidates their big chance, asks WAYNE SHELFORD.
If not, he argues, players should be able to opt for another country if — like John Gallagher or the Samoans playing in the All Black trials — they want to play at the highest level regardless of country.
He also casts his eye over the proposed law changes.
What makes an international player?
Skill, obviously.
Application, of course.
But then what?
In my experience the crucial factor is simply one of opportunity.
So many players get to first-class level and stay there.
In some cases this is simply because they are not quite good enough.
Or, if they have the skills, they simply can't be bothered to train hard enough in order to maximise that potential.
What, then, about the top tier?
Quite simply, our good, committed players need the crucial break.
If they don't get it, they can very quickly lose motivation.
The best of course will hang in there and tough it out.
To mind comes Ian Hunter of my own club Northampton.
He is at a significant stage in his development, but has had an excellent domestic season and also performed well for England ‘B’.
Will he get the chance to step up?
I hope so.
He has such a natural raw talent it would  be a waste to keep him hanging on.
Already he has had offers from league and, although he has no interest in switching codes at the moment, the history of the game is littered with examples of guys who were caught at a low ebb by rugby league scouts and consequently signed.
Also I know that my coach at North Harbour, Peter Thorburn, was very impressed with Ian when he played for us last summer.
Peter is now on the All Black selection committee and has stated that there is currently no fullback of Ian's calibre in New Zealand.
What price another John Gallagher story?
I know that yet again there will be a furore about players switching their allegiance as and when they see fit.
Three Samoans who played in the World Cup — Tagaloa, Bunce and Steve Bachop — have just been picked for the All Black trials.
The rule in New Zealand is that no player can represent two countries in the one calendar year.
That period ended for us on December 31st.
So, technically, there is nothing wrong at all in the boys being picked for the trials.
As to whether they ought to play, again I have no objection.
If someone is playing rugby full-time in that country then why shouldn't they have the opportunity?
As I've said before, the key factor is not one of nationalism but of sporting excellence.
Talent should be given a stage on which it can perform.
Another major topic of debate at the IB meeting will be the proposed law changes.
Some of these proposals seems to me to make great sense.
The five point try should at least ensure that the ball is in play more often.
As it is, a penalty kick at goal can take up to two minutes out of the match.
Have ten  shots at goal in a game and you've lost twenty minutes, a quarter of the match.
I'm all for having the ball in play as often as possible.
The other key area would appear to be the line-out laws.
There's a move to legalise lifting, a change which I would wholeheartedly endorse.
It happens at the moment anyway, so why not sanction it and make it a skill in itself.
You would get a much cleaner ball as a result and so the whole flow of the game would improve.
As far as I understand there is not real move to do anything about the current trend for teams to kick the ball from 22 to 22.
The idea is to kick for position.
I see no reason for the administrators to restrict this in any way.
The best remedy is to counter-attack.
It's up to teams to exploit this opportunity.
That would soon stop teams kicking the ball away.
There's a lot of change going on in the game at the moment, which is always a healthy sign.
There's room for even more, but that's another story.
Of course that's not to say that tradition doesn't have a place.
It most certainly does.
I was glad to see, for instance, that a proposed game between Australia and England scheduled to take place in Tokyo was kicked straight into touch.
The idea was prompted by commercial interests and, valuable as money is in the game, it has no place in setting up these gimmicky matches.
I would mean nothing.
Australia are the best in the world because they won the World Cup and they will be world champions until the next time.
No one-off contests should be allowed to alter that.
South Africa are back in the news in no uncertain manner.
They have made a strong bid for the 1995 World Cup with only NZ in opposition.
South Africa would host the tournament magnificently I'm sure.
But I can't help feeling that the IB should look to promote the game worldwide.
Let's give the Canadians and the Americans a boost.
Finally, one look at the South Africans' itinerary for the next six months — tests against Romania, Italy, then New Zealand, Australia, France and England — is enough to make you break out in a cold sweat.
Even though your aim is to get back up with the pace, using the matches as learning experience, it's still a very daunting programme.
Rather them than me.
LAWS LOW-DOWN
As the IRB meets in New Zealand to consider far-reaching proposals for changes to the game's laws, CHRIS THAU talked to the main
The game is about to embark on an expedition into the unknown as sweeping law changes come into force.
Having recommended acceptance and implementation at their annual meeting in Wellington, New Zealand, the IRB — as a result of reaction from within the game — will, however, shy away from a proposed four-year moratorium on change.
Improving player safety was the main objective of the last three-year moratorium.
That, according to the IRB, has largely been achieved and now, in the aftermath of the phenomenal success of the World Cup, the IRB think it is time to take the game to the world.
The leading Southern Hemisphere nations — New Zealand and Australia — see the proposed law changes as a means of achieving a faster, more spectacular game, better able to offer enough entertainment value to attract more spectators and new recruits.
The Northern Hemisphere countries generally take a more cautious view of any changes.
The different playing philosophies that account for the North-South divide are emphasised by the views of two of the most successful coaches or recent times — Australia's Bob Dwyer and Ian McGeechan of Scotland and the British Lions.
Dwyer outlined the bare bones of his playing philosophy: ‘We are no sure that the manner in which the laws developed has reflected the way the game was meant to be played’, he said.
‘We started from scratch by saying that if we had a brand new game called rugby what would it be like?
We looked at all aspects of play, we experimented in games and concluded that it is a running game, in which the player is expected to carry the ball’.
Not unexpectedly, Ian McGeechan was a bit more circumspect than his Wallaby counterpart, though: ‘We have a very good game as it is, and the only thing it needs is to simplify the laws to achieve refereeing consistency.
I am afraid that the proposed law changes could fundamentally alter the game.
It could be a different game altogether than one we are used to’.
While the two points of view differ — reflecting the priorities of the reformist Southern Hemisphere and the conservative Northern Hemisphere — and seem, at first, to be mutually opposed, there is still a great deal of middle ground and a consensus in favour of some change.
After their success in the World Cup, Australian administrators and officials are keen to use the game's newly acquired high profile to promote rugby back home and to make up lost ground on the other two codes — rugby league and Australian Rules.
The New Zealanders, also swamped by rugby league scouts and live television spectaculars from Australia and confronted by the increased assertiveness of sports like soccer and basketball, share the Australian perspective and views.
At the other end of the spectrum, many Northern Hemisphere administrators and coaches feel uneasy about law changes designed to increase spectator appeal rather than modify the game in response to arguments emanating from the game's grass roots.
Rugby has long prided itself on its image as a players' game and any ‘play to entertain’ push could only accelerate the drift towards professionalism.
‘If you ask the players to perform to the extent that they are expected to entertain the public, they you must pay them as entertainers’, was the way former Ireland coach Jimmy Davidson summed up the situation.
The players' own feelings about the entertainment factor in the game were epitomised by Andy Slack's dry remark after the spectacular Australia v France World Cup semi-final of 1987.
When congratulated on Australia's contributed to a splendid performance he said: ‘I would have preferred to win 3–0 today and have everyone yawning in the stand’.
RFU Technical Director Don Rutherford recognised the differing perspectives on law changes.
‘We don't approach the law changes with the same motivation as the Southern Hemisphere nations’, he said.
‘In the Southern Hemisphere they talk about rugby as a product.
‘The product needs improving’, they say.
All that is motivated by their desire to compete against rugby league.
We don't have the same problem over here.
Rugby league is an established game in the North of England, whereas rugby union is a world game which attracts huge crowds wherever it is played.
What about the World Cup?
We had good attractive games then’.
However, as Rutherford also  points out, the RFU does not oppose changes per se .
What the RFU want is a period of experimentation rather than a four-year moratorium, a view shared by the Irish RFU technical director George Spotswood, the WRU director of refereeing Ken Rowlands and even one of the leading advocates of reform — NZRFU chairman Eddie Tonks.
‘We are more conservative.
We prefer gradual change.
What we are saying is ‘Let's experiment’.
These changes may seem small on paper, but added together they could be quite fundamental’, added Rutherford.
Rugby has evolved as a game of checks and balances.
It reached its present form over a long period of time during which there have been numerous law changes — not all of which have achieved their desired result, as Ian Kirkpatrick, Rutherford's South African counterpart, was the first to point out.
‘Take the current offside law.
Moving the offside line from the ball to the foot of the scrum was intended to give the backs more room to run the ball.
The unforeseen effect was to give the kicker more time to kick, so it achieved the opposite’.
International referee Derek Bevan, who handled the World Cup final, agreed with Kirkpatrick, citing another area where law changes have had negative consequences: ‘When the ball is fielded following a high kick from the attacking side the chasing forwards can close in and circle the catcher provided that they remain at a distance of 10 metres.
Before the law changes the catcher had a good chance to counter-attack.
Now with all the forwards around him he has no option but to bang it into touch.
So I would like to see the old law brought back, which says that all the players in front of the kicker must retreat until the kicker or anyone behind him has passed them.
That would encourage a running game’, says Bevan.
An early Southern Hemisphere proposal to bring the scrum back to the point of introduction every time it moved backwards more than a metre and a half — in other words depowering the scrum has been abandoned.
It has been rightly pointed out that a quick ball from such a scrum does not necessarily lead to a running game and that the centre of the field, already bustling with activity due to the increased fitness and range of the modern player, would be  clogged up with roaming loose forwards relieved of scrummage duties.
In an attempt to rid the game of endless scrums, pushover tries etc., the NZRFU has proposed to do away with the five-metre scrum by moving it to 10 metres from the goal line.
That argued the NZRFU think-tank — comprising Brian Lochore, Wilson Whineray, John Hart, Laurie Mains, John Graham, Ivan Vodonovich amongst others — would stop pushover tries and limit multiple scrums on the goal-line.
That point of view hasn't found favour in all quarters, though.
‘Maybe that is true, but I can't see how it will deter a side which has superior scrummaging from trying to use it in such a situation’, said Ken Rowlands, the WRU director of refereeing.
‘Having to push 10 metres instead of five would make it harder, but it would not necessarily eliminate the problem.
In fact, with the try increased to five points it would make it more attractive’.
The hold-up!
England's Nigel Redman gets beats the Eagles' Chuck Tunnacliffe (left) and Norm Mottram (black headband) to the ball with a more than a little help from prop Jason Leonard as England beat the USA 37–9 in their World Cup Pool One clash.
The line-out was a source of controversy throughout the tournament, with Australian coach Bob Dwyer complaining after the final that the referee had unfairly penalised John Eales, applying the line-out laws in England's favour.
Dwyer is a leading proponent of adopting the South African dispensation — legalised lifting in the line-out, as demonstrated by Leonard — to ensure cleaner possession from the line-out and keep the ball in play for longer periods of time.
Others, though, favour an even more radical change in the line-out laws — arguing in favour of the Japanese proposals which will allow the quick throw-in anywhere behind the point where the ball went into touch.
‘The quick throw-in’, argues England's Don Rutherford, ‘completely changes the game; the tactics of the game are fundamentally affected’.
George Spotswood observed that the Irish Union, while recognising the problem of time-wasting in the scrum, is nevertheless keen to allow the side with a stronger scrummage to take advantage of it.
‘The New Zealand idea is interesting, but on the other hand it could be counter-productive, leading to even more time-wasting.
We must look for an equitable way of rewarding superior scrums.
‘We are happy to legislate on something which is already happening in the game, in other words to make it legal for the hooker to strike as soon as the ball leaves the hands of the scrum-half — as happens in reality — rather than when it pitches.
Rugby has always been a game for all shapes and sizes — the short and the tall, the squat and the big.
We don't want to lose the scrum as part of our game or just to be a means of restarting play’, concluded Spotswood.
‘I often feel that forwards waste too much time in scrummaging especially in the first six scrums of a game’, says Derek Bevan.
‘But this is part of the tactical process of sizing up your opposition, so it would be unfair to legislate against it.
If, on the other hand, we decide that the sole purpose of the scrum is to bring back the ball into the game, we may well use a free pass instead’.
But, says Bevan, the solution to many of the problems that lead to time-wasting — especially in regard to scrummaging — doesn't lie in creating new laws, but in applying the existing ones with more vigour: ‘There is a lot of talk about collapsed scrums and time wasting.
If all referees would make sure that the shoulders of the two front rows are higher than their hips there would be no collapsed scrums’, he said.
Each aspect of the proposed law changes is equally controversial.
‘The line-out is a shambles — each line-out could result in a penalty.
Something has to be done to bring this mess to an end.
If we make the laws simpler and eliminate the ambiguity it would allow the referee to be more consistent in refereeing the line-out’, said NZRFU chairman Eddie Tonks.
Most unions share the New Zealand view, though the Welsh are not alone in questioning the practicality of the quick throw-in.
‘While we support the idea of lifting in the line-out — after the ball as been thrown in — we would not agree with the quick throw-in unless it is done according to the line-out rules’, said Rowlands.
‘In other words, we would not vote for the ball being thrown in any direction, for instance to someone running onto it from deep.
On the other hand, the idea of having to use the same ball that went into touch if you want to take a quick throw-in is a red herring.
In my experience, the teams will throw in any ball they land their hands on — no-one really knows whether it is the playing ball or not.
No-one cares unless there is a score, and that's when everyone gets hot under the collar about it’.
‘I have seen a game played by the new rules, organised by HTV in Wales’, said Don Rutherford.
‘Two schoolboy sides.
It was really fascinating.
The quick throw-in completely changes the game; the tactics of the game are fundamentally affected.
But we are keen to experiment and we have invited Paul Ackford to join our working party’.
Another body which agrees with Rutherford is the Irish Union which, while keen to simplify ‘the line-out jungle’, does not seem impressed with the quick throw-in concept.
Derek Bevan, whilst pointing out that the quick throw-in does not happen very often in a game situation, is convinced that, overall, it would encourage a more open style of play.
He thinks it very important, though, to try to force players to use the same ball, arguing that there would be mayhem on the touchline were that provision not enforced.
The stand-off!
Referee Brian Stirling and All Black scrum-half Graeme Bachop (left) watch as — yet again — New Zealand prop Steve McDowell (right) and hooker Sean Fitzpatrick (centre) refuse to engage the formidable Argentine front row of Federico Mendez, Ricardo Le Fort and Diego Cash during last summer's Second Test in Buenos Aires.
After the 36–6 defeat, Argentine coach Luis Gradin said: ‘I was not happy with the three penalties they were given for collapsed scrums.
I've filmed the training sessions where they have been practising collapsing on purpose to cancel out our traditional strength in this department.
We were wrongly penalised’.
International referee Derek Bevan, though, doubts the need for a change in the laws: ‘There is a lot of talk about collapsed scrums and time wasting.
If all referees would make sure that the shoulders of the two front rows are higher than their hips there would be no collapsed scrums’.
Strangely enough for a coach who has tall trees like John Eales, Troy Coker, Rod McCall, Warwick Waugh and Steve Cutler at his disposal, Bob Dwyer is adamant that the new line-out law will change the game for the better.
This theory seems to be supported by research undertaken by the New South Wales Union.
They analysed four Currie Cup games in South Africa and compared to four games in the World Cup.
The results showed that there was twice as much free ball from the Currie Cup game line-outs as there was from the World Cup games.
The scoring is another contentious issue.
If adopted, the five-point try — with the change in the value of the conversion and the drop-goal — could be the most fundamental change in the scoring system undertaken in the history of the game.
‘I am all in favour of the five-point try’, said Dwyer.
‘It would definitely act as an incentive.
I would also like to see the drop-goal reduced to one point’.
Ian McGeechan, while agreeing that the five-point try would provide an incentive for attacking rugby, feels strongly that the conversion should be reduced to one point (as do the NZRFU).
‘There are several reasons why I feel that the conversion must be devalued, but the most important is that, unless the conversion is devalued, a converted try would total seven points which would require the opposing side to score three times to be able to take the lead.
That could be cynically exploited by a side who could afford to concede at least two penalties in a game's dying stages and still win.
Besides, some of the most spectacular and valuable tries are scored on the wing, and these are rarely converted’.
Ken Rowlands disagrees.
‘We genuinely feel that an increase in the value of the try is not going to change the pattern of play.
We formed a commission, chaired by the former international referee Winston Jones, who looked carefully at all aspects of the law changes.
They recommended we maintain the present scoring system.
‘Our statistical data shows us that an increase in the value of the try could have the opposite effect.
There is no side in the world which starts the game by saying ‘we are not going to score tries today, we are only going to kick’.
Those who do kick more do that because they can't run, and those who run will do that irrespective of whether the try is worth three, four or five points’.
Naturally, the debate will rage on as players, coaches and administrators become more involved.
As Ian Kirkpatrick, among others, has pointed out, the debate is one that is central to the game's future well-being.
‘We must sell the game in a world context.
We must compete against other sports and to do that we must make our game more attractive.
The more the ball stays alive, the more people will drawn to the game’.
But despite the differences of opinion that exist — ones that are generally between individuals rather than any factions based on club or country — there is one area of consensus that prevails: That any new laws be given a trial period of at least one year.
As IRFU technical director George Spotswood said: ‘One has to be aware that, when experimental matches are taking place, everyone is trying to be co-operative.
Once the laws are introduced, the coaches and the players will try to devise means of using them to their own advantage.
That is when we want to see the laws in action’.
MAIN TALKING POINTS
1)
All restarts to be drop-kicks and must go 5 metres (was 10).
2)
Penalties awarded only for foul play and repeated infringement.
3)
5-metre scrum becomes 10-metre scrum.
4)
Scrum-half dummy pass to be outlawed.
5)
If the ball is available from wheeled or collapsed scrum, play can continue.
6)
Lifting in line-out legalised and allowed after ball thrown.
7)
No gap required between teammates in line-out.
8)
Quick line-out can be taken behind where ball went into touch.
9)
Tackled player must promptly pass ball, even if still standing.
10)
All players must be on their feet when they play the ball.
11)
Allow four replacements in each game.
12)
Free interchange of players in each team (15 + 4 on bench).
13)
Try worth 5 points; conversion worth 1; drop-goal worth two.
14)
No need to be stationary when making a mark.
15)
Players may not retreat into own 22 to kick into touch.
WALES
Nobody likes us — we don't care
The image of that uncompromising shaven-headed pack still burns bright, but NEATH are no longer the force they once were.
Their steep decline has given grim satisfaction to their legions of detractors.
But, says STEVE BALE, Neath never asked to be placed on a pedestal.
Neath carried all before them in winning the inaugural Heineken League last season — or did they?
Their collapse from top to near bottom has given grim satisfaction their army of ill-wishers in the rest of Welsh rugby, but really the seeds of the Welsh All Blacks' failure were seen when they were becoming champions.
As last season illustrated, Neath were nowhere near as good as their Champion status indicated, nowhere near as good as they had been in the seasons of extraordinary success that preceded the advent of the leagues.
But then, as recent restorative wins over Newbridge and Newport also showed, neither are they anywhere near as bad as their desperate form from December to March — when they went three months without a league win — suggested.
On the other hand, something — many things — went wrong to turn a team who used to win virtually every match into one who could not win any.
There were exaggerated expectations for one thing, a more or less inevitable consequence of those golden years.
There was the debilitating link between Neath and Wales which carted off a team-load of Neath players to the Welsh squad and left them psychologically impaired; when Wales stumbled, they tumbled from bad to worse.
There was the simple failure to recruit adequate replacements for those who had gone, particularly those who had gone to rugby league.
Perhaps I should go no further without declaring an allegiance to Neath which survived some of the grimmer times in the club's history.
Neath have been a force in the Welsh game for most of its 120 years but were never, until lately,the force.
They have been champions of various things in four of the past five seasons compared with only two previous post-war Welsh Championships and one cup.
Of course clubs such as Neath and Pontypool are not really supposed to be at the head of the Welsh pecking-order, which goes some way to explaining why they become so unpopular when they do.
Anyway, in what seems the distant past of the late Seventies, when I was reporting from The Gnoll, they were not much good, not many players from Neath won caps and, once the new Welsh Challenge Cup had been won in 1972, an utterly barren decade ensued.
The story of how Brian Thomas, one of the ‘72 Cup winners, came in and hauled the club out of its curious mixture of complacency and mediocrity is an example of what can be achieved in apparently inauspicious circumstances.
The revolution at Northampton may have been different but it did have uncanny echoes of what had gone on at Neath.
By the 1986–87 season Thomas’ Neath had progressed sufficiently to win the old Western Mail Welsh Championship .
In 1988–89 they scored world record quantities of tries (345) and points (1,917) as well as winning the Championship and Cup.
And in 1989–90 the Championship and Cup were accompanied by the Whitbread Merit Table — a unique treble.
Playing two fewer matches, they finished only one try and 50 points short of their records and, in winning all 37 matches after losing to New Zealand in October 1989, put together the longest sequence of victories by any Welsh senior club since the war.
These are formidable statistics and worthy of celebration.
The fact that few outside The Gnoll saw fit to celebrate was only one of Neath's problems.
Their rugby was essentially unlovable, not because it was dull (it wasn't) but because it had a rock-hard edge which caused opponents to feel intimidated before they went on the field — and sometimes with good cause since there were plenty of occasions when the ‘manliness’ of which Neath made so much was actually foul play, plain and simple.
We heard this sort of thing before, when Pontypool ruled the roost in the Seventies and Eighties, and the fact that there was more than an element of truth in it, that the complaints of others could be justified, served only to make the accused — Neath, just like Pontypool before them — become more introverted and less receptive.
The more people complained about the Neath forwards' haircuts, the less inclined the Neath forwards were to change them; the more people complained about Neath's rugby, the less Neath were inclined to change.
It was the Millwall syndrome, ‘Nobody loves us and we don't care’, given a Welsh personification.
But in fact they did care, because if they hadn't the traumas that afflicted Welsh rugby at about this time would have had not effect.
First, when John Ryan was Wales coach, Neath couldn't get anyone much in the team; when Ron Waldron followed Ryan, it was as if the Welsh team had been taken over by Neath.
Which, in a sense, it had been.
Waldron had been Neath's manager (in succession to Thomas) and coach, and had seen his players roll over everyone else in Wales and based his international selection on that.
The trouble was that being a good club player, even being an outstanding club player, does not of itself make you a worthy international, and it was Waldron's failure to recognise this of his own Neath players that contributed as much as anything to his downfall.
Even in straight practical terms, Waldron's  departure from The Gnoll was a calamity for Neath.
They have undoubtedly missed managerial and coaching qualities that were ideally suited to this particular group of players in this particular club in this particular town.
But, more than that, his  predilection for Neath players deprived the club of their own best talent so that when they would otherwise have been training for the league, instead they were training for the Five Nations Championship.
First of all this knocked the edge, whether hard or not, off Neath's play last season.
Coupled with the exit of some vital players, it was as much as Neath could do to paper over the cracks and keep winning.
Indeed, it was an achievement that they managed it just long enough to clinch the Heineken title and then, once it did not matter any longer began to lose games at a rate that would have been unthinkable during the previous years of unbroken triumph.
The travails of this season, dramatic though they have seemed, have in reality been an extension of that.
But it was unquestionably made worse by the Welsh experience.
It was not only that the players were away but that while they were away they were losing badly.
Neath were blamed and given that there were so many of them in the Welsh team it is impossible to argue against Neath, in the sense that the Neath style and philosophy were also Wales' bearing some of the blame for the national decline.
The point, though, is that Neath never asked to be set on this pedestal.
For a while it seemed as if all the woes of Welsh rugby were down to The Gnoll — though this theory was eventually disproved by the World Cup.
But by then it was too late; the damage to the Neath players locked into Wales' downward spiral had been incalculable.
This brings us, almost, to this season.
Last season Neath never came to terms with the loss of Rowland Phillips and Mark Jones to rugby league, and this season they have done no better in this regard; the back row, once the fulcrum of the entire Neath effort, has no longer been an area of strength.
Opponents have lost their fear of facing Neath and have encountered a team low on confidence among the younger members and low on motivation among the older ones who have won everything and done everything.
Only recently has the former begun to develop and the latter to redevelop.
The result is that for the first time this season those of us whose attachment to the Welsh All Blacks cannot be broken can start to look ahead with optimism.
At The Gnoll, while the outside world has been chortling at Neath's discomfiture, they have insisted all along that every club is entitled to a transitional season now and then.
No-one loves a winner, they are saying, and everyone knows Neath do not particularly wish to be loved.
Kevin Phillips' snarl says it all as he leads the Neath tribe's celebrations after winning the 1990 Schweppes Cup Final.
IT'S A FAIR COP — WALES SCRAG SCOTS!
5 NATIONS ROUND 5
Only very partisan supporters could have gleaned much pleasure from this match.
No matter how hard the WRU tried to dress up the occasion with male voice choirs and star tenors, there was little genuine entertainment on offer.
Wales, though, will not worry unduly about that.
After so many dark days, it was a big achievement to get a result.
Again the forwards went well; again the backs struggled.
The Scots showed little of their famed fire in a mediocre finale to what was, England excepted, a mediocre Championship.
Come to Daddy!
Wales lock Tony Copsey (left) gets to grips with Doddie Weir as fellow Dragons Emyr Lewis and Stuart Davies (obscured) put the frighteners on Scots back-rowers Dave McIvor and Derek White (right).
Snared in the Dragons' den
5 NATIONS ROUND 5
SO, in the end, it did finish with a whimper and not a bang.
It would have taken a match of some note to have lifted this last weekend of the Championship out of the also-ran trough.
There were several things at stake, however.
Notably, here, second place in the table.
For the Scots there were tour places to Australia up for grabs: for the Welsh there was the need to secure the appointment of Davies and Norster by winning.
Not that the WRU should ever have delayed their decision anyway.
Despite having a fair bit to play for, the game was never better than mediocre, reinforcing the impression that England were a huge distance ahead of the field in this 1992 tournament.
Wales, at least, though, have risen from the dead.
After three years of groping in the dark they have emerged not quite into sparkling sunshine but at least into the hint of a new dawn.
Again they played with spirit, particularly the back row of Webster, Davies and Lewis.
Webster's try midway through the first half was well-taken coming on the end of an astounding burst by prop Huw Williams-Jones.
Both Ian McGeechan and David Sole admitted that it was by far their side's worst performance of the season.
It was not a very fitting way to pay tribute to Derek White on his last international performance.
Scots sandwich.
Gavin Hastings finds no room for manoeuvre as (l–r) Wales' Ieuan Evans and Roger Bidgood turn up the heat at Cardiff Arms Park.
Who will be the masters of arms?
DOWN THE LINE
with Phil BENNETT
SCHWEPPES CUP QUARTER-FINAL FOCUS
As the season draws to a thrilling climax, with Swansea and Llanelli both bearing down on a possible league and cup double, Pontypridd and Newport get their chance to throw a spanner in the works at the Bank Holiday back-to-back Schweppes Cup semi-finals at the Cardiff Arms Park.
When Neil Jenkins was asked after his side's quarter-final victory over Cardiff High School Old Boys (also known as Cardiff Harlequins), which club he would like to see Pontypridd avoid in the semi-finals, he replied that he would like to miss out on Swansea and Llanelli .
Well, he didn't get his wish and the prospect of playing against the Scarlets in the semis on the back-to back Bank Holiday occasion will be a daunting one.
But it is by no means a foregone conclusion.
True, Llanelli are in superb form at the moment, but Pontypridd had a good result at Stradey Park earlier in the season and they should not go into the game with any shortage of confidence.
Pontypridd are always hard to beat and there will be one player on their side with something to prove — Neil Jenkins.
He wants everyone to know that the Welsh selectors were right to prefer him to Colin Stephens for the game against Scotland.
Stephens, of course, will be equally keen to prove the opposite, so it should be a fascinating duel.
Llanelli should, on paper, win no matter how the fly-half confrontation goes.
They have a superior front five, although the Pontypridd lock Mark Rowley had been getting the better of several big names lately and will relish the prospect of testing himself against Tony Copsey.
Another with a point to make is their captain and scrum-half Paul John, a greatly improved player who will at least let Rupert Moon, also an outstanding player, know that he's been in a battle.
But Llanelli must be favourites to reach another final because they have so much talent amongst their backs, especially in Ieuan Evans and Nigel Davies.
A much harder game to predict is the one between Swansea and Newport .
The Swans are playing some outstanding rugby these days and, although they were given a hard time of it against Dunvant in the last round, it is always difficult to combat gritty opponents who feel they have nothing to lose.
The Black and Ambers' pack steamroller on as prop Malcolm Sibthorpe (in possession) holds up Bridgend before releasing scrum-half David Llewellyn.
Lock David Waters takes a breather as Newport win 9–4 at Rodney Parade to book a semi-final berth.
Swansea are, however, a quality team with excellent backs.
Anthony Clement has played superbly of late, as have Scott Gibbs and Aled Williams, who have proved to be two fine acquisitions.
Skipper Kevin Hopkins and scrum-half Robert Jones have been quite superb recently, but also enjoying something of an Indian summer is Mark Titley on the wing.
Some of his displays have reminded me of Gerald Davies at his best — and I can give no-one a greater compliment.
I must admit that I had doubts about Swansea's pack at the beginning of the season.
I was never sure about their ability to hold out against physically stronger packs, but they have proved me wrong time and again with Paul Arnold and Richard Moriarty back to their best.
Garin Jenkins has sorted out the front row and the Webster-Reynolds-Stuart Davies back row can live with any in the leagues.
No weakness for Newport to exploit there!
What have Newport to offer?
They have a juggernaut pack with a fine front row, two in-form locks in Kevin Moseley and David Waters and the back row of Glen George.
Alun Carter and Kevin Withey is an inspirational one which seems able to lift its game for the big occasions.
But don't fall into the trap of considering Newport a side that can only play ten-man rugby.
They have a good scrum-half in David Llewellyn and the backs have the confidence-boosting presence of Roger Bidgood, whose display against Scotland on winning his first cap was excellent.
However, despite my misgivings, I plump for Swansea to face Llanelli in the final.
I don't think they will throw in the towel as they did against Pontypool last year.
Coach Mike Ruddock is sure they can't fail again and I agree with him.
So there should be a tremendous final on May 16th and I look  forward to being there to see Llanelli and Swansea do Welsh rugby proud.
There is, however, one discordant note.
That is the well publicised row over the semi-finals.
This pits the WRU against the major clubs, who still haven't got used to the idea of back-to-back semi-finals at the Cardiff Arms Park on a Bank Holiday Monday.
Mike Ruddock put the point that rugby players are like thoroughbred racehorses who are tuned to turn out each Saturday either at 2.30 p.m. or at 3 p.m.
Playing of a Monday at an odd hour can break their rhythm.
Others like Robert Jones feel that such an arrangement for these showpiece games leads to a rather apathetic atmosphere at the Arms Park.
Matches at neutral venues, on the other hand, often have charged atmospheres as the contesting clubs bring along five or six thousand supporters and create the sort of scene we expect from cup semi-finals.
The WRU could have been diplomatic and should have consulted officials from the clubs concerned after the last 16 matches to see what they wanted instead.
I realise that they looked for a family atmosphere, but is imposing this solution in such an arbitrary way really in the best interests of the game?
This is another classic example of our ability to shoot ourselves in the feet.
Although the Schweppes Cup is the glamour competition in Wales, the Heineken Leagues are also reaching their own conclusions.
Easter sees the potential decider at St. Helen's between Swansea and Llanelli.
The home team has not beaten the Scarlets for some dozen matches and should still have their work cut out to win.
The winners of that game should take the title (although others, such as Bridgend are still in with a shout) and that will be a powerful incentive.
As Swansea are playing that vital game at St. Helen's, I've a sneaking suspicion that they might just pull it off.
It would be just reward for their recent form, and no-one would begrudge them the honour.
It's a tough league to win and slip-ups at this stage of the season could be fatal.
So this is where experience of run-ins can be vitally important.
The likes of Newbridge , Newport, Pontypridd and Bridgend can challenge for a while, but eventually class will tell.
At the beginning of the season I would have had an each-way bet each on Llanelli and Neath to win the title, but you all know what has happened to Neath.
In the recent cup tie at Stradey Park I was saddened to see their lack of commitment, but a recent big win at Newport has given them more confidence and I think that we should watch out for them next season.
Llanelli scrum-half Rupert Moon sets the Scarlets in motion as they savage Pooler 27–3 at Pontypool Park to claim a place in the Schweppes Cup semi-finals and record their second win over Pontypool within a week.
No team can lose the likes of Rowland Phillips and Mark Jones to rugby league — along with a class centre like Scott Gibbs to the competition — without feeling the pinch, but they'll come again.
It seems that it's really going to happen.
We are to have larger leagues next season and in the long run that can't be for the good of the game in Wales.
But that's not the only point of controversy at the moment.
On the day of the vital Swansea v Llanelli league game, Wales have to go to Stirling to play an U21 game against Scotland.
This could seriously weaken several clubs — including Llanelli, who will almost certainly lose Scott Quinnell and the promising backs Boobyer and Proctor.
Good luck to them for winning international honours at that level.
Country always comes before club, but someone could try a better job of arranging fixture to avoid such problems.
Llanelli can probably get over the difficulty as they have such a talented squad, although others might find it less easy.
I talked about shooting ourselves in the foot and that's another example.
But I can end with one piece of good news as far as I'm concerned — the reappointment of Alan Davies and Robert Norster to the coaching positions.
The fact that they have been asked to continue until the next World Cup makes good common sense and I hope it is a sign that at long last someone at the top is finally making the right decisions.
ENGLAND
WINTERS
a man for all seasons
Immovable and unyielding, England openside flanker PETER WINTERBOTTOM has been an almost permanent feature of England sides since he won his first cap a decade ago.
From New Zealand to South Africa to Australia, the quiet Yorkshire farmer turned EuroBond broker with the ice-cold stare has succeeded on every stage.
MICK CLEARY asked him about his future, his captaincy of Quins and his rivals.
The last thing he wanted was any fuss.
Peter Winterbottom was winning his fiftieth cap and everyone, wanted him to lead the team out on to the field.
Everyone, that is, except Winterbottom.
Hard as nails: After a decade of demolition work in the top tier, Peter Winterbottom's durability is the stuff of which legends are made.
First cap: fiftieth cap; second team game on a Sunday morning — they're all the same to him.
Of course the pace of the game will be different, the level of skills much lower, but you can bet your granny's pension that if the second team game need a thumping tackle to be made, then Peter Winterbottom would make it.
He has never asked for any favours and, on the field, he's never given any either.
The week before England took on Scotland for the Grand Slam, Harlequins travelled to Gloucester for a league match.
Several Quins opted out, fearful of injury.
Winterbottom played, even though he was up against his England mate, Mike Teague.
Neither gave an inch all afternoon simply because it would have been an insult to have done any differently.
Teague helped form what must have been the quietest back row in the history of the game when he joined up Dean Richards and Winterbottom in the 1991 Grand Slam side.
Yet body language often tells us so much  more than mere words.
If anything, the more people talk, the less it actually means.
Take one look at Winterbottom lining up his man and you can almost touch the raw passion in the man, sense the burning desire to knock the stuffing out of his opponent.
If one man has come to symbolise the hard, inner edge that has driven England to such success it is Winterbottom.
He has a stare that can fill a man with dread — a quiet, almost contemptuous look which shakes you to your boots.
His mere presence signals the fact that the opposition will have to bury the side ten feet under before they will concede victory.
‘He likes to scare the opposition’, says Roger Uttley, ‘Just like Tony Neary in his day, no-one gets away from him.
Ask any three-quarter who figures most in their nightmares and pound to a penny, the answer will be Winters’.
Winterbottom's game has always been based on his uncompromising attitude on the field ever since he won his first cap against the Wallabies in 1982.
Remember those days — Billy Beaumont was still playing!
The raw talent of the Yorkshire farmer was quickly honed by a summer spent with Hawke's Bay in New Zealand.
If Winterbottom had not played much hard rugby with Headingley, then he more than made up for it in those few short months.
‘That spell with Hawke's Bay was the making of me’, says Winterbottom.
‘Week in, week out, you had to perform.
That had never been asked of me before.
At the time it came as something of a shock.
It was a completely new attitude.
I'd say that that gap in outlook has certainly closed over the years.
Our guys are put to the test much more often, and I think the benefits of that have been reflected in results at international level.
In the mid-eighties England just floundered around.
Compare that to now.
Look even at the England ‘B’ results.
They want to win so badly’.
So successful had been Winterbottom's immersion in unyielding All Black ways that even though the 1983 Lions, of which he was a member, failed to win any of the tests, he was named as one of New Zealand rugby's five players of the year.
Apart from the interruptions caused by injury, Winterbottom has remained England's openside flanker ever since.
That is apart from the interruption caused by Andy Robinson's rise to prominence.
‘I chose to go to South Africa in 1988, knowing full well that in so doing I would miss out on England's tour to Australia and Fiji.
Robbo quite rightly got his chance and it was up to me to decide whether I wanted to fight for my place or not.
Did I want it enough?
The answer was yes.
Robbo's challenge was a great spur to me.
Having the appetite to get out there and do your stuff is the key factor for an international player.
You've got to want it badly.
Those that don't get found out very quickly’.
No-one could accuse Winterbottom of not wanting to deliver.
Recently he captained Harlequins on the Saturday, flew to South Africa, was voted Man-of-the-Match playing for the South African Barbarians on the Monday and then returned to England for Quins' league match against Leicester.
If ever a man and a club seemed, in theory, to be ill-suited, then it is Winterbottom and Harlequins, the club who once caused Dick Best to say when confronted by a bout of absenteeism of Saturday: ‘All perfectly valid excuses of course; skiing in Andorra, shopping in Harrods…‘
Winterbottom himself once said that the would join any club but Harlequins.
Now here he is well into his second season of captaincy.
‘I got it wrong’, he says.
‘Quins are different, but they're a good club.
 The guys here have all sorts of different pressures on them, not least at international level.
Such commitments makes it hard for them to really get stuck into each and every league match.
Now, I'm not like that.
But they are.
And no amount of bollocking from me will change that.
You could drag them to the pitch but you couldn't make them perform.
You just have to live with that.
If I didn't like it, I wouldn't still be here’.
That he is still here after ten years of international rugby is testimony to his remarkable physical durability.
Although he obviously trains hard, the English management were at times left frustrated by his preference for playing over preparation.
‘Winters always wanted to know what was expected of him’, recalls Roger Uttley.
‘Then he would go out and meet those requirements.
He would rarely look to go beyond.
To him rugby was about playing.
And you have to say that his philosophy works for him.
There could be no finer man to have in that position.
He gave so much to the side: speed, commitment, control and continuity’.
That last phase of his game — linking between forwards and backs — was not   always his strongest suit.
‘I could always handle’, says Winterbottom, ‘but doing it under pressure was another matter.
I worked hard at it, played more sevens and now feel comfortable no matter what the situation’.
Uttley is one of many to state that Winterbottom is playing the finest rugby of his life.
‘Who will replace him?’ asks Uttley.
‘I certainly can't think of anyone who has got all his attributes’.
Winterbottom himself believes that the ideal make-up of a flanker has changed in his time.
‘The guys are getting bigger,’ he says.
‘You've got to be big to knock them over these days in international rugby.
Having said that my two roles models, if you like, are Jean-Pierre Rives and Michael Jones.
Neither of them is over six foot yet both more than punch their weight.
Rives had everything, including immense strength, whereas Jones is hugely athletic and can jump as high as a guy six inches taller than himself.
‘Of the contenders lining up to replace me it's hard to give a definitive verdict.
My preference is for the bigger man yet Andy Robinson has given me more difficult games that any other opponent.
Neil Back is a similar built to Robbo, but I've seen little of him in action.
The outsider could be Saracens’ Justyn Cassell.
He's big, athletic and looks very promising’.
Just when Winterbottom will retire is undecided.
He will certainly play another club season at the Quins and, although he certainly nurtures a strong desire to play against the South Africans in November, he realises that come the new season he may not feel quite as strongly.
He also recognises that ‘the England management might not fancy giving the guys a swansong’.
It would be a great way for England's most capped flanker to bow out.
He has spent time in South Africa and has a tremendous admiration for their game.
‘They'll soon be back up with the pace’, he says.
‘They'll have to make adjustments, but theirs is such a rugby culture that they'll spare nothing.
Their front rows are too fat and slow at the moment, something of a throwback to the old days.
But the ‘Boks set so much more store on scrummaging, looking to destroy the opposition if they can, that they're reluctant to change until they have to.
‘Their forward technique is not up to scratch either in maul or scrum, but hose deficiencies won't take long to correct.
Their real strength, though, is outside.
They have so many big, hard runners.
I certainly wouldn't fancy having to knock them down’.
He may not fancy it, but it's a safe bet that he would be the first man to do it.
Waiting in the wings.
Andy Robinson (left) and Neil Back take a breather during the Leicester v Barbarians game.
But has the age of the lightning quick — but small — opening gone?
WHISTLE STOP!
THE CLIVE NORLING COLUMN
The front row of a scrummage has always been something of a mystery to most rugby spectators, referees and even players.
Rugby folk talk of a ‘front row union’ who, after 80 minutes hard battle, will walk off the field together and then drink with each other in the bar.
But, after watching some of the internationals this season, I think that these rival friendships must have worn pretty thin judging by the number of collapsed scrummages in games.
After all the communications I have received from Rugby World & Post readers on the recent Wales v Scotland international, let me at the outset state that no referee can collapse a scrummage — that is the result of the actions of the front row players.
Law 20 is very clear on the actions of the front row in a scrummage.
(5)(b) states: ‘While the scrummage is taking place, players in each front row must have their weight firmly on at least one foot and be in a position for an effective forward shove.
The shoulders of each player must not be lower than his hips’.
Now that should be clear even to the ordinary rugby spectator who has never played in the front row.
So why should we start seeing the highly dangerous picture of front rows collapsing the scrummage.?
I should point out that not all scrummages are deliberately collapsed by front row players.
Sometimes it is due to muddy ground where it is difficult for players to get a good grip with their studs, or by a player slipping in the front row.
But in the main I believe it is due to a change of attitude by props in particular.
When I started refereeing in the 1960s the props' attitude was: ‘I may go backwards in a scrummage, but I will never go down’.
A player took pride in his strength to keep his opponent on his feet.
Nowadays the attitude seems totally the opposite; the modern-day prop appears to say: ‘I may go down in the scrummage, but I will never go back’.
Hence the problem facing referees.
It is difficult to spot who is actually responsible, and using common-sense does not always work.
The television commentators are quick to say when a referee penalises the attacking team for collapsing in their opponents' 22 metre area: ‘Why would the attacking team want to collapse scrummage?’
But I would equally say: ‘Why would the defending team want to collapse the scrummage and give either three or six points away?’
What all front row players must know is the danger involved in collapsing — that of a broken neck and permanent damage to the player involved.
You would think that the law is clear on this area.
Really, there should not be any collapsed scrummages during the 80 minutes of play.
But the reality is different; collapsed scrummages appear to be on the increase, despite the obvious dangers.
The solution lies with the front row players and perhaps firmer refereeing of this area with the law of repeated infringement being implemented.
But I would also raise the question, ‘does rugby in the 90s need the scrummage to restart the game?’
I am sure that our readers have their pens ready to respond.
Back-to-front.
Wasps tighthead Paddy Dunston finds himself upright and turned 90 degrees as Harlequins' loosehead Jason Leonard turns the screw in a successful attempt to disrupt the Sudbury club's front row.
Is it time to consider the question ‘do we need scrums?’ asks Clive Norling.
CREAM OF THE CROP!
THE PILKINGTON CUP
SEMI-FINALS
It should be another fascinating Pilkington Cup final as Bath, 27–18 conquerors of Gloucester, take on holders Harlequins, 15–9 winners against the Leicester Tigers.
BEAUMONT AT LARGE Without doubt the two best Cup teams in the country have reached Twickenham this season and it should make for a superb final.
It's been a good season for Barnes and another Twickenham occasion is just the stage for him to show the selectors how good he can be.
His duel with David Pears will be just one of the fascinating prospects for the big day on May 2nd.
Up front, Quins will miss Jason Leonard, which should leave Bath as the superior scrummaging unit.
But, against that, the presence of Neil Edwards and Troy Coker (if he is not suffering from jet lag) in the line-outs should work in Quins' favour.
The back-row confrontation might just go the way of Bath with Dave Egerton, Ben Clarke and Andy Robinson looking a superior combination — on paper at least— although Peter Winterbottom, in particular , will want to prove me wrong.
Both he and Mickey Skinner have a limited number of appearances at Twickenham to look forward to and they will surely be anxious to go out on a high note.
The key here is the form of the no.8s and I think Clarke will come out ahead of Langhorn.
The backs will also provide some superb contests.
What a mouth-watering prospect it is to see Will Carling and Simon Halliday facing Jeremy Guscott and the emerging Phil de Glanville.
Out wide, the Bath duo of Tony Swift and Jim Fallon would seem to have the edge on Andy Harriman, if he recovers from injury, and Mike Wedderburn.
The same can be said fullback, where Jonathan Webb is in such good form.
Winger Jim Fallon beats the Gloucester cover for the try which took the Kingsholm semi-final into extra-time before Bath scraped through 27–18.
At half-back Richard Hill is the man with the reputation against the less highly rated Rob Glenister.
But as far as the fly-halves are concerned you can take your pick.
Neither side has yet lost a Twickenham final, which adds a little bit of an edge to the occasion.
Before the two teams take the stage at HQ, the league programme will be over and if Orrell keep up their current good form they will win the Championship.
That will be great for Northern rugby.
They have worked hard at it and deserve the title.
They certainly won't complain if Harlequins field a weakened side against them in the held-over match on Easter Monday.
I know that Quins have been heavily criticised for fielding weak teams in league games, but it is an amateur sport and they are entitled to select whomsoever they want  to see out there.
It may be unfair on clubs who could lose out as a result of weak Quins combinations, but I would hate to see the Football League system of fining clubs for this practice being brought into rugby.
I like the leagues the way they are.
Well, that last statement is not exactly true as I agree with the sentiments of those who have argued that the Exile clubs should not be in the Courage Leagues, which are meant to be for English players.
Quins fly-half David Pears dummies to Simon Halliday before carving a path to the line in Harlequins' 15–9 semi-final victory over Leicester at The Stoop.
Don't get me wrong.
I have nothing against either London Scottish or London Irish, who will both be in the top division next season.
But their presence in the First Division will mean that every Saturday thirty non-English players will be turning out in the top flight taking up places which should be filled by Englishmen.
They should shift to their own national leagues.
Of course, you'll then ask about foreigners playing in English clubs and I've no objections to that provided that not too many are brought in.
Probably, one per club should be allowed.
Then no harm would be done.
This will not make me too popular at the Richmond Athletic Ground or Sunbury and it'll probably not happen anyway.
But it's an interesting point of principal.
We should not be helping our enemies (in international terms, of course!), but that's what we are doing by allowing the Exiles to compete in our leagues.
SCOTLAND
Townsend — a touch of class
Still just 18, GREGOR TOWNSEND's precociously talented displays have earned him the chance to go head-to-head with Michael Lynagh this summer.
BILL McLAREN talked to the swashbuckling fly-half.
Out of a crop of precocious back division talent to whom Scotland will looking in the not-too-distant future, Gregor Peter John Townsend, who will not be 19 until April 26, presents an amalgam of skill, pace and learning capacity that mark him as one of specially exciting potential.
When I had a chat with him he had just celebrated Gala's triumph at Heriot's FP U21 sevens, in which his centre was older brother Craig.
A student of history and politics at Edinburgh University, he was only 17 when he first played for Gala's senior side and, since then, has achieved a meteoric advance through Scotland's enviable structure.
That includes two seasons as Scottish Schools' stand-off out of Galashiels Academy (he was captain in all four games last season), each of the national youth grades in Scotland, U21 and Scottish Students, Scotland ‘B’ appearances against Ireland ‘B’and France ‘B’, a Scottish trial in January and now selection for Scotland's tour to Australia in May and June.
In sharing the Reds' upset win in that national trial he proved a bit of success as a distributor and made two scorching breaks which hinted at a swashbuckling touch to his nature: ‘I was very keen to make a good impression in the trial because it took place a week after my ‘B’ debut against Ireland and I wanted to make up for two particular errors in that game.
They were really bad mistakes on my part and they cost us dear.
So I wanted to get that memory out of the way and I was just happy that I had had a better game’.
The Gala youngster acknowledges how fortunate he has been in the folk who have advised him along the way.
His father, Peter, was a stylish midfield back in Gala's Border Championship side of 1966–67 and a brilliant sevens exponent, while Rob Moffat toured with Scotland in the Far East in 1977 and coached Townsend at Galashiels Academy and Scottish Schools.
Johnny Brown guided the lad at Gala U14 and U16 levels and now continues as coach to the senior club.
Whilst learning to take the rough and the smooth of rugby fortunes with a philosophic air, Townsend has already reacted to criticism with refinements to his play that have been a factor in his selection for Australia: ‘I tend to pay heed more to criticism than to praise.
Of course, a lot depends on who is offering the advice.
Some of it you know just to ignore, but if it is from someone who knows what he is on about, then it can be helpful in making you into a better player.
‘I certainly have made a lot of mistakes and I have learned that the higher up the ladder you go, the less time you have in which to make your decisions.
For instance, there have been occasions when I have tried to run bad ball and you just do not get away with that against good opposition.
In punting, too, I have had a tendency to reach for too much length and so have been prone to slicing my kicks.
Hopefully I have improved in that regard and perhaps also I make better assessment of what is on.
‘Naturally, I prefer to play at stand-off.
I have had a couple of games at inside centre and am probably more settled in that position but I enjoy playing stand-off most of all’.
Townsend is one of those players capable of bringing an audience to their feet through his willingness to have a go and with his startling acceleration.
And yet he doesn't think that he is quick enough: ‘I used to compete in athletics but I don't see myself as being all that quick and I intend to work hard on improving my speed.
‘I enjoy playing with Gala because they seek to spin the ball where possible but we really haven't played all that well this season, mainly because we haven't been able to win enough quality ball.
To be honest, I didn't expect to be chosen for Australia.
I thought about the possibility but when my friends kept saying that I would be chosen I said that I thought the selectors would go for more experience.
But I am very happy to be in the squad.
It will be a great experience just be concentrating on rugby and playing rugby non-stop for a month and especially in company with so many good players.
That hopefully will bring about an improvement in my game’.
That tour to Australia is just one highlight in a busy itinerary for the Gala stand-off: ‘I have had am ambition to play at the Hong Kong Sevens and was simply thrilled to have been invited to join the Irish Wolfhounds squad for this year's tournament.
That was a wonderful experience’.
He is also a certain choice for the Scottish squad for the Students' World Cup in Italy in July.
A hectic programme for the 18-year-old: ‘I may have played a little too much rugby this season but I so enjoy playing, and I try not to say ‘no’ to anyone who invites me to play.
Meanwhile, I just want to keep on learning about the game’.
Having represented Scotland at virtually every level he seems destined to eventually reach cap status and perhaps bring Scotland's midfield — with several other young hopeful — some extra fizz and sparkle.
And, having captained South Schools, the U21s and Scottish Schools, how would he like one day to lead Gala to the Division One Championship?
‘Now that, too, would be just great’.
SCOTTISH NOTES
by Bill McMurtrie
MARR COLLEGE have won the Bank of Scotland Schools Cup for the first time, beating St Aloysius' College by 8–6 at Ayr.
It was St Aloysius' fifth successive final, though they have won only two of them.
MIDLANDS were denied the outright title in the Bank of Scotland Schools District Championship when they lost to the South by 13–19 at Netherdale in their final match.
Instead,Midlands and Lothian shared the prize with two wins apiece.
STIRLING COUNTY and CLARKSTON won the U16 and U14 competitions respectively in the SRU/Adidas midi-rugby tournament at Murrayfield, but the youngest section, S1, was undecided with Boroughmuir and Berwick denying each other a score, even after extra time in the final.
MELROSE have won the McEwan's National League title to add to the Bank of Scotland Border League Championship.
The Borderers, coached by Jim Telfer , beat Glasgow High/Kelvinside 27–16 at the Greenyards in their final game to win the major championship and hold off Edinburgh Academicals' challenge,Kelso , relegated last season, moved back up to the first division.
SCOTLAND have abandoned the ‘B’ international concept after 20 years.
Instead, the ‘A’ international programme has been expanded to take in four matches — against France, Ireland, Spain and Italy .
In each of the past two seasons Scotland ‘A’ have played just one match, beating Spain twice.
Scotland's ‘B’ teams have not included capped players whereas the ‘A’side will equate to the reserve national XV.
EDINBURGH WANDERERS have appointed their former captain,Ian Rankin , as coach for next season.
The primary demand on him will be to restore Wanderers to the national league's first division in time for the club's 125th anniversary in two years' time.
Rankin, who captained Wanderers in 1979–80, made his name as a coach with the North and Midlands U18 and U21 teams.
MURRAYFIELD 's capacity will be reduced from 54,000 to 38,000 when the International Board's first seven-a-side tournament is contested there from April 16 to 18 next year.
The West Stand will be out of commission at the time because of the ground's redevelopment, which has started with the construction of stands to replace the north and south terracing.
PAUL BURNELL the London Scottish prop who had played in 25 of his country's previous 27 internationals, could not be considered for Scotland 's tour to Australia because of a severe knee injury sustained in the Cardiff match against Wales .
It is the second time he has missed an international tour because of injury.
He was unavailable for Scotland's 1989 tour to Japan after a back operation.
Nine uncapped players have been included in the SCOTLAND party for the tour of Australia starting in Darwin on 28th May and including two Tests in an eight match programme.
Have a go ‘yer mug!
Gregor Townsend steps through Alan Watt's despairing tackle during his impressive performance for the Reds.
Whitbread Player of the Month
MICKEY SKINNER
Marc Cecillon, the French no.8, will remember MICKEY SKINNER forever.
In the World Cup quarter-final Skinner hit Cecillon with such force that the echo has barely died down around the Parc des Princes six months later.
It is this abrasive commitment to this duties which, in part, has won Skinner the Whitbread Player of the Month Award.
It is also an acknowledgement of the great spirit with which he plays the game.
He has had his critics down the years — too awkward, no ball skills, too dirty — complaints which have all been banished in these last two seasons.
There can be no more regular bloke in the circuit, though.
He is a man who plays the game with huge heart but who always shares a couple of pints with the opposition afterwards.
He is one of the few first-class players who make a point also of drinking in the public bar at grounds rather than cocooning himself away in the players’ or sponsors' lounges.
His basic earthiness means that this will be his last season for the Harlequins, the club he joined from Blackheath in 1986 in order to have a tilt at international honours.
Reward came immediately with the first of 21 caps.
he said at the time that as soon as his international career was over that he could go back to Blackheath and see them right.
That is what he is doing.
His time with England has had its ups and downs, most notably on the 1988 tour to Australia.
In his own words he went ‘walkabout’.
Even eighteen months ago he said that he doubted if he could give enough time and energy to securing a World Cup place.
As it turned out he had more in him that he realised.
Just ask Marc Cecillon.
International Crossroads
with Chris Thau
Coker's conundrum
AUSTRALIAN lock forward TROY COKER faces a very difficult dilemma: whether to come to London for Harlequins ’Pilkington Cup final on 2nd May or whether to play for his province Queensland against Auckland in the Super Six competition.
The Pilkington Cup weekend coincides with Queensland's crucial game against holders Auckland and, as Queensland coach John Connolly pointed out, with Tim Gavin back in contention and the young prodigy Warwick Waugh ready to challenge for higher honours, Coker may find it difficult to give the Queensland game a miss if he wants to retain his Wallaby berth.
And with the Scottish tour, the All Black tour, the Wallaby tour to South Africa, followed by the visits to Ireland and Wales , coming up, Coker has plenty of incentive.
On the other hand, the powers of persuasion of Harlequins' Colin Herridge are legendary, so who knows…
St. Alex of South Africa
ALEX WYLLIE , THE FORMER All Black coach, has accepted a two-year contract to work and coach in South Africa .
Wyllie, who starts his contract in mid-April, will be located in Port Elizabeth and will coach sides affiliated to the Eastern Province Rugby Union .
Wyllie, who stood down as a candidate for the All Black job after a confidential letter from NZRFU Chairman Eddie Tonks criticising him was leaked to the press, returns to what he loves most, working with clubs to develop the skill and the knowledge of the average club player.
‘I will be mainly involved in development work, mostly in the deprived areas.
That's what I've always loved doing.
Even when I was coaching the national team in New Zealand I was coaching at clubs in Christchurch.
Both Eastern Province representatives, A and B, have got their own coaches, so I will be mainly working for the union as a troubleshooter, helping wherever I am needed’, said Wyllie.
World Cup rules change
THE qualifying pattern of the 1995 WORLD CUP is likely to change at the IRB meeting in Wellington, if the proposals worked out by World Cup Director Russ Thomas are accepted.
Thomas believes that only four teams should automatically qualify for the next World Cup — the host nation (probably South Africa ), the two finalists (Australia and England ) and the winner of the third-place play-off (New Zealand ).
If accepted, this would give the play-off significant meaning.
It also means that all other quarter-finalists —Canada, Ireland, Scotland, Western Samoa and France — might have to join the rest of the world in the qualifying rounds, expected to start later this year.
The next World Cup is now only three years away if it is played in either South Africa or New Zealand.
The qualifying rounds, which have been played on a regional basis — Asia, Americas, Africa, Europe etc. — are likely to be restructured on a North/South basis.
‘Spain would play against Canada, the USA, Romania and Wales , while Argentina would compete against Fiji, Namibia, Zimbabwe, Chile and Western Samoa ’, said Thomas.
First for Melrose Sevens
BAY OF PLENTY are the first New Zealand team to send a team to the Melrose Sevens next month.
Barbarians break new ground
THE BARBARIANS have invited three foreign stars to join their Easter tour — Canadian no.8 Glen Ennis , Japan's Toshiyuki Hayashi and the US Eagles lock and captain Kevin Swords .
The Barbarians are to break new ground when they embark on a three-match tour of Russia at the end of May — playing in St. Petersburg, Krasnoyarsk and Moscow .
Case of mistaken identity?
THE New Zealand selectors of the World XV who invited South African centre MARTIN KNOETZE to step in for England 's Will Carling have been labouring under a rather severe misapprehension.
They confused the 24-year-old Transvaal centre with Springbok centre Faffa Knoetze , who is still playing somewhere in Italy .
South African experts say that Martin is a good provincial player — but nowhere near international selection.
Soviets slug it out
THE Soviet slot in the World Cup Sevens will be auctioned between the breakaway republics of the former empire.
Russia, Ukraine, Latvia, Georgia, Moldavia, Azerbaijan etc. will compete in a sevens tournament, probably in Moscow, to win the right to participate in the World Cup Sevens at Murrayfield in 1993.
Waikato walk it
WAIKATO are the flavour of the month in New Zealand .
They won the CANZ series after a phenomenal series of results: they beat all the main contenders by substantial margins and inflicted defeats by over 40 points on their main rivals;Otago , the provincial champions of the touring Rugby Canada .
In the last match of the series Waikato, with no.8 John Mitchell scoring three tries, beat North Harbour 49–3.
One of Otago's try scorers was Marc Ellis , a 20-year-old wing cum centre, tipped to step into the boots vacated by Craig Innes .
Plucked out of school rugby by the current All Black assistant coach, Ellis has impressed with his ability and polished skills.
Testing times for the Lions
THE Four Home Unions are still locked in an arm-wrestling contest with the New Zealand Rugby Union over the itinerary for the 1993 BRITISH LIONS tour.
With a year to go the NZRFU have yet to provide a detailed breakdown.
Worried by the £200,000 loss incurred during the Romanian and Soviet tours last year, the NZRFU wants four Tests (three internationals against New Zealand and the fourth against the ANZACS ).
The Home Unions want only three Tests, to include the ANZACS.
All this explains the rather unusual haste of New Zealand to secure the 1994 South African tour at the expense of the announced short tour to the Republic this summer which triggered off considerable controversy.
Spaniards come of age
SPAIN recorded a sensational 6–0 win over Romania in the FIRA Championship on the first weekend of April in Madrid.
This is Spain's first ever win against the Romanians in over 30 years of mutual contact and could signal Spain's coming of age as a rugby power in Europe.
To give you an idea of the margins recorded in the past between the two countries — in 1977 Romania beat Spain 76–3 in Bucharest while in Barcelona four years later they won 56–6.
Steve saves the day
AN INTERVENTION by the ANC shadow minister for sport,STEVE TSHWETE , has solved the deadlock over the New Zealand visas for the six South African players invited to the New Zealand RU Centenary series.
While Tshwete was in Australia and New Zealand following the Cricket World Cup , a leading ANC sports activist,Mr Mluleki George , who also chairs the NOSC (the National Olympic and Sports Congress, recognised by most Commonwealth governments as the voice of non-Olympic sports in South Africa), wrote letters to the governing bodies and the authorities in Australia, New Zealand, France and England demanding they ban or discourage the planned tours to and from the Republic, arguing that the development programme about to be launched by the SARFU was only a smokescreen designed to provide a cover for the international aspirations of the white rugby establishment.
The issue became hot enough in New Zealand to lead to a meeting between the Prime Minister Mr Bolger and the  NZRFU Chairman Eddie Tonks .
Following the row the New Zealand High Commission, which represents NZ interests in South Africa, refused to issue visas until guarantees had been provided by the relevant political bodies.
Tshwete's return from Australia saved the day and secured visas for the six beleaguered South Africans.
Read the rule books!
IN THE wake of his suspension, French prop GREGOIRE LASCUBE has taken up refereeing in the hope that his six months' ban will be reduced.
The Agen loose-head, who has never had a reputation for being a hothead, is refereeing junior and children's games unaware that an old regulation of the French Federation — which used to automatically reduce the length of his ban if a player could show repentance by taking up refereeing — is no longer valid.
The man who joined Lascubé in his early bath, hooker Vincent Moscato , has forsaken the rugby pitch to take up his other favourite pastime, boxing, just as he did a couple of years ago when suspended after being sent off in a club match.
Moscato fought in an amateur bout in Amiens which he won in controversial circumstances at the beginning of April.
He is planning a few more encounters before he becomes re-eligible for rugby next September.
Third time lucky
THE Romanians have accepted South Africa 's request for a third game during the Springboks ’ short tour in June.
The ‘Boks will play Romanian Students on June 6th in Constanta, Romania ‘B’on June 9th and Romania on June 13th, both in Bucharest .
After that they travel to Italy , where they play Italian Students on June 16th in Padua and Italy on June 20th in Rome .
SOUTH AFRICA
BEDFORD'S BLAST
Former Springbok skipper TOMMY BEDFORD'S column only in Rugby World & Post 
As mentioned in this column last month, committees of the South African Rugby Board and the South African Rugby Union have already begun working informally together in preparation for the coming rugby season.
At a recent rugby jamboree in Kimberley the unification of these two bodies was formally completed so now it is up to the various officials and administrators to make the new South African Rugby Football Union really work.
Last month I expressed the hope that, as the autocratic system of government in South Africa is replaced by a more democratic one, this might rub off on the new rugby bureaucracy.
I hope that the constitution of the new SARFU will protect rugby's new scheme of things from the power politics and  feuding which for so long bedevilled our rugby.
But the country needs a new voice, a new vision.
It needs a new person to take it into the future, someone free of the old, deeply ingrained prejudices and affiliations.
But where is such a leader to be found?
And in the game of rugby we, too, will need a new sort of president with a contemporary vision for the game.
But does such a man exist?
Doctor Danie Craven is the IRB's most senior citizen.
It is he, and Ebrahim Patel, the former President for 13 years of the now defunct SARU, who heads their combined organisation, SARFU.
But Craven is already in his eighties and has been plagued by ill-health for some time.
Realistically, the day cannot be that far distant when the good Doctor might have to stand down.
The question is: who is the visionary waiting to succeed him and breathe new life into South African rugby?
Even within Craven's own SARB this was never clear but.
His position was never seriously challenged, except once, when it looked as though the fiercely pro-Government, pro-Afrikaner, ‘Broederbond’— dominated faction which then existed on his executive might oust him.
Even then he managed to hang onto it.
But as the polarised politics of the country have intensified the split amongst nationalist  Afrikaners and in the ‘Broederbond’, so too has the once nationalist-dominated SARB splintered.
Professor Fritz Eloff, the President of the powerful Northern Transvaal Union and Craven's vice president for 20 years, substituted for him at IRB meetings abroad when Craven's failing health repeatedly prevented him from attending.
But Craven chose Louis Luyt, the maverick president of the powerful Transvaal Rugby to help pursue the initiatives which lead to the creation of SARFU.
Eloff and SARB's conservative Executive Committee were not informed of what was afoot, and, when it came to light, the existing animosity intensified.
In due course, Luyt lost his position and has slipped out of contention.
Nearly all the leading contenders have all been eliminated over the last year or so.
Eloff is no longer a spring chicken — nor is he in control of Northern Transvaal.
The politically powerful Jan Pickard of Western Province was forced to resign through ill health.
While Professor Koob Vermaak resigned from Eastern Province after problems with his University in Port Elizabeth.
Steve Strydom, of the Orange Free State, has probably been seen to be too ambitious and Dr. Nick Labuschagne, until recently mentioned as the most likely successor to Craven, was ousted as his Union's president in March.
It is unlikely that any of the former SARU Executives or candidates from the lesser Unions formerly under the SARB could fill Craven's shoes.
They don't have the resources or the clout, and the way in which the game has developed and has been structured in South Africa means they are dependent on the financial patronage of the six major urban unions — a new SARFU or not!
In rugby, as in most aspects of life in South Africa, we have agreed to let go of the old ways and leaders even though no-one can know where the new ways will lead us — or where the new leaders will come from.
Transvaal turn up the heat
South Africa may lag behind just now, says JOHN ROBBIE, but they are notoriously quick learners.
Watch out…
The South African rugby season has arrived.
What a pleasure.
What a prospect.
Just what it means to be back in sport was brought home to South Africans by the Cricket World Cup.
Alarm clocks waking us up in the middle of the night; absenteeism at an all-time high during the day games; the thrill of success and the despair of defeat for the national team — they were new experiences to many.
However, the ticker-tape parade through Johannesburg with the returned team riding on an open bus was undoubtedly the highlight.
The streets were full of cheering crowds finally free of their racial tags — finally South Africans, nothing more and nothing less.
What a prospect for the rugby season.
In fact the international flavour came early.
The Transvaal Union arranged four friendly matches, all at Ellis Park, within 13 days.
The second was against a South African Barbarians side captained by Philippe Sella and including Willie Ofahengaue, Peter Winterbottom and Philippe Saint-André.
The side was coached by Bob Templeton.
The game was neither spectacular nor gripping, but it was interesting.
Surprisingly, only one about ten thousand turned up to watch.
Perhaps the almost doubled entrance prices coupled with the knowledge that big international games lie ahead contributed to the poor show.
Certainly world stars of this calibre would have filled the stadium a year ago.
In the end the Baa-Baas won 25–15 with Ofahengaue rounding off a move right at the death.
That got the biggest cheer of the night.
However, the star of the show was undoubtedly Peter Winterbottom.
He played two seasons for Transvaal (in ‘87 he couldn't even make the side) but against them he was brilliant.
Quite apart from his work rate and tackling, which were to his normal standard, Transvaal watchers were amazed at his handling ability and his ability to retain and secure possession in the loose.
The lack of these latter qualities in South African rugby was pinpointed by Bob Templeton as the greatest lesson to be learnt.
He also added that when this is achieved South Africa will stand back to nobody.
Sella and Saint André were quiet on the night and indeed young Transvaal winger Pieter Hendriks was the pick of the backs.
He is off to New Zealand with the International XV next month and will keep up the traditions set by Van Vollenhoven, Englebrecht, Muller, Nomis, Mordt and Du Plessis — to name but a few of the recent greats.
Bloodied but not bowed.
Durable Free State prop Piet Bester has proved a technically formidable opponent.
Transvaal, who had beaten Western Province the week before, bounced back from the Baa-Baas defeat with a win against Free State the week after.
Pieter Hendriks scored a marvellous kick and chase try and one of the Free State stars was Hendrik Truter who last season played for Transvaal.
He felt, with some justification, that he had received from Transvaal a raw deal for his loyalty, and he moved to Bloemfontein.
A senior Transvaal player, who wished to remain anonymous, indicated that the burly 6ft 5ins fullback will be sorely missed.
The Free State front row was also impressive and it you can imagine three Mighty Mouse McLauchlans, well then you have them.
The two Bester brothers, Piet and André along with Johan Styger, prove week in week out that technique and timing can match size and bulk any day.
Future tourists beware.
Northerns made their debut a week later at the same venue and defeated Transvaal 22–14.
It was a greasy night, many mistakes were made but this was a thrilling game.
Three tries each, all but one by a fullback or wing.
Considering that Northerns had not practised at all this season it was a remarkable result.
Once again pundits are saying that Transvaal do too much too soon and burn out before the end of the season.
Remember it's getting close on 20 years since their last Currie Cup win.
Shades of Manchester United and that elusive league title?
More international appetisers for players were handed out in invitations.
Last month we heard of the New Zealand XV adventure which Martin Knoetze, the versatile Transvaal utility back has since been invited to join.
Others off to far-away places are Garth Wright, prop Balie Swart, flanker Ian Macdonald and hooker Harry Roberts.
They invited to the Hong Kong Sevens to play in the fifteen-man exhibition game beforehand.
Finally, South African players will experience and enjoy the fun and challenges of the international game.
Ironically this will come about as so many other top players are complaining that touring schedules are too rough.
Perhaps visiting New Zealand, Australia, France, Japan etc. are not quite so exciting the third and fourth time around.
You'd have difficulty a local player of that one.
To give you an example, South African hooker Uli Schmidt will be going on his first tour.
He is perhaps the best hooker in the world game and he has been nowhere, played against nobody overseas.
He's a doctor, married to a doctor and the son of Springbok flank Louis.
In fact his father is credited with being the original ‘Blue Bull’.
After his exploits the Northerns side adopted the nickname.
Uli played for the ‘Boks against the Cavaliers in 1986 and scored a remarkable try in the Third Test.
His exploits are legendary on the rugby field and, just to give you an idea of his strength and dedication, here are a few of his credits.
He finished second in the 1988 Superstars, losing by a whisker in the final event.
Once while at University he was bored with a rugby injury so he borrowed a comrade's marathon number from an injured friend and completed the 90km race in 8–1/2 hours.
Two days later he reported back for training.
His best standard Marathon time is 3.06 and he has also completed the Dusi Canoe Marathon and three Iron Man Events.
All this counts for nothing in the world of rugby and it will be his ability to scrum and compete with the best that will make or break this South African legend.
My money is on him against anybody.
NEW ZEALAND
THE ALL BLACKS' EMINENCE GRISE A blunt southerner by nature, LAURIE MAINS has been a changed man since he was made All Black coach.
But, asks DON CAMERON, will he still be smiling after a year in the job?
Laurie Mains was busily talking with John Dowling, a New Zealand Rugby Football Union councillor from Dunedin, about the public relations side of his new position as All Black coach when, all of a sudden, a smile moved over Mains' face.
‘Things are changing, aren't they’? remarked Mains.
The fact that Mains realised his image was changing, or had needed to be changed, will become a key part of Mains' progress in the hottest seat in New Zealand rugby.
Mains now realises tat there is a need for a certain amount of public relations work in his job, especially as he came to the coaching position under strained circumstances.
But perhaps Mains did not really need to polish up his public relations, but simply to brush aside some of the habits, and myths about his early career.
In his early days as Otago coach in the small 80's Mains did gain the reputation of being a rather acidic commentator after his team had played.
Those of us dropping into Dunedin with a touring international or provincial team could usually rely, if things had not gone well for Otago, on Mains later proclaiming that his side had in some way been unfairly treated either by fate or the referee.
So Mains did gain the reputation of being some rather grim eminence locked in his southern castle and given to humourless comment about the rugby matters of the day.
There was, I suspect, a little bit of Otago isolationism involved.
Mains had been born and bred in Dunedin and, especially in the days when the Evening Star newspaper folded, the rugby matters then tended to be faithfully recorded by the Otago Daily Times and other electronic media as if Otago was sometimes being unfairly treated by the teams and newspaper writers from the north.
Mind you, there was one right blarney when Mains decided that a rugby writer of the Otago Daily Times had harmed the Otago rugby cause, and there was a bitter no-speaks stand-off until good sense later prevailed.
However, I suspect that Mains rather got some enjoyment out of appearing as some grim nemesis of the south.
My personal view tended to be that if you approached Mains in a straightforward way and asked the straight question then you got the straight and honest answer.
If there were times when Mains was not available or chose not to speak then those were his business, and his silence could be respected.
There was one day when I was in Dunedin preparing a preview for a match the next day and was told that late in the afternoon Otago would be training at Carisbrook and I might there obtain their team for the morrow.
When I arrived I found I was the only newspaperman so involved, and Mains had his men out on the main field.
Soon I was approached by the manager of the Otago side, Fred Daniels, who, like Mains, could look rather sterner than his equable temperament would suggest.
I told Fred that I would like to get the Otago playing side.
Fred's reaction was to ask whether I would move away if I was first given the side.
The team was delivered, I was away, given more time to concoct a preview and then with the bonus of having time to join some friends for a Speights.
Later I found that Mains did not want me watching his team train ‘because I knew too much about rugby’ and would tell the opposition of his plans.
Mains thus became the first (and I am afraid, only) rugby man who ever considered I knew anything about the game.
He had the good grace to apologise afterwards and I also expressed my gratitude that I did not have to wait an hour or so until the training was finished before I could obtain his team and get busy.
I did not let on that watching rugby training from 30 or 40 yards distance does not automatically allow one to discover the training team's secrets.
Before and since then I have admired Mains' growing confidence as coach of a side which reached its peak with victory in the first division of the national championship last winter, and also his increasing comfort with the public relations impact of coaching a prominent side.
However, perhaps Dowling and his NZRFU men were taking a sensible step when the included Mains in their plans to improve the media relations of the All Blacks, something which hit bottom during the recent World Cup — and they had not been exactly healthy before that.
Mains will have found out by now that his private life will be interrupted by numerous calls at all hours of the day or night from people seeking information.
In passing the NZRFU are evidently planning to overhaul their media relations systems — with Mains as a central figure — and one plan is to invite the media in their many forms to a cocktail party next month, and have the All Blacks there as waiters and drinks-carriers.
That might close the gap between media and players.
It might also be a total disaster and leave the chasm as wide as before.
Mains certainly had no thought of these future publicity problems when he was one of a string of talented young players who came out of Kings High School in Dunedin in the early 1980s.
Chris Laidlaw, the All Black halfback, was another about the same time who, in fact, teamed with Mains' brother Rick as the inside backs in an outstanding school team.
Mains went to Training College in Dunedin to develop as a schoolteacher and his first adult rugby was with that club.
One year they won the second grade championship, with Mains as an outstanding left-footed fullback, but were not able to regain a place among the senior Dunedin clubs.
So Mains looked toward Southern, a senior club with which his family already had strong ties, and it was as a player for the famous club, with their black and  white colours, that Mains developed to the point of gaining the Otago side in 1967.
The main man.
Laurie Mains is at the centre of efforts to heal the rift between players and media.
In the very short space of ten seasons Mains played a hundred games for Otago and had begun a steady succession of matches in All Black trials.
So, when the 1971 British Lions stretched Fergie McCormick this way and that when winning the First Test on Mains' home ground, the All Black selectors decided that McCormick had to go, and Mains went on to play the remaining three Tests of the first rubber that the Lions had won in New Zealand.
Quite a few prominent people were to pay for that series defeat and it must have been a cruel disappointment for Mains that he was among those replaced.
He had played steadily enough and the fact that the Lions were able to outwit the All Blacks in that series had little to do with Mains' ability.
So if Mains' lean face did begin to take on a grey and grim hue it probably began in 1972 when the All Black selectors began shuffling around their fullbacks, with Mains conspicuously absent.
Trevor Morris was the first, a light-footed flier at a time when the running fullback was beginning to become fashionable, and even Mains' strongest champions would not suggest that the Mains' style had been developed along free-running lines.
He was the traditional, invaluable fullback — steady as a rock on defence, sensible on attack, the deliverer of the penalty goals and conversions when within his moderate-to-long range.
After Morris came Joe Karam and as the 70s went on and on Mains kept playing to his high level for Southern and Otago, but that All Black place he had held so briefly seemed to get further and further away.
Then Karam went to rugby league and the All Black position was again open.
Mains was recalled for the solitary Test against Tom Grace's Irishmen at Athletic Park, in which the All Blacks gained an undistinguished win, but Mains got a penalty goal and enough credit to keep him in the team for the great tour — South Africa, 1978.
If Mains' was not graven with deep frown-lines before that tour, those furrows must have been permanent afterwards.
The All Blacks took two fullbacks on that tour, Mains and a young and  flighty lad Kit Fawcett, whose enormous talent at rugby and cricket was never quite harnessed.
John Stewart, coach of that All Black side, was a man of inventive method.
Later it become known that Stewart would have preferred as fullback Bob Barrell, a hefty man from Stewart's area, Wanganui, who was a famed goal-kicker.
That at least was the comment — after the tour.
But on that tour Mains have wondered what was happening.
Fawcett soon became regarded as a dasher, but a dodgy proposition on defence.
Mains went along in the provincial games, playing steadily, scoring points (he became top for the tour with 132, 53 ahead of Bryan Williams and 77 clear of the third, Sid Going).
But when the First Test came the tour selectors, with Stewart naturally taking the dominant role, decided that Mains was suspect because he did not have the speed to cover the hard South African grounds when the ball was loose.
So Stewart opted instead for Duncan Robertson, a very talented five-eighths and Otago team-mate of Mains, but with no major experience in the specialist roll of fullback.
Fawcett played the Second and Third Tests — risking a major defensive error which cost a try in the Third — and Robertson returned for the Fourth.
And Mains sat and wondered what on earth was going on.
If the All Blacks had major weaknesses in the Test series they were of fullback defence and goal-kicking, where Williams and Going became the  erratic test kickers.
In the grandstand sat Mains, the All Blacks' safest and most experienced fullback and, by a mile, their best goal-kicker.
So little wonder that Mains should return to his country home just south of Dunedin and take with him a rather jaundiced view of the workings of New Zealand rugby, and the partiality of some of the media who followed the Stewart party line in South Africa.
Even Mains' warmest admirers suggest that in his early days as Otago coach Mains could be abrupt, and sometimes difficult of manner.
In those days, however, Otago were lacking in genuine playing talent while further north Canterbury and then Auckland were passing through golden and successful eras.
Otago did  manage to beat Auckland and Carisbrook in 1985, but suffered some solid defeats in later years.
But Mains was gaining confidence, and talented players — many of them attracted to Otago by various means from outside unions.
Greg Cooper came from Auckland, Arthur Stone from Waikato, Stu Foster from the north, followed by the two wings John Timu and Paul Cooke, plus the usual number of outside players attending the social sections of the University of Otago.
Mains gradually moulded the home-grown and the imported players into a playing pattern.
He always had steady and sturdy forwards, but never any real line-out height, and the Otago scrum was sometimes struggling to keep up.
So Mains had to organise a counter-punching attacking system, keeping the attacks rolling usually close to the forward mass with loose forwards and inside backs combining.
Only in the last year or so did the attack flow more regularly to the three-quarters, to make the best use of Cooper's thrusts from fullback quite often finished off by Timu or an exciting youngster Marc Ellis from the wings.
The Otago method may have been slightly below the classical tackling methods of attack, especially from first-phase, but Mains developed a special skill that was to have all his forwards, bit men and small, all very mobile and skilled at handling, retaining or winning the ball on the ground.
Mains did a lot with a lot of talent most of it slightly below international level.
Now he, allied with Peter Thorburn and Earle Kirton, will have the chance to develop his playing methods using the best players in the land.
It will be interesting to see whether Mains can bring a new dimension to All Black play.
He comes from a reasonably conservative background and Mains is sure to insist that a lot of very basic work is done before the backline frills are attempted.
But there is every chance that the Mains methods will work, and that Mains will have the luxury of starting his career with a public relations system between team and media being put into place.
The hope is that Mains is still smiling, and chatting to the media, after a fearsomely difficult first season.
He faces three early-season ‘tests’ against the World XV assembled for the NZRFU centenary celebrations, two home Tests against Ireland, then three away Tests against Australia, with the Bledisloe Cup at stake in each.
Now the NZRFU are talking about a short one-test tour to South Africa.
Public relations are easy, if you are winning.
If there are some losses, or some media sniping about Mains or his methods or his selections or his results, then some of those old Mains frowns might re-appear.
And that will be one of Mains' main tests for the year.
Winning the games and  winning over the media will come easier if the first is achieved.
AUSTRALIA
History in the making
Confirmation of a tour to South Africa and moves towards a Southern Hemisphere Five Nations — it's all happening Down Under, as GREG CAMPBELL discovered.
In an historic few days, Australian Rugby sanctions against South Africa were lifted, an invitation for the Wallabies to tour the Republic in August was issued and accepted and the heavyweight unions from Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Argentina agreed to combine their collective muscle and form the Southern Hemisphere Rugby Alliance.
These whirlwind developments were a long time in the planning but the results came with staggering speed and remarkable good nature and co-operation which finally sees the rugby world totally united once again but with a new combined force lurking below the equator.
And a key man involved in all these developments has been Australian Rugby Football Union president and chairman, Joe French, who has worked actively, but without recognition, behind the scenes for several years.
Ever since his election as ARFU president in 1988, French has been involved in many discussions with South African rugby officials assisting and advising them in their aim once again to be welcomed back into the international playing fraternity.
Once the new, non-racial South African Rugby Football Union was formed, South Africa's return was really only a formality.
But the question was when.
The ARFU indicated in 1990 their intention to play South Africa when announcing details of the proposed 1992 and 1993 incoming Springbok tours and plans for the Wallabies' deviation to South Africa en route to the tour of Ireland and Wales.
Blueprints for this year's Australian tour by South Africa were scrapped last September following delays in the formation of the SARFU.
This was contained in a joint statement issued with the New Zealand Rugby Football Union as both Unions had to formalise their 1992 domestic international programme.
And, when the Committee of the Four Home Unions refused Australia's application to play a handful of games in South Africa before touring Ireland and Wales in October, all that was left on the table was next year's tour which is part of the International Rugby Football Board's tours rota.
With SARFU unification accomplished in South Africa, French moved swiftly to secure a Wallaby tour to South Africa for this year.
Australia and New Zealand hold an annual meeting to discuss matters of mutual interest and French decided to broaden these horizons following the changes within South Africa and invite a SARFU delegation to attend a meeting in Sydney together with representatives from the Argentine Rugby Union.
The SARFU wanted to play the test at Johannesburg's Ellis Park, the biggest ground in the country, where gate receipts would be huge, while the ARFU wanted to play at the low altitude venues of either Durban's King's Park or Cape Town's Newlands Stadium.
The ARFU claimed that scientific evidence indicated that the Wallabies would be disadvantaged by playing a test in the high altitude stadiums of either Transvaal's Ellis Park or Pretoria's Loftus Versfeld.
This tour could be important for the Wallabies as South Africa's chances for hosting the 1994 World Cup have improved following the announcement in Sydney that Argentina would support the SARFU's World Cup application at the International Rugby Football Board annual general meeting in Wellington in April.
Australian and New Zealand players are set to make short trips to South Africa as early as next year when the Super Six series is expanded and called the Super Ten.
The participating teams will be New Zealand's top four provinces, South Africa's top three provinces, New South Wales and Queensland and the winner of the annual triangular Test series between the Pacific island powers of Western Samoa, Fiji and Tonga won by Western Samoa last year when it was the World Cup qualifying decider.
Back to blast the 'Boks
GREG CAMPBELL explains why Wallaby NICK FARR-JONES decided to bring his temporary Test retirement to a premature end.
World Cup winning captain Nick Farr-Jones as finally decided to make himself available for the Wallabies’ domestic Test matches against Scotland and the New Zealand All Blacks.
After months of indecision, Farr-Jones opted against confining his rugby to his Sydney club, Sydney University, and will once again lead New South Wales and Australia into battle.
Farr-Jones' final decision was made soon after the ‘Yes’ vote was overwhelmingly passed in South Africa by the white minority.
There is every chance Farr-Jones will be available for the Wallaby tour of Wales and Ireland in October and November.
While Farr-Jones will be wearing the gold Australian jumper this year, it seems certain that flanker Simon Poidevin will be missing.
Poidevin has announced he is unable to devote the same time and commitment to the game this year because of his business pressures with a Sydney stockbroking firm.
But Poidevin, a veteran of 59 test caps and Australia's most capped forward, didn't shut the door completely on playing in more Test matches.
He said he is still available to play for Australia in domestic tests but has asked to be judged on his form with Sydney club Randwick.
At the same time, though, Poidevin acknowledges that the national selectors will be more interested in choosing a flanker from the New South Wales and Queensland teams.
Although Poidevin may not be seen in the sky blue jumper of NSW or the gold of Australia, television viewers will be seeing plenty of Poidevin on-screen.
Poidevin has been signed by new Australian rugby broadcaster,Channel Ten , as an expert commentator.
David Campese has already been signed on a full-time marketing role and a Farr-Jones will also have a strong role in Channel Ten's rugby presentations.
World Cup flanker Jeff Miller will assist former test prop Chris Handy for Brisbane matches covered by Channel Ten .
The match commentator will be the highly experienced and versatile David Fordham.
Fordham is the brother of Australian Rugby Football Union executive director and former test referee, Bob Fordham.
David Campese required surgery and was ruled out of Australia's team for the Hong Kong Sevens after damaging a knee when playing rugby league at training with his Italian club, Milan.
Fullback Marty Roebuck continues to be in the wars and suffered a broken jaw in a pre-season club trial, while Test hooker Phil Kearns has been sidelined for three weeks with knee trouble.
Centre Anthony Herbert also injured his neck when running into former Wallaby prop Matt Ryan in a Brisbane club match.
Ryan was also sidelined with a badly bruised sternum.
Then there is Test no.8 Tim Gavin who is making slow progress after being ruled out of last year's World Cup because of damaged knee ligaments.
Australia launched a new preparation for sevens selection this year with the introduction of the Canberra Sevens.
The ARFU has been concerned at the falling standard of sevens, particularly with the World Cup Sevens to be played in April next year at Murrayfield.
The Canberra Sevens saw Australia Green, Australia Gold, NSW, Queensland, ACT, Fiji, New Zealand champions North Harbour plus an Invitation team on show.
Fiji's team was a second strength team but they were still too good, running away 22–10 victors over Australia Green after trailing 10–0 in the first half.
While the whole tournament was well conducted, the host club, Tuggerangong, is believed to have lost about $40,000.
The competitor.
Wallaby skipper Nick Farr-Jones argues the toss with Scottish referee Ken McCartney — but will his competitive instincts see him through a gruelling campaign as the World Champions take on South Africa this summer?
CANADA
Hadley hits the Tokyo trail
The phrase ‘Go West young man’ has taken on a new meaning in Canada, where going west means coming to terms with sushi, the bullet train and sumo wrestling.
PETER McMULLAN spoke to man-mountain NORM HADLEY, one of a growing number of players making the move.
Canada's Norm Hadley and Glenn Ennis, widely recognised as two of the outstanding forwards during the ‘91 World Cup campaign, have been in Japan since late last year and are now looking ahead to the new season.
They will complete their residency qualifications for league competition in September and until then will be playing for the Tokyo-based Suntory company in an extensive programme of exhibition games, starting this month.
Standing out in the crowd.
Norm Hadley gets down to mauling training with his Suntory — including countryman Glenn Ennis (far right).
Having already had a hand in preparing the Suntory team for the national play-offs at the end of last season, when they finished in the top eight, the two Canadian stalwarts have a pretty good idea as to what lies ahead.
They know the game is played at a fast pace but that, overall, there is room for improvement in the key area of ball retention in contact.
They have also noted a general lack of forward cohesion and attention to scrummaging technique.
Says Hadley: ‘All the teams are company based, such as Toshiba, Mazda and NEC.
In addition to playing and working for Suntory, Glenn and I have been helping with coaching, primarily with the forwards.
We have also set up a weight training programme for the Suntory players’.
Both are determined to make the most of the business career opportunities provided by Suntory and, outside work, find their time fully occupied with a daily training regime and intensive Japanese lessons.
Canada and especially British Columbia, has strong commercial ties with the Pacific Rim countries and fluency in Japanese will be a major asset in the years to come.
Hadley acknowledges there is a possibility that opportunities may arise to represent Japan at international level but stresses that he would not consider selection if it in any way jeopardized his standing with the Canadian Rugby Union.
‘I personally want to represent Canada at the 1995 World Cup’, he says, ‘and, to be realistic, there is absolutely no way the Japan RFU will see their national team take the field with more than a couple of foreigners in the line-up.
We will see if time proves me wrong on this one’.
Hadley is adamant that, despite the views expressed by Wayne Shelford, nothing can make up for the satisfaction of representing the country of your birth at international level.
‘Wayne suggests playing at the top level is what matters.
As far as I am concerned the desire to win, the fear and hatred of losing, is increased immensely by the knowledge that I have the maple leaf on my jersey.
‘I have no rational explanation for this but doubt I would derive that same feeling if I was playing for Japan.
I can play club and provincial anywhere in the world but international competition must be something more.
‘Maybe in Canada we are different.
If a Canadian player seeks some reward greater than the thrill of representing his country against from the best from around the world, as if that isn't enough, he is bound for disappointment’.
Noting that the amateur code is still alive and well in Canada, Hadley nevertheless feels the time has come, as he says, for the powers-that-be to open their eyes to reality.
‘The recent World Cup proved what a commercially lucrative venture rugby union can be.
The players, without whom there would be no World Cup, are not receiving any money.
As far as I know, the Canadian Rugby Union has received nothing for the development, or even the maintenance, of our cash-strapped programme.
So where are all the revenues going?
‘For too long the rigid enforcement of the amateur code has allowed many companies to get miles of free advertising out of higher profile players.
That the amateur code allows players to be exploited for the enhancement of someone else's bottom line should alone be enough to implement changes, at least with respect to produce endorsement’, Hadley says.
‘However, there comes a time, hopefully well before the kick-off, when a player has to set his disappointments and frustrations to one side, roll up his sleeves and get to work.
If nothing else, the games deserves this’, he adds.
NEWS FROM THE BIG COUNTRY
The third staging of the CANZ series saw visiting Rugby Canada fully stretched by four of New Zealand 's most powerful provincial teams.
With only six members of Canada's ‘91 World Cup squad on call — props Dan Jackart and Paul Szabo, lock Jeff Knauer, flanker Al Charron, centre Tom Woods and fullback David Lougheed — it was obvious from the outset that the Canadians were again sailing into deep and menacing waters.
So it proved.
In six days, playing Sunday, Wednesday and Saturday, they lost 31–3 to Otago , 15–13 to North Harbour , where a win was well within sight, and 49–13 to North Auckland .
In the final game Waikato took the honours 28–24, leafing Rugby Canada to wonder just how long it would be before they won for the first time on New Zealand soil.
Still, those last three tries against Waikato in Hamilton made a huge difference to the team and its supporters in Canada.
It suggests the defiant flame that burned so brightly against France and New Zealand in the World Cup remains a significant Canadian strength.
A lesser squad, after three earlier defeats, would have crumbled facing an 18–4 deficit; Rugby Canada rallied to match Waikato's three tries, only one converted, giving the home side victory by two goals, a try, a drop goal and three penalty goals to a goal and two tries.
This, is three visits and 10 games, dating back to 1989, the hosts have taken all the honours with North Auckland's 21–20 loss in Vancouver three years ago, thanks to a late Mark Wyatt penalty, the one and only reversal suffered by the Kiwis.
Not that Canada is crying the blues.
Coach Mike Luke is right to stress the positive aspects of the CANZ contacts when he says: ‘This is the single most important development tour we can undertake and we learned a great deal about some of Canada's future World Cup players in one of the strongest and most testing environments the game has to offer.
‘Remember we went with a relatively inexperienced group at   this level.
We met for the first time just two days before departure and accepted a murderous schedule of four games in 10 days, before opening against the New Zealand provincial champions just two days after a 25 hour journey to Dunedin.
‘The real value of the CANZ series is that it brings together a group of national level players for two weeks with games against consistently top level opposition which would be difficult to duplicate anywhere else.
The experience has already been invaluable, as proved in the recent World Cup when the backbone of our team had been to the 1990 CANZ series where we lost all four matches’.
On an individual level Luke singles out the contribution of Charron ‘outstanding in every way’, Lougheed ‘the man of the match against North Harbour’, Knauer ‘worked very hard, as always’, the front row group ‘for their strong scrummaging’, along with captain Woods and vice-captain and hooker Mark Cardinal, a 1987 World Cup veteran, for excellent leadership in most demanding circumstances.
Each time Rugby Canada were up against the big names.
Wing John Timu was one of the four All Blacks in the Otago XV, North Harbour called on another six, as did Waikato, who had already upset Otago 47–13, while North Auckland has as their captain Ian Jones, New Zealand's most recent All Black of the Year.
The opening setback at the hands of Otago, where arctic conditions would not stop Timu from claiming two of five tries, was followed by a solid hard-tackling performance against North Harbour in Auckland.
Wings Jeff Hurford and Scott MacKinnon each had a second-half try as Rugby Canada came storming back from 15–0 to 15–13 with outside-half Rob Ross, who provided a penalty and a conversion, just unable to land one more penalty for a long-awaited victory.
Ross, who scored with a penalty against spirited Otago in what was a very subdued Canadian effort, also contributed a penalty and the conversion to one of two tries at close quarters by no.8 Ian Gordon against North Auckland in Whangarei.
The host team almost doubled their score with 22 points in the last 20 minutes to make this a most unhappy day for a desperately tired and sore Rugby Canada.
They lost Canadian prop Szabo for talking back to the referee in the second half and his subsequent one-game suspension meant he could not play against Waikato.
Earlier, first choice scrum-half Ian MacKay had been ruled out with a broken hand before the finish of the North Harbour game, placing an enormous load on Alberta's Tom Liddle, a very successful first time tourist.
Dan Jackart, the other capped prop, went off with a damaged shoulder in the first half against North Harbour but came on as a replacement for Szabo.
Against Waikato, Rugby Canada had tries by Ian Gordon (his third), Scott MacKinnon (his second) and lock Jeff Knauer with Ross kicking the one conversion.
THERE is not better way to underline the problems of distance and climate that are a unique hallmark of the game in Canada than…talking to Canadian RU executive director John Billingsley who mentioned his Ottawa lawn had been deep in snow for more than three months — in Vancouver I was about to bring out the mower for the third time in a garden bright with spring blossoms.
It certainly helps explain why one country has two distinct seasons, September-May in British Columbia , April-October for the rest.
JUST as spring brings out the first swallows, so it also motivates incoming club tours from one or more of the four home countries.
A case in point is Dublin's Old Wesley who compete in the top division of the All Ireland league.
They are due in British Columbia for four games between May 13 and 22 against University of British Columbia Old Boys and Meralomas in Vancouver, and Cowichan and Oak Bay Castaways on Vancouver Island.
Harrow , from Courage League Middlesex 1 are also coming to North America in May for a Centenary tour that includes matches against Kats , in Vancouver,Port Alberni , on the Island, and Old Puget Sound Beach , in Seattle.
In August Northumberland will be on Canada's west coast to challenge Vancouver Island , in Victoria, on August 25th,Vancouver on August 27th and a B.C. President's XV , again in Vancouver, on August 30th.
One way or another they can expect to meet up with the majority of the players who will represent Canada at the ‘95 World Cup.
A FORMIDABLE All Japan High Schools swept to a five game unbeaten tour record in B.C. in March scoring 41 tries to four in the process.
But poor goal kicking could have cost them a 20–19 win in the big game against the British Columbia U19s .
All Japan won by five tries to a try, a drop goal and four penalties after missing all the conversions and two penalties.
For B.C., a missed conversion in the final minutes was critical.
The tourists’ top try scorers were wings Tetsu Kigawa (seven) and Tasuku Fujihara (five) with their other results.
U.S.A.
Second-class citizens?
Ski-jumper Eddie ‘The Eagle’ Edwards is a household name capable of drawing large crowds Stateside, while the only thing Carling or Campese draw is blank looks.
RANDALL LIEBERMAN explains the reluctance of trendsetters like the 3.25 million circulation magazine Sports Illustrated to take an interest in Rugby.
With last month's Winter Olympics receiving over 160 hours of television programming and three weeks of heavy newspaper, magazine and TV coverage, rugby enthusiasts in the United States were given a vivid lesson as to the power of being associated with the Olympics in making sporting heroes out of previously little-known athletes.
We learned much about out bobsled team, even though there are less than 100 active bobsledders and only one bobsled run in our country.
Even just the memories of 1988 Winter Olympics folk hero Eddie ‘the Eagle’ Edwards, the British ski jumper who put himself in the Calgary Games regardless of a lack of skill or training, made more of an impact with the American sporting public than super-fit and talented rugby players such as David Campese, Jeremy Guscott or Wade Dooley.
Or how about U.S. lock and Air Force captain Kevin Swords, who established himself as a world-class player and leader at the 1991 World Cup, but is still totally ignored in the U.S. outside the rugby community?
How do we get this to change?
First, we need more TV coverage.
As we reported in this space in January, World Cup broadcast managers TSL did the United States' game a disservice by making a deal with a network which showed the World Cup final almost four months after it was played.
They also inexplicably turned down a deal with another cable network that could have possibly provided live, or much closer to live, coverage.
But rugby will never have access to the three major broadcast television networks in the U.S. as a stand-alone sport; there are too many established sports hogging the airwaves.
Even professional NHL hockey is without a national broadcast contract these days.
But Olympic hockey was covered on CBS during the recent Olympics and U.S. amateur goal-tender Ray LeBlanc became more of a household name than any professional goalie in the NHL.
Get the picture.
For rugby to get any significant U.S. television coverage, we need to be in the Olympics.
Second, we need more print coverage.
Still reeling from the lack of coverage by U.S. magazines and newspapers of the Rugby World Cup in particular, and the sport in general ,Rugby U.S. interviewed Sports Illustrated (SI)managing editor John Papanek to get his perspective on rugby.
If you are unaware,Sports Illustrated is the United States' leading weekly sports magazine, with over 3.25 million subscribers.
Sports Illustrated is definitely a leading indicator as to what's happening in sports in the U.S. and clearly rugby is not.
Papanek did explain that stories were commissioned on both Rugby World Cups, but both times they were not up to his magazine's standards.
The most revealing thing he said, though, was that his image of rugby is a lot of guys putting their heads together and getting dirty and drinking beer after the game.
When we responded that there were many tavern-league baseball players, yet baseball is covered as a sport, just as the average rugby player shouldn't stop deserving, serious rugby athletes from being covered, he snapped back: ‘Are we having this conversation so you can pitch rugby or so you can get my answers to your questions?’
Furthermore, Papanek said that rugby was a participant sport with very limited spectator and fan interest.
He also described the chicken-and-egg situation rugby faces concerning media coverage in the U.S. He said: ‘If a sport gets covered, more people develop an interest, yet it only gets covered because a lot of people have an interest’.
This is a Catch-22 I don't think rugby will be able to spin out of in this country.
We have made great strides in de-emphasising the beer parties, but not many people in the general public have noticed.
There only seems to be one escape route from this cycle — inclusion in the Olympics.
Association in the Olympics would automatically clean up rugby's image (at least at the top level), and would markedly increase the coverage of the sport — at least every four years.
This would also open doors to coverage in non-Olympic years, the ones which are currently closed to us.
Finally, we need more sponsors.
It takes money to run successful programmes, especially in a country like the U.S. where the distances between major cities are so large.
Since late 1989, when Steinlager's three-year contract was not renewed, U.S. rugby has been without a principal sponsor.
Land's End , a mail-order retailer, is the official supplier of U.S. jerseys,Heinz and Tony O'Reilly contribute, of course, and Patrick Boots just came aboard, but business interest in U.S. rugby is lukewarm at best .
Even if association with the Olympics wouldn't help in getting sponsorships (which it definitely would), by being in the Olympic movement U.S. rugby would be eligible for large U.S. Olympic Committee grants to help administer its programmes.
The IRB professes to be the body administering world rugby, but the need for the existence of FIRA points out the IRB's failure to take a truly world view of the game.
If the IRB truly wanted to develop the game worldwide, it would consolidate FIRA under one international body, make all rugby-playing nations full members and it would apply to the International Olympic Committee to get rugby included in the Summer Olympics.
In 1924, the United States upset the heavily-favoured French 17–3 in Paris in the last rugby match in the Olympics.
We would love to put out title on the line, if the IRB had the guts and the vision to give us that chance.
John Papanek (top), managing editor of Sports Illustrated, still feels rugby is too minor a sport to warrant any coverage.
Eagles in there fighting.
But unless the game can achieve a higher profile, the advances of the World Cup will not be built upon.
USA NEWS
Illustrating the interest in getting rugby incorporated into the Olympic Games in the Americas, 18 representatives from 13 rugby-playing countries met in Miami on March 7–8 to form the Pan-American Rugby Association.
The organisation will assist in the development of rugby in North, Central and South America, as well as in the Caribbean Islands.
PARA will aid in the development of the game by organising coaching, refereeing and administrative schools and exchanges.
If will also hold competitions among its members.
The organisation will also seek recognition by the International Rugby Board and the Pan-American Sports Organisation.
PARA's initial members are: Argentina, the Bahamas, Bermuda, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Jamaica, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States and Uruguay.
Also associated are the British Virgin Islands and the Caribbean Rugby Union.
The following officers of PARA were elected: President — Terry Fleener, USA; Vice-President — Carlos Tozzi, Argentina; Secretary/Treasurer — John Billingsley, Canada.
The forming of the Pan-Am Rugby Association is a required first step to getting the U.S. and other Pan-American rugby nations recognised by their respective national Olympic Committees.
USARFU president Ian Nixon has also written a letter to the International Rugby Board, requesting that the IRB seek recognition from the International Olympic Committee as rugby's sole worldwide governing body; the other key step to providing rugby nations with access to Olympic funds.
Eagles v Hong Kong
THE EAGLES' 1992 international schedule will kick off on April 18 with a Test against a visiting Hong Kong side in the newly-renovated Kezar Stadium in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco.
With World Cup captain Kevin Swords off touring with the Barbarians, 29-year-old flanker Mark Sawicki will serve as Eagle captain for the first time.
There are nine uncapped players in the 21-man Eagle squad for Hong Kong, as a number of U.S. players retired following the World Cup, including centre Kevin Higgins, fullback Ray Nelson, prop Fred Paoli and no.8 and World Cup captain Brian Vizard.
The Eagles are also scheduled to play their annual Test with neighbours Canada on July 13 in Denver (The Canadians lead the series with 11 wins to 4, with one draw).
Incoming tours by Korea (July) and Spain (October) now appear to be off, due to a lack of available funds, now that the USARFU's without a major sponsor.
New U.S. Coach: Clarence Culpepper
GUIDING the Eagles in 1992 will be new coach Clarence Culpepper of Maryland, replacing Jim Perkins, who stepped down following the World Cup.
As a player, Culpepper, the highly successful coach of the Eastern territory from 1983–89, captained the Eagles to their first-ever victory; a 12–7 win over Canada in 1978.
Culpepper, a flanker, earned his only other cap in the 37–11 U.S. loss to England at Twickenham in 1977.
U.S. High School Development XV To New Zealand
FINALLY, in an important long-term development, a United States High School Development Team will make an overseas tour this summer, the first-ever such tour.
Coach Tony Smeeth of Seattle will lead a side of 27 players on an 18-day, seven-game tour to New Zealand.
ASIA
HONG KONG'S MIRACLE MAN
Hong Kong have appointed Kiwi GEORGE SIMPKIN as their new coach.
ALVIN SALLAY reports on his innovative plans for the future of the game in the British colony.
The miracle man of Hong Kong rugby, George Simpkin, has been asked to work wonders once again— to win Hong Kong the elusive goal of acquiring the Asian crown.
At the very least, Hong Kong are hoping that he will steer them to a vital second place in September's Asian Rugby Football Tournament in South Korea.
The Hong Kong Rugby Football Union, in a shock move — one which stems from desperation — saddled Simpkin with the post of national coach at the last meeting of its executive committee in March.
The 48-year-old New Zealander did not apply for the job in so many words, but it was well known in the British territory's rugby circles that he was available, if asked.
The HKRFU went further than asking.
They appointed Simpkin arbitrarily, ignoring the incumbent, English school teacher Jim Rowark, a man who had held the hot spot for five seasons.
While a crushed Roward tried to come to terms with the fact that he would be out of a job after the Hong Kong Sevens for Simpkin it was a goal realised after four long years in the territory as its technical director.
But his first comments were guarded.
‘It was a decision taken by the Union.
I did not stand for the job’.
Cautious by nature, Simpkin was not going to rock the boat more than necessary.
The move had come belatedly.
In Simpkin Hong Kong has a man of proven international calibre.
He was the man who coached Waikato to their first Provincial Championship win.
Simpkin also took Fiji to a fifth place finish in the inaugural World Cup.
Fiji's disappointing display at last year's tournament, according to Simpkin, was simply due to infighting within the Fiji camp and was mainly because Simpkin wasn't the only coach this time around.
‘I was only in charge of the forwards, and not the whole team’, pointed out Simpkin.
There is no danger of too many coaches spoiling the broth as far as the Hong Kong RFU is concerned though: Simpkin will have all the power he needs on the playing side.
His brief is simple — to see that Hong Kong qualify for the 1995 World Cup preliminaries in the Asia Pacific Zone.
Simpkin's first task was to have a fitness test.
‘At the moment the Hong Kong player is grossly unfit and slow by international standards.
It is vital that we start a training regime.
He will also get a national squad of over 100 players into place.
‘I want some continuity in the squad, going down even as far as the schoolboy grade’.
With this in mind the Hong Kong U24 squad will also become part of the national squad.
Simpkin will be better able to gauge how good Hong Kong's chances will be at the September 19th-26th Asian Championship in Seoul by their performance in internationals against the Americans (April 18th in San Francisco) and the Russians (early September).
Simpkin is under no illusions, however: ‘It will be tough getting a challenge ready in less than six months.
Countries like Sri Lanka, Japan and South Korea have already been gearing themselves up, fully aware of the importance of this tournament’.
Hong Kong rugby officials are also aware of the tournament's importance, hence the decision to appoint Simpkin.
When in 1988 he was entrusted with the job of getting a development programme among local Chinese off the ground, sceptics said it would be a lost cause — Hong Kong rugby hardly boasted a Chinese team at the time.
Today there are six teams playing in a fourth division and a viable programme underway with at least 500 Chinese players involved.
Now having seen one miracle, Hong Kong rugby wants another one from Simpkin.
Breaking new ground.
As the colony's new coach, Simpkin has initiated a successful programme to develop rugby amongst Hong Kong's Chinese population, as well as encouraging the game to take root on mainland China.
Here he meets Professor Cao Xihuang (left) before China entertains its first touring side.