

Emily Grenfell clasped her hands together, sitting on the edge of her seat gazing through the small window of the coach as it rumbled along Mumbles Road in the fashionable area of Swansea.
The journey from her home to the Assembly Rooms was a short one, but she was filled with excitement for she was at last being introduced into the social life of the town in a manner that befitted the daughter of one of Wales's leading leather lords.
Her father sat beside her and glancing at him she could see that he was quite puffed out with pride.
His Albert gleamed rich gold against the fine cloth of his waistcoat, the fine watch lifted now from its hidden pocket to be scrutinized for the hundredth time, a sure sign that Thomas Grenfell was nervous.
But then he didn't enjoy the hustle and bustle of Swansea's night-life, he preferred the warmth of his own fireside and the simple pleasures of a good cigar and a glass of brandy.
It was simply out of duty to his only child that he was venturing out at all.
Emily glanced at her aunt; Sophie was half asleep against her seat, her hands quiet in her lap.
Emily smiled, her aunt could be a holy terror but tonight she would be on her best behaviour because the élite of the Swansea gentry would be at the Race Ball and Aunt Sophie had not found herself invited into the social circles lately, not since Craig's arrest.
Emily pushed the unpleasant thought aside, she would  forget Craig and the trouble he was in, just for tonight, she promised herself.
Emily suddenly felt a surge of elation, she was eager for the new experience of being introduced into what she considered was the world of adulthood.
She glanced down at her magnificent dress and the rich emerald jewellery glistening on her hands and throat, her mother's favourite gems.
There had been tears in her father's eyes as he'd handed her the satin-lined box containing the jewels and Emily, taking it, had felt a constriction in her throat for, with the gift, her father was recognizing she was now a woman.
As though reading her thoughts, Thomas reached out a large hand and covered Emily's cold fingers.
‘You do an old man proud,cariad ,’ he said softly, ‘I only wish your mother was here to see you today, she would have been so happy.’
‘I know,’ Emily said softly.
She rested her head for a moment against his shoulder and then sat up straight, conscious that she must not ruffle her carefully coiffured hair.
Gloucester Place seemed awash with the carriages of other guests attending the ball and Emily chafed as she sat waiting impatiently to move on, watched by ladies' maids and servants of the lower orders who seemed to think that the spectacle was for their pleasure.
Emily caught sight of the shoemaker's daughter, a basket over her arm, and for a moment their eyes locked and then Emily looked away.
It was enough that the girl had made the shoes which she was wearing for this special occasion, she certainly had no place in this night of Emily's triumph.
A gentleman strolled casually past the carriage, staring at Emily with bold eyes much to her father's mixture of chagrin and pride.
‘You see,cariad , the gentlemen can't keep their eyes off  you.’
He laughed, ‘I'll have no trouble finding you a good husband.’
Emily stared at him.
‘But father, I'm going to marry Craig, it was all arranged years ago.’
‘Hush, my dear, you don't want your aunt to hear us talk ill about her son.
Now listen to me, all you feel for your cousin is only a childhood fancy.’
His lip tightened.
‘In any case, things are different now, you must see that.
The man is a rogue, he stole from his own firm and now that he is serving time in Swansea Prison, I could never allow him near you, let alone marry you.’
Emily was suddenly cold.
‘This is the first I've heard of your objection, father!’
She could hardly believe her own ears.
‘You know that Craig is innocent.’
Emily paused, angrily searching for the right words.
‘I don't care what anyone says, Craig wouldn't stoop to thieving, I just know he wouldn't.
How could you believe it of him?’
‘The man is in prison, what further evidence do you need?
Now be quiet, see the carriage is moving again.‘
Emily remained silent, it was pointless arguing with her father.
She'd better make the most of the occasion and put her views on marriage more forcibly once she returned home.
The coach drew to a jerky halt near the curbside.
Aunt Sophie woke suddenly, eyes clear, as though she had never been asleep.
She touched a hand to her hair and smiled at Emily, indicating she alight from the coach first.
Emily was being handed down to stand before the light-filled doorway of the Assembly Rooms and she took a deep breath of anticipation, this was her night, the night she was to be accepted as an adult and she would make the most of it.
In the main ballroom, the lights blazed from all sides and the many mirrors reflected the light a thousand-fold.
Emily gasped as she looked around her.
It seemed as if she was facing a sea of glittering gowns.
Diamonds, emeralds, rubies and sapphires as well as a mixture of semi-precious stones glinted and sparkled at her from all directions.
One woman seemed to drift in a sea of amethyst and diamonds, they were all about her, in her hair, on her gown, even her shoes were decorated with flowers made of amethyst with a huge diamond as a centre piece.
She must have shoes just like that, Emily decided.
‘Good thing I'm wearing mother's emeralds,’ Emily whispered to her aunt, ‘you won't see finer gems than mine anywhere in this room.‘
She glanced at the backdrop of gentlemen, most of them in uniform, standing uncomfortably near the wall as though to divorce themselves from the proceedings and her heart sank as she thought of Craig, he should be here today, sharing in her adventure.
She had written to him while he was in prison but had received no reply, but then she had excused him in her own mind, telling herself he would be free soon, then he would come home to her and make her his bride.
Craig was a fine catch, a handsome man and one of action rather than words.
She could not picture him behind the grim walls of Swansea Prison, instead she remembered him riding with her in the park, smiling down at her with his dark eyes, making her feel so small and helpless.
She glanced around the room, there wasn't a man here to come near to Craig for looks and presence.
Tomorrow she would ride in the park again but Craig would not be with her.
But she would write and tell him how fine the flower-beds were and how across the road the sea rushed into the golden shore and she would tell him how much she missed him.
But no, she could not ride tomorrow, her boots had not  come back from the shoemaker's.
Emily felt a flash of irritation, she had insisted that the shoemaker's daughter take the boots away to be soled and heeled and at the same time she'd had a fitting for some new slippers.
The girl was a gifted shoemaker, but there was something insolent about her, perhaps it was the way she held her head high with her glorious abundant hair flowing free that somehow irritated Emily.
She had requested new riding boots but her father with unaccustomed frugality had told her bluntly she must be satisfied with having her old boots repaired.
The orchestra began to play, an air of excitement gripped Emily and she forgot the shoemaker's daughter, she even forgot Craig in the excitement of the occasion as some of the ladies swung like flowers on to the floor in the arms of the men.
She sighed in anticipation, this would be an evening to remember for ever.
Hari was seated in the small shed at the side of the house bent industriously over the wooden last.
She had soaked the leather to bend and shape it into the form of a small shoe, but her hands were sore and her back ached and she wondered briefly if there might be an easier way of making a living than the trade her father had chosen for her.
Dewi Morgan had disregarded the customs and brought up his daughter to do what folk considered a man's trade.
Her hands, he had complained laughing, were a bit on the small side but they had learned strength and the skill was there already.
She paused for a moment remembering how from her earliest days she had sat with her father in the small shed working the leather.
When she was older, he had paid for her to go to school, proud of her ability to read and write and work out figures.
Dewi had wanted her to be independent, to fend for herself when he was no longer there to take care of her, but he could not have known that his death would have come so suddenly, striking him down in the prime of his manhood.
Hari sighed and returned to her task, the shoes she was making were for Emily Grenfell.
They were soft slippers, decorated with amethyst for wearing on thick carpets and Hari found herself envying the girl who seemed to have everything in life she could possibly want.
There had been reports in the pages of the Cambrian newspaper about Miss Grenfell attending the Race Ball in the Assembly Rooms.
There was a description of her fine crinoline gown and of the Grenfell emeralds she had worn.
Hari remembered standing in the darkened street, watching the parade of carriages driving along Mumbles Road and into Gloucester Place.
She had glimpsed Emily Grenfell who had been leaning forward in her carriage, staring out into the crowded roadway, her emeralds shining at her throat, the green richness of the stones glittering in the light from the street lamps.
She thought wistfully of the shoes she had fashioned for Emily's triumph.
Hari's hands were suddenly still, the leather clinging to the last, while she tried to envisage herself wearing fine crinolines and rich jewels, it was like something out of a dream.
But of course to Miss Hoity Toity Grenfell, it was nothing less than she expected.
Suddenly Hari thought of the man who had escaped from the prison, he was the same sort as Emily Grenfell, no doubt before he fell from grace they would have met and socialized.
The door swung open and a ragged boy stood framed in the early spring sunshine.
‘Got a crust, misses?’ he said softly.
His shoulders drooped, he expected nothing, but a small flicker of hope showed in the uptilting of his chin.
‘Aye, got better than that, William Davies,’ Hari said, ‘come on, I might be able to find you a bit of soup as well as some bread.‘
She led him into the kitchen where the fire burnt cheerfully in the grate.
There was a stock of food in the larder and coal in the cellar and she even had money to pay the rent for a month.
Just when she had been on the brink of despair, one of her rich customers had given her a handsome order.
Mr Edward Morris wanted several pairs of boots to be soled and heeled and what's more he had paid for the work in advance.
‘Here, Will, sit down and I'll warm the soup for you and then after you've eaten perhaps you'll deliver some repairs for me.’
She watched as the boy ate ravenously, he was one of a large family and though his father was in regular employment at the copper works, he drank a great deal and kept his wife and children short of even the bare necessities of life.
It made Hari so angry to see the little ones neglected but there was very little anyone could do, poverty was a fact of life in places like World's End.
She glanced at the clock, it was a wonder mother wasn't banging on the floor with her stick by now, it was way past dinner time.
Quickly, Hari ladled the soup into bowls and cut a few thick pieces of bread, suddenly realizing that she was hungry too.
‘Get on with it, Will,’ she said, ‘I'll be down in a minute, got to see to my mam.’
‘Duw , where you been then, Angharad?’
Win Morgan had obviously just woken from sleep, her eyes were heavy and her thin grey hair ruffled.
‘Been waiting all the morning for a bit of attention from my only daughter, not much for a sick mother to ask, is it?’
‘Sorry, mam,’ Hari replied absently.
‘Here have your dinner and then after I'll bring a bowl of water for you to wash, right?’
‘Soup again, is it?
I'll be looking like soup, can't we have a change sometimes, Angharad?’
Hari looked at her mother in exasperation.
‘I don't know, mam, you're never satisfied.’
She spoke loudly because her mother was a little deaf and smiled to soften her words.
‘If I give you bread and cheese you don't like it and if I give you too much soup that's not right.
What would you like?
Just tell me and I'll try to get it for you.‘
Win Morgan smiled with a flash of humour that was rare because she was a woman grown old before her time, worn by the constant pain of her bone ache and wearied by the persistent cough that racked her.
‘How about a bit of jugged hare or perhaps a nice plump breast of chicken,’ she said, knowing full well that such delicacies were beyond the reach of the poor worker.
But a neck of lamb made an excellent cawl and a knuckle of pork was cheap and nutritious.
Meat was a treat kept for good days and when the pickings were poor, Win and her daughter were lucky to have enough potatoes and bread and cheese in the pantry.
There was a loud clatter from the kitchen and Win Morgan lifted her head.
‘Who is that downstairs?’ she said suspiciously.
Hari smiled.
‘It's only young Will Davies, dropped his bowl on the floor by the sound of it.’
She patted her mother's hand.
‘He's going to do some errands for me so I thought it only fair to give him a bit of food.‘
‘Too soft you are, girl,’ Win Morgan broke her bread into small pieces soaking them in the soup, ‘can't be responsible for the whole neighbourhood, can you?
Just like your dad, you are and didn't I tell him that teaching you reading and writing wouldn't bring any good?’
Hari moved to the door.
‘If I couldn't read and write, mam, I'd have a hard job running my boot and shoe round, wouldn't I?’
She hurried back down the stairs to find Will mopping up the remains of his soup from the stone-flagged kitchen floor.
‘Sorry, misses, didn't mean to spill it, lovely it was.’
Hari shook back a strand of hair that had fallen from the pins.
‘Don't worry, after you've done the deliveries for me, you can take the rest of the bread and soup home with you.
Now, come into the workshop and I'll give you the boots I want delivered.’
Will followed her willingly and listened while Hari explained that the boots were to be taken to Edward Morris who lived in the big white house in Chapel Street.
‘You can't miss it,’ Hari said reassuringly, ‘it's the only one in the street with railings around it.’
When Will had disappeared from sight, Hari set to work on the slippers once more, they must be just so because Emily Grenfell was a good customer if a very exacting one.
She was easing her back with her hands, happy with the shoes near to completion, when young Will returned.
He stood in the doorway, his nose bloody, his face marked with tears.
Hari felt a chill fall over her.
‘What's wrong, Will?’ she asked apprehensively and at the sound of her voice, he burst into tears.
‘I couldn't 'elp it, misses,’ he sobbed, ‘bigger than me he was, this boy set about me and when I was on the floor he kicked me and took the boots away from me.
I tried to fight, honest I did, but he were too strong and my head was hurting and…’
Unable to continue, Will put his hands over his eyes and the tears flowed through his small thin fingers.
Hari felt cold panic wash over her, she had done the unforgivable, she had lost a customer's boots.
It was  something that had never happened before and she stood for a moment trying to control the thoughts that raced through her head.
‘It's all right, Will,’ she said at last , ‘come on, be a man now, no more crying.’
She drew a shawl around her shoulders.
‘You must show me where the boy went after he took the boots, we'll get them back, don't worry.’
William looked up at her, hope shining through his tears.
‘Will we, misses?’ he asked and his air of total belief in her banished the last of Hari's uncertainty.
She followed Will along the mean cobbled streets until he paused alongside a narrow alley.
A woman was leaning against the door of one of the houses, her gaudily painted face revealing her trade.
‘He ran down there,’ Will said.
‘There's the one, down the alley, look!’
The boy was ragged and dirty and for a moment he stood transfixed staring at Hari and Will as though he couldn't believe his eyes.
Then suddenly, he vanished into the doorway where the woman had stood and Hari lifted her skirts and ran after him, her hair flying behind her.
The door was shut fast but Hari hammered on it, anger lending her strength.
She tried the handle but the door had obviously been bolted from the inside.
Nothing daunted, Hari moved to the side of the house and saw that a small window was open.
‘Will,’ she said quietly, ‘if I help you to get in, can you open the door for me?’
His face was pale with fear but he nodded willingly.
Hari half lifted half pushed him through the window and then she waited breathlessly for any sounds that would indicate that Will had been discovered, but when there was nothing, she moved to the door and to her relief, she saw it swing open.
‘Good boy!’
She kissed his cheek.
‘Now get out of sight  until you see me come back.
If I'm not out in ten minutes fetch a constable.’
Hari moved along the dark passageway and from the kitchen at the back of the house she heard the sound of voices.
She knocked loudly on the kitchen door and waited for a moment, aware of the total silence from within the room.
She was lifting her hand to knock again when the door was flung open and she was confronted by the woman she'd seen outside who stared at her defiantly, her painted face incongruous against the fall of grimy hair over her shoulders.
‘Daro!
What do you think you're doing coming in here without so much as by your leave?’
Hari looked over the woman's shoulder and the first thing she saw was the leather boots standing on the table.
Of the boy who had taken them there was no sign.
Hari pushed past the woman and picked up the boots hugging them to her in a rush of relief.
‘These boots do not belong to you,’ Hari said fiercely, and as the woman moved menacingly towards her, she held up her hand.
‘The constable is on his way so don't do anything foolish, will you?’
The woman paused and stared at her suspiciously.
‘If the constable is coming anyway what have I to lose by giving you a good pasting and throwing the boots in the canal?’
‘A great deal,’ Hari spoke with more confidence than she felt, indeed, she was trembling inside and she could only hope her nervousness didn't show.
‘If I go now I'll meet the constable on the way and tell him it was all a misunderstanding.’
The woman rubbed a dirty bare foot into the sawdust on the floor.
‘How do I know you're telling the truth?
How would the constable know where to come?’
‘I had help getting in here,’ Hari said quickly, ‘I didn't get in through a bolted door on my own now, did I?’
The woman thought about this and after a moment looked up at Hari with venom in her eyes.
‘My name is Maria Payton, remember it well,’ she said.
‘See this gob,’ she pointed to her painted mouth, ‘it can talk a lot and these peepers can see a lot, they'll remember you, mind, and if there's anything I can do to hurt you any time then I will.’
Hari moved past the woman and as she negotiated the narrow passageway, her legs would hardly carry her.
Outside, she took a deep breath and, after a moment, Will appeared and stood silently at her side.
‘Come on,’ Hari said quickly, ‘let's get out of here.’
She sighed with relief when the seedy, rundown houses were left behind.
‘Go on home, Will,’ she said, ‘I'll take the boots to the customer.’
She saw a look of disappointment cross the young boy's face.
‘Oh, and on the way,’ she added quickly, ‘don't forget to pick up that bowl of cawl , all right?’
He sped away, his bare feet barely touching the cold stone of the roadway and, with a sigh, Hari turned towards Chapel Street.
The houses here were of the same structure as the mean buildings where Hari lived but the properties were well maintained, the outsides freshly painted, the windows gleaming with cleanliness and hung with rich drapes.
Here the houses would be occupied by one family and not by a dozen or more assorted tenants.
But at the end of the road was the big white house where Edward Morris lived, a gracious house standing out from the others because it sported white railings which guarded the small, well-kept garden.
Hari knocked on the door and it was quickly opened by a young maidservant who looked her over in disdain.
Hari  became suddenly aware that her hair was flying loose over her shoulders and the hem of her dress was stained with mud.
‘Please to go round the back,’ the maid said and, without another word, closed the door in Hari's face.
With a sigh, Hari moved to the back entrance and knocked again.
She waited what seemed an interminably long time before the same young maid again confronted her.
‘What is your business?’
The maid looked at a point above Hari's head.
‘I have a delivery for Mr Morris,’ Hari said shortly, ‘I should have thought that much was obvious even to you.’
‘Step inside.’
The girl didn't deign to rise to the bait.
‘I'll see if Mr Morris will speak with you.’
After a time, the girl returned and, with obvious reluctance, led Hari into the sitting-room.
It was a high-ceilinged, gracious room with thick carpet under-foot and rich curtains over the windows.
A visitor sat in a chair near the elegant grate where a huge fire burned, he glanced up at her and his eyes narrowed.
He had dark eyes, thickly lashed and they regarded her steadily almost as if he knew her.
And strangely enough she felt that she knew him but that was absurd, she had never seen him before.
The silence was broken by the entrance of Edward Morris, he smiled at her warmly and she returned his smile for this was a generous customer, a rare being who had paid her in advance for her work.
And she had almost lost him by the attempted theft of his best boots.
‘I want to be measured for some more boots,’ Edward said, ‘but you look a little shaken so I'm sure it can wait until another day.’
‘I'm sorry I look such a state.’
Hari decided to be truthful.
‘Your boots were stolen from young Will as he  was delivering them.’
She smiled, ‘But I made sure I got them back again, mind.’
Edward took the boots and glanced at the man sitting in the chair.
‘Isn't she a remarkable girl, Craig?’ he said, ‘Not only does she repair shoes as good as any man, but she fights for her rights, too.’
He smiled at Hari, ‘I admire your spirit young lady.‘
Hari felt her colour rising.
‘It's nothing, I was only doing my job.’
The man in the chair spoke for the first time.
‘Who taught you the trade?’
His voice was cultured, he spoke with a more cosmopolitan accent than Edward Morris who though obviously educated and quite well to do had a marked Welsh accent.
‘My father, Dewi Morgan taught me shoemaking from the time I was a little girl,’ she said quickly, almost resentfully, ‘and I'm better at the work than many men.’
‘I see.’
The man smiled at her and though she didn't understand why, she felt he was laughing at her.
Hari moved to the door.
‘If that's all then, I'll be getting back home.’
She bobbed a curtsy and put her hand on the gleaming brass door knob.
‘I'll come and do some measuring in the morning if that suits,’ she said.
Edward Morris smiled and nodded but it was the stranger who spoke.
‘I'll definitely keep you in mind,’ he said and as his dark eyes met hers he seemed again to be laughing at her.
Hari hurried back along the street anxious to get home, it was turning colder and the night was closing in.
She ran through the last few streets and saw with relief the familiar tall building rising against the night sky.
She let herself into the kitchen and sank into a chair before the fire that urgently needed mending.
Hari rubbed her hand over her eyes, it had been a strange day, an eventful one in which she had quite clearly made an enemy  but perhaps she had also made a friend of Edward Morris.
And yet it was not the face of her customer that she saw in her mind, but the strong lean jaw and the dark unfathomable eyes of a stranger.
Craig Grenfell stared moodily through the window of his friend's house in Chapel Street, his hands were thrust into his pockets, and his shoulders were slumped.
He was remembering the bitterness of his arrest and the ignominy of being imprisoned behind the grim walls of Swansea Prison.
He looked out into the roadway without seeing the rain beating mercilessly against the cobbled surface or the leaves of the trees dripping constantly as they shivered in the breeze, he was seeing the four walls of his cell and remembering his feeling of helplessness as the door slammed shut behind him.
Craig glanced down at the sheaf of papers lying on the small table beside him, brought to him earlier in the day by Edward Morris, papers that proved Craig's innocence.
But at what cost?
Craig rubbed at his forehead in a mingling of anger and despair.
To clear himself he would have to implicate his young brother in the embezzlement of a large amount of money from the family business, it would break his mother's heart.
Spencer had always been the favoured one, beloved by mother since his difficult birth made it impossible for her to have any more children.
Spencer had been spoiled, treated for far too long as a baby and he had grown up knowing how to twist his mother around his little finger.
Spencer had always appeared to conform, he wore neat  clothes and acted the gentleman.
He was the sort of son that Sophie Grenfell had always wanted, the pity of it all, from his mother's point of view, was that he was the younger son.
Edward entered the room and stood before the fire.
‘Well, Craig, what conclusions do you draw from the pages I managed to ‘borrow’ from the firm's accounting books?’
‘The same conclusion as you I imagine.
My brother is a very cunning young man.’
Craig lifted one of the pages.
‘The accounts have obviously been falsified.’
Craig pointed to a duplicate sheet.
‘Here, figures as they should read.
’ He glanced up at his friend.
‘Spencer has been taking money from customers and only entering a part of the amounts in the books.
He must have embezzled thousands of pounds over the years.’
Craig looked at Edward curiously.
‘As accountant for the firm, did you never question the validity of the books?’
Edward shrugged.
‘I doubted the figures, yes, the drop in profits was apparent but without the both sets of accounts, there was no hard evidence of any malpractice.
Markets do fluctuate, you know.’
Craig moved restlessly from the window.
‘The stupid young fool!’ he said angrily.
‘Why jeopardize what he had going for him by getting greedy?
If he'd been moderate in his thieving he would never have been caught;.’
‘They are all caught sooner or later,’ Edward said sagely and Craig stared at him.
‘Perhaps you're right but there are not many who would shift the blame on to a brother's shoulders.
Spencer was very clever, putting money into my account and hiding banknotes in my room.
I wouldn't have thought even he could have been so calculating.’
Edward shook his head.
‘Some folk will do anything for money, money makes many a man into a fool or a villain.’
He poured a brandy and handed it to Craig before helping  himself to a good measure.
‘The question is, what are you going to do about it now?’
Craig lifted his glass admiring the slant of light through the brandy.
‘I have to think about it.
One thing I do know, I'm not going back to that God-awful prison whatever happens.’
He sank back into his chair.
‘I've a great deal to thank-you for, Edward,’ he said, ‘not many would have helped me the way you did or taken me in the way I looked that night.’
He smiled wryly.
‘I'll never forget, playing sick to get out of my cell and then the waiting for the bread van to come and pick me up.
You must have given the driver some bribe, Edward, I don't know how he managed to help me at all, he was terrified of being caught.’
Craig looked into his glass.
‘The whole thing seems unreal now except perhaps the look on the face of the shoemaker's daughter when I pushed my way into her house.
She must have been very frightened.
I must say I admired her spirit.’
‘And she yours,’ Edward said drolly.
‘Hari Morgan didn't give you away, did she?
The old Grenfell charm must have been working even under all that hair not to mention the scruffy beard.’
‘She warned me that the constables were on their way, right enough, and I'll always be grateful to her for that.
But, in the end, the kindest thing to do was to get out of her way.’
‘She's wonderful,’ Edward said, his voice warm, ‘looking as you did, she would have been justified in turning you in.
I hardly recognized you myself.’
Edward smiled, ‘But a bath and a shave and some clean clothes worked wonders.’
Craig stared into the fire, it had been over a week since he had escaped from the prison, lying in the back of the  van, smelling the fresh mouthwatering tang of bread and listening to the clip clop of the horses’ hooves.
And the terrible moment when he heard the sound of officious voices calling to the driver to stop and Craig had taken his chance and leaped from the back of the van and disappeared into the dark streets of World's End.
If it hadn't been for the proximity of the tall dour houses and the unexpected kindness of a young girl, Craig would have been recaptured at once.
‘It was good of you to give the shoemaker's daughter work,’ Craig said taking a sip of the brandy.
It stung his throat, tasting rich and hot as he swallowed.
‘I don't think you could have thought of a better way of rewarding her, she seems such an independent little thing.‘
Edward stared at him eyebrows raised.
‘Lovely, isn't she?
Such fine features and blessed with thick lustrous hair as well as a shape that would fill any man's dreams.’
‘I see,’ Craig said in amusement, ‘so your kindness to the young lady wasn't entirely for my benefit.’
‘I had noticed some time ago that the shoemaker had a beautiful daughter and the more I saw of her, the more I liked her.’
He smiled.
‘I always make sure I have several fittings before I'm satisfied with my boots, that way I get to talk to Hari.
‘And she's a fine shoemaker, she has real talent and with a little help she could go far.
Some of the ladies from the finest houses have their fancy shoes made by Hari Morgan.’
He paused stroking his chin.
‘You know she carried on the business alone when her father died, got guts has that girl.’
He smiled wickedly, ‘And she moves so gracefully, too.’
There was a sudden, loud knocking on the door.
Craig set down his glass and taking up the papers moved swiftly across the room.
‘It must be the police,’ he said tersely.
‘My dear brother  must have guessed I'd come here and tipped them off, but then he wouldn't know I had these.’
He held up the papers.
‘Keep them talking as long as you can, Edward, give me a chance to get out of here.’
Craig hurried up the stairs as the knocking became more insistent and paused for a moment staring back to the hallway.
Edward was demanding that the callers be patient, he was coming as fast as he could.
Craig made his way to the attic and looked about him, quickly assessing the situation.
There was a skylight in the attic but the sloping roof was higher than he had anticipated and he needed something to stand on.
He moved a pile of old furniture and found a broken chair with its back missing.
He stood it beneath the skylight just as he heard footsteps pounding up the stairs.
He pushed at the skylight, it would not budge.
Cursing, he thrust at it with his elbow and the glass shattered in fragments around him.
The footsteps were getting nearer and from the sound of it there were at least a dozen men.
With strength born of desperation, Craig heaved himself up and pushed his way through the broken window just as the door burst open below him.
The roof sloped away alarmingly and, for a moment, Craig almost lost his balance.
Steadying himself, he made his way over the roof and on to the parapet that ran along the side of the building.
A yawning gap opened up before him and, down below, he saw a group of people staring up at him, arms waving.
He moved back a few paces and, without pausing to think, took a running leap out into the chasm between the two houses.
He heard a gasp from the crowd of people gathered below, he seemed to hang forever in mid-air and then, miraculously, he was crashing down on to the opposite roof.
His foot slipped and he grasped at a piece of jutting tile and dragged himself back to safety.
Carefully, he crawled the breadth of the building and, to his relief, he saw that the house beneath him was one of a row.
He realized that he was following the pattern of the streets, moving into the poor area of World's End.
More easily now, he made his way along the roof-tops, hidden from sight by the forest of chimney stacks.
He was breathless with the effort of clinging precariously to the limited footholds and it was time, he decided, to risk climbing down to the ground.
He let himself into one of the houses through the skylight and waited, hardly daring to breath, to see if he had been detected.
There was no sound from below and, carefully, Craig opened a door and stared out into the shabby passageway.
The place in which he found himself was a tall grimy building with a long passageway and the whole place reeked of cheap perfume.
He had entered, he realized with a flash of amusement, into what was obviously a whore-house.
He brushed down his hair and straightened his clothing and made his way down the narrow stairs towards the street.
A woman appeared in the lower passageway and smiled up at him, her painted face shrewd.
‘Did you enjoy your visit, sir?’
Her eyes appraised him and her thin fingers were spread towards him fan-wise, it was clear she expected some money.
She peered closer, ‘Aren't you Mr Spencer Grenfell?
It's me, Maria Payton.’
‘That's right.’
He smiled at her and touched her cheek with his fingertip.
‘And I did indeed enjoy my visit but I think I have missed the best treat in the entire house, what a pity I didn't see you first.’
He bowed over her outstretched hand and then left quickly before she had  time to gather her wits.
So that was where Spencer wasted some of his ill-gotten gains, was it?
It was growing dark, the moon hung between the trees in a misty haze as though unwilling to appear at all.
Craig looked around him and realized he had been here before.
It was the place where the young shoemaker's daughter lived.
Perhaps it would be just as well if he paid her another visit.
Hari was working late and the candle over her shoulder provided little enough light.
Two candles would be wasteful but the small stitches she was making in the soft leather swam before her eyes in the poor light.
She straightened her shoulders, perhaps she had done enough for today, mam would be getting restless wanting a bit of attention after her long day spent mostly alone.
It was not an ideal situation, Hari found it difficult to cope with the hard exacting work of a shoemaker and the demands of her short tempered mother.
‘Chware teg , mam's not that bad.’
The sound of her own voice in the shimmering candle-light startled Hari and she rose to her feet, conscious of the silence around her.
Then she heard the noise, a creaking of wood, it was repeated and Hari looked round nervously.
But she was being absurd, she was over tired and imagining things.
But she was not imagining things, the latch on the door from the street was being lifted and Hari waited, holding her breath.
So far, none of the ruffians from World's End had bothered her even though she was a young woman alone.
Villains they might be, but they had a certain code of practice and the rule was that you looked after your own kind.
‘Who is it?’
Hari said with a boldness she was far from  feeling.
The door opened wider and a man stepped inside from the growing darkness of the street.
Hari recognized him at once, he was the friend of Edward Morris, she had seen him earlier sitting before the fire in the comfortable house on Chapel Street.
‘What…?’ she began but he put his finger to his lips in a warning gesture.
Hari tensed, there was something about the situation that was familiar.
A week ago a man on the run had come into her house, he had been unkempt, his hair curling thickly about his face, he had not been as well groomed as the man standing before her now, but the breadth of shoulder was the same and something about the dark eyes staring into hers touched a chord.
‘You are the escaped prisoner,’ she said softly and he nodded wryly.
‘That's right, I'm not begging food this time but clothing, have you anything to make me look like a man from these parts?’
Hari gestured that he follow her through the door into the small back yard and from there into the small workshop.
‘Here.’
Swiftly, Hari selected some of her father's working clothes and returned to the kitchen.
She found she was trembling, not with fear but with excitement, there was something about helping the most unusual villain she'd ever seen that stirred unknown feelings deep within her.
He came into the kitchen looking strange in her father's trousers and leather waistcoat.
He came and stood close to her without touching her, but Hari was as tinglingly aware of him as though he'd embraced her.
‘I'll see to the fire and then I'll make you some tea.’
She knelt on the cold stone floor and carefully placed some coals on the dying embers in the grate.
She was foolishly irritated by the lack of warmth and the slowness of the  coals to light and all the time she was asking herself if she was completely mad harbouring an escaped criminal in her kitchen.
She heard the sounds behind her of her father's leather apron being tied in place and, for a moment, she could imagine her father was with her again, big and comforting, a shield between Hari and the world.
Then she turned and saw the stranger.
As she watched, he took up his discarded clothing and thrust the garments into the nearest cupboard.
‘There may be a search,’ he said apologetically.
‘Who are you?’
Hari said quietly, ‘There's things I need to know before I take any more risks for you.’
He stared at her steadily for a moment and then nodded.
‘You're right.
Sit down.’
He thrust his hands into his pockets and the leather apron creaked as he moved.
Hari thought again of her father and sitting there on the edge of her seat she believed that the man standing before her, handsome and young though he might be, was the same kind of man as Dewi Morgan, upright and steadfast, his eyes clear and direct as they looked down at her.
‘I'm Craig Grenfell.’
The words fell into the silence and Hari waited for him to continue.
‘Some months ago I was convicted of embezzling a considerable amount of money from the company I share with my brother.
I was innocent but the evidence was damning.’
He frowned as he moved about the room.
‘I could do nothing while I was behind bars so I was forced to make a run for it.
’ He was looking at her but now there was a far-away look in his eyes as though he'd forgotten her presence.
‘Now I'm almost there, a little more time and I'll prove my innocence.’
Craig ran his hand through his hair so that it sprung into small curls giving him a rakish appearance.
‘Oh, it's all been very cleverly done.’
He sank down into a chair  opposite Hari.
‘But perhaps my brother has become over-confident.’
Craig's jaw tightened.
‘I have papers that prove the books have been forged but now I need someone to help me.
I can hardly walk into a lawyer's office, I'd be arrested again and I don't intend going back into prison, not even for a few days.’
‘What about Mr Morris?’
Hari asked.
‘Couldn't he do it for you?’
Craig shook his head.
‘I couldn't let Edward take that risk, he might get himself arrested for stealing pages from the account books, they are company property after all.’
‘Could I see a lawyer for you?’
Hari was amazed to hear herself making the offer.
Craig shook his head.
‘No,’ he smiled apologetically, ‘I'm afraid you would not be given a hearing.’
He smiled suddenly.
‘Not that anyone as beautiful as you could be ignored of course.
’ His dark eyes stared into hers.
Hari's wash of hurt pride and anger vanished as suddenly as it had come, though she realized that Craig's words were no more than flattery.
He was a man capable of great charm, but she would have to be careful that she didn't get taken in by it, Hari told herself sternly.
‘Don't feel insulted, please,’ he said.
‘I'm refusing your generous offer as much for your sake as my own.
I don't want you to get hurt.’
‘Who then?’
Hari said softly and Craig looked at her and sighed heavily.
‘My fiancee, Emily Grenfell,’ he said, ‘she is forceful and strong, her background gives her standing and she won't be easily outwitted.’
He rubbed his hand through his dark hair.
Hari was surprised at the rush of pure jealousy that swept over her at the mention of Emily Grenfell.
But she was being absurd, she scarcely knew this man and what  was it to her who he was betrothed to?
He'd made it abundantly clear that Hari was of no account in the community, that she could not be trusted to carry any weight with lawyers and the like.
She rose from her chair.
‘I've got things to do,’ she said stiffly, ‘my mother is an invalid, I have to go and see to her.’
She took some bread from the pantry cupboard and placed it on the wooden table.
‘If you are hungry there's some cheese,’ she said, ‘I can't wait on you, I'm too tired for that.’
He came and stood close to her, his hand resting on her shoulder.
‘I've made you angry and I'm sorry.’
His hand was warm and strong and Hari resisted the urge to turn into his arms and rest her head against his broad shoulder.
‘I'm not angry,’ she said flatly.
‘But it's not very nice to take a convicted criminal into your home and then to have him tell you that you're of little consequence.’
He turned her to face him.
‘If I gave that impression then I can only apologize once again,’ he said.
‘You are a very brave young woman and a very beautiful one.’
He released her abruptly.
‘And I'm keeping you from your duties.’
Hari quickly moved to the foot of the stairs, her head bent to hide the blush that warmed her cheeks.
‘I won't be long,’ she said and hurriedly left the room.
When Hari returned she saw that Craig was standing at the window looking out into the darkness.
His shoulders were tense and there was an air of waiting about him that troubled her.
‘The constables are coming,’ he said tersely as he moved back into the room.
‘I hope you are a good liar.’
Hari shook her head in fear and looked around her as though expecting a solution to present itself.
Gathering her wits, she hurried into the workshop and picked up a last and a half-tapped boon Returning to the  kitchen, she indicated with a nod of her head that Craig sit on the stool near the fire.
She put the last in his lap.
‘Hold it between your knees,’ she hissed and then she stood behind him, leaning over his shoulder as though instructing him.
‘Duw , what's this interruption then?’
Hari said as the door was pushed open, looking over her shoulder.
‘Oh, it's you, Dai the Cop-shop, poking your nose in my business, is it?
Well, since you are so interested, this is my cousin come from the Neath Valley to help in the business.
Want to make anything of it then?’
The constable looked at Craig's leather apron and rough flannel shirt and, at last, his eyes slid away from Hari's challenging gaze.
‘Haven't you always known me to be a respectable girl then, Dai?’
She leaned on Craig's shoulder as if she'd known him all her life.
‘And don't go making a noise and waking mam, now, I know she's deaf but you lot sound like a herd of cattle, mind.’
Dai backed away.
‘All right, Hari Morgan, only doing my duty I am.’
He turned to look over his shoulder.
‘Nothing suspicious here, boys,’ he called, ‘get on with the search.’
For a long moment after the door had closed, Craig and Hari remained motionless, so close together that she could feel his breath against her cheek.
His mouth, so strong beneath the dark moustache, was tantalizingly close.
And then she moved and with trembling hands smoothed down her skirt.
Craig rose to his feet, placing the last on the table.
‘You are a very resourceful woman, Hari.’
‘It was nothing,’ she said quickly.
‘Sleep by the fire, you, I'm going to bed.’
As she lay between the sheets, Hari felt a great restlessness grip her, she thought of Craig's face so close to hers  and she could barely breathe for the confused emotions that raced through her.
But, she told herself sternly, she was nothing but a foolish girl, men the like of Craig Grenfell were not for Hari Morgan.
Suddenly and inexplicably tears were running hot and bitter down her cheeks as Hari buried her face in the pillow and wept.
Emily Grenfell looked up from her book as the maid entered the room bobbing a swift curtsy, her face red with indignation.
‘What is it, Letty?’
Emily said, impatient at being disturbed.
She hadn't been reading at all but had been glancing out of the window not seeing the gracious gardens that surrounded Summer Lodge, but planning ways to help Craig when he came to her.
And now that he'd escaped from that awful prison, come he would, she knew that as certainly as she knew daylight would follow darkness.
‘There's a girl to see you, Miss Emily, insists on it she does, quite cheeky she is, mind.’
There was a world of disdain in the young maid's voice.
Emily frowned.
‘Insists?
Who is she exactly?’
‘The shoemaker's daughter, miss, says she got a message from Mister Grenfell.’
Emily's thoughts raced, could the girl possibly know anything about Craig?
‘Bring her in to me, I'll soon sort out just what it is she wants,’ Emily said, rising to her feet and shaking the creases from her crinoline gown.
Letty seemed about to demur but Emily lifted her chin challengingly and the maid bobbed and left the room.
Emily paced around the book-lined study and blamed her father for his hostile attitude to Craig.
It was that sort  of attitude that would prevent Craig from coming to her directly for help.
Her father was kindness itself, but he was the sort of man who gave little credit to anyone who had fallen from grace.
Letty knocked and glancing up Emily saw a slight figure with a mass of dark hair following the maid into the room.
The shoemaker's daughter was pretty enough but poorly dressed with a Welsh shawl over her shoulders and not even a hat to cover her hair.
Emily waved her hand to Letty, ‘I'll send for you when I want you.’
She moved towards a seat and regarded the girl steadily for a long moment.
If she'd hoped to unnerve her the way she did Letty then she was wrong.
‘Yes?’
Emily said sharply, ‘What do you want?’
‘I'm Angharad Morgan,’ the girl began, her dark eyes challenging Emily to interrupt.
‘I was asked to bring you these papers.’
She brought from under her shawl an untidy sheaf of documents and handed them to Emily without so much as bobbing a polite curtsy.
Emily took them, glancing at them quickly.
‘So?
These are sheets from an accounts book, what are they to me?’
The girl lowered her voice.
‘They might clear the name of Craig Grenfell.
Anyway,’ she said challengingly, ‘he thought you'd be able to help him, perhaps he was wrong.’
Emily sank down into a chair and studied the pages closely, controlling the urge to slap the insolent hussy's pretty face.
On closer inspection it became clear there were two sets of figures for the same period of time for the Grenfell Leather Trading Company.
The profit margin on one sheet was much lower than the other and Emily drew in her breath sharply.
It was obvious that someone had robbed the company of a great deal of money and Craig was trusting her to find out who.
Emily frowned, ‘Have you looked at these?’
She glanced up at the girl standing before her and shook her head.
‘How silly of me, I don't suppose you can even read let alone add all this up.’
‘Indeed I can!’ the girl answered with quiet confidence.
‘The figures mean that someone has been defrauding the company and it wasn't Craig Grenfell because if you look at the dates you'll see that the fiddling went on even when Craig was in prison.’
The girl fell silent as Emily approached her.
‘Mr Grenfell to you.
And what do you know about him?’
Emily asked in a dangerously quiet voice.
The girl shook her head.
‘You must get all this seen to properly if you want to clear Craig's name, that's all I know.’
Emily felt anger run through her.
‘How dare you try to tell me what to do?’ she spoke icily.
‘You are an ignorant, uneducated girl and now you've delivered your message, you'd better leave.’
Angharad Morgan lifted her head with an air of dignity that infuriated Emily still further.
With a last disdainful look, the shoemaker's daughter turned towards the door.
‘I've said my piece, it's up to you.’
Her voice was controlled even as she lifted her hand to silence Emily.
‘I'm going, don't worry.’
Emily caught her arm in sudden desperation.
‘If you know where Craig is you must tell me, don't you understand, he and I are going to be married, I must see him.’
Angharad looked at her from under thick lashes.
‘Would you put him in danger then?’
‘Of course not.’
Emily straightened.
‘Very well, pass on the message that I will clear Mr Grenfell's name.’
She smiled in triumph, ‘Then he will be back where he belongs, with his own kind.’
Emily didn't know why she was being so defensive with  this girl from the lower order in her simple garments and with her wild hair.
Was it because the girl had something indomitable about her, a presence even?
Emily rang the bell and when Letty bobbed in the doorway, she spoke coldly.
‘See this woman out by the tradesman's entrance.
Oh and before you go, Miss Morgan, tell your father I shall no longer be requiring shoes from him, I will purchase my goods elsewhere.’
Angharad Morgan stared at her defiantly.
‘That won't be possible,’ she spoke with dignity.
‘My father died some months ago and, as for me, I can find work from far more rewarding customers.’
At the door she turned.
‘I will bring the shoes I am making for you now, the ones with the amethysts as decoration and I will expect payment for the work I've done, mind.
And there's something you should know, the amethysts are stones of tranquillity, it might do you a bit of good to wear them.’
She smiled.
‘From now on you will have to find a shoemaker skilled enough to make the sort of shoes you like and you might find that difficult.
You see the other shoemakers in Swansea are men and not interested in fiddly little slippers.
Bore da , Miss Grenfell.’
As the door closed behind the girl, Emily somehow felt that she had been bested.
Angharad Morgan had spirit and intelligence as well as beauty.
Emily bit her lip, the girl was obviously in touch with Craig, perhaps they were even living in the same house.
Emily moved to the desk and sat down, spreading the pages of figures out before her.
She must forget the girl and concentrate on helping Craig.
She chewed her lip anxiously.
It was clear that funds were being embezzled but who could be doing it?
Could it possibly be the accountant Edward Morris?
Emily rubbed her eyes as the figures swam before her, that didn't make sense.
Edward was Craig's friend, surely he wouldn't have allowed Craig to go to prison in his place?
There were several other people who had access to the accounts, Spencer Grenfell for one.
The two brothers had not always got along very well but in spite of their differences, Spencer would never do anything to harm the firm or his brother.
Emily drew a sheet of writing paper towards her and picking up the pen began to write…
Dear Spencer, there is something I think you should see …
Hari was angry as she walked back through the streets towards her home, Emily Grenfell was nothing but a snob, she thought everyone beneath her.
It was infuriating to be told she was stupid.
What did Emily Grenfell know about people like her?
A warmth filled her, Hari smiled as she thought of Craig Grenfell waiting for her, eager for news of what was happening to clear his name.
Hari smiled, she knew more than Emily, she knew where Craig was, and she was learning all about him, how kind he was and what a real gent he could be.
She had been surprised to find that he didn't feel it beneath him to help her in the house.
He go, t up early that first morning and lit the fire for her.
He even made a pot of tea and poured her a cup when she got up for work.
He'd even tried his hand at tapping boots, they were done with more enthusiasm than skill, but so far there had been no complaints from the customers.
She entered the kitchen from the back gate closing the door on the small yard with a click of finality.
She had done her best for Craig, now it was up to his own kin to sort his problems out for him.
He was kneeling before the fire, his hands and face  black with coal dust.
Hari looked at him with raised eyebrows.
He smiled.
‘I've been out picking coal,’ he sat back on his heels and shrugged, ‘it's not strictly legal of course, but I don't think that matters in the circumstances.’
‘You must be more careful!’
Hari said quickly, ‘You could be recognized.’
He got to his feet.
‘I don't think so,’ he said, ‘not looking like this.’
He stared at her as she shed her shawl and sank into a chair.
‘Well, Hari, what has happened?’
He rubbed his fingers through his hair and she could tell he was anxious.
‘It'll be all right,’ she said at once, ‘I gave the sheets to Emily Grenfell herself, I know she'll see that your name is cleared.’
‘Then what's wrong?’ he said and she looked at him in surprise.
He was very perceptive.
‘I seem to have lost myself a customer.’
Hari sank back in her chair.
‘Took a dislike to me, she did.’
‘Emily has a quick temper,’ Craig said, ‘but she's fair minded and she'll reconsider the situation, I'm sure.’
Hari said nothing, it was natural that he would take the part of Emily who was not only his cousin but was his promised bride.
But Craig was wrong, to employ Hari as her shoemaker was something Emily would never reconsider.
There was a knock on the door and Craig tensed, his big hands clenching into fists.
‘It's all right,’ Hari said quickly, ‘it's most likely the rent man, he comes today.’
She smiled, ‘Don't forget now, you're my cousin from Neath come to help with the business, you're big like my dad, could easily be his nephew and so long as you don't open your mouth, it should be all right.’
Hari took the money out of the old cracked teapot she kept on the shelf, she had just enough for the rent and she smiled in relief.
It was a good thing that Edward Morris had given her another order which he had insisted on paying for in advance.
Hari knew it was mostly done to help Craig and yet Edward Morris seemed to like her work a great deal.
She hoped she would keep his custom once all this drama was over.
She opened the door and handed the money over and Mr Fisher wrote something in his book.
‘Got a visitor have you then, Angharad?’
The man looked at her carefully as she nodded.
‘News spreads fast, I suppose Dai the Cop is gossiping like an old woman again.’
She asked quickly, ‘Well, if it's anybody else's business I got my cousin staying here, nothing wrong in that is there, Mr Fisher?’
He closed his book with a snap and looked past Hari to where Craig was bending over the fire.
His face was still covered in coal dust and he looked anything but a gent.
Hari suppressed a smile.
‘No course not, Angharad, glad you got a bit of help, mind.
You got enough to do with the business and looking after your mam and all.’
Hari breathed more easily, for a moment she wondered if the rent man suspected the truth about her visitor.
‘Duw ,’ she said, ‘don't you worry about that, now, my mam is no trouble, it's just her legs are bad just now and that cough of hers is troublesome but she bears up well, mind.’
‘Give her my regards,’ Mr Fisher turned away, ‘see you next week Angharad.’
‘Righto, Mr Fisher, I'll be here and if I'm not in the kitchen take the money from the old teapot.’
She closed the door and turned to see Craig leaning  against the fireplace, his eyes shining through the coal dust.
‘Well done, Hari,’ he said, ‘I think he believes that your honour is safe with your dullard cousin from Neath.’
Hari felt the colour rise to her cheeks.
‘It's not funny, mind!’ she said sharply.
‘It's just as well that mam's here with us, isn't it, or I'd have no honour, at least not in the eyes of the people around World's End.’
‘Would that matter?’
Craig said.
‘I didn't think you were the sort to care about other people's opinions.’
He was so innocent of the ways of the world that Hari just shook her head in amazement.
‘Don't you realize I'd be a target for all the men living in World's End who are just looking for a loose woman to amuse themselves with?’
She shrugged.
‘My chances of making an honest marriage or even of keeping up my business would be less than dust without the good will of my neighbours.
What do you think keeps the petty thieves and the people who run a bawdy house away from my door?’
‘I see.’
The smile had gone from Craig's eyes, ‘I'm sorry, I suppose I didn't stop to think.’
Hari shrugged.
‘You don't know how we people of World's End live,’ she said quietly, ‘so perhaps you would do well to stay indoors out of the way of any trouble.’
‘My dear, Hari, don't you think I've learned anything about human nature from my stay at the prison?’ he said softly.
She inclined her head.
‘Maybe you learned about the ways of criminals but we at World's End are not all criminals, there are good and bad everywhere.’
She glanced up at him meaningfully, ‘Even in the Grenfell family, mind.’
She stared at him for a long moment wondering if in her indignation she had hurt his feelings, but his eyes were narrowed and she could not read his expression.
‘I must see to mam,’ she said quickly.
She brought a bowl from the cupboard and filled it with water from the kettle, there were chores to be done before she could even begin to make a meal for the three of them.
She took a towel and hanging it over her arm, she made her way upstairs, her mind spinning with troubled thoughts.
Perhaps it was time Craig Grenfell looked elsewhere for lodgings, there were plenty to be had.
Perhaps she was being a complete fool helping Craig Grenfell, was she allowing herself to be taken in by the first handsome man to come into her life?
‘Hello, mam, you're looking perky this evening.’
Hari thrust her worries into the back of her mind and helped her mother to sit up against the pillows.
‘Come on then, have a nice wash, it will make you feel better.’
Win Morgan sat up and stared at her daughter.
‘I wish you'd stop treating me like a child, Angharad,’ she said irritably.
‘I may be going deaf and it's true I'm not in the most robust of health but I'm not daft.’
‘I don't know what you mean, mam.’
Hari damped a piece of flannel and carefully washed her mother's lined face.
‘Here's the towel, I'll see to you as quickly as I can, it's a bit colder this evening.’
‘You've got a man in,’ her mother said suddenly.
‘Don't bother to deny it now.’
Her voice was stern.
‘I saw him when I went down to make myself a cup of tea, just letting himself out the door he was.’
‘Mam!’
Hari said quickly, ‘I've told you not to try to get down stairs on your own, not with your legs so bad.’
‘Duw , girl, what do you expect me to do when you're in the shop most of the time?
Anyway, you know I have my good days and when I do I like to get up and sit by the fire for a while.’
Hari sighed, it wasn't much to ask to be able to sit  before the comfort of the fire and she was well aware of the frustration her mother must suffer lying in bed all day.
‘Anyway, who is this man?’
Win Morgan rubbed her face briskly with the towel bringing a spurious colour to her cheeks.
Hari decided that her mother must be told the truth, as she had pointed out, there was nothing wrong with her mind.
‘Well, don't go mad if I tell you all about him,’ Hari said firmly, ‘just hear me out before you pass any judgements.’
‘I've never known a girl to make such a fuss over talking to her mother, I'm losing my temper with you, Angharad, for heaven's sake get on with it.’
‘His name is Craig Grenfell,’ Hari said, folding the damp towel neatly as though it was the most important thing in the world.
‘One of them toffs from the other side of town?’
Win Morgan said in disbelief.
‘What in the name of heaven is he doing here in our house?’
‘He's escaped from prison,’ Hari said quickly, ‘but he hadn't done anything, it was someone else who cheated and lied and Craig was the one to take the blame.’
‘My dear Angharad,’ her mother said sharply, ‘don't you know that's what they all say?
I don't suppose there's one prisoner in Swansea Jail who would admit he was guilty.
The man's making a fool of you.
In any case,’ she warmed to her subject, ‘we can't afford to feed ourselves half the time let alone a stranger, what can you be thinking about?
You just can't trust these toffs, mind.’
‘His cousin, Emily Grenfell,’ Hari ignored her mother's outburst, ‘she will prove he is innocent, you'll see.’
Win Morgan looked at her daughter shrewdly.
‘You are falling in love with him!’
It was an accusation and, quickly, Hari shook her head.
‘Don't be so soft, mam, he's not one of us, I know that as well as you do.’
‘Aye, your head knows it but does your heart understand, Angharad?’
She sighed.
‘I don't want you hurt, love, you know how much I love you even though I don't always show it.
Be sensible, send this man packing.’
‘Listen now, mam,’ Hari said briskly, avoiding her mother's eyes, ‘we won't talk any more about it just now.
I've got us a nice bit of meat pie for supper and a lovely fresh bit of bread, I expect you're starving.’
‘No good changing the subject,’ her mother said slowly, ‘don't go doing anything daft,cariad , this man may be as innocent as you say but his kind use people like us, remember that.‘
Hari sighed, ‘I'll remember, mam.’
She moved to the door and glanced back, warming to her mother, it was not often she expressed affection or even concern, she was a hard woman who had lived a difficult life but now and then a little softness crept into Win Morgan's eyes that betrayed the real woman beneath the stern exterior.
‘Don't worry,’ Hari said, ‘I can look after myself, I've been taught well by my mam and dad.’
She hurried downstairs, the water in the bowl tipping a little on the bare treads.
Hari was tired, she had worked all day and then walked over to the other side of town and back and now there was supper to get.
Tears came to her eyes and, as she entered the kitchen, she stumbled a little.
Craig came to her side and relieved her of the bowl.
‘What's wrong?’ he asked.
‘Is your mother worse?’
Hari shook her head.
‘No, it's nothing, I'm just so tired, that's all.’
He led her to a chair.
‘You sit there and tell me what you want done, I'm not exactly helpless you know.’
‘The supper,’ Hari said, ‘there's meat pie in the pantry and the bread has to be cut.’
Craig moved about the room lightly, he was surprisingly deft for a big man and as Hari watched him cut the bread into silly thin slices, she smiled.
‘We won't save money the way you do things,’ she said softly, ‘thin bread takes extra butter, thick slices are more suitable.’
‘I see,’ Craig's dark eyes were alight with humour, ‘give me time, I'll learn how things should be done.’
He cut the pie and placed a slice on one of the earthenware plates on the table.
‘Here, have yours,’ he said, ‘perhaps with some food inside you you'll feel better.
You are far too thin.’
Hari shook her head.
‘I'll take mam's up first, then I can have mine in peace,’ she said.
When she returned to the kitchen, she sank down at the table and tried to eat a little of the food, conscious that Craig was watching her.
‘When my name is cleared,’ he said thoughtfully, ‘I'd like to set you up in better premises, supply you with as much leather as you need and get you an apprentice or two.’
She glanced at him sharply.
‘You don't owe me anything,’ she said.
‘Anyway, I manage my life quite nicely on my own thanks.’
‘Don't be so prickly.’
Craig leaned over the table towards her, his hands almost touching hers.
Hari looked away.
‘You'll soon forget this part of your life,’ she said to him, ‘it will be like a bad dream.’
‘Not all of it.’
His hand rested on hers, ‘You are a wonderful woman, Hari Morgan, and I won't forget you, don't you worry.‘
Hari looked into his dark eyes, they seemed to hold her  mesmerized as he leaned closer, his mouth only inches from her own.
Hari pulled away from him.
‘That's enough of that,’ she said trying to smile, ‘remember who you are, Mr Grenfell, and who I am.’
She rose from the table.
‘I'm going to bed,’ she said, ‘I'm so tired I can hardly think straight.’
He moved to her side.
‘Hari,’ his voice was soft, persuasive, ‘you are so lovely.’
His hands rested on her shoulders and she could feel the warmth of them through the coarse material of her bodice.
‘There are rules if you are to stay here,’ she said, forcing a note of firmness into her voice.
‘You do not make advances to me, you don't even touch me.
Remember I'm no trollop to while away the hours for you.’
He did not release her, he drew her closer until her breasts were pressed against him.
He stared down at her for a long moment, his mouth very close to her own.
Hari knew she should move away but she couldn't, she wanted him to kiss her, to know the feel of a man's lips against her own, it was only natural to feel that way, wasn't it?
He let her go so suddenly that she almost fell.
‘You're right, Hari.’
He sighed.
‘And you are a good woman, more's the pity.’
He turned away and stood before the fire, his back towards her and Hari leaned against the wall for a moment trying to recover her breath.
‘Nos da ,’ she said softly, ‘good night Mr Grenfell.’
Hari lay awake for a long time, staring into the darkness.
How she had wanted him to kiss her, she didn't know what it was like to be kissed and Craig Grenfell was such a handsome man.
But that was not all and Hari knew it, her mother was right, her head was filled with common sense, but her emotions were running riot.
Well, tomorrow he must go, she would tell Mr Grenfell first thing in the morning that he must make other arrangements and then he would be out of her life forever.
And somehow the prospect did not make her happy.
Morning came bright and clear with a pale dawn streaking the skies.
Hari sat up in bed and stared through the window to where the light from the street lamp paled into insignificance against the rising sun.
She stepped out of bed, careful not to wake her mother and quietly washed with the cold water from the china jug.
Hari shivered a little as she drew on her underclothes, then her thick skirt and bodice, lastly pulling the welcoming warmth of the shawl around her slim shoulders.
As she stood barefoot on the cold boards, she comforted herself with the thought that soon it would be spring, daffodils would raise proud trumpets to nod in the soft breezes and in the fields beyond the town lambs would be born.
But today she had come to a decision, she would tell Craig Grenfell to leave her house, his presence was beginning to disturb her, disrupt her life.
She was ready now to admit that her mother was right, Hari was falling in love with Craig.
It would not be easy telling him to go but it was something she needed to do for her own peace of mind.
The fire gleamed in the grate, the kettle was boiling on the hob, steam issuing from the black lips of the spout and of Craig there was no sign.
Hari made tea and sat at the table, her hands curled around the warmth of the cup.
She felt unrested, her eyes heavy as she stared into the fire for the truth was that she  had slept very little and, when she did drift off, dreams of being in Craig's arms tormented her.
Where was he now?
Fear for his safety warred within her.
Her mind worried the problem of where would he find lodgings, how could she summon the strength to put him out of the only refuge he had?
Hari rose, resolutely putting the thoughts behind her.
She moved into the workshop but, for once, the prospect of work did not please her.
There were the unfinished shoes for Emily Grenfell lying on the bench, the amethysts agleam against the softness of the leather.
The soft pumps of pigskin were made for pampered feet that trod not on cold stone or wooden boards but on rich carpets and Hari felt resentment fill her.
Emily had everything she wanted, even Craig.
Yesterday, Miss Emily Grenfell had momentarily been at a loss, wanting to know where her fiance was and realizing to her dismay that his safety was in the hands of the shoemaker's daughter.
Emily had taken her revenge swiftly, severing the ties that had long been between the Grenfells and the Morgans.
But serve her right, she had cut off her own source of fine delicate shoes, she would not find their like again, not in Swansea.
Hari prided herself that while she had the skill and the strength of any shoemaker, she also had a flair for design that most cobblers lacked, Emily would learn that lesson to her cost.
She set to work on Emily's shoes, pride insisted that she finish the job she had begun even if she was never paid for it.
She stitched the soft leather uppers into place, then dampened the soles to make them more pliable.
She glanced round her, there were boots to be tapped, heavy working boots belonging to Cleg the Coal with the sole hanging off like a ragged tongue.
She would attend to  those next for Cleg needed his boots for work, he only owned the one pair.
She heard sounds from the kitchen and she drew in a sharp breath, Craig must have returned.
The back door leading to the yard opened and Hari heard her mother's voice, sounding strangely weary, calling to her.
‘What's wrong, mam?’
Hari was at her mother's side in an instant.
‘Duw .
There's pale you are, you shouldn't be out of bed, mind.’
She helped her mother back to the warmth of the kitchen and sat her in a chair.
‘Have a cup of tea or some nice bread and milk, warm you up, you're shivering.’
‘I'm afraid, Hari,’ her mother looked up at her with large eyes, ‘I'm that afraid.’
Her lip trembled.
‘I tried to call you but you didn't hear me.’
‘I'm sorry, mam.’
Hari felt guilt sear her, she should be more considerate of her mother and yet the work must be done or there would be no money.
‘Hold my hands,cariad .’
Her mother's voice was fainter and, for the first time, Hari felt the fear communicate itself to her.
She took her mother's hands, they were cold and clammy.
‘I'll fetch the doctor, mam,’ Hari said, an icy coldness gripping her.
‘No, girl, the doctor can do nothing, it's my lungs, they are worn out, can't draw breath no more.
Don't leave me, Angharad, I don't want to die alone.’
‘Don't talk soft, mam, you are not going to die!’
Hari said quickly.
She looked down into her mother's eyes and read the pain and fear in them.
She knelt on the floor, heedless of the cold stone beneath her knees.
‘Come on, mam, let me hold you tight, you'll be all right, everything will be all right, you'll see.’
After a moment, her mother spoke and it was quite clear that each word was an effort.
‘There's money for my burial,’ her voice was thin and threadlike, ‘hidden in the bedroom it is, under the mattress.
I want to go decent with a wooden cross above my head, promise me, Angharad.‘
‘Don't, mam,’ Hari said brokenly.
As she held her mother, she noticed how thin she'd become and Hari blamed herself for not realizing sooner how sick mam was.
‘You'll be all right, you'll see, when you've had a warm and a bit of breakfast, you'll feel better.’
Then her mother's head was heavy against Hari's shoulder, the hands that had clasped her fell away and the tortured breathing had died away to an ominous silence.
Hari rocked her mother to and fro.
‘You are going to be all right, mam, you are, you'll see.
You can't die, mam, you just can't die like that so sudden without me being ready.’
She didn't know how long she knelt on the cold floor with her mother still and silent in her arms.
She didn't hear the door open or feel the hands that eased her to her feet.
And then she was looking into the compassion-filled face of Craig Grenfell.
‘My mother…?’
Her words trailed away as he nodded.
She turned slowly and looked at the figure in the chair.
It was not mam, oh, it was her features and her wispy greying hair that fell about the thin face, but her mother no longer inhabited the thin frame, the light had been extinguished and all that was left was a shell.
The tears came then with the tearing sobs that racked Hari and set up a trembling within her as though she had the ague.
After a moment, Craig took her in his arms and held her close and, smoothing back her hair, whispered to her  gently, the very same words she had used to her mother.
‘It's going to be all right, you'll see, it will be all right.’
They were useless words, meaningless now because it was not all right, mam was dead.
And yet Craig meant only to be kind, reassuring, and gradually, Hari's sobs subsided.
She moved from his arms and slowly untied her leather apron.
‘There are things to be done,’ she said, her voice heavy, ‘and I think it best if you are out of the way for a while.’
He nodded and, after a moment, moved to the door.
‘Are you sure you can manage?’
Hari drew a deep breath.
‘There's no point in you being here.
Please go.’
She wanted to thank him for his kindness, to tell him how grateful she was that he had offered to help but the words would not come.
After a moment, she turned away and she heard the door close quietly behind him.
Hari sighed and, pressing her eyes tightly shut, felt unequal to the task before her.
There was old Ma Feeney to call for the laying out, the coffin maker to see, the burial to arrange.
She covered her face with her hands.
‘Oh mam,’ she whispered, ‘why did you have to die and leave me alone?’
The cemetery had emptied of people, the cold winds swept in from the sea and the still bare branches of the trees shivered like thin fingers against the dark sky.
Hari had remained in the cemetery long after the few neighbours who had attended Win Morgan's funeral had gone.
She stood staring down at the fresh earth of the new grave, at the wooden cross bearing her mother's name and she could not believe that this nightmare was real.
She would surely awake from the nightmare world where she was without her mother?
She felt a hand resting lightly on her shoulder and she turned to look at Craig, almost unrecognizable now with his beard grown and his moustache thick and dark above his mouth.
He looked like a buccaneer of old except that he wore not the wide-sleeved shirts and breeches of the past but the rough working clothes that had been her father's.
Craig had been wonderful to Hari during the past days, she didn't think she could have got through it all without him.
He had sat with her in the long dark evenings, had made sure she ate at mealtimes.
‘Come home,’ he said softly, ‘there's little point in catching a chill, is there?’
Wordlessly, she allowed him to lead her on to the roadway and down the hill towards home.
‘You know I haven't walked so much during my entire lifetime as I've walked these last few days,’ he said with an effort to divert her from her dark thoughts.
‘At least I've seen more of the town where I live than I ever saw from a carriage or on horseback.’
‘Hush now,’ Hari warned dully as they drew nearer to World's End, ‘your posh voice will give you away if you're overheard.’
Craig opened the door to the house and stood aside for her to enter.
The kitchen seemed dark and cheerless and Hari wondered how she could go on living and working in a house that held so many memories.
She sank down into a chair and watched as Craig knelt before the fire, building it back into a glowing warmth.
‘I'll make you some tea,’ he said swinging the big black kettle effortlessly on to the coals.
‘You look as if you could do with a cup.’
She stared up at him, touched to tears by his thoughtfulness, he had come into her life such a short time ago and yet he had been so good to her, so strong and kind.
She looked up at him, unable to keep the trembling from her voice.
‘Thank you, Craig.’
He knew she was grateful for much more than the gesture of making some tea and, instinctively, he held out his arms.
Hari moved into them, resting her head wearily against the roughness of his shirt.
He held her close, smoothing back her hair, his big hands so gentle.
She could hear the beating of his heart and she closed her eyes, thankful for his presence for she could not bear to be alone, not now, not yet.
He released her.
‘You must get back to your work as soon as possible,’ he said.
‘Work will ease the pain, in time, believe me.’
He meant well but how could Hari ever get over the shock of her mother's sudden death?
He made her tea and sat holding her hand until the light faded and the lamps in the street were lit, shedding a faint light into the room.
‘I must go out,’ Craig said, ‘but I promise I won't be long.’
Hari sat up straighter in her chair.
‘You must not worry about me,’ she said quickly, ‘you are not responsible for me, mind, and I will not be beholden.’
He smiled down at her and, in the light from the fire, he looked so handsome, so strong and safe that she wanted to cling to him.
‘I know,’ he said, shrugging into his coat.
‘But remember, far from you being beholden to me, it is the other way around, I should be grateful to you.’
He crouched before her, his big shoulders against the light from the window so that she could not see his expression.
‘You are harbouring a criminal and that is something that takes courage.
You do have courage, Hari Morgan, and never are you going to need it as much as you do now.’
He let himself quietly out of the house and the silence closed in around Hari, smothering her.
She rose quickly and lit the candles, all six of them which was wasteful, but she needed to be in the light for the shadows in the corners frightened her.
Tomorrow she would work, she would finish the shoes belonging to Emily Grenfell in the morning and then in the afternoon she would sole the heavy boots that Cleg the Coal so badly needed for his round.
It was about time she stopped feeling sorry for herself, the hurt and pain of losing mam would be with her for a long time, but Hari knew she could not let her grief incapacitate her, if she did not mend and make shoes she did not eat.
A sudden rapping startled her.
Hari could just see a shape outlined against the uncovered glass, she had forgotten to put dad's apron over the window.
‘Duw .
Who is that then?’ she said, her mouth dry.
‘What do you think you're doing frightening a girl half to death?’
She opened the door and peered out.
‘What do you want?’
She saw the man draw nearer.
‘I want to pay my respects, Angharad,’ Mr Fisher stood on the threshold, his hat in his hand.
‘There's sorry I am about your mam, would have come to the funeral if I hadn't had to work, mind.’
‘What are you doing here this time of night, Mr Fisher?’ she asked.
She looked beyond him into the darkness afraid that at any moment Craig would return.
‘Your cousin at home, is he, Angharad?’ he asked mildly and Hari felt herself grow tense.
‘No, not right now.
Thank you for coming, Mr Fisher,’ Hari felt the tears of weakness brim in her eyes.
‘But my mam was only buried today and I'm not fit company for anyone.’
‘Right, I understand, but if there's anything you want, Angharad, any help you need, then don't hesitate to ask.’
He moved away into the night and Hari watched until he had disappeared from sight, then she closed the door.
Mr Fisher's visit had underlined the position she was in, she was now a woman alone.
She rubbed a hand over her eyes, she would have to talk to Craig when he returned, he could not stay with her now and, anyway, he would not wish to compromise her.
It was late when he returned, his brow was creased and there were circles of darkness under his eyes.
‘I've had bad news,’ he said, ‘Edward Morris has been taken into Swansea Prison, he is accused of fraud.’
He sank into a chair.
‘I never thought that Emily would warn my brother, how could she do it?’
The words she had been about to say died on Hari's lips.
‘Your brother?’ she echoed.
‘You didn't say anything about your brother so I never mentioned him to Emily Grenfell.
Duw !
It's all my fault.’
‘No,’ Craig said softly, ‘it's my fault for not warning you about Spencer.
What a fool I've been.’
Hari looked down at Craig's bowed shoulders, she couldn't ask him to leave not now.
‘Sit down, Craig,’ she said softly, ‘let me fetch you some tea.’
Emily lifted her head and breathed in the sweet March air, it was good to stand in the garden of Summer Lodge looking out over a tranquil sea with timid waves reaching for the shore.
Soon the fine weather would come, she would be able to take rides along the coast road, get away for a while from the interminable drawing-room meetings and card calling that wearied and bored her.
She wished she had been born into a different age, an age when women had been allowed to be more than a decorative possession.
All that lay before a young lady of breeding was duty to parents and hopefully a good marriage.
Emily sighed, unless Craig's name was cleared she would remain an old maid for ever, she would never accept second best whatever her father said.
‘Emily.’
A voice spoke close to her ear, ‘It's good to see you looking so well.’
Spencer Grenfell stood a little behind her, looking down at her.
She turned to him, her heart beating swiftly as he leaned forward and kissed her cheek.
‘I'm sorry, you seem surprised to see me.’
She shook her head not willing to admit that for a moment she had thought he was Craig.
The brothers were very much alike, the same strong shoulders and the fine head of hair, but physical appearances were deceptive and there was about Spencer a weakness that showed in the line of his mouth and the almost shifty look in his eyes.
‘Any news?’ she asked quickly.
‘I can't wait to hear what you've found out.’
‘Patience, Emily, all in good time, what about inviting me in and offering me a drink, the grass here is quite damp you know, and in those silly slippers, you'll catch your death.’
She warmed to him, he was concerned about her as a cousin should be.
‘Come inside we'll have some cordial.’
The drawing-room was lit with the pale promise of spring, daffodils were everywhere, on the occasional tables, in the window, yellow trumpets strong and bright against the damask wall-covering.
When drinks had been served and the door closed after the bobbing maid, Emily leaned forward in her chair.
‘What of Edward Morris, is he guilty?’ she asked.
‘And when will Craig's name be cleared?’
‘My brother will have to come forward before anything can be done,’ Spencer sipped the hot cordial slowly.
‘He must tell the judiciary that it was this accountant Morris who abused the trust the firm showed in him.’
Emily shook her head.
‘No,’ she said firmly, ‘Craig can't risk it, what if he was arrested again?’
‘Why should he be?’
Spencer said smoothly, ‘If my brother is innocent he has nothing to fear.’
Emily rose to her feet in agitation.
‘That's just not true,’ she protested, ‘his innocence didn't prevent him from being wrongly accused in the first place, did it?’
Spencer put down his glass with a sigh.
‘Has it occurred to you that this Morris fellow and my brother were in this thing together?’ he said softly.
‘That's absurd,’ Emily said hotly.
‘Why should Craig want to steal from his own company and what's more share the proceeds with an accountant?’
‘But it isn't entirely Craig's money, you know, a substantial part of it will be mine once my father's estate is sorted out properly.‘
Emily shook her head.
‘I don't believe Craig would be involved in anything illegal, certainly nothing that would harm your prospects, Spencer.’
‘There's such a thing as greed, Emily, and sad to say brothers are capable of hating each other, take Cain and Abel for example .’
He rose and put his hand on Emily's shoulder.
‘Let's leave the subject, shall we, I don't want us to quarrel, there's a more serious matter I want to talk about.’
‘What could be more serious than the trouble Craig is in?’
Emily asked quickly.
‘It's your father,’ Spencer said, ‘I'm sorry to be the one to tell you but you have to know, he is in financial difficulties.’
He paused to let his words sink in.
‘Your father is a worried man and he is looking to you to make a good marriage, that way at least your own future will be secure.’
Emily bit her lip, ‘I didn't know, my father hasn't said anything to me.’
It couldn't be true that her father's leather business was failing, could it, and yet hadn't he urged caution on several occasions lately?
Even to refusing her new boots.
She thought guiltily of the money she had been spending on new clothes and of the new slippers she had ordered with the amethyst decoration.
And then the full implication of her cousin's words fell into place.
‘Marriage?
But I've been promised to Craig for years, I can't break my word.’
‘You may have to break your word, Emily.’
There was something spiteful about the way Spencer spoke the words, they held an almost gloating ring.
Emily moved away from her cousin, anger forcing a harsh note into her voice.
‘No, if I can't marry Craig, I will never marry.’
‘We'll see,’ Spencer said softly.
He put down his glass and rose to his feet.
‘I've taken up quite enough of your  time, my dear cousin.’
He moved into the hallway and in the hazy light falling through the stained-glass window, he might have been Craig.
Then he looked down at her and the similarity was gone.
The maid came through from the back of the house and bobbed a curtsy to Emily.
‘That person is here again, Miss Grenfell, she says she has slippers for you, shall I show her in for the fitting?’
‘Tell her to wait,’ Emily said quickly, she didn't want Spencer to learn anything about where Craig was hiding.
‘Hold on there,’ Spencer said easily, as though sensing Emily's wish to get rid of him.
‘I need some boots repaired, I'd like to see the workmanship of this shoemaker.’
‘She does mostly ladies’ slippers,’Emily said, ‘I don't think she would be of any use to you.’
Spencer smiled and turned back into the room.
‘Nonsense, I must decide that for myself.’
He seated himself in a chair and Emily paused for a moment, she could hardly ask the maid to bring the girl into the drawing-room where Spencer would be listening to every word.
Resolutely, she moved swiftly towards the kitchen.
The girl was standing near the back door, obviously she had not been invited inside.
Over her arm was a basket covered with a snowy cloth.
‘Your slippers are ready,’ she said, her eyes challenging.
‘If you are not pleased with them then don't pay me.’
Emily swallowed her pride.
‘My cousin is here,’ she said in a low voice, ‘Craig's brother, be careful…’
‘Oh, there's the little shoemaker, bring her inside, Emily, let me see her workmanship.’
Spencer had followed her and was standing smiling at her.
‘Come in,’ Emily said shortly.
She was very conscious of the girl following her towards the drawing-room and a sudden sense of jealousy bit like sharp teeth as Emily imagined them together, Craig, and this girl who, however  poor she might be, had beauty as well as dignity.
Spencer was staring with obvious delight at the young girl standing before him.
‘I understand you are a shoemaker.’
He said thoughtfully, ‘I would very much like you to make a pair of boots for me.
How do you work, do you buy in the uppers or do you do the entire job yourself?’
‘I'd prefer to do it all myself, sir,’ the girl said.
‘I can buy uppers from abroad if French calf is required but there is nothing wrong with our own leather.’
‘What about design?
But then it's probably beyond your powers to design boots as well as make them.’
‘Duw , there's nothing I like better than to work on my own ideas.’
The girl spoke quietly but with conviction.
Emily watched as the shoemaker's daughter uncovered the amethyst-decked slippers.
‘See,’ the girl said proudly, ‘these flowers made of gems, I created the pattern for them and designed the slippers in such a way that the amethysts would be shown to the best advantage.’
Emily impatiently took the slippers away from the girl.
‘Send me your bill and it will be paid in full.’
She waved in a gesture of dismissal and turned back to her cousin.
‘I'm sure you have enough boots to provide for an army,’ she said jokingly.
‘In any case you can shop in London any time you choose.’
‘Where do you have your workshop?’
Spencer ignored Emily's words and continued to gaze at the girl who had paused near the doorway.
‘Oh, I think Miss Grenfell is right,’ she said guardedly, ‘my work is not up to the standard you require.’
She left abruptly and Emily closed the door after her with a sigh of relief.
‘That was uncalled for, cousin.’
Spencer said easily, ‘I think you might have been a little more enthusiastic about  such lovely slippers, they are a work of art, you must be very pleased to find someone with the talent to work as well as the best London shoemakers and at a fraction of the price, if I'm any judge.’
‘Forget the girl,’ Emily said, ‘let's talk about my father, shall we?’
Spencer shrugged.
‘Nothing to say, dear girl, your papa is flat broke, that's all there is to it.’
The words fell harshly into the silence and Emily looked at her cousin in disbelief.
‘If this is true, don't you even care?’
She spoke accusingly and Spencer shrugged again.
‘I would like to help but then the business is not entirely in my hands.
If Craig were to show up now, he could perhaps bale uncle out of the difficulties.
After all, it's Craig who will own Summer Lodge after your father's day.’
‘What do you mean?’
Emily's throat was dry as she stared up at her cousin.
He moved to the door.
‘Don't they tell you anything?
The house is entailed to Craig, no-one else can have Summer Lodge.’
He carried on speaking without giving Emily a chance to catch her breath.
‘What I suggested earlier might be a solution to all your problems, marriage, my dear, and I know just the man for you.’
‘Oh, do you now,’ Emily said sharply, ‘and who may I ask have you got in mind?’
‘Me, of course, I'm young and handsome, aren't I?’
He smiled, ‘What more could a girl want?’
‘You can't be serious!’
Emily said.
‘You are joking, aren't you, Spencer?’
‘Think about it, dear girl,’ Spencer said softly, ‘anything is better than disgrace to the family name, don't you think, and between us, you and I could rescue the old family firm?
I'm not badly off, you know, I have some money from my mother's side.’
Emily turned her back without answering, she could scarcely talk, marriage to Spencer was unthinkable.
She sighed with relief as she heard her cousin leave the room.
She stood in the window, holding back the heavy curtains, watching as Spencer climbed into his carriage and, with a wave to her, bowled off down the drive towards the roadway.
When the carriage was out of sight, she sank down into a chair and put her hands over her face.
‘Oh, father,’ she whispered, ‘why didn't you tell me you were in trouble?’
No wonder her father had not been well these last few weeks, he was worried about money.
His temper was uncertain and he was drinking a great deal of brandy during the evenings.
She rose suddenly and brushed back the tears, crying would get her nowhere.
She crossed the hall with determined strides and pushed open the door to her father's study.
She was not used to searching through his private possessions but she needed to learn the truth before he returned home.
She looked through the drawers of his desk and found nothing to indicate the financial problems her cousin had spoken of.
But the middle drawer of the desk was locked and there was no sign of the key.
Emily picked up the knife from the desk and inserted it between the top of the drawer and the desk and after a struggle, the drawer burst open.
It was crammed with unpaid bills for food and clothing.
Emily stared at them in horror but then a few bills didn't mean anything, most people hung on to their money for as long as they could, it was simply the way of businessmen.
She closed the drawer and stood thinking for a moment, then she moved into the drawing-room and rang for the maid.
‘Letty,’ she said as the young girl bobbed in the doorway, ‘ask Mrs Beynon to come in please.’
The housekeeper glided into the room and stood tall and gracious with greying hair under a black cap.
She maintained silence, but it was clear that the sudden summons had surprised her.
‘How long has my father had outstanding bills with the tradespeople?’
Emily tried to sound casual.
The house-keeper's eyebrows lifted a fraction.
‘For some time, Miss Grenfell, indeed only this morning the butcher refused to send around any more meat until he was paid.’
Emily felt cold.
‘And the servants, have they been paid properly?’
‘Not for some time but we are not worried, miss, it's not unusual for the gentry, if you will excuse me saying so, to keep folks waiting for payment.’
‘Right,’ Emily said with more confidence than she felt, ‘please send Letty in with a tray of tea, I'm quite thirsty.’
The housekeeper inclined her head and silently left the room.
Emily sighed with relief, she must be alone, she must have time to think things out.
Later when her father returned from his office, Emily greeted him with her usual kiss.
‘Hungry, father?’ she asked quietly.
‘We've some fish for supper.’
‘I'm not very hungry, truth to tell.’
Her father handed his topcoat to Letty and made his way into the drawing-room.
‘I could do with a drink, though.’
He poured himself a large brandy and Emily watching him tip the liquor into his mouth noticed how thin he'd become.
In a few short months he had changed, his hair was greyer, his face more drawn and the gold Albert hung loosely around his once corpulent stomach.
Emily had meant to wait until her father had eaten but she couldn't bear the suspense a moment longer.
‘Papa, something is very wrong, please tell me, I'm not a child any more.’
He looked at her and frowned as though he would make a denial and then he saw from her face that she knew the truth.
‘I'm sorry,cariad ,’ he said wearily, sinking into a chair, ‘I've done my best to keep things going but someone has been poaching my customers.
One by one my orders for leather have fallen away,’ he paused, his voice sinking lower, ‘now I'm almost ruined.’
He handed Emily his glass and, without a word, she refilled it.
‘I've not even the money to see you properly married, Emily,’ he said softly.
‘How can you ever forgive me for I shall never forgive myself.’
Emily felt a moment of pure terror, the spectre of the workhouse on Mount Pleasant Hill rose before her eyes, the poor house where the homeless lived a life of sheer drudgery and hardship.
Suddenly an unsuspected strength flowed through her.
‘We'll survive, papa,’ Emily said with a certainty that brought a light of hope into her father's eyes.
‘But you must show me the books, tell me everything about the business.’
Emily rose to her feet and moved restlessly around the room.
‘I need to know who your customers are, what orders they have placed in the past and why they no longer wish to trade with you.
I will personally see them all myself and talk them into offering us their business again.’
‘It's impossible, Emily,’ her father said at once.
‘No lady can enter business and keep her reputation intact.
Folk will think you eccentric at the very least.’
‘Let them,’ Emily said.
‘Anything is better than starving, isn't it?’
He shook his head.
‘But you don't understand, there's  no money to buy in the leather stocks we need, how can we sell a commodity we haven't got?’
‘I don't know all the answers,’ Emily said fiercely, ‘not yet but I will not let us sink, I will not.’
She smiled.
‘Now come on, let's go and eat, you look as if you need to keep up your strength.’
Her father accompanied her into the dining-room and though he made a pretence of eating, he barely touched the food on his plate.
Emily noticed that he was drinking excessive amounts of brandy, his cheeks became red and his eyes glazed and when the meal was over, he rose from his chair unsteadily.
‘I'm going to bed, Emily,’ he said, his voice slurred, ‘I don't think I'll bother to go to my office tomorrow, it would only be in order to wind matters up in any case.’
Emily watched him go and then, rising, she threw her napkin down furiously on to the table.
She would not give in!
She paced around the room thinking desperately, she needed free reign to look over her father's books and records and to speak to the men in his employ.
She moved into the drawing-room and stared into the fire, tears misting her eyes.
According to her father they were ruined, poverty stricken.
She glanced around at the house, she would lose her home; entailed as it was it would pass to the next male heir of the family.
Craig would inherit Summer Lodge.
‘Damn Craig!’
Why did he have to be so careless that he'd ended up in prison?
He could have sorted out all her problems if he'd been here.
She bit her lip, she must avoid financial ruin at all costs, what did she have that she could sell to raise money?
There was her jewellery, the Grenfell emeralds that had belonged to her mother, they were hers, hers to sell if she so chose.
Emily stood up and stared at her reflection in the ornate mirror that hung over the fireplace.
The emeralds must go, they would bring in enough money to pay some of the debtors sufficient to keep them quiet for a time.
She moved to the window and stared out towards the sea, the moon lit the bay with pure light, the craggy rocks of Mumbles stood out dark against the sky.
It was a lovely night, a night for calling on all her courage and all her resources to pull herself and her father out of this crisis.
And she would do it, Emily clenched her hands into fists, she would fight to the last breath to keep her heritage and to preserve the good name of the Grenfells.
In the morning, she rose early and dressed in her plainest clothes, flounces and frills had no place in business.
She drew on sensible boots and a warm woollen cape and called for the carriage to be brought round to the front.
Sighing, she looked around the elegant hallway, drastic cuts would have to be made but she could manage with just a cook and a maid, the others would have to be paid off.
She climbed into the carriage knowing it would perhaps be for the last time; maintaining the horses and the grooms was a luxury she would have to forgo.
As the carriage rolled down the driveway, Emily looked straight ahead, holding herself erect, determined not to give in to the tears that threatened to overflow.
The large old building, with its sign over the door bearing the Grenfell name, stood silent and empty.
Emily unlocked the front door and stepped inside.
She moved up the stairs past the few skins that lay on a table and made her way into the office.
A man who was vaguely familiar was seated at the desk, his hair was grey and his eyes peered short-sightedly at the books before him.
‘Good morning,’ Emily said quietly, ‘I'm Emily Grenfell,
‘I've come to find out what's happening to my father's business.’
He smiled at her and his kindly eyes almost hidden beneath straggling brows were sympathetic.
‘Bore da , Miss Emily, I'm Joey and I've worked for your father since I was a boy.
If there's anything to do to help, then I'm at your service.’
Emily took off her cape feeling she had found an ally.
‘Good,’ she said, ‘I want to know anything you can tell me about the problem with the business, daddy is honest and straight, he has a good name and what's more, he knows how to choose good leather, so what can have gone wrong?’
‘I wish I knew,’ Joey sighed.
‘What I suspect is that someone has deliberately caused delays in delivery of leather and has been undercutting your father's prices.’
‘But who?’
Emily asked and the old man shook his head.
‘Perhaps you can find that out, go to the old customers, ask them face to face.
They might well talk to a pretty lady when they would hesitate to confide in an old man like me.’
‘Right,’ Emily said firmly, ‘let me have a list of the best customers and a list of the people my father owes money to.’
She smiled, feeling suddenly alive and full of energy.
‘I am going to save the business, Joey, I don't know how I'm going to do it but somehow I will.’
She took a seat and drew a piece of paper towards her and began to write, the Grenfells weren't beaten yet, not by a long chalk.
The street was alive with the sound of ragged children playing noisy games.
Girls with hair flying were being chased by shouting boys.
It was holiday time for the Catholic children of Greenhill.
Hari knocked on the door of Cleg the Coals house, smiling as a small girl rushed past her, eyes wide with excitement.
Cleg's boots, a heavy weight in the basket over Hari's arm, were mended at last.
After a moment, the door swung open and a woman stood staring with big eyes in a pale face, her apron unable to conceal the fact that she was heavily pregnant.
‘Morning, Beatie, there's Cleg's boots all mended and ready to wear.’
‘Come in, Hari, sure Cleg will be that glad to see you, he's been wearing his brother's boots to work in and them pinching him like the devil.’
The house was spotlessly clean though the furniture was sparse and the floor covered with sand.
On the walls were hung religious pictures of Christ with a glowing heart.
In the kitchen at the back of the house, Cleg was eating his breakfast of thick brown bread and great hunks of cheese.
‘Bore da , Hari, there's a good girl you are finishing my boots for me and you with your mam so recently passed away.
So sorry to hear about Win Morgan I was, fine woman, your mam.’
He drew out a chair.
‘Sit down and have a cup of tea by here with us.’
Beatie crossed herself quickly at the mention of the dead, the young Irish woman was sometimes ashamed of her husband's bluntness.
‘Don't speak of death, Cleg,’ Beatie said, ‘not now with me in this condition.’
‘Duw , don't take on so, woman, got to pay my respects, haven't I?
Too superstitious you are, that's what comes of going to church so much, mind.’
Beatie put her hands on her full hips.
‘Don't you pick holes in my religion, Cleg Jones, being Catholic is better than being a Welsh heathen like you.’
Hari sat down and put her basket on the floor, pushing back the white cloth, she was well used to the way Cleg and his wife carried on, it didn't mean a thing.
‘See, I've put toecaps on for you, Cleg, make the boots last a bit longer they will.’
‘There's a good girl, work better than any man you do and me glad to give you my trade.’
He looked at her steadily.
‘Though I've got to tell you there's some gossip going around about the cousin you've got staying.’
He leaned forward, his great forearms bulging beneath the rolled-up sleeves of his flannel shirt.
He frowned.
‘None of my business, mind, but with your mam gone folk don't think it proper.
I don't want you getting in bad with the ruffians who live around World's End.’
Hari took the tea Beatie handed her and set it down quickly on the scrubbed wooden table.
‘There's nothing I've done that I'm ashamed of, Cleg,’ she said softly, ‘my father brought me up to be respectable and that's what I am.’
‘I know,’ Cleg's big hand covered hers, ‘but, for your own sake, send your cousin packing or marry him out of the way, then no-one will have room to talk.’
Hari smiled ruefully at the thought of Craig marrying her and yet there was a sadness deep inside her, a longing that she knew would never be fulfilled.
‘You're right, Cleg,’ Hari sipped the hot weak tea, enjoying every mouthful, the Jones family were one of the few families in Greenhill who could afford tea at all.
‘I suppose it's time I asked my cousin to leave.
It's no good putting it off any longer though he's been a great comfort to me, mind.’
The thought of being alone without Craig's warm presence in the house made her want to weep.
She placed her empty cup on the table and rose to her feet.
Cleg stood up too and put his hand into his pocket.
‘Here's the money for the boots and my brother Dai wants you to repair some shoes.
Can you call round to him?
He lives down near the bottom of Wind Street, got a shop he has, a well-to-do sort of man, better off than me at any rate.’
Hari nodded, she was glad of the trade, orders had dropped off lately and now she no longer had the boots of Edward Morris to repair, she was finding work hard to come by.
‘I know your brother by sight, big built like you, Cleg, but with greying hair, lives at the end of one of the courts, doesn't he?’
‘That's him, strike while the iron's hot, cariad, go see him straight away, Dai's a generous man, he'll pay you well.’
Cleg smiled.
‘Got four sons he has, they'll all need shoes too, I shouldn't be surprised.’
Hari left Greenhill and made her way towards High Street.
It was a pleasant walk down a gently sloping hill past the toll house.
The spring sunshine was almost warm and a soft breeze was blowing in from the sea.
Hari took a  deep breath and tasted the tang of salt in the air, soon it would be summer but she would be facing it alone.
She had been much comforted by Craig's presence in the house these past weeks, but in her heart she had known the situation was an explosive one and couldn't last.
She stared ahead of her to where Wind Street met High Street but she didn't see the portico of the inn she was passing or the ornate facades of the tall houses; she was acknowledging to herself that she was falling more and more in love with Craig Grenfell.
It was foolishness of course, nothing could ever come of her infatuation for a man from another world, a world of comfort and security.
And a world, she reminded herself sharply, that at this moment had turned against him.
At last she found the shop belonging to Dai Jones, it was spread well back from the front door, a long dimly lit store that sold everything from flour and salt to patent medicines.
Behind the counter stood a young man who smiled broadly when he saw her.
‘Bore da , miss, what can I get you?’ he asked pleasantly and his blue eyes looked into hers with obvious admiration.
‘Cleg Jones advised me to come and see his brother, Dai is it?’ she asked tentatively.
‘Needs some boots mending, I believe.’
‘That's my dad, I'm Ben Jones, youngest son and the most put upon.’
His cheerful smile belied his words and Hari found herself responding to his warmth.
‘Hello Ben, I'm Hari Morgan, shoemaker.’
She saw the lift of his eyebrows and she smiled.
‘I know, I'm only a woman but I can make and mend just as well as any man, if not better.’
‘I don't doubt it,’ Ben said at once.
He took her hand  and made a pretence of examining it and Hari drew her fingers away quickly.
‘Is your father at home?’ she asked and felt a sinking disappointment when Ben shook his head.
‘Not just now but tell me your address and I'll be sure to bring you any boots that need working on, right?’
Hari smiled ruefully.
‘Right.
I live just off Wassail Square, there's a sign over the workshop with my father's name and trade on it, Dewi Morgan, boot and shoemaker, you can't miss it.’
‘I'll make sure of that,’ Ben said smiling.
A group of chattering women in torn dresses and faded shawls entered the shop and Hari moved quickly towards the door, she must not hamper Ben when he should be working.
Ben lifted his hand in farewell and Hari smiled politely before closing the door behind her.
All the way home, she practised the words she would speak to Craig Grenfell, she must tell him to leave, to find another place to stay but the feeling of emptiness that swept over her whenever she thought of saying goodbye to him brought tears brimming to her eyes.
When she entered the house, it was silent and empty.
The fire was burning low in the grate and the kettle was cold on the hob.
Hari mended the fire and sat back on her heels, looking at her blackened fingers.
Where was he, had he been taken by the constables?
Was he even now locked up in some prison cell to become once again the unkempt figure he had been when she first set eyes on him?
Later, Hari forced herself to enter the workshop and get on with her repairs.
She had enough work for several more days and then after that, she would need to tramp around the streets seeking new customers.
Where was Craig?
Her hands fell idle in her lap and she stared around her at the bits of leather on the floor, at the  row of wooden lasts along her bench, at the boots that needed new soles and heels and, with a sigh of despair, she dropped her knife and rose to her feet.
It was no good, she could not concentrate on anything, not while her every nerve was alive with fear for Craig's safety.
In the early evening, Hari restlessly drew on her shawl.
She must get out of the house and breathe in some air that was free of the scent of leather.
She set out for the cemetery where both her parents were buried.
It was situated on a hill where the winds raced over the open ground and the sea below laved the shore with small, agitated waves.
It seemed that here, there was never any spring, only wind and rain and the dull ache of loss.
She knelt on the tufted rebellious grass and closed her eyes.
In her mind, she saw her mother, not dead but full of life with her eyes bright and a smile on her lips.
It was a dream, it had been a long time since Hari had seen her mother smile for the death of her husband had knocked all the spirit out of Win Morgan.
She felt a hand on her shoulder and she looked up into the thin face of Edward Morris.
She scrambled to her feet, the wind tugging at her hair.
‘Mister Morris, you've been set free then?’
Hari felt him take her arm and lead her beneath the overhanging trees.
‘It seems that I still have some friends in Swansea,’ Edward said softly, ‘no-one could convict me on such trumped-up evidence.
’ He smiled.
‘And Craig proved my innocence all right.’
‘How did he do that?’
Hari asked, her mouth dry.
Edward smiled down at her.
‘He sent a message to the governor explaining that the thefts continued to take place at a time when the firm had transferred me to England for a period of six months.
As I had no access to the Swansea accounts during that time, it  was clear I couldn't have embezzled anything from the company.
’ His expression became sober.
‘Unfortunately, in all the confusion of evidence, it seems to have come down to one brother's word against the other.’
‘But the balance sheets that you gave Craig and the fact that the thefts went on while he was in prison, didn't all that prove it was his brother's fault?’
‘Those papers conveniently disappeared after they were presented to Spencer Grenfell and poor Emily couldn't be blamed, she didn't fully understand the situation.’
‘Where is Craig now?’
Hari asked softly and Edward looked down at her with a shrewdness that disconcerted her.
‘Don't let your heart rule your head, Miss Morgan,’ he said, ‘Craig is a fine chap, a loyal friend but he has neglected the business and paid rather too much attention to the worldly pleasures instead, so be warned.’
Hari moved away from him, her cheeks hot with embarrassment and anger.
‘He has been a perfect gentleman,’ she said quickly.
‘I'm so pleased to hear it.’
Edward smiled warmly, ‘Because I have something to tell you.
I came searching for you at the shop and one of your neighbours told me she'd seen you come this way.‘
He paused and touched her hand.
‘I have to tell you that Craig will not be bothering you any longer, he has found somewhere else to stay.’
‘I see.’
She paused, her head bent, ‘There's strange, because I'd made up my mind to tell him to go anyway.’
‘That's all right then.’
Edward's grip on her hand tightened.
‘You have been very brave, Miss Morgan, and I want you to know that both Craig and I are very grateful, a gratitude that will be shown in practical terms as soon as possible.’
‘I don't want any charity,’ Hari said at once, her chin lifted, her eyes angry.
So Craig would pay her off, would he, leave her house without any word of his departure?
She shrugged.
What else could you expect from the gentry?
‘I was thinking more in terms of work, not charity,’ Edward smiled and lifted his hat.
‘I feel sure I can persuade some of my friends how good you are.
Now, may I walk you home?’
‘No, thank you,’ Hari said quickly, she wanted to be alone to sort out her muddled thoughts.
‘Well then, good day, Miss Morgan, I hope to see you again quite soon.’
He walked away across the uneven ground and, as Hari watched him, she felt her anger subside leaving only the dull ache of disappointment.
If only Craig had come to her, told her what he intended to do, left her a small message even.
She sighed and turned away from the graveyard, drawing her shawl closer around her shoulders.
It was getting cold, time she went home.
Once inside the house, Hari lit the candle and sank down at the table, her eyes heavy with tiredness and unshed tears.
The silence closed in around her and her loneliness was almost tangible.
Craig had been staying with her for some weeks now and she had grown used to seeing him there in her kitchen.
She had known that she was playing with fire, her own emotions had been awakened and she no longer trusted herself to be level-headed where Craig was concerned and yet wasn't that half-fearful desire a challenge, a part of the fascination she felt for Craig Grenfell?
Well, he was gone now and she would probably never see him again.
Slowly, she rose and pushed the kettle on to the flames, she would make herself a cup of hot sweet tea and then she would go to bed.
She was crouching near the dying fire, hands around the cup for warmth, when she heard a scratching sound at the door.
She lifted her head, listening, all her senses alert.
The sound was repeated.
Craig, he had returned.
She rose and hurried to the door and opening it saw not Craig but the small figure of Will Davies crouching in the street.
She drew him inside and led him towards the candle-light.
It was clear he had been beaten, his face was bruised and his ragged clothing was hanging from him.
‘What happened, Will?’
Hari asked softly and the small boy shook his head.
‘Nothing different, miss, dad came home from the inn and took his belt to me.’
He shook his head.
‘Can't stay there, see, he'll kill me in the end.’
He sank on to the floor, hugging his knees.
‘Can I stay by here, miss?
I'll work and I'll be no trouble.’
Hari took a deep breath.
‘Of course you can stay, William, we'll sort something out.’
She clasped her hands together and tried to think.
‘I'd like to have you as my apprentice but would your father be willing?’
Will's pinched face brightened.
‘I got a job, see, working in Jonah's bakery, hate it I do, sweeping up the floor and chasing the mice away and, worst of all, I has to get inside the ovens and clean them.
For that, I gets a whole sixpence a week.’
His face fell.
‘But my dad takes that.’
He paused.
‘If I had a bit more pay, he would let me come to you, you would have to keep me in grub if I was an apprentice wouldn't you?
But I would have to give the money to him, mind.’
‘How old are you, Will?’
Hari asked, feeling pity for the boy wash over her.
‘I think I'm nine, miss,’ Will said doubtfully, ‘perhaps ten, I don't rightly know.’
‘Have you never been to school?’
Hari asked softly and  when the boy shook his head, Hari sighed.
‘Well,’ she said trying to sound confident.
‘I know my father's apprentices used to get quite good money but then I can't afford the proper rate.
I think I could pay you two shillings a week for the first year and we'd have to see how things went.
I don't know if I could ever afford to give you more.’
She took a deep breath.
‘But, if we can turn out plenty of work between us, we should manage nicely.’
Hari knew that the two shillings a week would be crippling unless Edward Morris lived up to his promise of bringing in extra business.
And then of course there was the promise of repairs from Dai Jones and his four sons, that prospect offered some hope.
‘I'll tell my dad in the morning.’
Will's young face was grave, ‘The ale will have worn off him by then.’
On an impulse, Hari hugged Will and then with a grimace held him away from her.
‘One thing I must insist on, my boy,’ she said, ‘a good wash and then a hair cut.
I'll get you some clothes from Ma Popits so at least you won't put the customers off.’
The boy smiled cheerfully.
‘I could steal some things out of the rich folks’ washhouses, mind.
Done it before I have.’
‘No,’ Hari said sternly, ‘there'll be no, stealing, you must promise me that.’
‘Why not?’
The boy was genuinely puzzled.
He looked up at Hari his eyes wide.
‘Look,’ Hari pushed the kettle on the fire and then sat down and faced Will, her hands clasped together.
‘Our customers must trust us.
We should be able to go into the big houses and let the gentry know that we are honest, that's the only way they'll give us their business.
We must keep up our good name, right Will?’
‘Righto, Miss Morgan.’
He still sounded doubtful and Hari smiled.
‘Remember when you were delivering boots for me and that boy took them from you, how did you feel then, Will?’
‘Daro!
I was mad with him, could have battered him into the ground I could if I was strong enough.’
‘Why did you feel like that, do you think?’
Hari said watching the young boy's face.
He frowned.
'Cos he took them boots and it was my job to take them to the big house for the gentleman.’
He looked at Hari, ‘And I didn't want it to look bad for you.’
‘That's it, Will, if we are dishonest, it looks bad for me and soon I wouldn't have any more customers.’
She rose to her feet.
‘Right now, I'm going to fill the big bowl with nice hot water and you are going to have a scrub and I want every bit of you to be clean, mind, including your hair.’
Hari left the boy while she went to search upstairs for one of her father's night-shirts.
They were yellow with age and patched many times but at least the boy would be clean and warm.
Tomorrow Hari would go to Ma Popits first thing and see what cast-off clothing she could buy for young Will.
When she entered the kitchen, she stood still, the night-shirt slipping from her fingers.
Will was standing in the bowl of water and Craig Grenfell was kneeling before the boy, scrubbing him thoroughly with a piece of flannel.
‘What are you doing here, Craig?’ she asked.
‘I thought you weren't coming back.’
‘Just a quick visit,’ he replied looking up at her briefly.
‘I came to say goodbye and to thank you for all you've done.’
‘Second thoughts, was it?’
She moved towards him and he patted the boy on the shoulder as he rose to his feet.
‘No, I just wanted to say goodbye in person.’
‘Goodbye,’ Hari said unforgivingly.
He stared at her for  a moment and then shrugged and moved out of the kitchen and towards the back door.
Hari followed him, suddenly flustered.
‘Thank you for coming,’ she said, ‘but please don't wait around any longer.
I don't think you should have come here at all.’
She looked up at him, he was very handsome in the moonlight.
‘You have somewhere else to stay now so you needn't risk coming here again.’
Her words were an implied criticism and he read her well.
‘Hari, I'm sorry.’
He took her by the shoulders and his face was very close to hers.
She longed to reach out to him, to draw his lips on to hers.
She almost succumbed but then common sense came to her aid.
‘I was going to ask you to leave anyway.’
Her harsh words fell into the silence.
‘I don't see why I should take any more risks for a man I hardly know.’
He looked down at her, his face tightening and then, so suddenly that she had no time to read his intentions, he pulled her to him.
His lips hovered for a moment above hers and then he was kissing her, his mouth hot against hers.
Hari could not breathe, she felt lost in a flurry of emotions.
Love flared through her, she felt desire and sadness too because she knew this was a fleeting moment.
She allowed herself to cling to Craig's broad shoulders, she pressed close to him, her lips parting under his.
It was a moment of magic that she must cherish for it would never come again.
A hammering on the door startled Hari and, abruptly, she moved from Craig's arms.
‘Get away from here!’ she said sharply, ‘go out through the back yard, God knows who could be hammering my door this time of night.’
As Craig disappeared into the darkness, Hari hurried into the kitchen.
William was crouched before the fire, dressed in the too-long night-shirt.
His face was pale as he stared wide-eyed towards the door.
‘What if it's my dad?’ he asked fearfully.
Hari straightened her shawl with trembling fingers and moved towards the door.
‘Who is there?’ she called and waited with a feeling of dread.
‘It's Dai the Cop, open up, Hari girl, or I'll have to break the door in.’
Hari flung the door wide.
‘Duw .
No need for violence, mind, but no woman alone opens the door to anybody, not at this time of night and in a place like World's End.’
‘Enough of playing the innocent.’
A big constable elbowed his way past a sheepish-looking Dai and stared suspiciously round the room.
‘Where is this supposed cousin of yours?’
He spoke aggressively.
‘He hasn't been here for some time,’ Hari answered.
‘Why, what has he done?’
‘I don't think this man was a cousin at all, indeed, I think you've been harbouring a criminal from jail.’
The constable towered over her.
‘Tell me Miss Morgan, where are you hiding him?
He was seen coming here tonight so don't deny it.’
‘No,’ Hari shook her head.
‘You are mistaken, there's only me and young William here, look around if you don't believe me.‘
‘I will, be sure I will.’
The man nodded and behind him Dai gave a shrug of resignation and began to search the small house.
‘You,’ the constable pointed to Will, ‘what have you seen, was there a man here a few minutes ago or not?’
Will licked his lips and looked uncertainly towards Hari.
She thought of the lecture she had just read him on honesty and trembled.
‘No-one has been here only me and Miss Morgan, just  been bathing me, she has, see?’
He pointed to the cooling water.
The constable closed his lips in a firm line and made his way through to the yard.
Hari heard him beating at the bushes with his truncheon and then he opened the door to the workshop.
After a few moments he returned.
‘You have been sailing very close to the wind, miss,’ he said as Dai returned to the room.
He pointed his truncheon at her.
‘This house will be watched, make no mistake about it, we shall be out for blood.’
Hari sighed in relief as the door closed behind the men.
She sank into the chair, her hands over her eyes.
‘I did right, didn't I, miss?’
Will said anxiously.
‘It is right to tell lies sometimes, isn't it?’
Hari held out her arms and drew him close.
‘Aye, it's right to tell a lie to protect a friend, Will, it is necessary to lie sometimes.‘
She took a deep breath.
‘Right, let's make you a bed on the couch, is it?
I'll fetch you some blankets from upstairs and I'll put a bit more coal on the fire to keep you warm, just for tonight.
Tomorrow I'll clean out mam's bedroom for you.’
She smiled at him softly, he looked so young and vulnerable in the too-big night-shirt, a child who until now had borne the responsibilities of a man.
‘Well done, Will,’ she said, as she hurried from the room.
There was a constriction in her throat and her eyes were brimming with tears.
Though if they were for young William or for herself, she could not be sure.
Summer Lodge was in mourning, dark drapes were closed against the pale, spring sunshine and the gloom within the rooms was accentuated by the soft sound of women weeping.
Emily, entering the drawing-room, stood for a moment, watching her aunts in their black mourning silk and jet beads and, for a moment, they appeared like birds of prey, dark and menacing in the dim light.
The family had gathered to mourn the death of Thomas Grenfell, weighed down by the shame of losing all his money, overcome by a sickness that he had no will to resist.
Pride gave a lift to Emily's chin as she braced herself to move further into the room and greet her kinswomen.
‘Emily, my poor child, what will you do with no-one to protect you against the world?’
Aunt Sophie embraced her warmly and the soft scent of lavender rose from the pleated bodice of her gown.
‘Don't worry about me, aunt,’ Emily forced a note of firmness into her voice.
‘I am quite capable of taking care of myself.’
‘Nonsense, you are little more than a slip of a girl, you would be prey to all sorts of men, fortune hunters and the like.
You need someone to look after you.’
‘You forget, aunt, I have no fortune,’ Emily said, secretly appalled at the prospect of being ‘looked after’by  her well-intentioned aunt.
‘I shall be all right.’
‘But the business,’ Aunt Sophie said in dismay, ‘what are you to do about that?’
She patted Emily's shoulder, ‘We all know that our dear Thomas's affairs were not…settled.
Let Spencer help you, my dear, my youngest son always did have a good head for figures.’
Sophie regarded Emily steadily for a moment.
‘I know you were promised to Craig, but no-one would blame you for trying to forget him.’
She lifted a gloved hand to fan her hot cheeks.
‘Craig is my first-born son and I love him dearly,’ she paused, ‘but, after what he's done, Craig must consider himself disowned by the entire Grenfell family.’
Emily felt angry words rise to her lips but quickly suppressed them, this was neither the time nor the place to argue Craig's innocence.
Emily glanced through the curtains; outside in the driveway stood a group of her kinsmen, come to pay their last respects to Thomas Grenfell.
She could see Spencer quite clearly, he appeared to be holding court among the elderly distant relatives who had travelled from all parts of the country to be at the funeral.
Spencer lifted his arms in a flamboyant gesture and Emily felt physically sick at the mere thought of marrying him.
She turned away and rubbed her eyes wearily.
After the first shock of her father's death, Emily had felt a searing anger against him, furious with him for leaving her to face her misfortune alone.
Then came the terrible sense of disbelief and at last the dawning realization that she would never be held in his embrace, breathe in the scent of his cigars or hear his kindly voice ever again.
And yet she had not cried, not even now, when the coffin was to be taken from Summer Lodge and carried to the graveyard on the hill overlooking the sea, could she give way to tears.
If only Craig was at her side it would be so different, she  needed his strength to see her through the ordeal, not only of the funeral but of the days and weeks that were to come.
Emily felt a momentary sense of panic, she had no means of supporting herself, her father's business was in ruins, he had left great debts that she could not meet.
Then, an iron resolve began to grow within her, she would fight to make a future for herself, she wasn't stupid or helpless, the problems would be tackled and every effort made to save the business.
‘Come along, Emily, dear,’ Aunt Sophie was at her side, catching her arm, leading her back into the centre of the room where the vicar stood over the coffin, ready to pay his last respects to Thomas Grenfell.
Emily did not listen to the emotion-filled words, she would not allow her grief to show, it would be a sign of weakness.
She must conduct herself as though she was in complete control.
And so she would be she vowed, as she stared stony-faced at the gleaming brass and the glowing wood of the coffin.
She lifted her head and though her eyes burned and her throat ached with unshed tears, outwardly, she was a picture of perfect composure.
Craig Grenfell stood on the hilltop looking down at the scene in the graveyard below.
He had been fond of his uncle, Thomas had been a bluff hearty man but unfortunately he did not have a head for business.
The leather trade was one which did not take a great deal of effort to run successfully but then Craig believed that his brother had a hand in the unprofitable deals Uncle Thomas had made and had profited from them.
Craig's hands tightened into fists as he saw his brother, flanked by his mother and Emily, step forward and throw a little earth into the grave.
‘Blasted hypocrite!’ he said savagely.
Well, let brother  Spencer enjoy his ill-gotten gains while he may, the day was coming shortly when his fraud would be exposed for all to see.
Craig watched as Emily, stiff backed, moved away from the grave.
Her face was a white blur under the dark cloak and hood she wore as protection against the fierce wind coming in off the sea.
He felt his heart contract in pity, Emily was a fine woman, he admired her composure and he knew how much the facade must cost her, she had loved her father dearly.
He made his way from the hilltop and down into the valley, this was an ideal opportunity to search his mother's house.
He walked quickly.
Glancing at his fob watch, he had at least an hour before Spencer returned with their mother to the family home.
Funerals in Wales meant a large feast after the burial and knowing Emily, she could present a good face to the world in spite of her misfortunes.
There would be a table groaning with smoked ham, with thick succulent slices of cold beef and crusty fresh bread.
Hunger gnawed at him, he had not eaten properly for days.
He had spent his time in a lodging house on the Strand, eking out the small amount of money Edward Morris had been able to lend him.
He entered the house by the front door and was confronted by a flustered maidservant.
She bobbed a curtsy to him as he handed her his topcoat and if there were any questions at the appearance of a man who should be in prison, they were not voiced aloud.
Craig made his way at once to the study, the desk was locked as he had expected.
He took up the brass paper knife and with a turn of his wrist had the drawer open, his stay in prison had served some useful purpose.
As he expected, he found nothing incriminating, Spencer would be far too careful for that.
Quickly, Craig made his way upstairs to his brother's room.
He stood for a moment, looking around him.
Spencer would hardly keep important documents in the mahogany chest of drawers or the huge wardrobe.
Craig drew back the carpets and examined the floor-boards inch by inch.
He saw a fresh cut mark on a board near the fireplace and, quickly, he lifted it.
The books and papers were wrapped in a silk cloth and, smiling, Craig knew he had found what he had been looking for.
He heard the front door being opened even as he unfolded the cloth and began to read.
After a moment, there was the noise of voices in the hallway and then footsteps pounding up the stairs.
Craig tucked the books inside his coat and as the door was flung open, he strode past his open-mouthed brother and down towards the drawing-room.
Spencer hurried after him and as Craig flung wide the doors, he felt himself being grasped from behind.
Craig shook his brother off easily and moved towards the fireplace.
‘Hello, mother,’ he said, ‘and Mr Cummings, our respected solicitor, too.
Isn't it fortunate that you should be here.’
‘Get the constable,’ Spencer said hastily.
‘There's no knowing what this lunatic will do or say.’
‘Yes, bring the constable by all means.’
Craig brought the books from his coat and looked down at them thoughtfully.
‘I've just found these under a board in your room, Spencer, I think they will prove that I am not the one who's been defrauding the company.’
‘What rubbish!’
Spencer said quickly.
‘It was not I who interfered with customers’ accounts, taking out large sums of money.’
Craig smiled.
‘Then how did you know which way the  fraud worked?’
He flicked through the pages of the book.
‘The Honourable Charles Griffiths, for example, has lost, over a period of time, quite a lot of capital.’
‘I know nothing about it, nothing at all,’ Spencer protested.
But his mother was staring at him strangely.
‘Continue, Craig, if you please,’ she said sternly.
‘My dear Sophie,’ Cummings stepped forward, ‘I don't think you should listen to all this, your eldest son has been tried and convicted of the fraud, that should be enough proof for you that he is guilty.’
‘You are in this too, then, Cummings,’ Craig said with deceptive gentleness.
He looked down at the book again.
‘I see that the method used was to divert large amounts of money into a fund under the name of another firm, a non-existent firm I imagine.’
He paused as his mother stared at him in bewilderment.
‘I don't understand, Craig, can't you explain more clearly?’
‘Look, mother,’ Craig held the book towards her, ‘Mr Faraday's account is short by several hundreds of pounds, this loss has partly been made good by taking money paid in to the company by General Webber.
That way no-one misses too much money at one time.’
Sophie Grenfell looked at her youngest son in horror.
‘Spencer, explain yourself, what does all this mean?’
‘It means, mother, that Craig is trying to put the blame on me for the thieving he's done.’
Spencer turned to Craig and said challengingly, ‘How do we know you found those books in my room?
You could have just planted them there.’
Craig smiled.
‘Oh, I think an investigation into the bogus account will be very revealing, I don't see how I could have managed to go on robbing the customers from inside Swansea Jail, you should have stopped when you were ahead, Spencer.’
‘You fool, Cummings!’
Spencer was breathing heavily, ‘I told you we should hang fire for things to cool off.’
‘Be quiet!’
Cummings said angrily.
‘You don't have to say anything.’
Sophie looked at both her sons and then sank into a chair.
‘I can't see Spencer go to prison for this,’ she said brokenly.
‘Craig, can't you do something?’
Craig shook his head.
‘Mother, you amaze me,’ he said.
He thrust his hands into his pockets and moved to the window, staring out into the sun-dappled drive flanked by swaying trees.
‘But Craig, you know Spencer has never been strong like you, he could not survive in prison, his health…’
Her words fell away into silence.
After a long moment, Craig turned to face his mother.
‘Send one of the servants for Edward Morris,’ he said, ‘and for a solicitor, an honest one.’
Craig stared directly at his brother.
‘The best I can offer you is a head start, get out of here and don't ever come back.’
Spencer stared at Craig with venom in his narrowed eyes.
‘Don't think you've heard the last of this matter,’ he said through his teeth, ‘you won't get away with it, taking from me my home and my birthright, I should have been the eldest son, I am more worthy of the position.
I'll never forgive you for what you've done to me.’
He stood before his mother.
‘I'm innocent, believe me, Craig has fooled you but he can't fool me, he wanted it all, the property and land, the business and every penny of the money.
Well, he won't get away with it, one day I'll have my revenge.’
He swung out of the room and after a scared glance in Craig's direction, Cummings followed him.
Craig looked into his mother's white face and saw lines of pain etched around her mouth.
‘What have I done?’ she  said, her voice trembling, ‘my baby, I've lost him for good and it's all your fault, Craig.’
Craig took a deep breath, controlling his anger.
He moved forward and pulled at the bell rope, it was about time he put the wheels into motion, the wheels that would prove his innocence.
And Spencer would be caught, there was no doubting that, and then he would learn what it was like to be imprisoned behind grey walls and iron bars.
Emily sat in her father's study, staring at the mass of figures that danced before her eyes.
The first thing she would have to do was to raise some capital so that she could rescue something from the dregs of her father's business.
It was clear that Thomas Grenfell had made more than his share of mistakes, it seemed that The Fine Leather Trading Company had been overspending on labour and without the expected turnover in goods moved and sold.
Poor prices had been asked, ridiculously low prices for expensive imported French calf so that losses on the leather had been sustained.
It was clear that her father had been wrongly advised and Emily thought she knew exactly who was responsible.
A great deal of Thomas's trade had passed through the hands of Spencer Grenfell who seemed to have trouble bringing in payment to her father on time.
In short, Thomas Grenfell had been gulled.
‘Spencer Grenfell, you have a great deal to answer for,’ Emily said bitterly.
She picked up the stock records, she had studied them for so long that her head ached.
In the warehouses there were still some bales of fine leather and if sold to an honest dealer, they would bring in enough at least to pay off some of her father's debts.
She pushed away the papers and rubbed at her eyes, she would have to visit the creditors, pay them a little of their  money and then beg them for time to pay the rest.
If most of them accepted her terms, then she might just survive.
Then there were the contents of Summer Lodge, fine antique furniture, exquisite china, carved marble figures, all would have to be sold.
Emily covered her eyes, it would be so humiliating, selling everything she held dear, but there was nothing else for it, it would have to be done.
When it was all over, she would rent rooms in some small lodging house with perhaps one maid.
And from the sale of the contents of the house, she could buy in more leather to keep the suppliers happy.
She felt tears blur her vision, she was weary and the grief of her father's death hung over her like a dark cloud.
A great silence filled the house, the servants were asleep, not knowing that tomorrow they must find themselves other positions.
It would be hard saying goodbye to the servants, some of whom had been around since she was born, but it was something she would have to do, she simply had no choice.
Slowly, Emily rose from the chair where she had seen her father seated many times, not knowing the problems he faced or understanding how troubled he was.
She was at fault for not taking a hand in the business before now, she could have helped him, been her father's right hand.
At least with her young, keen eyes she would have seen that he was being duped by his own nephew.
Emily felt a sudden anger against the Grenfells, they had allowed this to happen to her father, even Craig had not been innocent, he should have seen what was going on in his own business.
Instead of spending most of his time shooting game and striding about in the parks of his estate, he should have stopped Spencer from ruining Thomas Grenfell's life and casting a shadow on Craig's own business.
She moved to the stairs and stood for a moment in the silence of the hallway, the candle flickering in her hand.
She felt so alone, so very frightened of the future and all the challenges it held.
Slowly, she mounted the stairs and went into her room and, sinking down on the bed, she began to weep.
In the morning, she rose early and already the fires were lit and breakfast cooking on the range.
She had taken it all for granted for so long, her creature comforts had been assured and she had not given a moment's thought to how they were provided.
After breakfast, she called the housekeeper and asked her to summon the rest of the staff.
‘Bring them into the kitchen, please,’ she said, her hands clasped tightly together, ‘I must tell them all the bad news personally.’
The housekeeper looked at her with concern.
‘What is it, Miss Emily?’ she asked anxiously.
‘I'm sorry,’ Emily said, ‘I have to let you all go, Summer Lodge is no longer mine and, in any case, there is simply not the means to keep going as we have been.’
The housekeeper bit her lip.
‘Let me come with you wherever you go, please, Miss Emily, you are the only family I've ever known, I won't need paying, just my keep, I can still work hard, mind.’
‘We'll see,’ Emily said softly knowing in her heart that the old woman could hardly bend, let alone light fires and carry coal.
The servants were subdued by the occasion, sensing at last that something was badly wrong, it was a rare occasion when all of them were summoned before the mistress at the same time.
Emily paced around the room, her skirts swishing against the carpet.
At last, she paused and looked at the assembled staff.
‘There is no easy way to say this,’ she began haltingly, ‘my father died a ruined man, I have to let you all go, there's nothing else for it.’
The butler stepped forward.
‘May I speak, Miss Emily?’ he said gruffly and, when she nodded, he gestured towards the rest of the staff.
‘I think I am talking for us all when I say that we will gladly work for nothing, just until matters improve, we have all been so happy here at Summer Lodge and each and every one of us would like to stay with you wherever you go.’
Emily felt tears constrict her throat.
‘Your loyalty is very touching,’ she forced herself to speak, ‘thank you all for this fine gesture, but I can no longer afford to maintain a staff of servants.
As to Summer Lodge, it will as is the custom pass to the next male heir of the Grenfell family.’
She turned away and hid her tears.
‘But I will tell you this, I shall not be beaten, I will rebuild my father's business and when I do, I want you all to return to work for me.’
She swallowed hard and turned to face them again.
‘There will be enough wages to keep you all for a few weeks at least, until you have a chance to find another situation.
Of course, there will be fine references for you all.
Thank you.’
The servants filed silently from the room until only the housekeeper remained.
‘What is it?’
Emily asked, forcing back the tears.
The older woman rubbed her hands together.
‘I may be speaking out of turn, Miss Emily, but you are young and innocent and I am concerned about you.’
‘Go on,’ Emily said encouragingly, ‘I won't bite your head off.’
‘It is not ladylike to run a business, Miss Emily, that's a job for a man.
Why you would have to travel abroad and choose leather and see that those in your employ did not cheat you, you are too sweet and beautiful to survive in such a harsh world.’
‘Thank you for your concern, but I shall be all right,’ Emily said firmly.
She turned away and heard the door softly closing and knew she was alone.
Alone, she sank into a chair and covered her eyes with her fingers, moved to tears by the way her staff had reacted to the bad news.
They had not worried for themselves, only about what would happen to Emily.
She realized she had never seen the servants before except as part of the backdrop of Summer Lodge, now she saw that they were part of her life, real people with loves and loyalties especially to her and it made her feel suddenly humble.
She rose and stared through the window to the hills outside, to the sea running gently into the embracing arms of the bay.
She would fight for a new future and she would succeed.
And yet, even as determination rose within her to right the wrongs that had been done her father and to make the name of Thomas Grenfell respected again in Swansea, she was trembling with fear.
Hari stood in Goat Street staring up at the facade of the old theatre and swallowed hard, trying to pluck up enough courage to walk into the ornate portico.
The theatre was not something of which her parents would have approved, such frivolous pleasures were not for the likes of hard-working shoemakers.
The basket on her arm contained assorted shoes, soft satin slippers, pumps of French calf as well as stout leather shoes for walking.
She was taking a gamble, already Hari had spent precious time and materials making footwear that might never be bought and paid for.
And yet she must seek new outlets for her work; she greatly wanted to expand her range of shoemaking outside the humdrum jobs of soling and heeling heavy working boots.
It was true that she had gained a few customers lately, Dai Jones, Cleg the Coal's brother being one of them.
Dai and his sons were always needing boots tapped for they were big men all of them and heavy on their feet.
Once Edward Morris had been set free, he had recommended her to some of his friends and so trade was looking up.
But Hari had ambition, she wanted to raise her business to great heights; to one day own an emporium where there would be shoes of all descriptions, serving the best customers in the country.
Well, she would do none of that standing here in the  street, she told herself firmly.
She pushed open the door and moved into the strange world of sparkling glass and soft carpets.
The scent of rose water hung in the air, covering the stale smell of pipe tobacco and strong drink.
Hari stared around the silent building, there was no-one about, the silence hung heavily over the rows of seats, the stage was hidden by a thick curtain and yet Hari had the eerie sensation that she was being watched.
She moved down one of the long aisles; the body of the hall was in darkness and she stumbled a little as the floor sloped downwards.
She felt panic rise within her, what was she doing here in this strangely unreal world?
Her place was in her workshop, sitting before her bench moulding shoes upon a last, cutting and stitching, working the leather into a recognizable shape.
That was the part of shoemaking that she loved.
This plying of her trade was foreign to her and she felt unsure of her ability to carry it off.
‘And what might I ask are you doing here, young lady?’
A voice boomed at her from a small door at the side of the stage.
Hari stopped abruptly and peered into the darkness, trying to see the face of the man addressing her.
‘I'm a shoemaker, sir,’ she said, forcing a confidence into her voice that she did not feel.
‘I wondered if I could be of service to anyone in the theatre.’
‘Come with me.’
She followed the sound of the disembodied voice out of the darkness of the theatre and into the lighted area of a long passageway.
The man looking down at her wore an imposing set of whiskers, a grey beard hung down over his brightly coloured waistcoat and thick, waving grey hair sprouted back from his forehead, giving him the look of an ageing lion.
‘I am Charles Briant,’ he spoke with a flourish as though addressing an audience.
‘I am the owner of this theatre and  you should have sought my permission before you ventured inside, young lady.’
Hari tried to conceal her surprise, she had believed the man to be a famous actor, he seemed so colourful and too theatrical to simply be a businessman.
He saw the lift of her eyebrows and smiled.
‘Oh, I used to tread the boards, I am an actor all right but there aren't many roles for a man who sustained an injury that left one leg shorter than the other.
None of your boots would remedy that, young lady.’
Hari frowned.
‘I don't know about that,’ she said, ‘but it's certainly something I would like to think about.’
He laughed with forced heartiness, as limping badly he began to walk along the corridor, leading the way, and Hari realized that he had used the laugh many times to conceal his true feelings.
‘I won't promise anything,’ she said following him, ‘I've never tackled a job like it before but I might just be able to make a built-up boot for you.’
‘In that case, young lady, you would have my undying gratitude.’
Charles Briant glanced back over his shoulder.
‘I am taking you to the dressing-room where the ladies are gathered, they would be your best customers, I don't doubt.’
He took her to a surprisingly small room furnished with dark leather sofas and lit by harsh gas light.
Curious faces turned in her direction, faces some plain some pretty but all innocent of paint and powder.
Hari felt a sense of disappointment, she had expected something more from players at the theatre, exactly what she didn't know.
‘What's this then, Charlie?’
One of the women rose to her feet, she wore a tight corset and bloomers, and pink ribbons trailed from the silk robe that hung loosely over  her shoulders.
‘Heaven forbid that you've brought us another budding actress.’
‘My dear Meg, this lady,’ Charles Briant said with dignity, ‘is a boot and shoemaker, she simply wants to be of service to us, to make, like us all, an honest living.’
He stepped aside with a flourish and, after a moment's hesitation, Hari removed the cloth from her basket and took out the satin slippers.
With cries of delight, the ladies of the theatre gathered round Hari, exclaiming loudly that they had never seen anything so pretty.
‘Can you make these to fit any foot?’ the actress in the pink robe asked, touching the satin almost caressingly.
Hari nodded.
‘I can make anything you like, here are some fashionable French calf slippers decorated with glass beads that glitter as you walk.’
‘I want some,’ Meg took the shoes lovingly in her hands, ‘they are so beautiful, a work of art, you are very clever, Miss Shoemaker.’
‘My name's Angharad Morgan, Hari.
My workshop is in World's End.’
Hari smiled.
‘You'd be welcome to look around any time you like.’
‘I'm Clarisse,’ the actress said, ‘well, that's my stage name of course, my real name is Meg.
’ She shook back her curled hair.
‘But you wouldn't catch me venturing into World's End for love nor money.
Why don't you get respectable premises somewhere more suitable.’
‘Because I can't afford to move,’ Hari said with a flash of anger.
‘In any case I was born in World's End, everyone there has been very good to me.’
‘I'm sure,’ Meg said quickly.
‘I'll order a pair of these French calf shoes for a start but I won't have green beads, do you hear?
Green is unlucky, don't you know that?’
‘No, I'm sorry, I didn't.’
Hari put her basket down and  took out her paper patterns.
‘Right then, let's have some measurements,’ she said firmly.
Within the hour, Hari had measured several pairs of feet and had enough orders to keep her busy for several weeks.
She felt jubilant but apprehensive too, how was she going to cope with all the work?
She would just have to give young William the task of cutting out the leather soles, he had learned very quickly and his hands, though small, were strong and deft.
Meg was trying on the satin slippers.
‘These are so comfortable,’ she said happily, ‘and they fit beautifully, I'll have them.’
She held out her hand to Charles Briant, ‘Give me some money, Charlie, take it out of my wages.’
‘Wait just a minute,’ Meg said as Hari moved towards the door, ‘next week, my friend Benny the Clown is appearing here in Swansea, he wears these enormous shoes for his act, he could be a very good customer for you.’
‘Next week?’
Hari said in dismay.
‘Do you mean you won't be here then?’
Meg laughed, ‘Bless you, no, chick, we'll be off to Somerset in a few days.
Some fine shoes down there in Street, you know, made by Mr Clark, you must have heard of him.’
Hari remained silent not wanting to admit her ignorance.
Meg smiled.
‘You will have the shoes/ready in time, won't you?’
‘Duw , course I will,’ Hari said firmly though she had no idea how she was going to live up to her word.
‘I'll be back in a few days with your orders.’
Her head was buzzing as she followed Charles Briant out of the theatre and into the sunlight.
Blinking a little, she looked up at him.
‘Will you be going to Somerset too?’ she asked and it was with a sense of relief that she saw him shake his head.
‘Dear me, no, I'm a permanent fixture here in Swansea, this is my home and this,’ he waved his hand towards the ornate facade of the theatre, ‘this is my domain.’
Hari sighed.
‘When I've done the orders for the ladies, I'll try out some ideas for a boot for you, all right?’
‘That will be wonderful, my dear.
In any event, come again, we always have a great deal of variety here at the theatre and if you are a speedy worker, you should do very well.’
When Hari returned home, she found William in the workshop hammering leather soles on to a pair of small boots.
He looked up happily as Hari put down her basket and took off her shawl.
‘There's nice to see you back, it's quiet as the grave in by here on my own.’
Hari sank down on the bench beside him.
‘I see you're getting on with the boots for Edward Morris's nephew, doing a good job too by the look of it.’
She leaned forward and examined the leather which had been well cut, fitting the boot with just a little to spare.
Hari sighed heavily.
‘What's the matter, no job for you down at the theatre then?’
William looked up at her and Hari smiled, pleased with the way his cheeks had filled out and that the set of his shoulders was straight now, his fear of violence having given way to a new confidence in himself.
‘Don't talk, Will, there's too much work, six pairs of shoes to be made by the weekend!
I don't know how we're going to do it, even if we work flat out every day.’
William bit his lip.
‘We could get somebody else in to help us, just for now, like.
Got to be a cobbler round who is having a lean time of it.’
‘Will, you're a genius,’ Hari said, eagerly.
‘I could go to see Lewis Watts, he was my dad's apprentice for five years when I was a little sprout like you just learning the trade.
I think he'd help us out if he's not too busy.’
She stood up and straightened her back.
‘Let's have  something to eat, William, then afterwards I'll go and see Lewis, I expect he still lives down near the docks.’
William took a tack from between his teeth and hammered it into the leather and then picked up a file.
‘I'll just tidy up these boots and then they're ready to be delivered.’
He said smiling, ‘That's one job off our hands.’
Hari felt the impulse to ruffle William's hair but she knew he would resent being treated like the child he was, boys grew up quickly in the harsh realities of World's End.
William insisted on accompanying Hari as she left the house and made her way towards the docks.
It was not yet dark but soon it would be and then the town would come alive.
Sailors from off the boats would be looking for a good time and public bars would resound to the sound of many voices.
William kept close to Hari's side, though for his own protection or hers Hari wasn't sure.
She smiled down at him and realized that in the few weeks he'd been with her he had not only put on weight but had grown a few inches in height too.
For the first time in his life, William was having enough food to eat and was not being beaten into submission by his bully of a father.
The boy was still obliged to give his earnings every week to his family, otherwise he would have been dragged unceremoniously home and that was something Hari would not allow.
‘There's the Watts's house down by there near the public bar.’
Hari pointed to the building tall and narrow sandwiched between two other houses.
It looked neat and clean from the outside and the curtains were freshly washed.
Hari knocked on the door and after a time it was opened by an elderly lady who stared down at her with a frown.
‘If you're begging, there's nothing here for you,’ she  said sharply and was just about to close the door in Hari's face when Lewis appeared behind her.
‘Mam, for heaven's sake don't be so hasty.’
He smiled with dawning recognition.
‘It's Angharad Morgan,’ he said smiling warmly, ‘my master's daughter, come inside.’
He stepped back from the door.
‘Mam, this is the daughter of Dewi Morgan who taught me my trade.
Duw , there's sorry I was to hear of his death, a fine man was Dewi Morgan.
Your mam's gone too, Angharad, there's sad for you.’
He led the way into a warm pleasant kitchen.
‘And you've grown up since last I saw you.’
Hari, aware of the admiration in Lewis's eyes, felt her colour rising.
‘Sit down,’ Lewis said, ‘and who is this lad, then?’
‘William is my apprentice,’ Hari said, ‘and though he may look very young he's a good cobbler and a great help to me.’
‘Glad to hear it,’ Lewis said smiling.
‘You stick with Angharad, my boy, she's almost as good a cobbler as her father before her.’
‘She's very clever,’ William said at once, ‘making lovely shoes she is for them actresses in the theatre.’
Mrs Watts sniffed disapprovingly, ‘Actresses, is it?
Hussies the lot of them.’
‘Now mam, go and put the kettle on the fire and get our visitors a nice cup of tea.
’ Lewis sat opposite Hari and she was suddenly aware of how handsome he was.
Thick, dark hair curled around his face and his rolled-up sleeves revealed strong, well-muscled arms.
He saw her regarding him and smiled.
‘You've changed a great deal, Angharad,’ he said, ‘you were just a little girl when I finished my apprenticeship and now look at you.’
Hari returned his smile, liking his friendliness and  enjoying his open admiration.
‘Yes, look at me,’ she said ruefully pushing back her tangled hair and straightening her skirts.
‘Anyway,’ she said in what she hoped was a businesslike manner, ‘I've come to see if you can help me out on a special job.’
‘Oh?’
He looked at her questioningly and Hari leaned forward eagerly in her chair.
‘I've got rather a big order,’ she said, ‘mostly for slippers but one or two pairs of shoes I have to make in French calf.‘
‘Expensive,’ Lewis said thoughtfully.
‘I hope your customer is prepared to pay you well.’
‘I think what I'm asking for a pair of shoes is fair enough though I am keeping the prices low as an incentive for my customers to come back for more.’
‘These are the theatre people?’
Lewis said.
‘Not best known for their reliability, mind, travelling about the country, never being in one place for more than a few weeks, got to be careful there.’
‘That's my problem,’ Hari said firmly, ‘what I want from you is help in making the shoes, perhaps you could work a few evenings for me?’
Lewis leaned back in his chair as his mother came forward with the teapot, setting it on the china stand.
‘Why should I help you, Angharad, I've got my own job, mind, working for Maunders boot and shoe emporium.
It's long hours and when I get in I've seen enough shoes to last me a life-time.’
Hari thought quickly.
‘If I build up my business the way I hope I can, I may well need a partner.
Just think, you'd be your own boss, up to a point, master of your own destiny, not slaving away for a pittance while someone else makes all the profit.’
She paused as Mrs Watts handed her a cup of tea.
‘Thank you for the tea,’ Hari said, trying to thaw the iciness of Mrs Watts's expression.
‘It's very kind of you to bother.’
‘No bother, just good manners.’
Mrs Watts sat in a deep chair in a dark corner of the room but Hari had the impression that the woman was like a cat sleeping with one eye open, watching everything that went on.
‘What have you to lose, Lewis?’
Hari returned to the attack, ‘A few hours of your time, that's all.’
Lewis's smile was full of charm.
‘I'll think about it,’ he said.
‘Now, have one of mam's Welsh cakes, beautiful they are, mind.’
Hari felt a rush of disappointment, she had expected Lewis to jump at the chance of earning some money but it seemed he was reluctant to take her venture seriously.
Well, she would do it without him, if need be, she would not let this chance slip away from her.
When she left the Watts's household, Hari rested her hand on William's shoulder.
‘It seems I've failed to get myself a helper,’ she said.
‘I thought Lewis would agree straight away.’
‘He'll agree,’ William said with conviction, ‘but in his own good time.’
‘What do you mean, Will?’
Hari asked in surprise.
‘In his own good time?’
‘It's pride, see, not many men would like working for a lady, mind.’
Hari walked along in silence for a moment, breathing in the salt tang of sea air.
‘You know something, William?’ she said at last.
‘You are a very wise person.’
It was the next day that Lewis turned up at the door of the workshop his tools in a bag and his leather apron over his arm.
‘Right, then,’ he said smoothly, ‘where's the French  calf?
It's a long time since I've had some first-class leather to work with.’
Hari led him to the bench and watched as Lewis tied on his apron.
He looked down at her, his expression sober.
‘If you are to go into this business in a big way, you want to think of buying in ready-made uppers for men's boots, that would cut down the work a lot, mind.’
‘There's something in that,’ Hari agreed, ‘but, for the moment, I have to concentrate on the ladies’shoes so that they are ready for the people from the theatre to take with them when they move on to Somerset.’
‘They're going to Somerset?’
Lewis said in surprise.
‘There's a lot of good leather down that way, why aren't they buying shoes from Mr Clark's factory?’
‘It might just be,’ Hari said sharply, ‘that I am making something a little bit different, giving personal attention to what the ladies require in a way that a big factory could not do.’
She had read about Mr Clark since –er visit to the theatre, he was doing very well and turning out shoes and boots of good quality.
‘Good point,’ Lewis said with a rueful smile.
‘I'll consider myself put in my place.’
He sat down at the bench and picked up one of the patterns Hari had made on paper.
‘This the right size, you've checked with the customer?’
‘Lewis,’ Hari said in exasperation, ‘please give me credit for some sense, how do you think I've survived on my own since my father died?
Certainly not by making the wrong size shoes.’
She settled herself beside him at the bench and took up the satin slippers she was decorating for Meg.
‘I must remember, no green beads,’ she said under her breath.
‘Green beads are unlucky.‘
‘What?’
Lewis said and Hari smiled at him cheekily.
‘Just talking to myself, it's the only way I can get any sensible conversation round here.’
Lewis pretended to be angry.
‘That's nice, isn't it?’
He appealed to William who was cutting leather at the other end of the bench.
‘I never thought I'd end up working for a bossy woman.’
Hari could almost feel the silence as the three of them worked industriously, cutting, stitching and shaping the leather into something beautiful.
She sighed with satisfaction, the job was going to get done on time after all and that, she promised herself, was only the beginning.
The elegant drawing-room at Summer Lodge was filled with people; intruders who lifted priceless objects and studied them trying to assess their worth.
One man, corpulent and a little seedy looking, took an occasional table and upended it, examining the workmanship with cool appraising eyes.
Emily felt a sudden anger at the way her home was being violated, how could she bear to have the things she'd held dear being haggled over like so much rubbish?
Already the auctioneer was positioned outside on the lawn, a table before him and a wooden gavel in his hand.
Soon, her possessions would belong to strangers, the familiar well-loved objects that had surrounded her since childhood would be gone.
The summer sun spilled over the gardens, the trees swayed gently, the leaves rustling like soft, applauding hands.
Emily sighed heavily, no more would she sit beneath those trees reading or idling away her days so carelessly as she had done, was it only a few short weeks ago?
The voice of the auctioneer rang out, hushing the expectant crowd.
The bidding began and Emily turned away from the window, unable to watch.
People were drifting away from the house, moving into the garden.
Wide crinolines brushed against the grass and men in fine suits made bids with a raised finger or a simple  nod of the head.
Emily found her gaze drawn irresistibly to the scene outside, she longed to rush to the auctioneer and put a stop to the proceedings.
She turned abruptly and moved quickly through the hallway, hearing from outside the open front door the sound of muted voices.
A woman laughed, a carefree tinkling laugh and Emily paused in wonder, it seemed so long since she had felt like laughing.
Suddenly she envied the unknown woman.
In the kitchen, Letty was standing near the black hob staring listlessly as the kettle hissed a rushing jet of steam towards her.
The mistiness seemed to well from the maid's eyes, but perhaps, Emily thought, she was being fanciful.
‘Let's have some tea.’
Emily sat at the scrubbed table and the startled look on Letty's face made her smile ruefully.
‘We are both going to get used to the old order being disrupted,’ she said softly.
‘I'm glad you are coming with me to Chapel Street, Letty, I know it's only lodgings but it's clean and respectable and it won't be for long, I promise you.’
‘What's going to happen to Summer Lodge, Miss Emily?’
Letty sniffed a little as she made the tea.
‘Will it have to be sold like all the other stuff?’
Emily shook her head.
‘No, it passes to the next male heir, that's my cousin, Craig Grenfell.’
Emily sighed heavily, ‘It just isn't fair!’
She had not been surprised to learn that the accountant Morris had been proved innocent of any crime and had pointed the finger at Spencer Grenfell.
His accusations backed up with the evidence found by Craig would be enough to convict Spencer and send him to prison for some time, once his whereabouts were discovered, for Spencer seemed to have vanished from the face of the earth.
Emily had not called on Aunt Sophie recently, she wasn't in the mood for visiting nor for the lecture her aunt would surely give her on humiliating the family by openly selling her possessions.
And if Emily had expected Craig to ride in on a white charger and save the day, she had been doomed to disappointment.
He had left Swansea without even sending a message and, as empty day ran into empty day, Emily's anger and resentment towards her cousin continued to grow.
No doubt Craig was ashamed to face her, he had allowed her father to be duped into losing everything and now Craig would benefit from Emily's misfortune.
He would inherit Summer Lodge.
No wonder he wasn't anxious to see her.
Emily drank the tea, suddenly aware of the incongruity of the situation: here she was, sitting in the kitchen like one of the servants, something that would have been unthinkable just a few weeks ago.
She rose restlessly and moved to the door.
‘I'm going up to London tomorrow, Letty,’ she said quickly, it was best she got things moving as soon as possible.
‘I have some business up in town.
Perhaps while I'm away, you'll see to moving our bags to Chapel Street, I'll make sure you have some money for the cab.’
‘Yes, miss.’
Letty bobbed a curtsy and Emily smiled with a sudden feeling of gratitude towards the maid.
‘I think you can dispense with the formalities, Letty, curtsying would look out of place in a few rooms in a lodging house, don't you think?’
‘If you say so, miss, but it's going to be hard getting out of the habit, mind.’
Emily stood in the hallway for a moment staring into the garden, the sun still shone brightly and the inexorable voice of the auctioneer rose and fell in the summer air.
Emily turned and walked up the wide staircase, looking painfully at the bare walls where paintings of her ancestors had hung for generations.
It would be hard to leave Summer Lodge but there was no other choice, it was no longer her home, it belonged to Craig Grenfell.
In her room, she sat on the bed and opening her travelling bag carefully took out the satin-lined box.
Opening the lid, she stared down at the emeralds glinting up at her like cat's eyes, her mother's emeralds and her grandmother's and many generations of Grenfell women before her.
She closed the lid with a snap of finality.
Tomorrow, she would go to the finest jeweller in London and sell the gems for the best price she could get.
She was determined not to look on it as the ending of a chapter but the making of a new beginning.
Why then were tears burning against her closed lids?
Emily sat in her small room in the lodging house in Chapel Street working over the books and she rubbed her eyes tiredly.
A slight chill the day after the sale had delayed her journey to London and so she had been forced to leave Summer Lodge with her few possessions in a bag and watch as the cab carried her from the large estate on the hill to the cramped rooms of the house in Chapel Street.
Almost immediately, she had written ta her father's supplier in London and made an offer to pay off some of the debt he owed.
Now, she held the letter of reply before her and sighed; it seemed that Croydon and Cooper, Leather Importers, wanted more than she was able to offer.
There was nothing for it but that she visit the company directors in person and see if she could persuade them of her determination to rebuild the business.
Emily hated travelling by train, the noise and the steam and the cinders made her head ache and the feeling of not  being able to control the iron monster frightened her.
But go to England she would for she was determined to make the directors of Croydon and Cooper see sense.
And at the same time she could sell the emeralds, a task she had been dreading.
She glanced at the clock, it was barely eight thirty and the train would be leaving within the hour.
She might as well get ready for the journey.
‘Letty!’ she called, ‘check my overnight bag, see that I've got all I need, there's a good girl.’
Letty appeared from the kitchen and looked at Emily with concern.
‘Going off to London today, are you, miss, and on your own too, won't you let me come with you?’
Letty said coaxingly.
Emily sighed.
‘You've no reason to worry, I'm not a child and anyway the fare is dear enough for one of us, let alone two.
But I will have a cup of tea, Letty, please.’
Emily had become accustomed to taking her meals with Letty; there was no dining-room in her lodgings, only one small sitting-room apart from the two bedrooms and it was convenient to eat in the kitchen, keeping the sitting-room as an office.
‘There's some cold beef and a nice fresh loaf I brought from the bakers early this morning,’ Letty said.
‘Shall I make you up some nice sandwiches?’
‘That will do nicely.’
Emily thought ruefully of the sumptuous meals she used to eat at Summer Lodge, the tempting courses of meat and fish and then a carefully concocted pudding that melted in the mouth.
It was a wonder she had not grown fat.
Letty disappeared and Emily turned her attention to the letter on the table before her.
‘Well, Croydon and Cooper, you shall see me face to face soon enough and then you will know that Emily Grenfell is not a woman to be trifled with,’ she said grimly.
The station was practically empty of people and Emily felt so alone as she stepped on to the train.
She watched as the town moved past the grimy train windows and Emily felt that she was tugging up her very roots.
She must have dozed a little and the train grew stuffy as the sun hit the windows.
When she woke it was to the incessant chattering of the wheels against the rails and Emily thought she would never arrive at her destination.
It was hot in London, the pavements seemed hard beneath her feet.
People passed by without a glance in her direction and it was as though she had suddenly become invisible.
Not so long ago she had been loved and cherished with the world at her feet, now she was a woman alone.
Emily shook back a stray curl of hair and held herself upright, she must stop feeling sorry for herself.
Before papa died she had been a child, spoiled and cosseted and it was a pity she had not grown up a bit more quickly.
As she made her way to the modest Grenfell town house, Emily felt the beginning of a headache coming on.
The house was no longer papa's property, although she still held the key; it rightly belonged to Craig, just as Summer Lodge did.
Nevertheless, she meant to make use of it.
Emily unlocked the door and moved into the cool of the hallway, putting down her bag gratefully.
She went into the drawing-room and sank down into a chair.
The silence hung round her like a shroud and, looking around, her feeling of resentment against her cousin burned into a fierce anger.
Where was he when she needed him most?
Her fiance, the man who was supposed to love her, had not come near her since her father's death.
But that was wholly unreasonable for when papa had died Craig was still under suspicion of fraud, how could he come to her?
She rose and moved to the window  and stared out into the silent square.
The hot sun fell between the buildings throwing great shadows, the trees dotted along the road waved greenly reminding Emily of home.
But home was Summer Lodge with its lawns and flower-beds, not the cramped lodgings in Chapel Street.
Suddenly Emily was weeping, she put her hands over her eyes fighting the feelings of pain and frustration.
She had lost everything, first her father and then her home, to a man who cared nothing for her.
A sudden sound in the doorway startled her and she looked up in fear.
‘Emily!’
The voice was gentle.
‘Emily, I'm here, everything is going to be all right.’
Craig was suddenly in the room, moving towards her, holding out his arms to her as though he had never been absent.
‘What are you doing here?’
Emily realized that she sounded hysterical.
Quickly, she wiped away the tears.
‘Come to claim the town house have you?
Having a wonderful time in London I don't doubt and at my poor father's expense.’
Craig's expression hardened.
‘I'm in London trying to sort out my own affairs,’ he said gently, ‘I'm making an effort to repay customers who have been cheated.’
He paused staring at her with half-closed eyes so that Emily could not read his expression.
‘And what about me!’
Emily demanded.
‘I suppose now that I'm penniless I'm no longer suitable for the wonderful Craig Grenfell.
Your firm might have problems but you are still solvent, that's more than I am.’
‘I'm sorry, Emily, I know I should have been there to help Uncle Thomas with his business long ago.’
He shrugged.
‘I suppose I was careless but in any case your father never welcomed interference in his affairs, he was his own man.’
‘That's an easy thing to say now, isn't it?
It was your precious brother who stole customers away from papa, took the profits to put in his own pocket.
You are a fine pair, you and Spencer.’
Craig's jaw tensed.
‘And why should you care about my customers, is that it?
Why should you worry if they are losing much of their investment?’
He paced around the room.
‘You always were a selfish little madam, wrapped up in yourself to the exclusion of everyone else.
Just see how you've walked into this house without a thought for if I wished to use it.’
He looked down at her.
‘However bitter you may feel about it, the properties were entailed and I am the heir to them, like it or not.’
He sighed.
‘And I have a great many debts to repay before my affairs are sorted out.
I am sorry for your problems, Emily, and I'll try to help, of course I will, but I have worries of my own too.’
‘What worries?’
Emily said, her voice hard, ‘Paying back a few paltry debts.
I have watched my most treasured possessions being sold to strangers, I have moved out of my home to accommodate you, my precious cousin.’
She rose and faced him angrily.
‘I am here to plead my case with my father's creditors and to sell the family jewels, I suppose it is selfish of me to be concerned with such trifles when you have such pressing concerns like where you shall live, in the London home or at Summer Lodge.’
‘Emily,’ Craig said suddenly, ‘why are we quarrelling?
We should be helping not blaming each other.’
Craig made to put his arm around her shoulders but she held up her hand.
‘I don't want your pity!’
She picked up her bag, ‘And I don't want your charity either, keep your house, long may you enjoy the fruits of my father's labour.’
She was out in the street before she knew it, walking along the hard pavements beneath the swaying trees.
She longed to cry, to dissolve the hard knot of tears that was inside her but pride would not allow her to make a show of herself in the street.
She waved her hand to call a cab and when, at last, one stopped, she leaned towards the driver.
‘Where can I find decent lodgings for the night?’
She heard her voice tremble but could not control it.
‘Don't worry, misses,’ the driver said staring at her in open curiosity, ‘I'll take you to a very respectable lodging house run by a real lady.
Mrs Simons will look after you.’
With a sigh, Emily sank back in her seat and closed her eyes, listening to the clip clop of horseshoes ringing against the roadway with a feeling of unreality closing in on her.
This was all a nightmare from which she must one day awake.
But for now, she would not allow herself to think, she would rest for a few hours and then make arrangements to deal with business matters.
It was early the next day that she was ushered into the offices of Croydon and Cooper.
Mr Cooper was not present but Mr Croydon sat behind a huge desk, a bland smile on his face.
‘My dear Miss Grenfell, this is a surprise,’ he said jovially.
He was a big man with a fine moustache about the same age as her father had been, Emily guessed, but it was quite apparent that he considered himself quite a dandy.
He wore a richly coloured waistcoat beneath a fine linen jacket and in his cuffs were large gold links.
Emily smiled, she knew instinctively that here was a man who thought of women as merely creatures of decoration and, if it would serve her purpose, it was a view she would exploit to the full.
‘Please help me out of my problems, Mr Croydon,’ she  said softly, despising herself for the wheedling tone in her voice.
‘If you will only accept the offer of payment I made to you earlier, then the rest of the debt will be paid very shortly.’
‘And who, my dear lady, is handling your business interests and why are you here in person on such an unladylike errand?’
Emily looked up at him from beneath her lashes.
‘My cousin is indisposed, he will, of course, handle everything once he is well again.’
‘I see,’ Mr Croydon stared at her shrewdly.
‘Isn't there talk of some sort of scandal involving your father's nephews, some…dubious business dealings?’
Emily looked down at her hands, she knew it was useless to deny it, the man was no fool.
‘Alas,’ she sighed, ‘there's one black sheep in every family, I suspect.’
She smiled again and Mr Croydon leaned towards her over the desk.
‘But fortunately,’ she continued quickly, ‘the rest of the Grenfells are honest, upright citizens.’
‘Quite so.’
He shuffled some papers before him and regarded the figures in silence for a moment.
Then he looked up and met Emily's eyes.
‘Your father does owe us rather a lot of money, you know, will your cousin meet the obligations?’
Fat chance!
Emily thought, Craig was too– wrapped up in his own schemes to care about her father's debts.
‘Once he is quite well, he will take up the reins and the business will be booming again,’ she said out loud.
Mr Croydon leaned back in his chair and smiled ruefully.
‘Right now,’ he said abruptly.
‘Let's be done with the play acting, what is really going on, Miss Grenfell?’
Emily sat up straighter in her chair feeling the colour rise to her face.
‘I'm sorry,’ she smiled ruefully, ‘I shouldn't have tried to fool you.’
She twisted a scrap of  lace handkerchief between her fingers.
‘I'm going to run the business myself, I have plans for paying off the bills of each creditor in instalments and then trying to build up the business again.
‘First thing I must do is to sell the emeralds I inherited from my mother, they will bring me in enough to buy in leather and begin to trade again.’
She stared hard at Mr Croydon.
‘But I must have your good will.’
He remained silent for a long time, staring at Emily as though summing her up.
At last he spoke.
‘Very well, you have it,’ he said.
‘Now that you are being honest with me, I think I can help you.’
He leaned forward.
‘Let me see your jewels, I might be able to find you a buyer who will give you a good price.
Then, we will talk again.’
He rose to his feet and extended his hand.
‘I can't say I approve of it, young lady, you going into business, but I admire your courage and any help and advice I give willingly.’
He led her to the door and opened it for her.
‘One hint, don't be so coy with the men you deal with, they might misconstrue your intentions and try to take advantage of you.’
He smiled as she walked past him her cheeks burning.
‘And get yourself a good shoe designer and a good cutter, make your own shoes, begin an emporium instead of just importing and selling the leather, at least then you would not find yourself out on a limb in a man's world.‘
Emily took a cab back to Mrs Simons's house and went directly to her room.
She sank on to the bed and closed her eyes, ideas racing through her mind.
Mr Croydon was right, she must open her own shop, have shoes made to order at first and then perhaps import goods from the English shoemakers such as Mr Clark of Somerset.
She would need the services of a talented shoemaker and the best one she knew of in Swansea was Hari Morgan.
Emily swallowed hard, how could she lower her pride so far as to approach the girl she had been so scornful of?
And yet she knew that swallowing her pride was something that must be done, she would offer Hari Morgan the inducement of her own premises, a free hand in design and the services of experienced boot and shoemakers to work under her direction.
But would Angharad Morgan be willing to give up her own independence?
Determination surged afresh through Emily's consciousness, she would rebuild her father's reputation and his business, she would show the world that Emily Grenfell was no weak-kneed lady of leisure, but as strong as any man when it came to business.
She would make Hari Morgan interested in her scheme for an emporium however much it cost her in lost pride for in.
Hari lay the key to success.
Emily was astute enough to recognize that Hari had a singular talent, a fine touch for design that eluded most men.
She also had the gift for innovation, something the more practical-minded Emily lacked, a fact she readily admitted to herself.
The ringing of a bell from downstairs announced that it was time for supper and Emily realized quite suddenly that she was hungry.
She rose from the bed and stared at her reflection in the speckled mirror on the wall.
She was unremarkable to look at and far too tall for a woman.
But Emily did herself an injustice, her hair was lit with copper tones enhancing her creamy skin.
Her figure though slender was well formed and her height gave her an almost regal appearance.
She moved away from the mirror and walked slowly to the door, she would eat her supper, make pleasant  conversation with her landlady and then return to her room.
Tonight, she would rest and not think about her future until the morning.
Tomorrow would come all too soon and then her problems would really begin.
The foyer of the theatre was ablaze with lights, music drifting from behind closed doors carried to where Hari stood in the street with William at her side.
Her eyes felt heavy, she had worked much of the previous night and most of the day to have the shoes for the theatre people ready in time.
‘Noswaith da , Miss Morgan, going to the theatre like the rich folks now, is it?’
Hari turned to see Ben Jones smiling down at her, his cap in his hand.
‘Good evening to you, Ben.’
Hari smiled ruefully.
‘No such luck, I'm just working as usual.’
She moved the basket from one arm to the other.
‘You haven't brought me any boots for repair, lately, Ben, anything wrong with my cobbling then?’
Hari smiled.
‘No offence intended, mind, if you want to go to someone else that's up to you.’
‘Duw , it's not that,’ Ben protested.
‘I didn't like to tell you before but I've learned to be a dab hand at tapping the boots myself.
Had to do it see, dad's been complaining about me being lazy.’
He shrugged.
‘I like the cobbling, that and driving the van is about the only work I'm fit for, having very little brains for the counting and stock taking.’
Hari liked Ben's open friendly manner and his honesty.
‘Well then, I can't complain about a man who does his own boots, can I?
But when I'm rich and have my own emporium 
‘I'll hire you as part-time cobbler and van driver, right?’
‘Right,’ Ben said solemnly, ‘but for now can I wait by here for you and walk you back home, it's no time for a young lady to be out alone.’
‘I'm here, mind!’
William said indignantly.
‘I wouldn't let Miss Hari go out by herself.’
‘My apologies,’ Ben said at once, ‘I didn't notice you by there.’
He winked at Hari.
‘May I still have the pleasure of walking to World's End with the both of you?’
‘Well, I'm willing,’ Will said reluctantly, ‘if that's what Hari wants but there's no need, mind.’
Hari moved purposefully towards the foyer.
‘See you in a few minutes, Ben,’ she said smiling.
‘You're welcome to walk back home with Will and me and have a cup of tea for your trouble.’
The theatre was alive with the sound of voices and Hari realized with relief that the show must be over.
She led the way along the back passages towards the small dressing-rooms and she could hear William's well-soled boots clattering against the stone floor.
The corridors were ill-lit and cheerless and Hari shivered, the backstage life of the theatre folk was far from the glamour portrayed in front of the public.
‘Ah, our little shoemaker.’
Charles Briant welcomed Hari into the bright lights of his office.
‘You've come just in time because tomorrow the cast moves on to Somerset.’
He sat on a huge leather chair with a sigh of relief and it was clear to Hari that his leg had been giving him trouble.
‘Let me see what you have been doing for us,’ Charles said smiling widely beneath his white moustache.
‘I'm sure Meg and all the ladies are very anxious to take possession of their fine new footwear, but I shall have the privilege of seeing it first.’
‘There's something for you to try.’
Hari took a pair of boots from her basket.
On one of them, the leather sole  had been built up fairly high and yet by the sheer elegance of the design the modification scarcely showed.
‘You know I took all those measurements?’
Hari said smiling.
‘Well, I'm hoping I've made good use of them.’
Charles frowned and cleared his throat, tentatively he took the boots from Hari and kicking off his leather slippers, bent forward and gingerly drew the boots on to his feet, lacing them up with trembling fingers.
Slowly, he rose to his feet.
He took a step forward and then another free from the characteristic rolling movement caused by the shortness of one of his legs.
He turned to Hari, his eyes moist.
‘For the first time in years, I can stand proud like any other man.’
He took her hand and kissed it.
‘I can't find enough words to thank you.’
Hari swallowed hard.
‘No thanks needed,’ she said briskly.
‘I shall pay you well for the boots, of course,’ Charles said in a matter-of-fact tone that did little to conceal his emotions.
Then, with a return to his flamboyant self, he flung his arms wide.
‘But more, I shall spread your name far and wide to all parts of the country, you will be as famous as any of the actors who have trod the boards at this theatre, that I promise you, Hari Morgan.’
A sudden wash of laughter and raised voices shattered the silence as the doors opened and from the area of the stage, the performers returned to the small dingy dressing-rooms.
‘Hari!’
Meg's voice was joyful, ‘you've brought our shoes, thank the Lord for that, I thought you'd forgotten.’
She fell silent, staring in wonder as Charles walked towards her, hands outstretched.
‘Look what the wonderful girl has done for me, my darlings,’ Charles waved his hand to encompass the entire cast, ‘I can walk straight as a  tree, no more will I have to endure the taunts and jeers of the ignorant, I am a new man.’
‘Hari, you are so clever,’ Meg said warmly, ‘you can see what happiness you've brought dear Charlie, you are a genius.
Come now, let us all see what you've done for us, then you must celebrate with a glass of champagne, mustn't she Charles?’
‘Indeed, she must,’ Charles said emphatically.
‘The first toast shall be to Hari Morgan, shoemaker extraordinaire.’
It was much later when Hari, with William at her side and her empty basket swinging on her arm, left the theatre.
Of Ben Jones there was no sign and Hari sighed, she could hardly blame him for not waiting, she had been in the theatre for over an hour.
‘Looks like your follower didn't want to hang around,’ William said with obvious satisfaction.
‘Looks like,’ Hari agreed hiding her amusement.
‘Never mind, you and me will manage on our own, right?’
‘Right.’
William walked swiftly to keep stride with Hari.
Although he was growing fast, Hari was still taller than he was, a matter which quite clearly irked him.
Hari rested her hand on his shoulder.
‘But I have you at my side, Will, and I know we'll be all right.‘
Nonetheless, she was happy to reach the tall narrow house in World's End, she didn't like the darkness of the streets and the distant sounds of drunken voices.
She closed the door behind her with a sigh of relief.
‘Bed now, Will,’ she said softly, ‘you look worn out.’
She threw off her shawl.
‘As for me, I must write what I am owed in my book and then I too will go to bed.
I'm sleeping on my nose.’
She sat at the table and painstakingly wrote down the sums of money that should have come in for the work  already done.
She had expected to return home with full payment for the shoes she'd made, but it seemed the theatre people were not too quick in settling bills, a practice they shared with the gentry.
The only payment she had received was from Charles Briant who had given her a generous bonus for her extra work on his boots.
Hari closed her book with a snap of finality, the outstanding balance she owed for the French calf hung like a weight around her neck.
She stood for a moment staring round at the flickering shadows thrown by the lone candle, the fire had died long since and the room was cold and suddenly lonely.
‘Time for some sleep, Hari, girl,’ she said softly, knowing that in the morning her worries would subside and her natural optimism take over once again.
She would face the future with renewed determination but, for now, all she wanted to do was to crawl into her bed and sleep.
Emily climbed down from the cab and stood looking uncertainly around her, World's End was a far worse place than she could ever have imagined.
Tall narrow houses stood back to back and grimed curtainless windows stared blankly at her as though reflecting the hostility of those within.
Her lodgings at Chapel Street were a palace in comparison with this place and Summer Lodge a far-off dream of perfection.
And yet, amidst the dirt and grime, grew the occasional camomile, white flowers pressing strongly towards the sun.
Perhaps it was fanciful to think of Hari Morgan as a defiant camomile flower and yet that was the picture which came to Emily's mind.
She saw to the side of one of the houses the faded sign for Morgan and family, boot and shoemakers, fastened over what appeared to be little better than a shed.
Surely  Hari Morgan would be only too grateful for the opportunity to get away from such an unprepossessing background?
She pushed open the door and saw a small counter before her arrayed with pieces of leather and a variety of lasts.
The smell of leather permeated the air and at once Emily was back in her father's storehouse where he had kept mountains of skins ready to be cut and fashioned into boots and shoes.
She straightened her shoulders, harking back to the past would do her no good at all, it was all gone, like a once-cherished dream.
She was alone now, she had lost not only her father but her possessions, her beloved emeralds and her home and all because of the neglect of Craig Grenfell.
Prison had been too good for him and although he declared himself innocent of any crime, he was most certainly guilty of fecklessness, leaving important matters of finance in the hands of his greedy younger brother.
It was ultimately Craig's responsibility and yet he had stood back and allowed himself to be duped and Emily's father to be ruined.
How could she ever forgive him?
A small boy appeared from the table behind the counter, he smiled at her politely and waited for her to speak.
‘I'm looking for Miss Hari Morgan,’ she said stiffly, not taking kindly to having to explain her business to a mere boy, however clean and polite he might appear.
‘Are you a customer, misses?’ the boy said eagerly, touching his cap, and Emily nodded.
‘That's right, is Hari Morgan here or not?’
‘I'll fetch her now, misses, won't be a minute.’
He ducked out of a back door and Emily heard the sound of his boots ringing on the cobbles.
She looked around at the bare, cheerless workshop, at the roughly made counter and the cold bare flags of the floor and shivered, what a place to have to work, even in  her own reduced circumstances she was so much better placed than Hari Morgan.
Why was it then that she almost envied the girl?
Suddenly, Hari Morgan appeared in the opening of the back door, her hair fanning out darkly on her shoulders, an incongruously large leather apron swamping her small frame.
She looked very vulnerable and Emily wished that they had started off on a more pleasant footing.
‘May I talk to you?’
Emily asked awkwardly, not quite knowing what to say.
‘It's about business.’
‘Aye, come through into the kitchen,’ Hari spoke guardedly and Emily couldn't blame her for being suspicious.
Emily followed her across the yard into the surprisingly sunny warmth of the kitchen.
The room was poorly furnished but it was spotlessly clean and a cheerful fire blazed in the blackened hearth.
‘Yes?’
Hari said and there was a note of hostility in her voice that was unmistakable.
‘I want to make you a proposition,’ Emily said, almost wishing she hadn't come.
q intend to start up a business.’
She paused for a moment looking for the right words.
‘I want to make shoes and sell them in large quantities and yet I would like them to be different, individual, and to achieve that, I require a designer.’
The words were rushing out and Emily realized with surprise that she was actually nervous of this composed young woman standing before her.
‘You could be my designer if you so wished.’
‘Me?’
Hari said with disbelief.
‘You want me to work for you after the way you've treated me?
You must be daft then.’
Hari raked the coals beneath the kettle on the fire, more, Emily imagined, to give herself time to think than for any other reason.
Hari looked up suddenly, catching Emily off her guard.
‘You've got plenty of money, why should you want me when you could pay the best in Swansea?’
‘You are the best in Swansea as far as I'm concerned,’ Emily said.
Ambition burned within her, she wanted Hari to work for her so much, to make the business an outstanding success and Hari's reticence only made Emily more eager to have her services.
‘I can take any debts you might have on to my books and raise the money I need to start the business off, but I must tell you one thing,’ Emily said, ‘I am not rich, don't make that mistake, I need the business to succeed or I'm finished.’
Silence hung heavily in the room as Hari seemed to be assessing her words.
‘With your talent and my management,’ Emily went on, ‘we could make the names of Grenfell and Morgan known throughout the country.
It's a wonderful opportunity, please don't discard it out of hand because of pride or pique, just think it over for a few days and let me know your decision when you are ready.’
‘I can let you know my decision now,’ Hari Morgan's face was tight with controlled anger.
‘I don't want to work for you, I'm employed very nicely working for myself and the name of Morgan is respected already in town, which is more than can be said for that of the Grenfells.’
‘I see.’
Emily felt as though she had been slapped in the face.
Well, this little upstart would see that the Grenfells had dignity.
She moved towards the door.
‘In that case, I'm sorry I troubled you.’
‘Wait!’
Hari said quickly.
‘That was rude of me, I'm sorry.’
Emily smiled bleakly.
‘Yes, I'm sorry too, we could have made a good team, in business at least, though I realize we could never be friends or anything of that sort, but I'm convinced it could have worked.
If you change your mind, please call to see me.’
She opened the door.
‘I am in lodgings in Chapel Street, you must know that all my possessions from Summer Lodge had to be sold?’
‘Yes, I know,’ Hari said ruefully, ‘I don't suppose you realize how lucky you were to have things to sell, that's more than I ever had, mind.’
Anger surged through Emily and she bit her lip hard to stop the rush of bitter words.
After a moment, she took a deep breath.
‘Yes, well, if you feel it's lucky to see all the things you held dear being handled and bought by strangers just to pay off your father's debts, then I suppose you could say I'm lucky.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Hari smiled suddenly.
‘It seems I'm making a habit of saying sorry to you.
Look, sit down, have a cup of tea, let's be civilized to each other at least.’
Emily hesitated then moved to the scrubbed table and sat down abruptly, her legs shaking so badly it seemed they wouldn't support her.
Hari made the tea silently and deftly pushed the cup towards Emily.
‘It's very weak, mind, got to make the tea last, it's so expensive these days.’
She leaned forward and looked earnestly at Emily.
‘I don't mean to be nasty or anything but I don't really think we could work together, do you?’
Emily sipped the tea gratefully.
‘Perhaps you are right,’ she said flatly.
‘In any case, we would both have to be committed to the idea, half-heartedness won't do, it's all or nothing.’
‘I agree,’ Hari seemed ill at ease, ‘I would like to help but I'm all right here, I've got people working for me, see I owe it to them to make a success of my own business.
I have never worked for anybody but my father, I like being my own boss.’
Emily finished her tea and rose to her feet.
‘Well, if you'd rather be a big fish in a very small pool, that's up to you, I suppose.
Personally I would have thought you had more ambition than that.’
‘I have got ambition,’ Hari said quickly, her cheeks suddenly flushed and Emily could see that her words had stung.
‘I'm making shoes for the theatre folk just now and I intend to build my business up bit by bit.’
Emily smiled.
‘I suppose it's my turn to say I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘Of course you must do things your own way, I was silly expecting you to take a big risk with me when you can get along quite nicely alone.’
Emily left the house, her mind in a turmoil, she couldn't allow Hari to stand in her way, the girl was refusing her offer out of sheer pride, Emily was certain of it.
But perhaps there would be some way of persuading her; at any rate, Emily would not give up her ideas.
When she arrived home, Emily shrugged off her coat and kicked her shoes across the room; they were not comfortable shoes, the leather was hard and ill-shaped, nothing like the wonderful shoes Hari Morgan used to make for her.
Letty appeared with a tray of tea and Emily smiled her appreciation.
‘You must have read my mind,’ she said, ‘a good strong cup of tea is just what I need.’
A little later, Emily was looking through her accounts and came across a bill for French calf; thoughtfully, she turned it over in her hands, Hari would need to buy the calf too and the usual practice was to pay for it at the end of the month.
There was no doubt that Hari would buy from the same supplier as the Grenfells and what if Hari had an outstanding bill?
Emily might be able to persuade the supplier to call the debt in, just as a favour of course, then Hari would need money at once , she would have no choice but to throw in her lot with Emily.
Emily reached for some paper and began to write.
It was almost a week later when Hari Morgan was shown into the small sitting-room of the house in Chapel Street.
Emily rose to her feet and smiled.
‘Good morning, I'm very pleased to see you, does this mean you've changed your mind about my business proposition?’
Hari nodded.
‘I'll be honest with you, I didn't want to come but I've got no choice.’
‘Sit down, please.’
Emily avoided Hari's eyes, unable to suppress the sudden dart of guilt that brought the colour rushing to her cheeks.
‘I owe a large bill for leather,’ Hari said, ‘and I haven't yet been paid by the theatre folk.’
Hari's face was pale and Emily told herself sternly that it was all for the best, together she and Hari would prosper.
‘As I told you when we first spoke,’ Emily said quietly, ‘I can take your debts on my own books and I can raise enough money to start us off in quite good style.
For your part, you will bring your undoubted talent as well as your customers to the business.
Eventually, we shall build our clientele from the richer people of Swansea.’
Hari nodded.
‘Agreed, but one or two things I must make clear, William comes with me and I choose the cobblers who work for us, I'm not putting the name of Morgan to any inferior work.’
Emily smiled.
‘I understand.
Together we will make it work, Hari, believe me, we shall have the finest business in the country.‘
Hari moved towards the door.
‘I will go on working in my shop until you get the premises, then.’
‘I've got the premises already,’ Emily said and then she saw the surprised look on Hari's face.
‘Nothing definitely decided, of course.’
‘Where is it?’
Hari asked.
‘I hope it's nothing too grand.’
‘It's an old building at the bottom of Wind Street,’
Emily said.
‘I can rent it cheaply because the owner was a friend of my father's.’
‘It's handy to have friends like that,’ Hari said drily.
‘Do you plan on us living in?’
‘Yes, I think it will be cheaper that way and more convenient,’ Emily said.
‘Don't forget, we will be equal partners.’
She moved forward and held out her hand and, after a moment's hesitation, Hari took it.
When she was alone, Emily allowed herself a smile of satisfaction, nothing could stop her now, she was on her way up and all thanks to her own ingenuity.
Into her mind quite suddenly came an image of Craig.
Emily covered her face with her hands, she should be making plans for her marriage right now, but he had failed her miserably, she no longer wanted anything to do with him, did she?
Emily stood in the centre of the shop staring round happily at the crowd of curious customers.
The sound of voices and the clink of glasses was like music to her ears, the shop,her shop was actually open for business.
One of the singers from the theatre had stood in the doorway declaring to the crowd who had gathered to watch that the Grenfell and Morgan boot and shoe emporium was providing the best leather goods in town.
Charles Briant had spoken in his fine voice that carried to the very edge of the crowd, telling the people of Swansea how talented and gifted was Angharad Morgan.
‘She made me walk straight and tall again, made me feel a complete man with her excellently designed footwear,’ he had boomed.
And then the crowds of crinolined ladies with their escorts had moved into the interior of the store, eager to drink the champagne that Emily had insisted upon and to look at and touch the merchandise.
Hari was at Emily's elbow.
‘How do you think it's going?’ she asked anxiously and Emily smiled.
‘Very well attended, as an opening occasion should be, but I think half of these people have come to stare at Emily Grenfell who has done the unthinkable and gone into trade.’
‘Don't be so downhearted,’ Hari said quickly, ‘I'm sure that toffs aren't all like that — are they?’
Emily smiled.
‘I don't suppose so, I am feeling a little self-conscious, I'm not used to being on display in this sort of way.’
‘You must be more used to it than I am.
You've always been one of the gentry, used to grand balls and such.’
Emily shrugged.
‘Look, Sir Charles is coming over, I must thank him.’
Emily smiled at the surprised look on Hari's face.
‘Sir Charles, do you mean Charlie from the theatre?’
Hari said.
‘Of course, why do you think I asked him to attend the opening of the store?’
Emily said easily.
Hari shook her head.
‘I thought you'd asked him because he was a kind considerate man and a customer.
You are a snob.’
Emily was not a bit offended.
‘Well, one of us has to be,’ she said coolly as she moved forward, holding out her hand.
‘Well done, ladies,’ Charles winked at Hari, ‘I see the rich have come to stare, let us hope that they are as free with their orders as they are with drinking your champagne.’
‘Thank you, Charlie,’ Hari said, ‘there's good of you to spare the time to come to help us out.’
‘Wild horses wouldn't have kept me away, my dear Angharad.’
Charles smiled at her before moving to the centre of the room.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ he said, his voice easily overriding the hum of conversation.
‘I shall be the first one to give in my order to these dear ladies, I shall have three pairs of the best leather boots the house of Grenfell and Morgan can supply.’
He turned to Emily and kissed her hand and then took Hari in his arms in a bear hug of an embrace.
Emily found herself inundated with people wanting to make orders and cursed herself for not being prepared.
She held up her hand for silence.
‘Please have another glass of champagne and in the meantime I will bring my order book from the office.’
She smiled at Hari as she moved towards the stairs, there was no order book but from now on there would be one and, if today was anything to go by, it would always be full.
As she moved up the stairs, Emily felt a sense of triumph, she was on her way to a big success and no-one was going to stop her.