

CHAPTER TWO
‘There you are, then, that's your new commission, my friend,’ said Mr George Singleton, portly form comfortably ensconced in a leather-padded wall seat.
Sergeant Joe sat next to him.
They were in Hennessey's in the Strand and tucked into a corner.
Their conversation was discreetly quiet.
The place, with its bright gas lamps, shut out the fog.
Sergeant Joe tucked papers into cardboard folders and put the folders into his carpet-bag, together with a square-shaped bottle of special ink.
‘Lord Byron, of course, has a romantic appeal.’
‘Byron it is,’ said Sergeant Joe.
‘And Shelley.
And their ladies.’
Mr Singleton chuckled.
‘All sailing on a sea of Italian misadventures.’
‘End of Shelley, poor devil.’
‘You've read some of his poetry?’ enquired Mr Singleton, sipping his whisky.
‘None.’
‘Byron's?’
‘None.
Not my style, poetry.’
‘Yet you have your own artistic gift.’
‘Is that what you call it?’
Sergeant Joe smiled.
‘Most people would say it's a gift for forgery.’
Mr Singleton looked pained.
Another sip of whisky cleared his brow and restored his prevailing expression of geniality.
He was, outwardly, a happy friend to the whole world.
‘Come, Sergeant, never think the copying of handwriting equates with the forging of banknotes.
A talent that results in giving exquisite pleasure to collectors of memorabilia is to be admired, not deprecated.’
‘It's still forgery,’ said Sergeant Joe, although it amused him rather than troubled him, this gainful exercise of his talents.
His cockney friends would have called it honest endeavour in a dishonest world.
They were broadminded.
So was he.
A moderate scholar at his Chatham school, he had nevertheless amazed his teachers by his ability to write copperplate script at the age of eleven.
At fourteen he found he could also copy perfectly any handwriting placed in front of him.
But he had always had a wish to join the Army, and at sixteen he enlisted as a drummer boy.
That led to Africa and to Kitchener's campaigns.
And to a wounded knee-cap.
He had met Mr George Singleton two years ago in Petticoat Lane, at a stall that sold knick-knacks, bits and pieces, and other oddments that appealed to people with a passion for collecting things, particularly things that had belonged — or might have belonged — to a figure of history.
A hat, a locket, a snippet of hair curled inside a little velvet-lined comfit box, an ornament, a bill, a letter.
Yes, a letter was always prized.
Every collector prized letters above all.
Except that one had reservations about what was genuine on a Petticoat Lane stall.
That was where Mr Singleton came in.
He had a shop in Charing Cross Road.
He sold second-hand books and rare first editions.
He could never get enough of the latter.
He could get items that had once been owned by this author or that author, and there was a market for these, particularly for letters.
He and Sergeant Joe, having met in Petticoat Lane and having talked, repaired to a pub and had a long and very friendly conversation.
They both had principles.
They could both stretch them.
Mr Singleton knew other talented people, among them an extremely obliging fellow who could treat a sheet of notepaper to give it the feel and appearance of age, and could also produce ink of a quality used in the past.
Could Sergeant Joe use a quill pen?
‘Don't make me laugh,’ said Sergeant Joe.
‘Apologies, my dear fellow,’ said Mr Singleton, ‘momentarily I failed to appreciate I was talking to an artist.’
The outcome of the conversation was another meeting three days later.
A third followed after two more days, when Sergeant Joe visited Mr Singleton in his shop in Charing Cross Road and produced two letters ostensibly written by the Duke of Wellington on the eve of Waterloo.
To ladies of his acquaintance.
Mr Singleton sold them for two pounds each.
He split the proceeds with Sergeant Joe, down the middle.
That to Sergeant Joe was money for old rope.
Subsequently, such authors as the Brontë sisters, Jane Austen, Oliver Goldsmith, Jonathan Swift and others of great renown were the apparent signatories of letters placed in the care of Mr Singleton and sold by him by way of his bookshop or through the hands of trusted business friends who ran seemingly dowdy or seedy little second-hand enterprises in shops dark and dusty.
It was in such shops, however, that questing collectors often seized upon priceless memorabilia.
And there was also the Petticoat Lane stall and its owner, a shrewd East End cockney who knew Mr Singleton well.
There began to appear on his stall the occasional letter, its edges artfully worn, its folds artfully aged.
Sometimes there was even an envelope, particularly when it was plain from the contents of the letter that it had been delivered by hand.
Or so it appeared.
Mr Singleton advised Sergeant Joe at the beginning to be careful about envelopes.
They were relatively recent.
‘You should not speak too bluntly of forgery, my dear fellow,’ said Mr Singleton, delicately imbibing more whisky.
‘You are an artist, as I have said many times.
A genius even.
Your efforts are of a harmless kind.
They hurt no-one.
They merely induce wealthy collectors to dip into their pockets.
If they mistake the origin of a letter of  yours, it's neither your fault nor mine.
I never give guarantees.
If what I say leads a buyer to believe he's acquiring an original, that, I assure you, is mainly because it's what he wishes to believe.’
‘One day,’ said Sergeant Joe, ‘one of them will come back with proof that you've sold him a forgery.’
‘I shall defend myself with all the eloquence at my command,’ said Mr Singleton unworriedly.
‘Nor would I ever mention your name.’
‘Wouldn't you?’
‘Sergeant, I like you too much.’
‘Fetch up there, George.’
‘It's true, my friend.
You are the last one I'd throw from a lifeboat.’
Sergeant Joe laughed.
It was a deep and pleasant sound.
It made Mr Singleton smile.
His smile gave a beam to his plump face, and he looked like Mr Pickwick in the flesh.
‘I'll give this business one more year,’ said Sergeant Joe.
‘I'd be a fool, and so would you, to risk longer.’
‘Ah, I must mention that the sun is shining,’ said Mr Singleton.
‘Forget the fog.
Think of Italy, for that is where the many letters you are about to produce will end up.
Italian romanticists have a great fondness for Byron and Shelley.
Allowing for commission and certain expenses, the sales in Italy will modestly enrich us.
And the risks you have in mind will not exist there.
Nor shall I stay longer than I need.’
‘You're taking the letters yourself?’
Sergeant Joe regarded his business partner with gravity.
But he knew his man.
There was never a note of distrust in any of their transactions.
‘Understood.’
‘Trust me.’
‘If I didn't, I'd come to Italy with you.
Now I'll be on my way.
I've got another walk to make through the fog.
Back home.’
Sergeant Joe finished his warming whisky, shook hands with Mr Singleton, took hold of his carpet-bag, and limped out of the cosy, club-like atmosphere of Hennessey's.
A good fellow, a fine soldier, thought Mr Singleton.
And an artist to boot.
Sergeant Joe paused for a moment on the pavement.
He turned up his coat collar and gave his eyes time to adjust to the thickness of the night fog.
The Strand was buried in rolling dirty-yellow clouds.
Traffic had long left the streets.
Hansom cabs had returned to their mews.
All sound was suffocated, and the light from street lamps was all but smothered.
However, he began his walk back to Newington Butts.
It took him over Waterloo Bridge.
Faintly he heard the sound of a hooting tug.
The fog lay upon the river and swirled over the bridge.
He seemed alone in one of London's infamous pea-soupers.
He passed no-one.
He was silent in his limping walk, his footwear rubber-soled.
He thought about hob-nailed Army boots and the crisp sounds of infantrymen drilling on the square.
It reminded him of the vigorousness of Army life.
But he had not missed it as much as he'd thought he might.
He had realized early on that social life in the Army was painfully restricted, especially when serving abroad.
As a civilian, his horizons were far broader.
On the other hand, more than a few civilians were sloppy and needed to smarten up a bit.
Most women had straighter backs than most men.
Well, women were carriers.
They carried their offspring and they carried shopping bags.
Carriers always walked upright.
Men who walked with their hands in their pockets slouched along.
Not good, that.
Made them look old before their time.
A lone horse and cart approached, coming at a snail's pace from the direction of the Elephant and Castle.
It was invisible in the fog except for the faint blur of its lamp.
But he heard its turning wheels and the slow clop of the horse.
What a night.
He entered London Road, feeling his way  by keeping close to buildings on his right.
Midway down, the muffled sounds of running feet suddenly reached his ears.
Whoever it was had to be desperate to be running through fog as thick as this.
A street lamp threw faint light and out of it came a young woman.
She ran straight into him.
The collision staggered her and she fell.
A little gasp of pain escaped her, then some hissed words.
He made sense of none of them, but thought she was probably swearing at him.
He dropped his carpet-bag, stooped and helped her to her feet.
She winced, clutched him for support as she eased her right foot off the ground, and a shabby handbag touched his chest.
‘Fetch up there,’ he said, ‘what's your hurry on a night like this?’
She drew a breath.
‘They're after me — quick, 'elp me, won't yer?’ she begged in a whisper.
He heard other footsteps then, and the shouting voice of a man.
‘Stop!
We'll get yer, yer thievin' 'aybag!’
Joe's thoughts flashed.
What was one more thief in Southwark, and what was there for some of its people except snatching and pickpocketing?
Even more, what was there for some of its women except that or selling themselves?
A man, panting and cursing, emerged at a run from the small patch of light.
He glimpsed two figures and pulled up.
He laid a fast hand on the woman's wrist and twisted her arm.
‘Gotcher!’
‘Hold your horses,’ said Joe, ‘the lady's with me.’
The man, burly, and with a flat cap on his head, said, ‘That she ain't, mister, and I ain't lettin' go of 'er.
Shove off.’
Another man arrived.
He wore a trim bowler hat and an  overcoat.
The overcoat was unbuttoned.
He said nothing for the moment.
He was breathing hard, and Joe thought he was even sweating.
Which meant he was either out of condition or in a state of agitation.
He spoke then.
To the young woman.
‘So,’ he said.
Just that.
‘So nothing,’ said Joe, ‘she's with me.’
‘So's me Aunt Fanny,’ said the burly man.
‘Listen, cock, suppose you mind yer own bleedin' business, eh?
This thievin' cow's snaffled this 'ere gent's wallet.
Didn't I see 'er with me own eyes, down in the Rockingham?’
The Rockingham was a public house by the Elephant and Castle.
‘Didn't I offer to go after 'er on be'alf of the gent?
And now I got 'er, ain't I?’
‘Oh, yer rotten liar,’ breathed the young woman, a shabby black straw hat on her head, ‘I never snaffled no gent's wallet in all me born days.’
‘Not so,’ said the bowler-hatted gentleman, who also sported a neat black beard.
‘You have taken mine.’
His English was accented.
‘You are one filthy thief.
Give.’
He put out a gloved hand.
‘Give it back.’
‘Me?’ protested the young woman.
‘'Ow can I when I ain't got it?
I just got an 'urt foot, that's all.’
‘Divvy up, yer bitch,’ said the burly man, ‘or yer'll 'urt all over.
I got a reward comin' from this gent for coppin' yer.
So let's 'ave 'is wallet, an' quick.’
‘I ain't got it, I tell yer!’
‘A lie,’ said the foreign gentleman.
He looked at Sergeant Joe.
‘You are her accomplice, I think.’
‘I'm just standing here listening,’ said Joe.
‘Search her,’ said the gentleman to the bruiser.
‘Strike her if she resists.’
‘Don't like the sound of that, mister,’ said Joe.
‘Don't advise it, either.’
‘You are not the one who has been robbed,’ said the gentleman.
‘Search her,’ he repeated to the bruiser.
‘'Ere, no yer don't,’ said the young woman, suffering the pain of a wrenched ankle.
‘No-one's goin' to search me, it ain't decent, I'm a respectable girl and nor ain't I a thief — oh!’
She gasped as the bruiser's hand struck her mouth.
‘Pity you did that,’ said Joe, and put the bruiser on his back with an iron right-hander to his jaw.
‘Can't have it.
Don't like it.
It's uncivilized.
And what's more, I'm against it.’
‘Stand back.’
The bearded gentleman was steely.
The pervading fog enclosed the group, and the world outside seemed at a silent standstill.
Not a single vehicle moved on the road, nor a footstep.
‘Stand back, I command you.’
For all that they were wrapped in fog, the revolver that had appeared in a gloved hand was all too visible to Sergeant Joe.
It was pointed at his stomach.
‘Believe me, I will shoot you if you move again, and I will then have this filthy woman carried away.
You understand?’
‘I understand all right,’ said Joe, ‘but I still don't like it.’
‘Oh, me dear gawd,’ gasped the young woman, ‘I've never seen the like of that, it's a gun.’
‘Take your clothes off and empty your handbag,’ said the gentleman, who was no gentleman.
‘Take me clothes off?
‘Ere, what d'yer think I am?’
‘A thief.
You have my wallet.
Do as I say.’
Sergeant Joe thought the man ferociously determined.
The bruiser was back on his feet, shaking his head dizzily.
‘I bleedin' owe you for that one,’ he growled at Joe.
‘Not now,’ rapped the icily ferocious man.
‘Search that filthy woman.
Her handbag first, then her clothes.
Strip her if necessary.’
His cold rage thickened his accent, but the revolver in his hand remained steady.
Joe watched him.
The bruiser went to work, wrenching the young woman's handbag from her.
He opened it and plunged his hand in.
‘Oh, yer swine,’ breathed the young woman as he flung the handbag to the ground.
He stooped.
Her skirts tossed and swirled.
She uttered gasps and protests.
And she winced again.
‘Bleedin' 'ell,’ growled the searching bruiser, ‘where's she put it?’
‘Break her arm.
She will tell us where it is then, or her other arm will be broken.’
‘'Ere, 'old on, guv,’ said the bruiser, ‘I dunno I go along with that.
It ain't too clever, yer know, breakin' 'er arms on account of a wallet.
A bleedin' good 'iding, that'll make her divvy up.’
‘Strip her.’
‘I'll scream the 'ouses down!’ shouted the young woman.
‘And I'll lose my temper,’ said Joe.
‘Shut up!’ hissed the bearded man, and pushed the barrel of the revolver hard into Joe's stomach.
The fog was an impenetrable yellow wall around them, and it favoured the opposition.
‘'Ere, guv, what's that?’ asked the bruiser.
He had spotted the carpet-bag.
It was still on the pavement, close to Sergeant Joe's left foot, and faintly visible.
‘'Ere, that's where yer wallet is, I'll lay to it.
That's where she put it.’
‘Search it.’
‘Now yer talkin'.
We don't want no bleedin' bullets flyin' about, guv, if yer don't mind, it'll bring the rozzers down on us like a ton of bricks, even in this fog.
I brought yer the letter, and I offered to catch this thievin' 'aybag for yer, but I ain't partial to firearms —’
‘Quiet, you fool.
Earn your twenty pounds.
Search that bag.’
Twenty pounds?
Sergeant Joe silently whistled.
He was watching the man with the revolver, watching and waiting.
His thoughts took a new turn.
Twenty pounds was a small fortune to most cockneys.
The missing wallet must be stuffed with banknotes.
The bruiser took up the carpet-bag, at which point every ear caught the sounds of slow, measured footsteps and a man's voice.
The bruiser, opening the bag, jerked his head up.
He swung round.
‘Guv, it's the bleedin' rozzers on their beat!’ he whispered.
‘What?
What?’
‘Police, guv, on their beat — I'm off.’
‘Give me that bag!’ hissed Blackbeard, but Sergeant Joe was quicker by far.
He wrenched the bag from the bruiser.
An obscene oath in a foreign language escaped Blackbeard's furious lips.
Then he was gone, with the bruiser, back the way he had come.
Did it on himself, thought Joe.
Could have stayed and reported the theft of his wallet to the police if he hadn't produced that revolver.
The police might have nicked the young woman.
They'd have certainly nicked him.
They loomed up, two uniformed constables.
Since the murderous excursions of Jack the Ripper in London's East End some years ago, the patrolling of streets on both sides of the river had been strictly enforced, particularly on foggy nights.
The constables halted.
The young woman had picked up her handbag, but hadn't moved apart from that.
Her right ankle wouldn't let her.
‘Evening,’ said Joe, the carpet-bag out of sight behind him.
‘'Ello, ain't it an 'orrible night?’ said the young woman.
‘Not the kind to hang about in,’ said one constable.
‘What're you up to, anyway?’ asked the second.
‘Up to?
‘Ere, you bein' cheeky to a respectable girl?’
‘Highly respectable,’ said Joe.
‘Looks like it,’ said the first constable.
‘Prime case of solicitin', if you ask me,’ said the second.
‘Not by a long shot,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, I never been more insulted,’ said the young woman.
‘'E's me best friend.’
‘Well, get your best friend to take you home,’ said the first constable, ‘or we might have to take you down to the station for the good of your health.’
‘'Ere, that ain't funny, yer know,’ said the young woman.
‘Serious, I'd say,’ said the second constable, but they both had grins on their faces as they resumed their beat.
‘You're well out of that,’ said Joe to the young woman.
‘Don't I know it?
You've been a real sport, mister, standin' up for me like you did, and fetchin' that brute a lovely wallop.
Only what am I goin' to do now?
Me ankle hurts every time I put me foot to the ground.
I'm near crippled.
You can chuck me in the river, if you like, for all the good I am to meself.
It ain't far.’
‘I'm not keen on that idea,’ said Joe.
‘All right, I'll chuck meself in,’ she said.
‘Don't like that, either,’ said Joe.
‘Where'd you live?’
‘Oh, it's all right, I —’ She stopped and did her best to get a really good look at him through the fog.
She did a bit of thinking.
‘Well, I don't like sayin' so, mister, but I don't even 'ave the price of a night's lodging.
I got thrown out of me previous room this morning, on account of owings.’
‘Hard luck,’ said Joe.
‘Well, we can't leave you to the wolves.
Hold my bag.’
He placed it in her arms and she clutched it to her bosom, with her handbag, the toe of her right foot gingerly touching ground.
He stooped and lifted her.
She gasped.
‘Here, excuse me, what d'you think you're doin'?’ she demanded, as he began to walk.
‘I'm carrying you,’ he said.
‘I didn't say you could — crikey, what a liberty.
You're takin' advantage just because I'm near crippled.
Where you takin' me to?’
‘My lodgings.
Then I'll have a look at your ankle.’
He peered into the fog, proceeding slowly with his warm-bodied burden.
‘Then I'll find a bed for you.’
‘Whose bed?’
‘Mine, probably.’
‘Here, what d'you think I am?
You're not draggin' me into your bed, I'll scream the place down.’
‘Don't get funny ideas,’ said Joe.
‘Me?
I like that.
I'm respectable, I am.
Did you see that rotten perisher, searchin' me clothes?
I nearly died of blushin' all over.’
‘Report on what happened to the wallet,’ said Joe, thinking he needed to watch out in case Blackbeard and the bruiser were still around.
‘What wallet?’ she asked.
‘The wallet.
What did you do with it?’
‘That's it, go on, insult me.’
‘Was there any money in it, or haven't you looked yet?’
‘Mister, you're givin' me a hard time, you are, and just when I'm thinking I've met a real gent for a change.
Mind, I hardly know how to get a proper look at you in all this fog.’
But snug in his arms and very close to him, she could at least see his looks weren't villainous.
She sighed.
‘I'm honest but unlucky, mister.’
‘Are you?’ said Joe.
The dark bulk of buildings on his right gave way to emptiness, and he knew he'd reached Princess Street.
He came to a stop to feel for the kerb.
Finding it, he crossed the entrance to the street and then he was on the pavement again, with buildings again his guide.
The fog was dense, a killer to old people with bronchitis.
‘Mister, are you a gent?’
‘Can't answer a question like that,’ said Joe, ‘can't make sense of it.’
‘No, but you've got a gent's moustache, I can see that,’ she said.
‘Here, d'you 'ave a funny ankle too?
Only you're limpin', ain't you?’
‘Stiff knee,’ he said, watching for obstacles he might only know about by walking into them.
He reached the Elephant and Castle, a busy junction by night as well as by day, but it was a silent yellow emptiness tonight.
The time was past ten, kids were wrapped up in their beds, and parents were probably about to retire themselves.
Most mums and dads in Walworth had to get up early.
He turned right into Newington Butts, the young woman no great weight in his arms, although he was sure she wasn't skinny.
‘You sure I'm not too much for you, mister?’ she asked.
‘I mean, your limp and all.’
‘Exercise is good for it,’ he said, the familiarity of the Butts lost in the fog and making it necessary for him to still proceed carefully.
He kept listening for sounds that would tell him Blackbeard and his henchman were in the vicinity.
‘I'll beat my stiff knee one day.
One day it'll start bending again.
If not, I'll take a hammer to it.’
‘Don't do that, mister, I begs you,’ she said.
‘It'll give you an 'orrible pain and do your knee in for good.’
‘We'll see,’ said Joe.
There was not far to go now.
But he thought then that there was someone behind him, he thought for a moment that he heard footsteps.
He stopped and listened.
The young woman peered at him from under the brim of her ancient straw hat.
Hearing nothing, he went on.
Someone, perhaps, had turned into a house.
‘What did you stop for?’ she asked.
‘I thought someone was coming up behind us.’
‘Fog plays funny tricks, mister, don't you think so?
It makes you feel old Nick is about.
Where'd you hurt your knee?’
‘Playing soldiers,’ said Joe.
‘Help, 'ave you been in a war?’ she asked.
‘Not the same kind you have,’ said Joe.
‘Here, when we get to your lodgings, you ain't really going to take advantage of me, are you?’ she asked.
‘Don't fancy that,’ said Joe.
‘Wait till you've been tidied up.
Then we'll see what you look like.’
‘What a sauce,’ she said.
‘I ain't going to be tidied up and looked at so's you can make up your mind about fancying me.
Oh, help, me blood keeps running cold about that bloke havin' a gun.
Him and his wallet, what a carry-on.’
The wallet must have been fat, thought Joe.
The bruiser wouldn't have been promised a reward of twenty quid otherwise.
And Blackbeard wouldn't have threatened to start shooting.
‘Here we are,’ he said, stopping outside the right house.
‘Pull the latchcord for me, would you?’
‘What?’ she said.
‘The latchcord.’
‘Oh, lor',’ she said, ‘it's like come into me parlour, said the spider to the fly.’
She leaned in his arms, groped for the latchcord dangling from the letter-box, and pulled it.
The door opened and he carried her in.
He closed the door with the heel of his right foot.
‘Oh, help,’ she said in the lamplit passage.
After all, she didn't know him, and a fate worse than death might just be awaiting her.
CHAPTER THREE
As soon as he closed the door, Joe knew the Beavises were all in bed.
There were no sounds or vibrations.
Mr and Mrs Beavis, their three daughters and two sons were all larger than life, except for young Linda.
They could make the house shake when they were in full flow, the vibrations spreading from the kitchen.
They attacked life, they didn't sit quietly around waiting for it to flatten them.
It would have a job flattening that boisterous family, thought Joe as he carried the young woman through the passage and up the flight of stairs to the first floor.
He had no option now but to speak to his landlady in the morning about letting this homeless female have his bed for the night.
He set her down on the landing and she stood on one foot, using the wall for support while he opened his living-room door.
He went in, struck a match and applied the flame to the gas mantle.
It sprang into bright white light and he covered it with its glass globe.
He returned to the young woman and carried her in, sitting her down in the fireside armchair.
If her ankle was painful, she wasn't making a fuss about it.
That was in her favour, and if she did happen to be a female tea leaf, well, he was the last person entitled to throw stones.
He relieved her of the carpet-bag, and she looked around, her eyes quick and observant.
The fire in the compact range was burning slowly, and the room was warm and cosy.
On the hob plate stood an iron kettle.
A square-topped mahogany table was covered with green baize, and there were two upright chairs, a small dresser, a larder and a tallboy.
On the tallboy was an inkstand with four wells, a squat bottle of  ink in each.
Nibbed pens lay in the groove.
Old velvet curtains of dark red draped the window.
Joe took a good look at the young woman.
What a mess.
Her black straw hat, secured by a beaded hatpin, had seen its best days long ago.
So had her dark blue jacket, white blouse and black skirt.
Over the jacket she wore the inveterate shawl of cockney women.
But at least she didn't look starving or thin.
Nor could he say she had no colour and no bosom to speak of.
On the other hand, her grey eyes were big, and that was usually a sign of hunger.
But she had quite good looks, and beneath her hat a loop of luxuriant dark auburn hair was showing.
‘All right,’ she said, making a face at him, ‘I know I ain't much to look at, but I've had some blokes fancy me.’
‘Have I said something, then?’ he asked, taking off his cap and overcoat and hanging them on the door peg.
‘No, you've just been lookin',’ she said.
‘Lookin' and saying nothing, well, a girl knows what that means.
It's not fair.’
‘What isn't?’ he asked, lifting the kettle, removing the hob plate and putting the kettle in its place.
He raked the fire with a poker, pulled out the damper, and the fire began to glow.
‘What isn't fair?’
‘Being looked at by a bloke that's saying nothing.’
‘What's not fair about that?’
‘It's the way you're lookin',’ she said.
‘Can I help it if I ain't an oil painting?
It's bein' poor and 'omeless that does it.
Mister, I suppose you wouldn't have a bite of food to spare, would you?’
‘I'll find you something, but let's look at your ankle first,’ said Joe.
She regarded him suspiciously, but couldn't find anything shifty about him.
His eyes were frank, his features regular and his expression quite friendly.
His thick moustache, neatly trimmed, gave him a handsome look.
‘Sit on the table,’ he said, ‘and oblige me by not being sorry for yourself.’
‘Mister, I ain't complaining about me lot, honest, I'm just saying, that's all.
All right, I'll sit on the table, you've been good to me, savin' me from those blokes that came after me for nothing.’
She got up.
‘Could you believe your eyes when you saw that gun?
Mad, that's what he was — oh’ Her ankle gave way as she moved, shooting pain, and he caught her as she fainted.
He carried her to the bedroom then, and in the darkness placed her gently down on the bed.
He lit the gas mantle and light beamed.
He looked down at her.
An empty stomach and the pain of her ankle had been too much for her.
Further, the thug had been rough with her.
It couldn't be helped if she was a pickpocket.
Something had to be done for her.
He leaned over her, removed her cheap hatpin and her old straw hat.
A little grin parted his mouth.
There was the wallet.
Clever girl.
She had hidden it under her hat, in her wealth of hair.
But it was out now.
It was made of expensive brown leather, but it wasn't fat, it was thin.
He opened it.
All it contained were four white English banknotes and an envelope.
The banknotes were fivers.
Four amounted to twenty quid, the sum offered to the bruiser.
Odd, that.
If Blackbeard was carrying only that amount, what was the point of offering it all?
Why so much fury?
Why the threat to use his revolver?
Didn't make sense.
Unless it wasn't the money, but the envelope, which obviously contained a letter.
There was no name on it.
He mused over it, thinking about Blackbeard's sweat and his icy rage.
It had to be the letter that was important.
He'd forfeited the money in advance.
Joe smiled and slipped the letter into his pocket.
He placed the wallet on the bedside table.
The young woman opened her eyes and stared vaguely up at him, her hair a spilling mass of deep auburn.
‘There you are,’ he said, ‘hold on a tick.’
He disappeared.
She lay frowning until her mind cleared.
Then  she sat up.
Galahad reappeared, with a glass containing a small amount of brandy.
‘Drink this,’ he said, ‘it'll give you a lift.’
‘I fainted,’ she said, looking disgusted with herself.
‘I've never fainted before.
Here, what's in the glass?’
‘Brandy,’ said Joe.
‘Mister, don't you try gettin' me one over the eight.
Not a drop of gin or brandy ever touched me lips in all me born days.
I ain't goin' to let it now, either; I ain't goin' to be taken advantage of.’
‘Stop fussing,’ said Joe, ‘I don't go in for that sort of thing.
Come on, drink it, all at one go.’
She took the glass.
She rolled her eyes at him, put the glass to her lips and drank the brandy, a small nip.
She didn't cough.
It all went down and it immediately flooded her with warmth.
‘Help,’ she breathed, ‘it's burning me alive.’
‘Good,’ said Joe.
‘What's good about burning alive?’ she said.
‘Why couldn't you give me a nice drop of port?’
‘Don't have any,’ said Joe.
‘Right, don't let's take all night seeing to your ankle.
I'll get you some food in a few minutes, but first let's have your shoe and stocking off.’
‘Oh, all right.’
She put the glass back into his hand, fumbled under her skirts and pushed a black lisle stocking down over her right leg.
He placed the glass on the bedside table, leaned over her and unbuttoned her weary-looking ankle-boot.
He removed it quite gently and drew her stocking off.
Her foot was clean.
He inspected her ankle.
It was swollen and tinted with blue.
He hoped that didn't mean a fracture.
Gently again, he turned her foot.
She winced.
‘Painful?’ he asked.
‘Well, hurtful, like.’
‘Yell if this is really painful,’ he said, and slowly turned her foot the other way.
She didn't yell, she just winced again.
‘No sharp pain?’ he asked.
‘No, it just aches a lot,’ she said.
‘Hurtfully, like.’
‘Well, we've got a sprain,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, we 'ave, 'ave we?’ she said with typical cockney pertness.
‘I thought it was just me.’
He gave her a smile then, a kind of comradely one, as if her sprain and his stiff knee meant they had something in common.
‘Hold on,’ he said, and disappeared again.
He returned with a basin of cold water, a flannel and a towel.
He placed the towel on the bed under her bare foot.
He dipped the flannel in the water and bathed the swollen joint not once but many times, leaving the flannel wrapped around it for long seconds each time.
Water dripped on to the towel, and the cold wet flannel soothed the ache.
Eventually, he left it fully wrapped and fastened with a safety-pin.
‘Mister, that's done wonders,’ she said.
‘Hot tea and something to eat next,’ he said, and was gone yet again, taking the basin and towel with him.
She lay musing, eyes on the ceiling.
She was cross with herself, and she was also very hungry, she'd had nothing much all day.
That bruiser.
She'd followed him into the Rockingham public house by the Elephant and Castle.
The pub had drawn her out of the cold and fog into warmth.
The publican had looked at her several times as she offered little posies of limp flowers to customers for a penny a time.
There were no takers.
The bruiser had just given her a growling look.
She found a penny and two ha'pennies in her purse, and the publican had served her a little port in exchange, which she sipped close to the blazing fire.
The bruiser sat by himself, drinking a hot toddy, and he hardly moved except to bring the glass to his lips.
Then a bearded man in a bowler hat and overcoat came in, looked around and found himself a seat in a corner.
The burly bruiser got up, carried his toddy over and sat down opposite the bearded man, who listened to him muttering, then gave him a silver coin.
The bruiser got up again and  bought a large measure of whisky, which he gave to the bearded man, who made short work of it.
Two swallows and it was gone.
Then the bruiser produced a letter, the bearded man gave him a bit of a stony look, but took it and put it in his wallet.
Then he said something in a very low voice, while gesturing at the bruiser with the wallet.
She moved then, swaying a bit as if she was drunk.
She lurched, reached out a hand and plucked the wallet clean from the bearded man's grasp.
The bruiser bawled at her, but she was out of the door in a flash.
She ran into the fog and through the fog, its thickness a blessing now, although she was risking a fall and broken bones.
But the bruiser was after her, and the click-clack of her heels over the pavement kept him from losing her.
While running, she took off her hat, placed the wallet inside it and put it on again, thrusting in the pin and nearly falling while doing so, handbag swinging from her arm.
She kept going, blindly, and with both men chasing her.
Then some way along London Road she'd run straight into a man.
It knocked her off her feet and wrenched her ankle.
That was when everything could have got really ugly if the man hadn't sided with her.
Now here she was, in his lodgings and on his bed, and out of action because of her ankle.
Oh, her hat!
She sat up again, looking around.
She saw the wallet on the bedside table.
That's done it, she thought.
Joe brought tea and sandwiches on a tin tray that was decorated with a colourful imprint of Queen Victoria.
The tray was a little battered, and so was the likeness of the late Queen.
It was nothing personal, just the result of usage.
‘Here we are,’ he said.
The patient was sitting up.
‘Oh, ain't you kind to a poor girl?’ she said.
‘I don't know I've ever met anyone more kind.’
He placed the tray  on her lap.
The tea was hot, and the sandwiches, filled with sliced ham, were made of crusty bread, fresh that day.
She sipped the tea, cradling the cup in both hands.
‘Mister, 'ave you been a soldier?’
‘I have,’ said Joe.
‘'Ave you got medals?’
‘One or two.’
‘Well, you ought to 'ave another one, for savin' a homeless girl from them 'orrible geezers and all the cold and fog.’
She gulped the hot tea, put the cup down, took hold of a sandwich and sank hungry white teeth into it.
Joe sat down on the edge of the bed, taking note of the wallet.
It was still there, but not as he had left it.
It had been moved.
Her eyes, following his, alighted on the item of contention.
‘Oh, help, look at that,’ she said.
‘The wallet?’ said Joe.
‘Had you forgotten about it?’
‘What wallet?
Oh, that one.
Is it yours, mister?’
‘Not mine, no.’
‘How did it get there, then?’ she asked.
‘You'd better smarten up, my girl, or it'll be seven days general fatigues for you when you're back on your feet.
All right, so you lifted the bearded geezer's wallet, but never mind that for the moment.
What's your name?’
‘Dolly,’ she said, casting him a cautious look.
‘Dolly?
Dolly what?’
‘Dolly Nobody, I suppose,’ she said, drinking more tea.
‘Well, I was brought up in that orphanage in Dalston, and that's what they called me there.
Just Dolly.
I don't know who me mum and dad were.
Ain't Dolly a soppy name?
No wonder you're laughin'.’
‘I'm not,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, ain't you kind?
I run away when I was fifteen and got a job as a skivvy with a fam'ly up on Brixton 'Ill.’
She finished the sandwich and started on the second, eating hungrily.
‘They didn't pay me no wages, not real wages, they just gave me a bob now and again, and me board and  lodgin', and some clothes.
I run away again when I was eighteen.
Well, the woman's 'usband started to fancy me, but I wasn't 'aving that, I'm not that kind of a girl, I never 'ave been.
I've been doin' all sorts of jobs since then, and livin' in all sorts of lodgings, and now I've been chucked out of me last place because I didn't 'ave any job or any money.
I've never had any luck, I was born under an unlucky star, mister.’
‘No such thing,’ said Joe, ‘it's all in the mind.
Look, what you've got at the present moment, Private Nobody, is a badly sprained ankle.
Right, you can stay here till it's better.
I'll speak to my landlady in the morning.
And while you're here, let's see if we can get you straightened out.
You can start by chucking all that hard luck stuff out of the window.’
‘Honest, mister, I'm the 'ardest luck case I ever 'eard of,’ she said, halfway through the second sandwich.
‘Can't have you talking like that,’ said Joe, ‘don't like that kind of attitude.
Won't stand for it.
Get yourself a good night's sleep, and first thing tomorrow morning I'll put you into a hot bath.
Then —’
‘Here, 'old on,’ said Dolly, ‘I ain't five years old, y'know, I'm twenty-one, and I ain't lettin' you put me into a bath with no clothes on, it ain't first thing decent.
What about me honour and virtue?
I've still got them, y'know, and I ain't losin' them in any bath.’
‘You'll take a bath, Private Nobody, first thing in the morning, and all by yourself.
I'll boil a saucepan of water for you.
Then we'll get you to square your shoulders and liven yourself up.
Once you're back on your feet, I want a straight back, polished footwear and buttons done up.
Also, a clean face and no swinging the lead or nicking wallets.
Then I'll see if I can find you a job and some decent lodgings.
In return, I don't want any more hard luck stories or any answering back.
Have you got that, Private Nobody?’
Dolly blinked.
‘Here, what's your game?’ she asked.
‘I ain't simple, mister, I bet you'll want something more than no answering back.
It ain't fair, bein' kind to me and gettin' me obligated.
It makes it 'ard for a girl to say no when she's obligated.’
‘Stop thinking about things I'm not thinking about,’ said Joe.
‘All I'm after is getting you to stand up straight so that you can look people in the eye without feeling you need to pinch their wallets.’
‘Me?
Pinch wallets?’
Dolly looked indignant.
‘I don't know what you mean.
Crikey, what an insult.
Still, as long as you're not thinking about makin' me your fancy piece, I'll do me best to stand up brave to the world.’
‘You'd better,’ said Joe, who thought it wiser to help her get up and fight her hard luck than to harp on it.
‘Mister, you 'aven't told me your own name.’
‘I'm Joe Foster.
You can call me Sergeant.
That —’ He stopped as a sudden little laugh escaped her.
It had something of a giggle to it.
He looked at her.
She put her face straight.
‘That'll get us on the right footing,’ he said, ‘and no arguments.
You can get yourself into bed now.
Reveille's at seven for you, and that's when I'll have the bathtub ready.’
‘Mister, you lettin' me sleep in here, in your bed?’
Dolly eyed him disbelievingly.
‘You need to be comfortable with that ankle of yours,’ said Joe, picking up the tray.
He glanced again at the wallet.
‘I'll take charge of this,’ he said, and placed it on the tray.
‘Don't look at me,’ said Dolly, ‘I don't know where it came from.
What's in it?’
‘Banknotes and a letter.’
‘But —’ Dolly checked.
‘But what?’
‘Well, I don't know, do I?’ she said.
‘It's nothing to do  with me.
Look, can I wash me hands before I get into bed?’
‘Of course,’ said Joe.
He put the tray down, lifted her and carried her to the WC on the landing.
It had the extra amenity of a handbasin.
He set her down on her good foot.
‘Hopping job now,’ he said, opening the door for her.
‘Ain't you kind?’ she said.
To her, the house was quiet.
To Joe, it was a quiet with underlying vibrations, the vibrations of the Beavis family rumbling in their sleep.
Mr and Mrs Beavis slept downstairs, their sons and daughters on the second floor of the three-storeyed house.
‘I think I'll be able to 'op back to the bedroom by meself,’ said Dolly.
‘Where are you goin' to sleep?’
‘In the other room.’
‘Oh, it don't seem right, me takin' your bed.’
‘Get a good night's sleep,’ said Joe, and left her to it.
In his living-room, he examined the envelope again after collecting the tray from the bedroom, and after noting that the fivers were still in the wallet.
It reawakened his curiosity, the fact that Blackbeard had been willing to hand them all over for getting back a wallet that otherwise contained only a letter.
Dolly, of course, had played the innocent for the moment and had left the money untouched.
Had he been a man of no imagination and of totally strict principles, Joe would never have considered steaming the letter open.
During his time in the Army he had been exemplary as far as conduct in battle and general discipline were concerned, but he would not have been as traditional a British soldier as he was if he hadn't stretched a principle or two during life in barracks.
And his return to civilian life soon made him realize that almost every principle needed to be a little elastic.
It didn't hurt his conscience too much, therefore, to spend time steaming the envelope open and letting curiosity prevail.
He took the letter out and unfolded it.
There was no address, and the writing was in a foreign language.
It was all Greek to him.
He put the letter back in the envelope, but did not reseal it.
He tidied up, damped the fire down, undressed down to his underwear, took a cushion from the armchair to use as a pillow, used his overcoat to cover himself and went to sleep on the rug beside the hearth.
He had no difficulty in dropping off.
Ex-Sergeant Joe Foster could sleep anywhere.
Dolly also slept soundly, with nothing on her conscience and her ankle at blissful rest.
CHAPTER FOUR
‘Private Nobody?’
Dolly woke up.
There he was, standing beside the bed in grey trousers and a black jersey, and looking disgustingly wide-awake.
‘What's the time?’ she asked.
‘It's gone seven.
Did you get a good sleep?’
‘'Eavenly,’ said Dolly, digging herself deep under the bedclothes because she was naked.
‘Report on the state of your ankle.’
‘Report?
Look, I'm not in your Army, y'know.’
‘Do you good,’ said Joe.
‘Report state of ankle.’
‘It's a bit better,’ she said.
‘Well, it feels a bit better.’
‘Right, we'll have you on sick parade after your bath and give it an inspection.
For now, let's have you out of your cot.’
‘I ain't gettin' out while you're here, what d'you think I am?’
‘I'll bring the bath.’
He went to the lavatory, lifted a large tin bath off its wall hook, took it into the bedroom and placed it on the floor.
‘Hot water next.’
Out he went again and back he came, carrying a huge saucepan of boiling water.
He emptied it into the bath, and a cloud of steam rose.
Dolly watched him, bedclothes up to her chin.
He fetched cold water in the saucepan, adding it to the hot water.
Testing the mixture of hot and cold, he said, ‘Right, that'll do.
Soap, towel and scrubbing brush next.’
Out he went once more, and back he came again with soap, towel and scrubbing brush.
‘Here, give over,’ said Dolly, ‘I don't need no scrubbin'  brush, I went in the public baths two weeks ago.
I keep meself clean, I do.’
‘Give you half a minute to get in or be chucked in,’ said Joe.
He spotted her clothes hanging over the bottom rail of the iron bedstead.
A white petticoat, black stockings and white drawers lay over outer clothes.
The underwear was not only surprisingly clean, it was also pretty with ribbons and bows.
‘Damn my eyes,’ he said.
Dolly blushed.
‘That ain't nice, lookin',’ she said.
‘Anyway, I nicked 'em from a shop.
Me own stuff was all ragged and I thought I might as well nick something decent, it 'elps a girl, knowing she's dressed decent.’
‘Can't say I like all this nicking, Private Nobody.
It's got to stop.
Right, proceed with your ablutions, but mind your ankle.’
He left, closing the door.
Dolly took her bath.
She used the soap, but not the scrubbing brush.
That man, what a funny character, did he treat everyone as if they were in the Army?
What had he done with that wallet?
What a nerve, taking it away.
It was hers more than his.
He'd nicked a letter that was in it.
You just couldn't trust some people.
She winced then as she stubbed her right foot on the side of the tin bathtub.
Joe went downstairs to have a word with the Beavis family, to let them know he had a young woman upstairs and why.
It was seven-fifteen and they were all in the kitchen having breakfast.
It was a large Victorian family kitchen, and looked so when it was empty or when only Mrs Beavis was there.
But when they were all present, its size seemed reduced.
Big of heart, they were also big of body, except for young Linda.
Mrs Beavis looked plumply overflowing at the table.
Mr Beavis looked mountainous.
Well, he was five feet ten tall and five feet wide, or thereabouts.
His  sons Albert and Alfred, sixteen and nineteen respectively, were as full-girthed as the famous Fat Boy of Peckham, or almost.
His elder daughters, seventeen-year-old Nancy and fourteen-year-old Ella, were round all over.
Twelve-year-old Linda looked like a happy accident.
Mr Beavis was a navvy, and his sons worked at the Bermondsey shunting yards of the railway.
Nancy had a job in a leather factory.
Accordingly, father, sons and one daughter all brought wages home, and on top of that they had seven and sixpence a week from their lodger.
So the whole family ate handsomely and with a great amount of hearty relish.
They were a cheerful and noisy lot at meal times.
Food was a joy to them, and they had no sooner finished one meal than they were enthusiastically discussing the next.
At this moment they were enjoying a sustaining breakfast of sausages, bacon, eggs and fried bread.
Knowing that not many Southwark families sat down to a breakfast like that, the Beavises blessed their luck and addressed the world with beaming gratitude.
They all beamed at Sergeant Joe as he knocked and put his head round the door.
‘Well, 'ello, 'ello,’ said Mr Beavis in his fruity voice.
‘Come in, come in,’ cried Mrs Beavis happily.
‘'Ave a fried egg,’ invited Albert.
‘'Ave a banger,’ said Alfred.
‘'Ave a kiss,’ offered Nancy.
‘Sergeant Joe,’ said Linda, ‘you can 'ave me last bit of fried bread, if yer like.’
‘'E can't 'ave mine, I just ate it,’ said Ella, ‘but I got 'alf a sausage left.’
‘Appreciate all offers,’ said Joe, ‘but I'll be having my own breakfast in a little while.’
‘We're 'aving Irish stew an' suet dumplings for supper tonight,’ informed Ella.
‘An' spotted dog for afters,’ said Nancy.
‘With custard,’ said Albert.
‘An' sugar,’ said Linda.
‘What can we do for yer, Sergeant Joe?’ asked Mr Beavis.
‘Give 'im a kiss,’ said Nancy, plump mouth pursing.
‘That gel's gettin' forward,’ said Mrs Beavis fondly.
‘Sergeant Joe ain't gettin' no kiss from me,’ grinned Albert.
‘Much obliged for that, Albert,’ said Joe, and explained that he'd got a guest and how it came about, although he said nothing about the wallet or the men.
‘Crumbs, she bumped yer in the fog?’ said Ella.
‘An' done 'er ankle in?’ said Alfred.
‘An' she ain't got no 'ome?’ said Linda.
‘Poor thing,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I wouldn't mind bumpin' yer in the fog, Sergeant Joe,’ said Nancy.
‘Ain't that 'eart-warmin', Bessie?’ said Mr Beavis.
‘Bringing the poor gel 'ome an' givin' 'er 'is bed.’
‘I don't like you not 'aving no bed for a bit, Sergeant Joe,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘I'll air the one in the spare room for yer.’
There was a third room, a large one, on the first floor, and it was empty.
A previous lodger had departed on receipt of a message that the rozzers were after him on account of a jeweller's broken window.
‘No need, Bessie,’ said Joe.
‘Course there's need,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘and it won't be no bother, nor no charge.’
‘Ain't it romantic?’ said Nancy.
‘I wouldn't mind bein' carried 'ome by Sergeant Joe to 'is bed, it 'ud be worth sprainin' me ankle for.’
‘It 'ud sprain 'im all over,’ said Linda.
‘Cheeky,’ said Nancy.
‘Oh, me gawd, look at the time, I'll 'ave to run all the way to me work if I don't get goin'.’
There was a general rush then.
The kitchen overflowed with large bodies, plump bodies and colliding bodies as  Mr Beavis, his sons and his elder daughter all prepared to leave the house.
There were shouts, yells and happy Bedlam, with Mrs Beavis doling out huge brown paper packets of sandwiches to be eaten at work at midday.
Out of the kitchen they bounded, father, sons and daughter.
‘Look after yer 'omeless bit of stuff, Sergeant Joe,’ called Alfred, ‘get 'er some steak-an'-kidney pudden.’
‘And a nice bit of jam roly-poly,’ called Albert.
‘Nourishin' stews, that'll do the trick!’ bawled Mr Beavis from the passage.
‘An' some lovin' cuddles,’ sang Nancy, and shrieked with laughter.
Out of the house they went, into a morning magically clear.
The kitchen ceased vibrating, and its walls relaxed.
‘Am I still on my feet?’ asked Sergeant Joe.
‘Course you are,’ said Linda.
She and Ella had plenty of time before they needed to set off for school.
‘Can't think why, Carrots, I've just been steamrollered.’
The girls giggled.
Mrs Beavis laughed.
‘I got a rumbustious lot,’ she said cheerfully, ‘like an 'erd of noisy elephants sometimes.
Still, no-one can say they ain't 'ealthy.
Now don't you worry about that young woman that's upstairs, Sergeant Joe, except of course I wouldn't want no talk goin' on.’
‘No grounds for it, Bessie,’ said Joe.
‘Just thought I ought to let you know about her.’
‘Well, I know you'll treat 'er proper an' get 'er on 'er feet again,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘you ain't one for 'anky-panky, that you ain't.
I'd trust all me gels with yer.
I'll come up when I've got a bit of time, I'll come an' cheer her up.’
‘Take 'er some of the jam tart, Mum,’ said Ella.
‘I'll do that,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I'll come up this evenin',’ said Linda, ‘and if 'er shoes want a polish, I fink I could find some spit for 'er, I expect I could easy find a penn'orth.’
‘Little monkey you are, Linda,’ said Mrs Beavis, beaming proudly.
‘Top monkey in the class,’ said Joe.
‘Right, behave yourselves at school, girls.’
Returning to his living-room, he mixed some porridge oats with milk and water and put the saucepan on the open hob.
He used a wooden spoon to stir the mixture, whistling softly.
Dolly looked up at a knock on the door.
‘You can come in,’ she called, and in he came, carrying a bowl of cold water.
Dressed, except for one stocking, she was sitting on the edge of the bed.
Her long hair was gathered and twisted into a topknot, much like the style affected by the acrobatic cancan dancers of Paris.
She looked clean of face but shabby of clothes.
‘I've 'ad me bath,’ she said, ‘d'you like me looks better now, mister?’
‘You'll do,’ he said, eyeing her.
Quite good-looking on the whole.
No reason why she should be homeless, jobless and hungry all her life.
A decent blouse and skirt, or an attractive frock, either outfit worn with a clean straw boater, and she ought to be able to get a job in a store.
Something needed to be done to stop her picking pockets and nicking underwear.
While he was in no position to read her the Riot Act, it was plain commonsense to discourage her from her present ways.
She should be able to do far better for herself than that.
‘Right, expose injured ankle, Private Nobody.’
That Dolly had never met anyone quite like Sergeant Joe was obvious.
For all that she was twenty-one, she had a hard job to smother giggles as hysterical as a schoolgirl's.
‘You don't 'alf talk funny,’ she said.
She hitched her skirts.
A white petticoat danced as she lifted her bare right leg.
Her ankle was swollen and blue.
No, no fracture, he thought.
She'd have known by now if there had been, and the blue would have been dark and ugly.
‘Oh, look at that,’ she said, ‘what a lump of an ankle.’
‘Is it very painful?’ asked Joe.
‘Tender, more like, and achin',’ said Dolly.
Joe placed the bowl of water on the linoleum floor, took the discarded flannel from the bedside table and went down on one knee to apply treatment.
‘I 'ope it's not damaged permanent,’ she said, ‘I don't know what I'd do if I 'ad more 'ard luck and found I couldn't ever walk again.’
‘Chuck yourself in the river off one leg, I suppose,’ said Joe, dipping the flannel.
‘Here, that's not a nice thing to say,’ protested Dolly, eyes on his bent head as he began to apply cold compresses.
He had a good head of dark brown hair, and it looked as if he knew a decent barber.
And he knew how to treat her ankle, he was doing another soothing job on it.
‘Mister, 'ave you got a crust or two for me breakfast?’
‘Hot porridge,’ said Joe.
He applied the flannel repeatedly, then wound it around her tender joint and fastened it again with the safety-pin.
‘Then a boiled egg with some bread and butter.’
‘Butter?
Did you say butter?’ asked Dolly.
‘I can run to butter sometimes,’ said Joe, getting to his feet.
‘Blimey, are you rich, then?
Or 'ave you just come into a bit of money?’
‘Money out of that wallet?’ said Joe.
‘What wallet?
Oh, that one.’
‘Yes, it fell out of your hat,’ said Joe.
‘Now don't make me laugh,’ she said.
‘How could it 'ave jumped out of that geezer's pocket into me hat?’
‘Listen, Private Nobody, don't try to teach me how to suck eggs, let's get you to your porridge.’
But Dolly insisted on testing her ankle first.
It protested at once, so she let him carry her to the living-room.
He sat her down at the table, where she could feel the warmth of the fire after her bath.
They breakfasted on sugared porridge, boiled eggs, bread and butter, and a pot of tea.
Dolly ate with the enjoyment of a healthy young woman, and said he was useful considering he was a man.
So-so, he said.
Well, yes, said Dolly, so-so was about right for a man.
Mind, that didn't mean he wasn't a kind bloke, he'd been very kind to her.
Call me a port in a storm, said Joe.
I don't know about port in a storm, said Dolly, more like an Army parade ground.
Not that she was complaining.
Pleased to hear it, said Joe.
‘Are you the only lodger?’ she asked.
‘I am at the moment,’ said Joe.
‘The other room on this landing is empty.
It might do for you when you get a job.
By the way, I've let my landlady and her family know about you.’
‘Oh, help,’ said Dolly, ‘I suppose that gave 'er ideas.’
‘What ideas?’
‘You'll 'ave to tell her I'm not that kind of a girl.’
‘What kind?’
‘The wrong kind,’ said Dolly.
‘She'd chuck you out if you were, and me as well for bringing you here,’ said Joe.
‘Anyway, you can stay until your ankle's better and something's been sorted out for you.’
‘Mister, I don't know 'ow to thank you, honest I don't, you've got more human kindness than a bishop.
D'you 'ave to go off to your work soon?
I don't mind being left alone.’
‘I work here,’ said Joe.
‘Here?
In your lodgings?’
Dolly didn't seem to think much of that.
Wants to look around for the wallet while I'm not here, thought Joe.
‘What sort of work?’ she asked.
‘Writing letters for businessmen,’ said Joe.
‘That don't sound like a man's work,’ said Dolly.
‘What's a man's work, then?’ asked Joe, smiling.
‘Well, being a sergeant in the Army, for a start,’ said Dolly, ‘and fightin' for your king and country.
I bet you've been a sergeant, I bet you 'ave.’
‘Most people call me Sergeant Joe.’
‘Well, I ain't goin' to,’ said Dolly, ‘I'd feel daft.’
‘Nothing daft about a bit of discipline,’ said Joe.
‘Let's get it clear, if I'm going to knock you into shape, you'll obey orders, answer up smartly when you're spoken to, and be alert at all times.
Got that, Private Nobody?’
‘Here, I'm not an orphanage kid any more,’ said Dolly, ‘I've come of age, I 'ave.’
‘Yes, and you're on the downward path,’ said Joe.
‘Can't have any more of that.
Right, breakfast over, now let's get you back on the bed.
Your ankle needs to be rested all day.’
‘Am I goin' to be by meself?’ asked Dolly in disgust.
‘I won't 'ave anyone to talk to.’
‘I thought you said you didn't mind being alone.’
‘Only if you 'ad to go to work,’ said Dolly.
‘I'll find you a book,’ said Joe, who needed to keep his living-room to himself when he was doing his specialized work.
He got up, lifted her and carried her back to the bedroom despite her threats to do him a fatal injury if he didn't stop carting her about like a sack of old cabbages.
He placed her on the bed and looked down at her.
She made a face.
‘Can you read?’ he asked.
‘Well, what a cheek!
Course I can read,’ she said.
‘I 'ad schooling at the orphanage, didn't I?’
‘Good,’ said Joe.
‘Right, a book it is, then.’
He stooped and lifted the tin bath.
It was weighty with water now cold, but he limped to the lavatory with it, emptied it, cleaned it and put it back on its hook.
Then he found a book for her, one of a dozen given to him by George Singleton from a clear-out of Victorian titles.
‘Here you are, this should be just right for you,’ he said.
Dolly took it and opened it.
She read the title and inscription.
USEFUL HINTS FOR YOUNG WORKING LADIES.
Being a Detailed Summary of Rules, Requirements and Virtues Concerning Young Ladies Desirous of Working in Shops, Stores, Hotels and Business Houses.
‘Here, what's this?’ asked Dolly in disgust.
‘It ain't my kind of book, it ain't even a proper book.’
‘Yes, it is.
Digest it,’ said Joe, ‘and it'll teach you how to go after a job in a store or a ladies’dress shop, how to get the job and how to keep it.
Start from the beginning.’
‘You've got a hope,’ said Dolly, ‘I'll bore meself silly readin' this stuff, and I'll get an 'eadache as well.
Look, don't you 'ave a nice romantic book, one that's called a novel?
I read a nice one once, all about a poor girl who was found in the snow with a lost memory by a young and 'andsome squire that took her home to 'is castle and —’
‘Fetch up there, Private Nobody, squires don't live in castles.’
‘Well, it was something like a castle, and he 'ad tons of servants and a butler as well, and a sister who was secretly a witch and tried to make the poor girl worship Satan, but —’
‘But the squire found out and chopped his sister's head off, which made her change into a baby rabbit.
Yes, good stuff, but make do with what I've given you.
It'll be more help to you than a novel.’
‘You don't 'alf order a girl about,’ said Dolly.
‘Anyone can see you've been a sergeant.
Mind, I'm not complaining.’
‘Pleased to hear it,’ said Joe.
‘I've got some work to do now.’
‘Wait a tick,’ said Dolly, ‘where's that wallet?
I'll split the money with you, if you like, and wasn't there a letter in it as well?’
‘Was there?’
‘I'm only askin',’ said Dolly.
‘It's funny 'ow it managed to get under me hat.
I suppose that bearded bloke must 'ave dropped it, I suppose I must 'ave picked it up without thinking and that I went off with it in an absent-minded way.
I must 'ave been light-headed with starvation.
But we  can't give it back to 'im, can we, not knowing who 'e is or where 'e lives.’
‘His name and address might be in it,’ said Joe.
‘What?’
Dolly looked startled.
‘Is it, then?’
‘I'll have a good look.’
‘Oh, blow that,’ she said, ‘he don't deserve to 'ave it back, anyway, and it's really mine now.
Well, I was the one who found it.’
‘Found it?’
‘Yes, I suppose it was on the floor somewhere, in a pub where I was tryin' to sell some violets to save meself from real starvation.
And it's finders keepers, y'know.
You let me 'ave it back and what was in it, and I'll split with you.
That's fair, mister, ain't it?’
‘Read the book,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, blow you,’ said Dolly.
‘Relax,’ said Joe, and left her.
He washed up and tidied up, and put the baize cover back on the table.
He opened the larder, which he kept locked whenever he was out, and picked up his carpet-bag from the stone floor.
Sitting down, he extracted folders and studied some of the contents, including photographs of letters written by Byron, Shelley, Claire Clairmont, Byron's mistress, and Shelley's wife Mary, author of Frankenstein .
Joe never forged letters that were known to exist.
Far too risky.
George Singleton, a dab hand at composing missives purporting to have originated under the pens of famous people of the past, supplied pencilled drafts of same.
Joe's task was to write these out in the forged handwriting of the deceased.
He studied a letter written by Lord Byron to his sister, Mrs Leigh, on 29 August 1816.
It was about Claire Clairmont, madly in love with him.
Now don't scold me, but what could I do?
A foolish girl, in spite of all I could say or do, would come after me, or rather
went before — for I found her here — and I have had all the plague possible to persuade her to go back again but at last she went.
And so on for several more lines, and all to say he meant to finish with Claire, even though she was expecting his child.
Joe thought Lord Byron, at that stage of his life, needed frog-marching around Horse Guards Parade for a week, with ragamuffin boys allowed to chuck rotten vegetables at him.
He began to execute some sample specimens of the poet's handwriting.
Satisfying himself after a while, he commenced to write a follow-up letter, composed by George and dated 31 August.
His quill pen scratched away on a sheet of treated notepaper, creating a little masterpiece of querulous complaint about a mistress Byron was tired of.
‘Mister, here!’
Dolly was calling.
He put the quill down and went to see what she wanted.
She was still resting on the bed.
That was something in her favour.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘I told you this wasn't a real book.
It's daft, it says a girl's always got to wear grey if she works behind a counter or in a business 'ouse or as an 'otel clerk.
I ain't dyin' to wear grey all me life, y'know.’
‘You need a job,’ said Joe, ‘so never mind what you have to wear, as long as it's not fig leaves.
Keep reading, find out the best way to apply for a job and how to keep it.’
‘You've already said that,’ sighed Dolly.
‘I wouldn't like to think a kind bloke like you can be 'ard-'earted, makin' me stay here all alone and with a daft book like this.
A girl likes to 'ave someone to talk to now and again, it's all right for men, they ain't as sociable as we are.
Can't you come and talk to me for a bit?
I could tell you lots about me orphanage days.
Here, there was a boy there who wasn't 'alf a saucebox, he was always trying to get a look at me legs and drawers —’
‘Stop,’ said Joe.
‘What for?’ asked Dolly.
‘Can't have you talking like that, Private Nobody, don't want to hear about your legs and drawers.
It won't do, won't make a lady of you, and you have to be some kind of a lady to get a decent job in a decent ladies’ shop.
All the same, I think I know how you feel.
You want someone to talk to.
Right, hold on.’
He went down to see his landlady again.
Mrs Beavis was existing in an atmosphere of relative quiet, the boisterous echoes of her rumbustious family having long since died away.
She at once offered Joe a cup of hot morning Bovril and a warm sausage roll, if he'd like.
She'd made all the beds and done her cleaning, and was feeling like some Bovril herself.
Joe said he liked the sound of that, and could she bring her Bovril up and drink it while having a chat with the young woman who was resting her sprained ankle on his bed?
Said young woman was dying for female talk, and he was busy himself, anyway.
‘Well, you got a nice way with you, Sergeant Joe,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘and I don't suppose many women would find it easy to say no to you, whatever you wanted.’
‘Steady, Bessie,’ said Joe, who didn't intend to ask the ultimate of any woman until he'd acquired enough savings to put an end to his career as a forger.
The ultimate meant marriage in his book.
‘Well, you're a manly feller, Joe, that you are,’ beamed Mrs Beavis.
‘I'll go up to that poor gel and 'ave a nice chat with 'er.
I'll take some Bovril up for 'er too, and some sausage rolls, we all 'ave to keep body an' soul together.
I'll bring yours up the same time, in a few minutes.’
‘Much obliged, Bessie,’ said Joe, ‘you'd make a fine corporal.
Can't say fairer than that.’
Dolly lay numb.
‘Then there was me sister's weddin' eighteen years ago,’ said Mrs Beavis, seated on the bedside chair.
‘What a day  that was for 'er, it nearly give 'er permanent ‘ysterics, though she's been all right lately, except for 'er chilblains.
Lovely bride, she was, she 'ad apple blossom in 'er weddin' bokey.
‘Er weddin' dress 'ad been run up for 'er by Mrs Stuart that 'ad only just give up 'er job workin' for a dressmaker in Shoreditch.
Well, she was gone sixty by then, an' they give 'er ten yards of pink silk an' five pounds on 'er retirement day, and I asked 'er if she fancied makin' me sister's weddin' dress to keep 'er 'and in a bit — 'ere, you ain't ate your other sausage roll yet.
You all right, love?
It's a shame you ain't got no 'ome nor fam'ly, but I don't like to see someone not eatin' when they're laid up, you need a bit of food then.
Anyway, the weddin' day come along, but would yer believe it, that Arthur Goodwin, the bridegroom, didn't turn up.
Well, not at the time 'e didn't, nor 'is best man, not for nearly an hour.
That Arthur 'ad stopped at a pub on 'is way to the church, 'e said 'e needed fortifyin', and 'im and 'is best man both went in the pub an' stayed there a lot longer than they should of.
At the church, me poor sister was near to swoonin', our mum 'ad to give 'er smellin'-salts, with 'is reverend the vicar sayin' 'e'd 'ave to cancel the ceremony.
Well, that Arthur turned up at last and the vicar married them, but afterwards me sister let Arthur know just 'ow she felt, she chucked the whole weddin' cake at 'im, then 'er bokey an' then a full bottle of port.
She might easy 'ave murdered 'im if our dad 'adn't pulled 'er off.
You sure you don't want that other sausage roll, love?’
‘I ain't got the strength,’ said Dolly faintly.
‘I'll eat it for yer,’ said Mrs Beavis with cheerful understanding, ‘it don't do to let good food lie about not eaten.’
She took a large and happy bite.
‘I must say you've 'ad an 'ard time, not 'aving no job or anything, but you're in good 'ands, love.
Sergeant Joe'll see yer sprain don't get worse, 'e'll get the doctor in if it does.
‘E's got a warm 'eart, 'e'll call the doctor in if 'e thinks yer leg's broke.
Doctor Watts, near the Elephant an' Castle.
Mrs Baldwin's been under 'im just recent, poor woman, with a leg ulcer.
‘E treated our Nancy when she 'ad w'oopin' cough, but 'e told Mrs Walker that 'er varicose veins is provin' obstinate.
Well, when varicose veins catch up with yer —’
‘Is that Sergeant Joe goin' out?’ asked Dolly, exhausted from the flow of words pouring relentlessly into her ears.
‘Is that you goin' out, Sergeant Joe?’ called Mrs Beavis.
‘Right first time, Bessie.
To get a paper.’
Joe descended the stairs, a grin on his face.
He knew all about his landlady's ability to talk the hind-leg off a cockney donkey.
‘'E usually goes out an' gets a daily paper about this time,’ Mrs Beavis informed Dolly, ‘and an evening paper later.
And a bit of shoppin' quite reg'lar.
‘E don't like sittin' too long at 'is work.
Well, it's what you might call clerkin' work, writin' letters for business firms at 'ome, which don't come too welcome to an active man like 'im, so 'e likes to get out as much as 'e can to give 'is gammy leg a walk.
Mind, it don't make sense to me, an 'andsome feller like 'im not 'aving no wife.
Our Nancy might be only seventeen, but she's already a full-growed woman to look at, and I know she'd be pleased to be 'is wife, 'e'd only 'ave to ask 'er, except 'e did say once that 'e's waitin' a while before 'e gets married.
All me three gels is fond of 'im…’
On and on the happy landlady went.
I'll murder her in a minute, thought Dolly.
And him as well.
CHAPTER FIVE
Mrs Beavis had gone at last.
Joe reappeared, a copy of the late edition of the Westminster Gazette in his hand.
Dolly, from the bed, ground her teeth at him.
‘You rotten swine,’ she said.
‘Is that a complaint, Private Nobody?’
‘Stop callin' me that, it's daft.
I suppose you realize I'm nearly dead from suffocation?’
‘State your complaint in full,’ said Joe.
‘I wish I could, but I'm all wore out,’ said Dolly bitterly.
‘From having someone to talk to?’
‘Don't make me laugh,’ said Dolly, ‘your landlady's not just someone, she's a bloomin' steamroller.
You did it on me, gettin' her to come up and talk to me, and don't think I don't know you're laughin' about it.
You ought to be stood up against a wall, you ought.
It ain't funny, y'know, gettin' a steamroller to come up and suffocate me, and me in an unwell condition.
I thought at first you was a kind bloke, I didn't think you was goin' to help put me in me grave.’
‘Cheer up, you're not dead yet,’ said Joe.
‘I think an improvement's setting in.’
‘All right, I forgive you,’ said Dolly.
‘What's in the paper?’
‘Usual kind of news.
Thought you might like to read it.
For a bit of light relief, except that there's been a murder.’
‘A murder?’
‘Some unlucky bloke was found late last night in Houndsditch, with his throat cut from ear to ear,’ said Joe.
‘That's it, cheer me up,’ said Dolly, ‘it's just what I need.
Are you always the life and soul of the party?’
‘Not always,’ he said.
‘Here.’
He placed the newspaper on her lap.
She picked it up.
In the Stop Press column on the front page were details of the murder.
She read a few lines, then made a face.
‘Poor bloke,’ she said soberly, and read on, her expression registering distaste.
‘Awful,’ she said.
‘Don't like it much myself,’ said Joe.
‘Are you thinking about the fact that we might have been murdered ourselves last night?’
‘Oh, blimey,’ she said, and bit her lip.
‘Don't talk about it, I'll 'ave bad dreams.’
‘The peculiar thing is that Blackbeard seemed ready to murder us for a wallet with a few fivers in it, all of which he was going to give to his bruiser, anyway.
Makes no sense, does it?’
‘Don't ask me,’ said Dolly, ‘I ain't educated enough to work out Chinese puzzles.’
She didn't, he noticed, ask him how many fivers.
She knew, of course.
She cast him a glance.
‘How many's a few fivers?’ she asked.
Joe smiled.
‘Two,’ he said.
‘What?’
‘Four.’
‘That's more like it,’ said Dolly.
‘Well, I mean, all the fuss 'e made.’
‘Yes, but what about exactly?
Four fivers make twenty quid, and he was going to give that amount to his bruiser.
I just pointed that out.’
‘Well, I suppose — well, didn't you say last night there was a letter as well?’
‘You think that was what he was really worked up about?’ said Joe.
‘I don't know, do I?
I'm only an 'omeless girl out of an orphanage; you're the clever one.
Still, you shouldn't worry about it, mister, I'll take it off your 'ands, you just keep ten quid of the money.
Well, you deserve that, standin' by me like you did and givin' me your bed when I 'adn't got a farthing to call me own.
We'll split the money down the middle, shall we?’
‘Can't encourage splitting the proceeds of thievery,’ said Joe, and went back to his work.
In frustration, Dolly read the newspaper.
Yet she couldn't help thinking he was a bit of a giggle.
Well, he was slightly off his rocker to start with.
He couldn't forget he'd been an Army sergeant, he talked like one and acted as if he was still on a parade ground or something.
There was a report in the paper about the coronation and the unveiling of the memorial to Queen Victoria two days before the coronation, and about the many crowned heads of Europe who were going to be present, including the German Emperor, the late Queen's grandson.
The safety of all these august personages must be assured.
Certain European monarchs were constantly troubled by agitators, anarchists and pro-republican factions.
Bombs that were thrown at monarchist gatherings in Europe must not be thrown in London.
The Home Office was willingly cooperating with other authorities to ensure the events passed off peacefully and with due respect.
Dolly made a face, then rustled the newspaper irritably.
‘Oi, mister!’ she called.
Joe failed to respond this time.
He was busy forging a letter in the handwriting of Claire Clairmont.
To Byron, concerning their child Allegra.
I have this day received a letter from Dearest Mary about that which has so distressed me, your unbelievable decision to place Allegra in a convent —
‘Oi, mister!’
Resignedly he put his quill down and went to the bedroom.
‘Now what?’ he asked.
‘Oh, hello,’ said Dolly.
‘What's your problem?’
‘Me foot 'urts,’ she said, sitting up.
‘Badly?’
‘Well, it ain't good,’ she said.
‘Can't have that, can we, Private Nobody?’ said Joe.
‘Sick-list cases are a liability.
Right, let's have a look at you.’
‘You and your Private Nobody,’ said Dolly, and pulled her skirt up, saucily unveiling her white petticoat with its foamy lace and pink ribbons.
Joe gave her a questioning glance.
Dolly responded with a sweet smile.
‘Yes, all right, I can see,’ he said.
‘Very pretty.’
‘Well, when a girl's sufferin' desperate times, she might as well nick something nice,’ said Dolly.
‘I told you that before.’
‘Well, I'm now telling you that if you go nicking again, you'll get seven days’ hard labour scrubbing this house out.
Present injured foot that's hurting.’
She drew her petticoat up.
Her left leg was clad in one of her black lisle stockings.
Her right leg was bare.
It looked smooth, shapely and healthy.
Around her ankle was the pinned flannel.
He undid it and drew it off.
The swelling was still very evident, but the blue tint was no worse.
‘Oh, lor', look at that,’ she said, ‘ain't it 'orrible?
Who'd have a leg like that?
You wouldn't think I'd been complimented on them, would you, but when I 'appened to show them accidental to a gentleman once, he said I ought to go on the stage and wear tights and a little frou-frou skirt — here, where you goin'?’
‘To get some cold water.’
He brought some in the basin, and treated her ankle as before.
Dolly, still sitting up, watched him.
‘You're a nice bloke really,’ she said, ‘I'm not 'olding it against you that you're keepin' the wallet and all that  money to yourself, even if it is rightly mine, like I said.
Well, it is.’
‘Yes, in a thieving kind of way,’ said Joe.
‘I'll get the rats in a minute,’ said Dolly.
‘You shouldn't say things like that to a girl who's had my kind of 'ard luck.
D'you really think me legs are pretty?’
‘I said your petticoat was.’
Joe fastened the wet flannel around her ankle again.
‘I'll get you some food now,’ he said.
‘I'll come out and 'ave it with you, shall I?’
‘I'll bring yours in,’ said Joe.
‘Don't you care that I'm all bored?’
‘I'll bring a pack of cards as well,’ said Joe on his way out.
‘You can play Patience.’
‘Think you're funny, don't you?’ she called after him.
‘Not much,’ called Joe.
He took food to her ten minutes later.
Cold ham, pickle and a plateful of crusty bread and butter.
‘Thanks ever so,’ said Dolly gratefully, ‘you're a nice bloke mostly.’
‘Midday rations,’ said Joe, ‘hot supper this evening.’
He placed the tray on her lap.
Dolly, healthily peckish, said, ‘I don't know how you can be so good to me, nursin' me ankle, givin' me your bed, and feedin' me as well, and me a girl that's done pinchin' and nickin'.’
‘It's all out of the goodness of my hard heart,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, you're not so bad most times,’ said Dolly.
‘You goin' to come in and talk to me after you've eaten?’
‘Sorry, I'm busy.
I've got a full day's work to do.’
‘Oh, you're mean, you are,’ said Dolly.
Joe made a sandwich for himself.
Having eaten it, he brewed some tea and took her a cup.
She fell over herself in a spasm of new gratitude, only to give him an earful because he wouldn't bring his own tea in and talk to her.
It all bounced off him.
It was Dolly's first encounter with the  imperturbable nature of a British Army sergeant, and it made her want to spit.
He drank his own tea while getting on with his work, work that demanded care and concentration.
Each forgery had to be faultless, and each took time.
He was allowed forty minutes of peace before the patient made herself heard again.
‘Mister?
Mister, you there?’
He ignored the summons.
‘Oh, me foot, I've fell off the bed!’
He appeared.
She was on the bed.
‘Report on what happened, Private Nobody.’
‘Me?’ said Dolly.
‘You fell off the bed, then what?’
‘Me?
Oh, that.
Well, I nearly fell off, that's all, and it gave me foot a bit of a twinge.
Still, it's all right now.
Here, ain't you an 'andsome bloke?
‘Ave you got a lady friend?
I bet you 'ave, I bet she's a treat and wears posh hats.
Your landlady said you wasn't married, that you was waiting for a while.
Does your lady friend mind?
I wish I was some 'andsome gent's lady friend, but I don't 'ave the looks really, I've just got a sort of orphanage face — here, what's goin' on?
Oh, you brute!’
Dexterously, Joe turned her on to her stomach, then slapped her bottom.
Dolly didn't think much of that.
For one thing, she was unprepared for it.
For another, it wasn't decent.
True, it was only one slap, but even that was one too many.
She yelled.
‘Punishment applied for playing up, Private Nobody,’ said Joe.
‘Slate's clean now.
Behave yourself.’
Dolly, still lying face down, breathed, ‘Oh, you ain't decent.
You wait, I'll 'ave the police on you for assault and battery.
You've bruised me, you have.’
‘Well, if it gets painful, let me know,’ said Joe, ‘and I'll bathe it.
With warm water.’
‘Oh, I never 'eard the like,’ said Dolly, ‘that's downright  indecent.
I don't know 'ow you can talk like that to a girl that's twenty-one.’
‘Well, be your age,’ said Joe, and returned to his work.
Dolly quivered all over and buried her face in the pillows to smother her shrieks of laughter.
But she stopped playing up.
It tried her patience, but she left him alone.
He reappeared at four o'clock, when she was just about dead from boredom.
‘Anything to report?’ he asked.
‘I ain't talkin' to you,’ said Dolly, perking up.
‘Ankle feeling better?
Bottom up to scratch?’
‘Oh, you cheeky cuss,’ she said, ‘I might be poor and 'omeless, but I'm respectable, I am, and I ain't goin' to listen to you talkin' about my bottom, you ought to be locked up for even mentioning it.’
‘That's the spirit,’ said Joe, ‘I like to hear a girl standing up for herself.
I'll treat your ankle again now, then I'm going to the shops.
D'you like fish?
How about plaice?
Right, I'll get a couple and we'll have them with mashed cream potatoes.
Fancy that?
Good, we'll have that, then.’
Dolly tried to say it would be nice if he'd give her the chance to tell him what she liked, but he was away again.
He came back with the basin of cold water and put more cold compresses on her ankle.
She said she was grateful that he could be a real gent when he tried.
‘So-so,’ said Joe.
‘I'm off to the shops next, I'll bring you a cup of tea on my way.’
He brought her a cup, and with it a small cardboard packet.
‘What's this?’ she asked.
‘Pack of cards.
For playing Patience.’
Dolly chucked the pack at him.
Mrs Beavis, busy preparing a large supper for her family, answered a knock on her front door.
Archie Cousins stood on her doorstep.
He let a neighbourly grin slide over his  foxy face.
Thin, quick and elusive, he was never where he was expected to be.
He was also workshy, and no-one could remember when he last had a regular job, but most people could recall when he'd last tried to touch them for the loan of a bob.
Yesterday, usually.
His habitual dress was a long black jacket with undone buttons, baggy grey trousers, a woollen scarf and an ancient brown bowler.
‘'Ello, Bessie me old sweet'eart,’ he said, ‘'ow yer keepin'?’
‘I ain't yer old sweet'eart,’ said Mrs Beavis, whose naturally sunny beam did not always shine for everyone, ‘and I 'appen to be keepin' me hands to meself.’
Archie, accepting this reference to his pickpocketing activities on occasions such as the Derby, put a finger against the side of his nose and winked.
‘All in a day's work, Bessie me love,’ he said.
‘What day's work?’ asked the large lovable landlady.
‘Well, as I'm always sayin' to me old Dutch, what the eyes don't see the 'eart don't grieve about, and a bloke's got to make a livin' some'ow.
‘Ere, what did I come for?
I know — is Sergeant Joe in?’
‘Not just now,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘'e 'appens to 'ave just gone out.’
‘That ain't too inconvenient to me,’ said Archie, ‘I'll go up an' wait, I don't suppose 'e'll be long, will 'e?’
‘'E didn't say, but 'e won't want you nosin' around 'is room-'ere, come back 'ere.’
Archie had sidled adroitly past her.
‘Save me callin' again, me old darling,’ he said, making for the stairs.
‘You ain't to go up there,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘there's a — oh, 'ello, me loves.’
Ella and Linda bounced in through the open front door.
At least, Ella did.
Her plumpness never restricted her movements.
She bounded through life.
Into the house  she came like an Indiarubber ball, Linda skipping in behind her.
‘Watcher, Mum,’ said Ella, ‘is there a slice of cake?’
‘Course there is, pet,’ said Mrs Beavis, and Archie, moving fast and silently, ghosted up the stairs to the landing.
A few minutes later, Linda, a slice of cake in her hand, slipped out of the kitchen and ran up the stairs, thinking to ask Sergeant Joe if the poor young woman with a sprain wanted her shoes polished, although at the moment the eating of the cake was interfering with her spit.
The living-room door was ajar.
She pushed it open and put her head in.
‘Sergeant Joe — oh, what you doin' of, Mr Cousins?’
Archie had already been through every drawer in the tallboy.
He had in his hurry left one drawer just a little open, and was now delving into the carpet-bag, which he'd found at the bottom of the shelved larder.
His rummaging hand hastily withdrew.
‘Well, 'ello, Linda me pretty, 'ow yer doin'?’ he said.
The carpet-bag was on the table.
‘Just 'ome from school, eh?
Bet you're the teachers’ fav'rite.’
‘What you doin' of?’ persisted Linda.
She knew Archie Cousins was a loafer whose sharp nose pointed him at everything except honest toil.
His slippery feet could take him in and out of a West End emporium in two shakes of a fox's tail, but what he collected on his way through was as much as six pairs of hands could manage.
‘What you got that bag out for?
It ain't yours, it's Sergeant Joe's, and it's private.’
‘Oh, I was just waitin' for 'im,’ said Archie easily.
‘'E won't be long, yer mum said.
I just 'appened on 'is bag, it was near to fallin' off the table.
Anyway, don't you worry yer pretty little 'ead, Linda, I'll tell 'im you come up to say 'ello.’
‘I ain't goin' downstairs,’ said Linda, ‘I bet you was goin' to pinch things from that bag.
I'll tell Sergeant Joe —’
‘Here, who's that out there, what's goin' on?’
Dolly suddenly made herself heard from the bedroom.
‘Now you've done it,’ accused Linda, ‘you've woke up a poor young woman Sergeant Joe's been lookin' after.’
‘Well, ain't that a coincidence?’ said Archie.
‘I just 'eard about 'er.’
‘Who is that?’
Dolly made herself heard again, having swung herself off the bed to hop to the door of the bedroom.
‘Come on, what's goin' on?’
‘Miss, it's a bloke from down the street,’ called Linda, determined not to leave the living-room while the fly Archie Cousins was still there.
‘'E's been lookin' in Sergeant Joe's private bag.’
‘What?’
Dolly thought about the wallet.
‘He's doin' what?’
‘Now, Linda me cherry blossom, yer don't need to say nothing, yer know,’ said Archie. ‘'Ere, would yer like a new penny?
I might just 'ave one on me.’
He fished around in his pockets.
‘I don't want no money from you,’ said Linda, ‘I don't trust yer, Mr Cousins, I bet yer up 'ere to do thievin'.’
‘Me?’ said Archie, a classic study of injured innocence.
Dolly hopped to the open door of the living-room.
She saw the girl and the man.
‘That's 'im, miss,’ said Linda, 'an' that's Sergeant Joe's bag.’
‘'Ello,’ said Archie amiably, ‘got an 'urt leg, 'ave yer?
I 'ad one once.
Well, there was this runaway 'orse —’
‘How d'you know I've got an 'urt leg?’ asked Dolly suspiciously, holding on to the door frame for support.
‘Oh, I 'eard, yer know,’ said Archie, ‘and I can see you're standin' on yer good 'un, aincher, ducky?
Tell yer what, I'll pop off 'ome and get yer me bottle of embrocation, seein' I can't wait no longer for Sergeant Joe, anyway.
I got a bloke to see about some business.’
‘Oh, no you don't,’ said Dolly, ‘I want to know what you're doin' 'ere.’
‘Me?’
Archie looked positively pained.
‘Me?
I just popped up to see Sergeant Joe, didn't I?
‘E's a mate of mine.
I don't tell no lie, I was goin' to ask 'im for the loan of a bob so's I could get to see this bloke that might be puttin' a bit of business in me way.
Well, 'e 'angs out in Barnet market, and I ain't got enough to cover me train fare.
Sergeant Joe wouldn't want me to walk all the way, 'e'd see me straight with a bob.’
‘Sergeant Joe ain't your mate,’ said Linda.
‘'E ain't 'is mate,’ she said to Dolly for good measure.
‘He looks more like someone's bad luck, if you ask me,’ said Dolly.
‘I like a joke,’ said Archie, ‘but I've got to be off, if yer'll excuse me.
Not that it ain't been nice talkin' to yer.
You too, Linda me sweet'eart.’
‘You're lyin',’ said Dolly.
‘Come on, what've you been lookin' for?’
‘Me?’ said Archie.
‘I — 'ere, what's that?’
He turned his head to look at the mantelpiece.
Dolly and Linda followed his gaze.
He was out in a flash, going past Dolly like a fox slipping the hounds.
He whisked down the stairs at speed.
‘Blow that,’ said Dolly, ‘he's dished us.’
‘Oh, me dad always says 'e's 'ere today an' gone today,’ said Linda.
‘Are you one of the landlady's girls?’ asked Dolly.
‘I'm Linda, I'm fav'rite with Sergeant Joe.
‘E calls me Private Carrots.
I bet 'e won't like Mr Cousins lookin' in 'is carpet-bag.’
‘We'd better 'ave a look in it ourselves,’ said Dolly, ‘in case he's taken anything.’
‘Oh, d'you fink we'd better?’ asked Linda.
‘Yes, let's 'ave a look,’ said Dolly, and hopped to the table.
She pulled the carpet-bag open wide and saw cardboard folders.
Downstairs the front door opened and  closed.
Dolly felt between the folders in a quick hopeful search for the wallet.
‘What's this?’ asked Sergeant Joe from the landing, and came in.
Dolly leaned on the table to help keep her right foot off the floor.
‘Someone's been up 'ere,’ she said.
‘Yes, it was Mr Cousins,’ said Linda.
‘I fink 'e was after pinchin' somefing from yer bag, Sergeant Joe, only I come up an' caught him openin' it.’
‘He mentioned he was a friend of yours,’ said Dolly.
‘I wouldn't want 'im as a friend of mine.’
‘Yes, we fought we'd better see if 'e'd pinched anyfing,’ said Linda.
‘Can't think why Archie Cousins should pick on me,’ said Joe, eyeing his carpet-bag frowningly.
He'd made an unusual mistake in not locking the larder.
‘Not his style to try his luck on his close neighbours.’
From the passage downstairs came the sound of the landlady's singing voice.
‘Linda, you up there worryin' Sergeant Joe again?’
Linda, going out to the landing, called down, ‘Yes, I'm up 'ere, Mum, but I ain't a worry to Sergeant Joe.’
‘Young pickle, that's what you are.
Come down 'ere now, there's a love, Sergeant Joe's got things to do.’
‘Oh, all right,’ said Linda, and went down to tell her mum about catching Archie Cousins rummaging around.
Her mum said Sergeant Joe would take care of that Flash Harry, but if he didn't she'd have a go herself, she'd bash Archie's bowler so hard over his head he'd never get it off again, he'd have to go about like a man with no eyeballs.
Linda thought that good for a giggle.
So did Ella.
They watched their mum making suet dumplings for the stew which, in the iron cauldron on the hob above the glowing range fire, was already giving off an aroma that was a delight to anyone's nose on a winter evening.
Upstairs, Sergeant Joe noticed the partly open drawer in  his tallboy.
He pulled it farther open and saw that a bunch of quill pens in an elastic band had been moved.
He examined other drawers.
The contents of each had been disturbed.
Dolly watched him.
‘What was he lookin' for?’ she asked.
‘No idea,’ said Joe, placing his carpet-bag on the tallboy.
‘Money?’
‘Probably.
I'll go round and see him this evening.’
‘'Ave you got money lyin' about, then?’ asked Dolly.
‘I don't let money lie around,’ said Joe.
‘Right, I'll start doing something about supper now, but I'll carry you back to bed first.’
‘Oh, don't be rotten,’ said Dolly, ‘I'll go mad if I 'ave to lie on that bed any more today.
I can sit down in 'ere a bit, can't I?’
‘Sounds reasonable,’ said Joe.
‘Yes, you can sit and peel the potatoes.’
‘Me do what?’
‘Peel the potatoes.’
‘I 'ate peelin' potatoes,’ said Dolly.
‘Don't we all.
You can sit at the table and do them.
Idle hands equal lazy brains.
Not good for either of us.
Smarten up, Private Nobody, do your bit.’
‘Do me bit?’ said Dolly.
‘I ain't an Army skivvy, mister.’
But she let him help her into a chair.
However, when he placed a bowl of potatoes on the table in front of her, and gave her a peeling knife, she wasn't at all pleased.
‘Me peel all them?’ she protested.
‘Glad to have your help,’ said Joe.
He poured some water into the bowl and brought a saucepan containing more water to the table.
The baize cover was off, revealing an oil-cloth cover beneath.
‘The saucepan's for the peeled spuds,’ he said.
‘Oh, lor',’ muttered Dolly, and went to work with gritted teeth and the knife.
Joe began to prepare the  plaice, using a thin and very sharp knife to fillet them.
He paused in his work to stare at what Dolly was doing to her first potato.
The skin was coming off in chunks.
‘Fetch up, Dolly, don't chop it to pieces.
Peel it.’
‘I am, ain't I?’
‘Perishing punkah wallahs,’ said Joe, looking at the finished potato.
Dolly had reduced it to the size of an irregular-sided marble.
‘That's a peeled spud?’
‘Yes, and I can play the mouth-organ as well,’ said Dolly.
‘Didn't they teach you how to peel potatoes at the orphanage?’
‘I never let 'em,’ said Dolly, ‘I told you, I 'ate peelin' potatoes.’
‘Right, it's kitchen fatigues for you when you're on your feet again,’ said Joe, ‘and that'll include teaching you how to do a fair job of work on spuds.
Got that, Private Nobody?’
‘You don't half keep on at a girl,’ said Dolly.
‘Leave the rest of the spuds,’ said Joe, ‘I'll do them.
But at least you're sitting up straight.
You've got a good back.
Keep at it and I might let you have a couple of those fivers.’
‘Now you're talkin',’ said Dolly.
‘I don't mind you 'aving the others.
Here, I think I could get a bit for the wallet, it's pigskin, did you notice?’
‘I noticed.’
‘Could you let me 'ave it back, then?’
‘Not yet,’ said Joe, wondering exactly what Archie Cousins had been after, and why.
‘Oh, blow you,’ said Dolly.
CHAPTER SIX
Mrs Connie Cousins, a long-suffering woman of forty, opened her front door and found Sergeant Joe smiling at her.
The evening was cold and misty, the fog beginning to creep up the Thames and to sneak into the alleyways on either side of the river.
Still, a woman could forget that when a nice upstanding chap like Sergeant Joe called on her.
‘'Ow'd yer do, old soldier?’ she said.
‘All the better for seeing you, Connie.’
‘'Ello, 'ave yer come for a cuddle, then?’
‘Not if Archie's around.
Is he?’
‘'E is, if 'e ain't slipped me.’
‘I'd like to see him,’ said Joe.
‘That's right, be a disappointment to me,’ said Mrs Cousins, warmly clad in a dark brown woollen dress with huge leg-of-mutton sleeves now going out of fashion.
Well, the dress was five years old, and there was little chance of affording a new one unless Archie finally backed a Derby winner.
‘You sure you want to see Archie an' not me?’
‘Well, you're better-looking, Connie, but it's Archie I'd like to have a word with,’ said Joe.
‘What's 'e been up to this time?’ asked the put-upon wife.
‘I don't know if that shifty old man of mine is ever goin' to be a credit to 'is fam'ly; I don't know there's any man that can spend more time doin' nothing than Archie can.
Come in, Sergeant Joe, don't stand out there in the cold, I'll get Archie for yer-'ere, no yer don't, yer crafty fly-be-night.’
She turned to catch Archie in the act of trying to vanish upstairs.
‘You come down 'ere now, Sergeant Joe wants a word with yer, and if it means 'e's goin' to knock yer 'ead off, I'll give 'im an 'and.’
‘Me?
What've I done?’ asked Archie, sidling sideways up the stairs in the hope of reaching the lavatory and locking himself in.
‘Come 'ere,’ said his trouble-and-strife, whisking along the passage.
She reached and grabbed the tail of his long jacket, and she hauled him back down the stairs.
Joe entered the passage and closed the door.
‘Would yer be wantin' to speak to 'im in private, Joe?’
‘In your parlour, Connie, if that's all right with you.’
‘Yes, I don't want 'im bein' shown up in front of 'is fam'ly in the kitchen,’ said Mrs Cousins.
‘'E gives me enough embarrassment as it is by what 'e gets up to.
In yer go, Archie.’
‘Now look, Connie me pet, it's bleedin' cold in the parlour,’ complained Archie, ‘and, anyway, I got to see a bloke about a job.’
‘Don't come the old acid with me,’ said his better half, ‘you ain't seen any bloke about a job since Noah built the Ark, and if anyone offered you one you'd fall down dead.
In the parlour you go, me lad, or I'll crown yer with me kitchen poker.’
‘Stone me Aunt Fanny,’ said Archie, ‘I ain't got nothing to talk to Sergeant Joe about — oh, all right.
’ He flitted into the parlour as his wife made a threatening gesture.
‘There y'are, Sergeant Joe,’ she said, ‘'e can't slip yer now, only watch 'e don't wriggle out through the keyhole.
Mind, I ain't sayin' 'e don't 'ave 'is good points, nor that 'e don't come up with a cuddle and a present sometimes.
Except,’ she added regretfully, ‘the presents usually turn out to be nicked.
‘E give me a lovely pair of stays once with satin panels.
Just what I wanted at the time, to 'elp me keep me figure tidy.
I could've sworn they was new, but what d'yer think I found out?
That 'e'd nicked them off a woman's washing-line in Brixton.
I chased 'im all the way  up the Butts with me stew saucepan, and a bobby 'ad to come an' save 'im from 'aving 'is brains bashed in.
Well, you can go an' talk to 'im now.
You shouldn't need no 'elp, but if 'e gives yer any lip, just call me.’
‘I'll manage, Connie,’ said Joe.
‘Know yer will, me old soldier,’ said Mrs Cousins, and departed to her kitchen.
Joe entered the parlour.
It was in darkness.
‘Light the gas, Archie,’ he said.
‘No, I can see yer all right—’
‘Light the gas.’
Archie muttered, but struck a match.
He lit one of the gas mantles above the fireplace.
Sergeant Joe made a thoughtful study of him.
Archie tried a friendly grin.
‘Look, me old mate —’
‘What were you after in my lodgings, Archie?’
‘Me?
In yer lodgings?’
‘You heard.’
‘Oh, yer lodgings.’
Archie blinked.
‘See what yer mean, Joe, me neighbourly visit.
Well, I 'eard — well, someone told me you was lookin' after some poor tart that 'ad 'urt 'er leg, an' young Linda said so.
I popped in on yer to see if I could do anything for yer, like did yer want a medical bandage that I could get cheap.
She was there all right, standin' on one leg — 'ere, yer done yerself proud, Joe, findin' a nice-looking bit of stuff like 'er.
That's all, me old mate, been nice talkin' to yer —’
‘Cut the fairy stories,’ said Joe.
Somehow, his mind was still on the wallet and the letter, discounting the money.
He could not forget that Blackbeard had arrived on the scene sweating and then become coldly murderous in his need to get the wallet back.
‘What were you after, Archie?
I want to know.’
‘Course yer do, Joe,’ said Archie, ‘course yer do.
Well, I ain't one not to be frank, so I'll tell yer.
I got to admit I didn't pop over just to offer yer some neighbourly 'elp, it  was on me mind while I was there to touch you for the loan of a bob.
I'm a bit skint at the moment.’
‘Won't do, Archie,’ said Joe, ‘won't stand up.’
Guess-work made him flight an arrow.
‘Who sent you?’
‘Eh?’
Archie's face fell apart.
‘What d'yer mean, who sent me?’
Joe was remembering how he thought he heard someone behind him when he was carrying Dolly through Newington Butts.
It occurred to him now that Blackbeard had got on his tracks in the fog.
It was in keeping with the determination of the man, and he'd probably only held off because those bobbies had to be somewhere in the vicinity.
But he'd made sure he knew where the quarry lived.
And today he'd made enquiries, of course, and had found it easy to be put in touch with someone who would sniff around in search of the wallet, someone like Archie.
‘I mean what I say, Archie.
Who sent you, and for what?’
‘I ain't quite observant of your meanin', if you get me drift,’ said Archie.
‘Don't play about,’ said Joe.
‘Answer up, or I'll tread on your foot.
It'll put you in hospital.’
‘'Ere, that ain't neighbourly, talkin' like that,’ said Archie in alarm.
‘I'm surprised at yer., mate, I never reckoned you was that kind of bloke.
I've said more'n once to Bessie Beavis what a credit you was to the human race.’
‘Give you thirty seconds, Archie, to spill the beans,’ said Joe, who was still guessing.
But he had a feeling it wasn't a bad guess.
Walworth was hardly the place where families had money lying about, except perhaps a few pennies in a cocoa tin for feeding gas meters.
Archie had turned the living-room over not in search of money, but in search of the wallet.
In which case, someone had sent him to do just that.
Blackbeard.
‘Thirty seconds, Archie.’
‘'Ere, and then what?’ protested Archie.
‘I'll cut your hamstrings, you bugger, and you'll never walk again.’
‘Oh, yer bleedin' terror, yer mean it.’
Sergeant Joe didn't quite, but he looked as if he did, his eyes like gimlets, his mouth a hard line beneath his moustache.
‘Cough up,’ he said.
‘All right,’ said Archie, ‘only for gawd's sake don't say I did.
I was walkin' 'ome to me Connie this afternoon, and a bloke stopped me an' spoke to me.
Asked me who lived in yer lodgings.
Well, the 'ouse.
‘E pointed it out.
I told 'im.
Well, 'e give me 'alf-a-crown, so I 'ad to pay me dues in the way of informin' 'im.
‘E asked me to describe yer, which I did, thinkin' maybe 'e was goin' to tell yer you'd come into some money, but 'e said you'd taken in a young woman, that the pair of you 'ad nicked 'is wallet an' made off with it.
When I said why didn't 'e go an' get it back 'isself, 'e said don't ask questions.
‘E asked me if I'd go an' look for it, and 'e gave me a quid.
Well, I put it to yer, Joe, a quid for just 'aving a look around, you can't 'old that against a mate like me.
Mind, it was the surprise of me life to 'ear you'd teamed up with a fly female pickpocket, I didn't know you was one of the lads.’
‘It's a long story,’ said Joe, ‘with a different ending from yours.
What was the bloke like?’
‘Funny geezer, but dressed dapper, yer know.
Smart overcoat an' bowler.’
‘Funny?’
‘Foreigner, like,’ said Archie, forthcoming on account of the fact that Sergeant Joe still looked ready to do him grievous bodily harm.
‘Can't say much about 'is looks, 'e 'ad a scarf wrapped around 'is neck an' face; you could only see 'is hooter an' mince pies.
I 'ad to meet 'im after I'd 'ad me look around.
Course, I 'ad to 'ang about a bit until I saw yer go out, and afterwards I met 'im at the Elephant an' Castle.
‘E didn't 'alf spit when I told 'im no  luck.
‘E said I'd got to give it another go.
‘E said if you didn't 'ave the wallet, then yer female accomplice did.
I was to get at 'er in the bedroom, 'e said.
Use a knife on 'er, 'e said.
Tell 'er you'll cut 'er throat if she don't come up with it.
I said I wasn't cuttin' no-one's throat, I didn't go in for it.
Well, a bloke can't, can 'e, unless 'e don't mind the 'igh jump.
Blimey, 'is eyes bulged at that, 'e looked blue murder at me.
‘E's got funny blue eyes, they stare at yer all the time.
I tell yer, Joe, I ain't too partial to that cove, and nor ain't I 'appy that 'e knows where I live.
What's more, 'e's callin' on me late tonight to find out if I've 'ad another go and if I've earned the quid.’
‘Right,’ said Joe.
‘What's bleedin' right about it?’ asked Archie.
‘Pop over in an hour,’ said Joe, ‘and I'll give you the wallet.
You can tell him you showed the girl a knife, that you got into her room and that she handed the wallet over.
Right?’
‘Always knew you were one of me mates,’ said Archie, highly gratified that things had suddenly been made easy for him.
‘Only I been sufferin' 'orrible suspicions about endin' up gettin' me own throat cut.’
Sergeant Joe looked long and hard at the fox of Newington Butts.
Archie shuffled his feet and looked as if he'd like to vanish up his parlour chimney.
But Joe wasn't thinking about Archie's throat, or Dolly's.
He was thinking, suddenly, about the stop press report on a man who had suffered that fate in Houndsditch late last night.
Now why should that enter his mind?
He had no answer to his unspoken question.
‘Pop over in an hour, Archie,’ he said again.
‘What a pal,’ said Archie.
‘And what's more, yer me friend as well.’
Dolly hopped back to the bedroom just in time, for a moment later up came Linda and Ella to say that as  Sergeant Joe was out, their mum had asked them to keep her company for a bit.
‘She told us yer like bein' talked to,’ said Ella, as round as Humpty Dumpty.
‘Yes, she told us you couldn't do much 'cos of yer sprain,’ said Linda.
‘She told us to come up an' do yer a nice kindness by talkin' to yer.’
‘I'm overcome,’ said Dolly, resigning herself.
She wasn't having the best of luck lately.
She'd hopped into the living-room a few minutes after Sergeant Joe had gone out to have a few words with Archie Cousins.
She'd searched and searched for the wallet.
She had a feeling it was in that carpet-bag, but couldn't get at the bag.
The larder door was locked.
‘We all do talkin',’ said Ella.
She thought.
‘It's like Bedlam in our kitchen sometimes,’ she added proudly.
‘Ain't you lucky?’ said Dolly.
‘We're awful sorry you ain't got no fam'ly, nor no 'ome,’ said Linda.
‘Still, yer got nice looks,’ said Ella.
‘Well, thanks,’ said Dolly.
Linda saw ankle-boots beside the bed.
‘Oh, would yer like me to shine yer boots?’ she asked.
‘I'll do 'em for a penny, if yer like, I got lots of spit.’
‘A penny?’ said Dolly, who couldn't help smiling.
‘I does Sergeant Joe's gent's shoes for a penny,’ said Linda.
‘That's not much,’ said Dolly, ‘you can do mine for tuppence, we'll ask 'im to pay as I'm a bit 'ard-up meself.’
‘Oh, d'yer fink 'e'll pay tuppence?’ asked Linda.
‘I'll talk to 'im if 'e argues,’ said Dolly.
‘I'll go an' get the box,’ said Linda, ‘and I'll get me best spit ready.’
She fetched the box containing the polish, brushes and velvet polishers.
She sat down on the floor and went to work.
‘'Ere, miss, we 'ad stew an' dumplings for supper,’ said Ella, face still shiny from her large meal.
‘Stew an' dumplings?’ said Dolly.
‘Crikey, what a spread.’
‘Ella 'ad seconds,’ said Linda.
‘We all did,’ said Ella, residing plumply on the edge of the bed.
‘I didn't,’ said Linda.
‘Mum says you'll get poorly not 'aving seconds,’ accused Ella.
‘You 'ad dumpling seconds’ said Linda.
‘Well, Dad told us dumplings keep yer body and soul together,’ said Ella.
She looked at Dolly, resting on the bed.
Dolly was visibly slim.
‘Don't you 'ave dumplings?’ she asked.
‘I ain't 'ad much chance,’ said Dolly.
‘Oh, course, you ain't got no job nor 'ome, 'ave yer?’ said Ella sympathetically.
‘There was two dumplings over from our supper.
Would you like 'em?
I'll go an' bring them up, if yer like, with some gravy.’
‘How kind,’ said Dolly, ‘only I ain't long had fried plaice an' mash.’
Linda, doing some good spit and polish work, said, ‘I fink Sergeant Joe's comin' up the stairs.’
‘Us is in 'ere, Sergeant Joe,’ called Ella, ‘Mum told us to come up and talk to yer lady friend.’
Joe entered the bedroom.
‘Well, who's doing the talking, then?’ he asked.
‘We all are,’ said Ella.
‘I ain't,’ said Linda.
‘Well, not much, I'm cleanin' Dolly's boots for 'er.
She said tuppence for doin' them, Sergeant Joe.’
‘Tuppence?
That much?’
‘She said you'd give it to me, Sergeant Joe.’
‘Well,’ said Ella, ‘she ain't got no job, yer see, an' she's ard-up.
‘Got her head screwed on the right way, though,’ said Joe.
‘I 'ope you ain't goin' to be mean,’ said Dolly.
‘All right, here's tuppence, Carrots.’
Joe fished out the coppers and handed them to Linda.
‘Oh, yer swell,’ she said.
‘Are yer goin' to sit an' talk wiv us?’
‘Sounds exciting,’ said Joe.
Dolly put her tongue out.
‘But I've got a little job to do.
You carry on, just as you are.
Or what about your mum, Ella, think she might like to come up and join the hen party?’
Dolly expelled a hiss.
Joe departed for his living-room, another grin on his face.
He left Ella asking Dolly if she should go down and get her mum.
He knew what the answer to that would be.
He studied again the letter he had found in the wallet, then got to work making a careful copy of it.
He had to take care because the language was foreign.
Not French, though.
Nor German.
He would have recognized French or German, without being able to speak either language.
Some of the letters were very odd.
Finishing, he put the original back into its envelope, applied the merest smear of thin gum to the flap and stuck it down.
Satisfied, he returned the envelope to the wallet.
The fivers were still there.
He gave them some thought, then extracted two and stowed them in his hip pocket.
At that moment he heard Mrs Beavis call up to her girls.
‘Come an' 'ave yer 'ot cocoa, loveys.’
Down the stairs the girls went seconds later.
Ella sounded as if she was bouncing down, with Linda skipping after her.
He smiled.
The whole family liked to be heard, as if they wanted people to know they were alive in a world where young and old alike were here one day and gone the next.
For the next ten minutes the house was quiet except for the perceptible hum of healthy life from the kitchen.
Then Dolly made herself heard.
‘Here, you there, Napoleon?’
Dolly, in fact, was fed-up.
She didn't like immobility, she didn't like being on her own, and she didn't like the fact that the wallet still hadn't been given back to her, not when she'd nicked it at great personal risk.
Joe appeared, looking as if he'd just finished knocking the Army into shape, and the Navy as well.
‘State your requirements,’ he said.
‘State my what?
Look, stop talkin' like that,’ she said.
‘Feeling poorly, are we?’
‘It's all me frustrations,’ said Dolly from the bed.
‘Still, I don't like to keep botherin' you.’
‘No bother,’ said Joe, observing that her pretty petticoat was showing.
‘It don't seem right, though, askin' for things when you've been such a kind bloke to me, and doctored me as well.’
‘Can't remember doctoring you,’ said Joe.
‘Isn't that something to do with —’
‘Oh, help,’ she said hastily, ‘me tongue fell over me feet.
I meant — well, if you must know I wouldn't 'alf like a cup of tea.’
‘Good.
I'll get you one.
Won't take more than’ Joe was interrupted by a double knock on the front door.
‘I think I know who that is,’ he said.
‘Won't be a minute.’
It was Archie, of course.
‘I'm 'ere, mate,’ he announced.
Behind him the fog was rolling.
‘'Ave yer got it?’
‘Here,’ said Joe, producing the wallet.
Archie was bound to nose around in it, but wouldn't interfere with the contents.
He had the wind up.
‘Hand it to your funny friend just as it is.
Understand?’
‘You bet I do,’ said Archie, receiving the wallet with gratitude.
‘I tell yer, Joe old cock, my bleedin' trouble is that I'm misunderstood meself, I been sufferin' misunderstandin' all me life.
All I want now is to get this 'ere wallet  into the mitts of that geezer I don't like the look of.’
‘You can let me know tomorrow morning if he cuts your throat,’ said Joe.
‘Eh?
‘Ere, that ain't much of a joke,’ said Archie.
‘Well, who's laughing?’ asked Joe.
‘I ain't,’ said Archie.
‘Anyway, ta, Joe, yer a pal.
’ Off he went, and the fog wrapped itself around him.
Joe climbed the stairs again, exercising his stiff knee in his persevering way.
‘You back again?’ called Dolly.
‘I'll bring you some tea in a few minutes,’ he said.
Dolly perked up when he brought it, because the tray contained two cups, together with the pot itself.
‘Oh, you goin' to be sociable?’ she said, sitting up.
‘Don't see why not.’
Joe placed the tray on the bedside table and poured the tea.
‘You're a good bloke,’ said Dolly, receiving her cup.
Joe sat down.
‘Would you like to hear about me orphanage days?
You can tell me about the Army after.
You don't mind talkin' a bit with me, do you?’
‘I'm not much good at parlour talk,’ said Joe.
‘Don't make me split me sides,’ said Dolly, ‘you can talk all right, don't I know it.
It's me that's not much good at it.
At the orphanage I was complimented on me English composition, but I've always been a bit shy about speakin' up for meself.’
‘Have I noticed that?’ asked Joe.
‘Yes, I thought you 'ad,’ said Dolly.
‘Of course, you talk more than I do because you've 'ad more education than me.’
‘Not much,’ said Joe.
‘If I'd been educated proper, I expect I'd be able to talk more,’ said Dolly, ‘specially if I 'ad good looks and not just a sort of orphanage face.
Mind you, when I was skivvying for that Brixton fam'ly, the head of the fam'ly didn't 'alf take a fancy to me.’
‘Probably had a funny kind of weakness for a sort of orphanage face,’ said Joe.
‘Yes, that's what it was, I expect,’ said Dolly.
‘Did I tell you I 'ad to run away in the end because he got to fancy me too much?
Well, not being that kind of a girl, I wasn't goin' to stay there with me virtue in danger.’
Joe let her talk.
Usually, he took a walk in the evenings, going down Kennington Park Road as far as the Oval, and dropping into a pub on the way back for an ale and a chat with any friends or acquaintances he found there.
His knee stood up well to any excursion.
He repeatedly told himself he'd beat the stiffness out of it one day.
Dolly Nobody or Whatever was coming along.
Her ankle had had a full day's rest, and it shouldn't take long for her to be on her feet again.
What she'd need then would be some fresh clothes.
In fact, that was what she needed now.
Her present outfit was a mess.
Well, as soon as she was up and about she could buy some new stuff.
She had ten quid coming to her.
In the meantime, perhaps he could get her a blouse and skirt from somewhere.
‘Have to find you a change of clothes,’ he said.
‘Here, ain't you listening?’ she asked.
‘I've just been tellin' you how Mr Winterburn chased me all over the house when 'is fam'ly was at church one Sunday.
He was set on sweepin' me off me feet and doin' me wrong.
I 'ad to hit him with an ornament, and when his fam'ly got back from church 'is wife asked him what 'ad happened to his face.
He said he walked accidental into a door — here, who's that?’
Someone was coming up the stairs, treading quickly and lightly.
‘It's Linda,’ said Joe.
It was.
She wanted to know if Sergeant Joe would like her dad's evening paper, if he hadn't bought one for himself.
Joe said no, he hadn't today, and that he'd like a look at her dad's.
‘I brought it up,’ said Linda, and gave it to him.
‘My, ain't you 'aving a nice rest,’ she said to Dolly, ‘an' wiv Sergeant Joe sittin' by yer bedside.’
She giggled at a sudden thought.
‘I best not tell Nancy, or she might come up and 'ave a jealous fit all over the room.
Well, Sergeant Joe ain't ever sat by 'er bedside.’
‘Yes, keep it dark, Private Carrots,’ said Joe, and Linda departed with more giggles.
Joe took a look at the front page of the paper.
There was a headline about the murder in Houndsditch, together with a photograph of the victim.
He was wearing a flat cap, a suit and a choker, and there were dock gates in the background.
He looked a tough and burly man, and Joe thought he was vaguely familiar.
It made him think about last night's events.
No, he was imagining things, he hadn't seen the man all that clearly in the fog.
‘What's up?’ asked Dolly.
‘Take a look,’ said Joe, and handed her the paper.
The photograph sprang to her eyes and startled her.
‘Oh, Lord,’ she breathed.
She knew she had seen this man not just in the fog, but in the Rockingham public house.
She had seen him hand a letter to the man with a black beard.
‘Joe, that's him, that's the bloke you knocked down!’
‘Can't say I like the look of this,’ said Joe, frowning.
CHAPTER SEVEN
The murdered man's name was Dan Pearson.
He was a docker, living in Artillery Lane off Bishopsgate, not far from Houndsditch.
The police were making enquiries and would be pleased to hear from any person who had seen the victim on the night he was murdered.
‘That means us,’ said Dolly.
‘And a few others, I suppose,’ said Joe, who had closed the bedroom door.
‘What're we goin' to do?’ asked Dolly.
‘I'm not going to do anything, except wait and see how the police get on,’ said Joe, ‘and I don't know what you can do except tell the police that you got acquainted with the unfortunate bloke when he came after you for nicking that wallet from Blackbeard.
That would put you right in the soup.
Can't have that, can we, not on top of all your other hard luck.
You need taking care of.
I wonder why Dan Pearson was murdered?’
‘He didn't deserve that,’ said Dolly.
‘I mean, he was a bruiser all right, but he didn't like the idea of Blackbeard doin' you and me in.’
‘Yes, think about Blackbeard and what a cold-blooded character he is, and a foreign one at that.
He was sweating on getting that wallet back.
What's he doing in London?
What's the betting he's up to no good, and that he felt Dan Pearson got to know too much about him and needed to be silenced?’
‘Oh, crikey, d'you think so?’ asked Dolly.
‘Where was it you first saw them?’
‘In that pub by the Elephant and Castle, the Rockingham,’ said Dolly.
‘I was cold and starvin', so I went in.
I'd  found some bunches of violets that weren't much good, but I thought I might sell them in the pub, or that some kind gent might treat me to a sandwich.
They do mouth-waterin' ham sandwiches in the Rockingham.
Well, I saw Blackbeard there.
This other bloke came in and joined 'im.
They talked a bit in whispers, then the other bloke, Dan Pearson, gave Blackbeard a letter, which he put in his wallet.
Well, as no-one 'ad bought any of me violets or treated me to a sandwich, and me near dyin' of starvation, with no job and no lodgings, well, I was so desperate I went up and grabbed the wallet, which Blackbeard was wavin' about at Dan Pearson.
Then I just rushed out of the pub and started runnin', then you got in me way and knocked me over and sprained me ankle.’
‘Pardon?’ said Joe.
‘Well, good as,’ said Dolly.
‘Still, I liked you for standin' up for me like you did.
You don't 'old it against me for pinchin' the wallet, do you?’
‘You need an uncle,’ said Joe.
‘You sure you're twenty-one?’
‘Of course I am.’
‘Where's your birth certificate?’
‘I don't know that I ever 'ad one, the orphanage never said I did, but they did say me birthday was December the second, and that I was born in 1889.’
‘Well, you don't need an uncle, after all, not at that age,’ said Joe, ‘you need a sergeant-major.
I'll have to promote myself and tidy your life up for you.’
‘You're bossy, you are,’ said Dolly.
‘But look, what about this murder, d'you really think Blackbeard did it?’
‘He looked capable of murdering us,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, help, you're right, he did,’ breathed Dolly.
‘He'll come after us now, seein' he was desperate to get 'is wallet back.’
‘He's probably got it back by now.’
‘What?’
Dolly stiffened.
‘Didn't I tell you about it?’ asked Joe.
‘Tell me?’
Dolly fumed.
‘You don't hardly pass the time of day with me, this is the first time you've sat and talked to me.
How could Blackbeard 'ave got his wallet back, go on, tell me.’
‘Slippery Archie's the go-between,’ said Joe, and explained.
Dolly looked as if she wanted to spit.
‘Oh, you daft loony,’ she said, ‘call yourself a sergeant?’
‘Watch your mouth, Private Nobody.’
‘But lettin' him 'ave it all back, the money and letter as well,’ said Dolly bitterly.
‘Don't you see, there could 'ave been five 'undred quid in fifty-quid notes in that letter, which was why he was spittin' blue murder.’
‘No, there was no money,’ said Joe, ‘just a letter.’
‘How d'you know?’
‘I steamed it open.’
‘You did what?’
Dolly stared suspiciously at him.
‘Steamed it open.
I was curious.
Couldn't understand it, though, it was in a foreign language.
What d'you think, Dolly, might it have been details of a plan to rob the Bank of England?’
‘Well, if it was, what a daft thing to do, lettin' him 'ave it back,’ fumed Dolly.
‘We could 'ave kept it and blackmailed him.’
‘Pardon?’ said Joe.
‘Well, so we could,’ said Dolly.
‘You go in for blackmail as well, Private Nobody?’
‘No, course not,’ said Dolly.
‘Well, not much.’
‘It's going to be harder work than I thought, tidying your life up.’
‘It's all right for you,’ said Dolly, ‘you ain't never been a poor orphan girl.’
‘Point taken,’ said Joe, ‘so in view of all your hard luck, I kept two of the fivers.’
He drew them from his hip pocket.
‘I think Blackbeard owes you this much.
Here we  are, ten quid.
When you're back on your feet, you'll be able to buy yourself some new duds.’
Dolly, taking the fivers, stared at them.
‘You left the other two in the wallet?’ she asked.
‘Yes, to let Blackbeard know we only charged him fifty per cent for returning it.’
‘Oh, you're a soft touch, you are,’ said Dolly.
‘Think so?’ said Joe.
‘But now he doesn't have to come after us.
You felt he would.
Don't want that, do we, young Dolly?’
Neither of them could afford to get mixed up in something that might involve the police.
‘Oh, blow it,’ said Dolly, ‘and fancy you not takin' the other ten quid for yourself.
You can't get paid much for writin' out business letters.’
‘Well, it's done now,’ said Joe.
Dolly made a fidgety gesture.
‘Cheer up, Blackbeard's off our backs now.
Right, let's have one more go at your ankle before we both turn in.’
Dolly let him get on with it in the usual way.
The swelling was still very perceptible, and so was the bruised look.
He asked how it felt.
‘Better,’ she said.
‘I'll be able to get up and go out tomorrow.’
‘You can forget that,’ said Joe.
‘You're not getting up and you're not going out.’
‘Who says so?’
‘I do,’ said Joe, busy with the wet flannel.
‘Here, mind yourself,’ said Dolly, ‘you're not me keeper, y'know.’
‘You're confined to barracks for the time being, Private Nobody.’
‘I'll hit you if you keep callin' me that daft name,’ said Dolly.
‘And d'you mind not playin' about with me petticoat?
It 'appens to be private.’
‘Not touching it,’ said Joe, ‘and stop trying to kick me.
I'll see if I can get you some clothes tomorrow.
Can't have  you wearing that grubby skirt and blouse much longer.’
‘Well, thanks very much,’ said Dolly, ‘and why don't you try and get me a spare face as well, seein' you don't like the one I've got?’
‘Why shouldn't I like it?
It's quite a nice face.’
‘Honest?
You don't think all me days of starvation 'ave ruined it?’
‘Hardly at all,’ said Joe.
‘It strikes me that in new clothes you could be highly presentable.
If we can get you a job in a store, we might later on get you married to one of the floorwalkers.
Would you like that?’
‘Can't wait, can I?’ said Dolly, and Joe fastened the cold compress.
‘Good night, Dolly,’ he said, and was smiling as he went out.
It left Dolly fretful.
She had a job getting to sleep later.
He took breakfast to her the following morning.
She woke up, her eyes dreamy.
‘Morning,’ said Joe.
‘Breakfast.
Toast and tea.
Sit up.’
‘What?’
She came to.
‘Not likely,’ she said.
She had nothing on.
‘Understood,’ said Joe.
‘I'll leave it here.’
He placed the tray on the bedside table.
‘I'll be going out when I've had mine.
Don't try going out yourself or you'll catch it.
I'll bring a daily paper in for you.’
‘I'm goin' to be all by meself again?’ asked Dolly, her hair flooding the pillow with auburn.
‘Only for an hour or so,’ said Joe.
‘Shall I ask Mrs Beavis to bring you up some knitting?’
‘What a joke,’ said Dolly, ‘don't you know any funny ones?’
The morning was fine.
It was the last day of March, and overnight the belated wind had arrived to clear every  vestige of fog from the brick and stone of London.
The sun was out, the air bright and crisp, the traffic busy.
Office and factory girls were hurrying to their work, some boarding trams and some walking.
Straw boaters sat perkily on the heads of office girls, and the hems of their long skirts swirled around their ankles.
Saucy hats were favoured by the factory girls, and saucy lights danced in their eyes as van drivers or cart drivers whistled at them.
‘Oi, Gertie, what yer doin' tonight?’
‘Mind yer business, ‘Oratio, I ain't doin' it with you.’
Over Waterloo Bridge, the horse traffic was a slow-moving procession, and pedestrians, streaming along to their places of work in the West End or the City, passed rumbling drays and laden carts as if these horse-drawn vehicles were standing still.
Men and women, seated on the open top decks of newfangled motorized omnibuses, had elevated views of what the bright morning sun was doing to the muddy Thames.
It was coating the flowing brown surface with shimmering, sparkling gold.
Along the north bank, the crisp light was sharpening the noble outlines of majestic buildings, although it could do very little for stone blackened by the soot of ages.
Joe, limping along amid the flow of workers and enjoying the exercise and the clear air, saw barges cleaving the sunlit surface of the river, a crowded passenger boat in their wake.
It was good to be out.
It was always good, the more so because he spent a great deal of time trapped indoors by his choice of work, a choice governed by his wish to acquire a useful little nest-egg in a relatively short time.
He would have preferred an outdoor job.
With horses, perhaps.
He knew about horses from his years as a dragoon.
Well, he could look around in time.
As for marriage, yes, he fancied that.
A wife and some kids, a family.
What men didn't have that urge?
Some, of course, but he wasn't one of them.
Ivy Williams, a shopkeeper's  daughter, twenty years old, was a very nice girl.
So was Alice Dodds, who lived with her family at the far end of the Butts.
He knew them both quite well.
Not that he supposed either of them would jump at him, since neither was short of admirers.
And he had no intention of getting seriously involved while he was executing dubious commissions for George.
All that would have to go before he took up with any woman.
He was giving forgery another year.
George accepted that.
Then he would put his quill pens aside and consider an honest job of work.
And marriage.
He turned into the Strand.
It was a bustle of traffic and workers.
In this popular thoroughfare, restaurants and theatres existed side by side with shops and offices.
The time was coming up to nine o'clock, and shopkeepers were making ready to open their doors.
Romano's, the restaurant haunt of fashionable people, was closed, but would be open for lunch.
Dignified City men in top hats, using rolled umbrellas like walking-sticks, advanced unhurriedly towards Fleet Street, Chancery Lane and other City venues.
Their clerks, mostly in straw boaters, hurried along.
So did shop girls and office girls.
To be late would earn a reprimand and possibly a warning from those who stood above them.
Joe crossed the Strand to St Martin's Place, and from there entered Charing Cross Road.
He passed theatres sleepy with morning, and walked on to Singleton's bookshop, noted for its excellent array of new books and old books, and for its service to customers looking for something special in the way of rare editions.
The shop was open and George was there but still yawning.
He came fully awake, however, when Joe walked in.
‘Ye gods, at this time of the day, my friend?’ he said, his portly form draped by a dark grey suit comfortable enough to give his portliness room to live and breathe.
‘Won't keep you long,’ said Joe.
‘Never say so, my dear fellow,’ said George.
‘My hope with some people is that they don't stay any longer than they need to.
Not so with you.
You are a natural gentleman, Joe.
A natural gentleman is a man who serves his friends honourably and doesn't bore them.’
‘Have you had a good breakfast?’ asked Joe.
‘I fancy you could say so,’ said George, ‘yes, I fancy you could.’
‘Thought so.
Can you do me a small favour?’
‘Why not a large one?’
‘Don't need a large one,’ said Joe.
‘Can you get someone to translate this for me?’
He produced the folded sheet of notepaper on which he'd copied down Blackbeard's letter.
He unfolded it and handed it to George.
‘Any idea of the language?’
‘Russian,’ said George immediately.
‘What's it all about?’
‘Don't know, can't say, haven't the foggiest,’ said Joe.
‘I'm curious, that's all.
You can't translate it yourself, I suppose?
I'll wait if you can.’
‘I can recognize it's in Russian, but no, I can't translate it myself, old chap,’ said George.
‘Never mind, leave it with me.
I know two or three people, any of whom will do it.’
Something made Joe say, ‘Someone you can trust.
It's confidential.’
‘Now I'm curious myself.’
‘Yes, we're all a bit nosy, aren't we?’
Joe smiled.
‘Call again in a couple of days,’ said George.
‘Meanwhile, allow me to give you glad tidings.
I'm promised by our very reliable agent that we'll receive the excessively handsome sum of fifty guineas, in the form of a draft from Paris, for the two letters from Molière to his lady love.’
‘Fifty guineas?’
Joe whistled.
‘Dangerous amount, George.’
‘Worthy, old fellow, worthy.
Your genius for copying  the handwriting of the noble, the illustrious, the famous and the infamous is remarkable.
Your letters in French, particularly the French of Molière, are incredibly so, for you don't speak the language.
I envisage a mountain of guineas from France.
Capital, Joe, capital, and we're safer selling abroad.’
‘Yes, less chance of being found out,’ said Joe.
‘Well, my friend, it's a happy fact that not every collector would wish to advertise the fact that he's been fooled.
They'd rather settle for a return of their money, if it came to that.
But yes, abroad lies our final year of partnership, although I've been toying with the idea of alighting upon a play by Shakespeare hitherto unknown, unseen and unenacted.’
‘What did you have for your breakfast, a bottle of brandy?’ asked Joe.
‘I rarely shake hands with Bacchus, Joe, until the sun goes down,’ said George.
‘Or Eros, for that matter.
I'm quite sober, although elated by the thought of an unknown play by Shakespeare coming to light.’
‘You're off your rocker,’ said Joe.
‘Who'd write it?’
‘As a scholar and a Shakespearian, I would.
I fancy my acquaintance with the Bard's works and my gift for scribbling would inspire me to produce a dramatic masterpiece.
And your own exceptional gifts would help us to confound critics, experts and scoffers.
What d'you say to that as a triumphant finale to our partnership, old man?’
‘Off your rocker,’ repeated Joe.
‘Alas,’ sighed George, ‘have you so little faith in our collective talents?’
‘We'd be on a hiding to nothing,’ said Joe, ‘and that would probably include being shot at dawn.
I'll see you in a couple of days, then, and with a packet of some finished stuff.’
‘Byron and his associates are coming along?’ enquired George in pleasure.
‘I'm satisfied with what I've done so far,’ said Joe, ‘but what a scoundrel.’
‘Magnificent poet,’ said George, ‘and who's perfect?’
‘Good point,’ said Joe.
‘So long, George.’
‘So long, my friend.’
On his way back, Joe called in at the local pawnbroker's shop, run by ‘Uncle’ Jeremiah Baldwin and his daughter Annie.
‘Uncle’ wasn't around, but Annie was.
Annie was a cheerful, tireless and obliging young lady who had a young man, a dowry in an old sock, and a helpful welcome for customers who were not only hard-up but a bit embarrassed.
Joe had a job to get through to the counter, for the pawnshop was overflowing with articles awaiting redemption.
Suits, coats, dresses, boots, shoes, bicycles, tools, furniture, companion sets, china, ornaments, pictures, stuffed parrots, music-boxes and linen were only some of the things that caught the eye and sometimes an elbow.
There was even a piano.
There was also a section where goods not redeemed within the allotted time were for sale.
Joe, shouldering his way through, called, ‘Come out from wherever you are, Annie, I know you're there somewhere, I've just seen your knees.
But don't faint, it was only your knees.’
A little shriek escaped a startled mouth, and Annie popped out from behind a bamboo table containing a large potted aspidistra.
‘Oh, yer cheeky cuss, Sergeant Joe, it would be you to catch me fixin' me stocking garter.’
‘Well, sometimes a bloke's lucky, sometimes not,’ said Joe.
Annie laughed.
In a high-collared striped blouse of blue and white, and a dark blue skirt, she looked attractively neat.
Just right for size, thought Joe, just about the same measurements as Dolly.
‘What can I do yer for?’ asked Annie.
‘You ain't come to put yerself in pawn, 'ave you?
Don't know where I could put you, except in me bedroom, only if I did it might send me young man potty.
Here, I heard you'd got a young lady stayin' with yer.’
‘She's a lodger of mine,’ said Joe.
‘A likely story, you're a lodger yerself,’ said Annie.
‘I've sub-let,’ said Joe.
‘Well, she's got a damaged ankle, no home and no family.
I found her in the fog.
Didn't want her to chuck herself off a bridge, so I've let her have one of my rooms.’
‘Sounds as if she needs an 'elping hand,’ said Annie.
‘I suppose she's broke as well, is she?
‘Ave you come to pawn something of hers?’
‘No, I've come to see if you can fix her up with a couple of skirts and blouses, Annie, from your unredeemed stuff.
Nothing tarty, something respectable.’
‘Tarty?
Like yer sauce,’ said Annie.
‘Still, we've got skirts and blouses.’
‘Yes, she needs a change of clothes until she's on her feet and can do her own shopping,’ said Joe.
‘She's only got the stuff she's wearing.’
‘That's hard on a girl,’ said Annie, and kept her face straight as she asked, ‘What about a change of other things?’
‘I'm not answering that,’ said Joe.
‘You can confide in me,’ said Annie, ‘it's what I'm 'ere for, to be a help to customers.
I mean, we've got bloomers and things.’
‘I'm not listening,’ said Joe, at which point a middle-aged woman came in, found her way through the maze and reached the counter.
She'd come, she said, to redeem her husband's watch and chain.
Joe stood aside.
‘That's quick, Mrs Goodbody,’ said Annie, ‘it's only been a couple of days.’
‘I know,’ said Mrs Goodbody.
She handed over the  pawn ticket.
‘But me old man says 'e never knows what the time is.’
‘Don't you 'ave a mantelpiece clock, then?’ asked Annie.
‘Oh, 'e don't believe in tin clocks, only in 'is pocket watch,’ said Mrs Goodbody.
‘It come to 'im from 'is dad; 'e says 'e feels undressed without it an' don't know whether it's 'alf-past five or ten to eight when 'e gets up, or if it's teatime or dinnertime.
So I better 'ave it out, Annie, that's if I can pawn me lace tablecloth for one an' six, same as you gave me on the watch.’
She took the tablecloth, wrapped in brown paper, from her shopping-bag.
Annie unwrapped it and inspected it.
It was a domestic treasure.
‘One an' six, Mrs Goodbody?
Two bob, if yer like.’
‘Yer a good sort, Annie, so's yer dad.
I'll take two bob, then, and you can take the one an' six an' the penny interest out of it.
I'll come in on Saturday and 'ave the tablecloth back for Sunday tea, seein' me sister and 'er old man's coming to 'ave shrimps an' winkles with us.
Me sister's 'aving terrible trouble with 'er eldest daughter.
She wants to do bareback ridin' in a circus and show 'er legs like all them circus girls do.
Me sister never showed 'er legs in all 'er life, nor me, neither.
I don't know what girls are comin' to.
Ain't it shockin', mister?’ she said to Joe.
‘Queen Mary won't like it,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, lor', nor she won't,’ said Mrs Goodbody, ‘I just 'ope she don't get to hear about it.
I read she's partic'lar about be'aviour.
I wouldn't like me niece's be'aviour to spoil the coronation.
Oh, ta, Annie.’
She received the watch and chain from the pawnbroker's daughter, together with the new pawn ticket and fivepence, and went off in a pleasured state over the transaction, although a little worried that Queen Mary might find out that her naughty niece wanted to show her legs riding bareback on a circus horse.
‘Now, Sergeant Joe,’ said Annie, ‘let's see about your wants.
What size you after for the skirts and blouses?’
‘Your size,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, you've measured yer sub-let lodger, 'ave you?’ said Annie.
‘I don't recollect you measurin' me.’
‘I'm relying on my eyesight,’ said Joe.
‘Cheeky.
All right, let's see what me dad's emporium can offer.’
Annie was a great help after finding out from Joe what the young lady's colouring was.
She sold him something simple, one skirt of navy blue, one which she said was autumn brown, and two white blouses.
She also persuaded him to buy a hip-length jacket to help the suffering young lady keep warm if she was only sitting around nursing her ankle.
The lot cost Joe only a few bob.
‘What's that?’ he asked, pointing.
‘A lady's straw boater,’ said Annie.
‘Thought so.
Try it on.’
‘I should think she needs other things more than a boater,’ said Annie.
‘I'm having nothing to do with things,’ said Joe, ‘so stop your tickling.
Be a good girl and try that boater on.’
‘Well, me dad always says we've got to be obligin'.’
Annie put the boater on, tilting it.
It fitted and gave her a perky look.
‘Mind, it might not fit 'er.’
‘I'll chance it,’ said Joe, and paid for the boater.
‘Tell you what, Joe,’ said Annie, ‘you 'aven't got new stuff there, but you 'aven't got rubbish, either, and you've 'ad me best attention as well.
On top of which, I'll put everything in a cardboard box for you free and for nothing.’
‘Go top of the class, Annie, especially as I've had a look at your knees,’ said Joe.
‘Strikes me you'd look a treat yourself riding bareback at a circus.’
‘Saucy this mornin', are we?’ said Annie.
‘You'd better  'oppit now or me young man might get to 'ear I've been dilly-dallying with you.’
‘Don't like the sound of that,’ said Joe, ‘it could mean I might get damaged and laid up myself.
So long, Annie, and good luck.’
He departed, cardboard box under his arm, his back straight and his limp brisk.
CHAPTER EIGHT
On his return, Joe took the Westminster Gazette in to Dolly.
‘How's the patient?’ he asked.
‘Nearly dead,’ she said, lying flat out on the bed.
‘Mrs Beavis came up again, and with Bovril and a cheese roll.
You can laugh.
She's only just gone down, after givin' me her life story and what 'appened at her granddad's funeral when a wheel came off the 'earse.
Thank 'eavens you're back — oh, the swine, he's gone again.’
But he came back, this time with a cardboard box.
‘Have you read the paper?’ he asked.
‘'Course I 'aven't, you've only been gone a minute.’
‘There's nothing in it about the murder, except the police are continuing with their enquiries,’ said Joe, ‘but it'll help you pass the time.
By the way, what name did you answer to in your jobs?
Not Nobody, that's just a lark.’
‘It ain't a lark to a girl that's got no 'ome, no fam'ly —’
‘Answer up,’ said Joe.
‘Well, it was Smith, of course,’ said Dolly.
‘Understood,’ said Joe, feeling that all her years of hard luck hadn't wrecked her spirit.
‘What's in that box?’
‘Clothes,’ said Joe.
‘I mentioned I'd try to get hold of some for you.
There you are.’
He placed the box on the bed.
‘Skirts and blouses.’
‘You 'aving me on?’ said Dolly.
‘You need a change of clothes,’ said Joe.
‘Where'd you get them from?’ asked Dolly, sitting up.
‘Local pawnshop,’ said Joe.
‘What?
Here, I ain't wearin' clothes from a pawnshop.’
‘Yes, you are, and they're quite clean.
Don't let's have any fireworks, Private Smith.
Get changed.’
‘You're as bossy as a copper, you are,’ said Dolly.
‘Would you like bacon and eggs at midday?’ asked Joe.
‘Oh, you lovely feller, not 'alf I wouldn't,’ said Dolly, ‘I was too weak to eat the cheese roll, so Bessie ate it for me.’
‘Bessie?’
‘Well, she's not so bad really,’ said Dolly, ‘she's just a bit overflowin', that's all.’
‘Well, there's a lot of her,’ said Joe, making another exit.
‘What?’ asked Dolly.
‘Oh, what's the use, he's gone again.’
She called him a little later.
‘Here, mister, would you like to see what you've been and done to me?’
Joe came to take a look.
She was wearing the navy blue skirt and one of the white blouses, with a frilled front.
The boater was on her head and she was looking at herself, her bare right foot touching the floor lightly.
‘Not bad, not bad at all,’ said Joe.
‘What, me in these pawnshop leftovers?’ she said, turning.
The blouse shaped her very nicely, he thought.
Actually, both garments fitted her very well, and the boater gave her the same kind of perky look it had given Annie.
‘Ain't you ashamed, makin' me wear things out of a pawnshop?’
‘No, not much,’ he said.
‘Still, the blouse and skirt don't look too bad, d'you think?’
‘You look very nice, Dolly.’
‘Like to take me out, would you?’
‘Not yet,’ said Joe, ‘your ankle wouldn't stand for it.’
He picked up the garments she'd taken off.
He picked up the old shawl and straw hat too.
‘I'll chuck this lot in the dustbin.’
‘What for?’ she asked.
‘Best place for them, the dustbin.’
‘Oh, don't mind me,’ said Dolly, ‘I'm only — here, where you goin' again?
You're like a bloomin' jack-in-the-box, you are.’
She hopped to the open door to make sure her voice followed him.
‘You're drivin' me dizzy, you ain't no sooner in here than you're out again.
’ He was descending the stairs now.
‘Can't you stay still for five minutes?
I don't know, chuckin' me clothes in the dustbin, I suppose you'd like to chuck me in as well.
You listening, mister?’
‘Yes.’
His voice floated up to her.
‘I'll see you in a couple of minutes, Private Smith.’
‘What for?’
‘To chuck you in the dustbin for unbecoming bawling and shouting.’
Dolly limped to the bed and flung herself down on it, stifling hysteria.
That man, he didn't know what a comedian he was.
All that funny Army stuff.
Not that he was dotty all the time.
She'd never seen anyone move as fast as he did when he put poor old Dan Pearson on his back.
And he'd done the right thing in getting that wallet back to Blackbeard, because Blackbeard was horribly evil and would have come after them if Joe hadn't been sensible.
And he'd given her two fivers first.
All the same, she owed him one for slapping her bottom.
No-one had ever done that to her before.
Even so, what other man would have helped her like he had and given her his bed as well ?
But bringing her clothes from a pawnshop, oh, help.
Dolly had to stifle more hysteria.
She heard him coming back up the stairs, she knew his limping step now.
He came into the bedroom.
She turned over on the bed and sat up.
‘I'm for the dustbin now?’ she said.
‘Not this time,’ he said, ‘I'll bathe your ankle with warm water in a moment, and put some liniment on it.’
‘Ain't you kind?
And thanks ever so much for the  clothes, honest.
You're a real help to someone like me.
Were me other clothes startin' to smell a bit?’
‘Not that I noticed,’ said Joe.
‘But there were one or two fleas.’
‘Oh, you rotten beast, I've never 'ad fleas in all me born days.’
‘Don't worry,’ said Joe, ‘what you collected recently are in the dustbin now, saying hello to a pair of old boots.
Right, I'll bring some warm water in, with the liniment.’
‘Well, you'd better make your will out before you come in again,’ said Dolly, ‘because I'm goin' to do you in as soon as you put your face round the door.’
But she didn't, of course.
She let him treat her ankle and put liniment on it.
The swelling was beginning to subside.
‘It's coming along,’ said Joe.
‘Well, you've got a nice touch, Joe, honest you 'ave,’ she said.
‘Can I come and sit at the table with you when the eggs and bacon are ready?’
‘All right, I'll come and carry you in,’ said Joe.
‘Don't want you limping about too much, not now your ankle's on the mend.’
‘You're a good bloke really,’ said Dolly.
A tall gentleman, a diplomatic courier with a permanently diplomatic expression of kindness, was sitting in a private room in Collins Coffee House in the City.
A person was with him.
The gentleman thought of him only as a person, no more than one step up from a peasant.
But he was extremely useful at times.
That was what made him a person.
The gentleman, however, being a diplomat, spoke to him as an equal.
‘You are sure the letter had been opened?’
The person, who had a pointed black beard, a large nose, bushy eyebrows and deep-set blue eyes, nodded.
‘I'm positive,’ he said.
‘It was opened by this man and woman?’
‘Of that I'm even more positive.’
‘Unfortunate.
Very.
But might not the woman be a mere pickpocket and the man her accomplice, as you first thought?’
‘No, I tell you.
Only half the money had been taken.
That was to mock me.
And a mere pickpocket would not have taken the trouble to steam the envelope open.’
‘Perhaps they had already spent half the money, perhaps they returned the rest in a gesture to placate you.
After all,’ said the kind-looking gentleman in his pleasant voice, ‘they were aware by then that you knew where they lived, and that there was a chance you'd have them arrested.’
‘By the police?’ said Blackbeard.
‘I am not here to make myself known to the police.
No, I believe them to be spies working for a rival power aware of my presence in London and suspicious of my intentions.
The steaming open of the letter convinces me.’
‘Well,’ said the courier, ‘you and your confederates must accomplish what you came to do.
You have plenty of time to perfect arrangements.
But first you'll have to deal with this man and woman to satisfy yourself one way or the other about them.
Even if they are what you think they are, rival agents, how could they have known you were expecting a letter, and how could they have known you were expecting it on that particular night?’
‘Name of a fox,’ said Blackbeard between his teeth, ‘the woman was in the place and saw it handed to me.
Does that mean it was what she expected?
I suspect she'd been following that fool of a carrier.’
‘In such a fog as that?’
‘We, Your Excellency, are not the only ones who make sure we don't lose the quarry once we have him in our sights.
But the handing over of the letter was not something  she necessarily expected, it was simply something she saw.
What fool picked the carrier, who was an idiot and an inquisitive one?’
‘One who knew him, I assume.’
‘We are committed, myself and the woman,’ said Blackbeard.
‘I object to having idiots used as go-betweens.
I am always at risk in the things I do for the Motherland, but idiots create the kind of additional risks one cannot always allow for.’
‘Well,’ said the kind-faced courier, ‘you have dealt with this idiot and his inquisitiveness.’
‘A greedy inquisitiveness,’ said Blackbeard.
‘So, now I have to deal with this man and woman.’
‘If your assumption that they are the agents of another power is correct, you may be too late.
They may have already informed their masters of the contents of the letter.’
‘I shall find out,’ said Blackbeard.
‘What is to be accomplished means too much to the Tsar —’
‘Be warned.’
The courier's kind expression became slightly reproving.
‘His Imperial Highness is not to be mentioned.
He knows nothing.
You are quite aware the venture is the brainchild of certain senior officers.’
‘Nevertheless —’
‘Nevertheless has no place in this conversation.’
‘My lips, Excellency, are sealed,’ said Blackbeard, but his blue eyes hardened a little.
He considered himself to be his own master, and deference to this aristocratic head of Russian Intelligence, Count Zhinsky, did not come easily to him.
‘The meeting with your colleague will take place when?’
‘This afternoon.’
‘There must be few meetings between you while you're in London.
Make sure you aren't followed, for if it's known you're here you must avoid being seen together.’
Blackbeard was inclined to curl his fleshy lip.
Was he an idiot himself?
He was not.
‘I should not be alive today if I had ever been guilty of complacency or carelessness,’ he said.
‘We value your gifts,’ said the courier.
‘Might I suggest you leave now?
I will do so a little later.’
What a fool, he's trying to teach me how to suck eggs, thought Blackbeard.
Except, of course, he was not a fool.
He was the brains of Russian Intelligence.
Which was why Blackbeard accepted directives from him, even if he felt that he did not need them.
Over the eggs and bacon, eaten with bread and butter, Dolly said, ‘Like you told me, there wasn't anything in the paper about the murder except the police are still workin' on it.
But they didn't say there'd be an arrest soon.’
‘It's only been a couple of days,’ said Joe.
‘It's worryin', though, ain't it?’
‘Who for?’
‘Well, for us.
I mean, Blackbeard must know we could 'ave recognized the man from the newspaper photograph, and that we might go to the police about it.’
‘Pass the salt, Dolly, would you?’
‘Blow the salt, I'm talkin' to you,’ said Dolly.
‘Yes, I'm listening,’ said Joe.
‘If we went to the police, we'd have to explain in detail.
They'd nick you for lifting the wallet, and me as well probably, for helping you.
Pass the salt, please.’
Dolly pushed the cruet across.
‘But don't you see that Blackbeard might come after us?’ she asked.
‘To murder us because he murdered the man we saw him with?
It's a point, I suppose.
I'd better think about getting you out of here.
I'll ask around and see if there's a room vacant somewhere.’
‘Me, why just me?’ asked Dolly.
‘Because you're a young lady, and because you've  already had your share of hard luck,’ said Joe.
‘I'll find you a room —’
‘I ain't goin',’ said Dolly.
‘Now look —’
‘I'll scream the place down, I'll tell Bessie you tried to ruin me virtue, I'll tear some of me clothes to prove it.’
‘Stop waving your knife about,’ said Joe.
‘Well, stop upsettin' me, then,’ said Dolly.
‘Mister, you wouldn't really get rid of a poor girl who's got no 'ome or fam'ly, would you?
Oh, me foot, it's all painful suddenly, I think it's 'ad a relapse — that's it, go on, laugh.’
Joe straightened his face.
‘I'll have another look at it,’ he said.
‘Oh, all right,’ said Dolly blithely, ‘I don't mind you, you like lookin' at me legs, I can tell.
Well, I do 'appen to 'ave good legs, and I've been complimented on me knees too.’
‘What have we got here?’ asked Joe of the salt cellar.
‘Another bareback circus rider in white tights?’
‘Now what're you talkin' about?’ asked Dolly.
‘Legs,’ said Joe.
‘Don't be vulgar,’ said Dolly.
‘No, but you've got to be serious, Joe, you've got to watch out for Blackbeard.
I mean, if it really was him that done the murder, he won't like it if he thinks we've got suspicions.
You've got to take care.’
‘I think I'll go and see Archie,’ said Joe.
I
‘Yes, find out what Blackbeard said to 'im last night.’
‘Yes, Archie's in,’ said Mrs Connie Cousins.
‘I don't know what you said to 'im last evenin', but 'e 'ad a bloke call later and done a bit of a business deal with 'im that earned a fiver, would yer believe.
‘E took me out this mornin' an' bought me a new dress.
I couldn't 'ardly credit it.
Still, it showed 'e's got 'is good points, an' that I don't 'ave to clip 'is ear every day.’
She turned in the passage and called.
‘Archie, Sergeant Joe wants to see yer.’
‘In the parlour,’ said Joe.
‘'Elp yerself, love,’ said Mrs Cousins, and Joe went in.
Archie joined him a few seconds later, closing the door behind him.
‘'Ello, mate.’
‘Well?’ said Joe.
‘I'm fine, 'ow's yerself?’
‘Don't come it,’ said Joe.
‘What happened?’
‘Eh?
Oh, see what yer mean, about the funny geezer.
Well, 'e called, like 'e said 'e would, all wrapped up still, and I brought 'im in and 'e stood just where you're standin'.
‘E wasn't 'alf lookin' at me.
Mind, when I give 'im the wallet and 'e looked inside it, 'e was a mite more pleasant, even if I couldn't see nothing but 'is mince pies and 'is 'ooter.
‘E shook me 'and then, an' said I was to forget all about 'im.
Pleasure, I said.
Well, 'e ain't the kind of bloke I want to remember.
I reckon 'e's ate new-born babies in 'is time, so I was 'ighly relieved that we parted on friendly terms, as yer might say.’
‘After he'd given you how much?’ asked Joe.
‘Eh?’ said Archie.
‘You were supposed to report this morning.’
‘Report?’
‘To me.’
‘Was I?’ said Archie, beginning to shift his feet about.
‘Ruddy black mark, Archie,’ said Joe, ‘ought to tread on your foot, you bugger.
I suppose you thought I'd ask for my share.’
‘Search me, Joe, I dunno what you're on about,’ said Archie.
‘Share of what?’
‘Don't make me cross,’ said Joe, ‘or I'll march you off to Wellington Barracks and drill you till you've got no legs left.’
‘'Ere, Joe, what's eatin' yer?’ protested Archie.
‘Didn't you say I'd only got to come an' see yer if the geezer got awkward?’
‘No, I didn't say that.’
‘Funny, I could've sworn you did,’ said Archie.
‘Still, me ears ain't as good as they was.
Anyway, I didn't get no trouble from the bloke, 'e plonked a couple of quid into me mitt just before 'e said cheerio.’
‘Just two quid, was it, Archie?’
‘That's it, Joe, for gettin' 'is wallet back an' mindin' me own business now and in the future, like.
‘Ere, if yer a bit short of the ready at the moment, I can let yer 'ave five bob without askin' for it back.’
‘Keep it,’ said Joe.
‘Listen, did the bloke ask any questions about me and my lady lodger?’
‘Not a dicky bird,’ said Archie.
‘Good enough,’ said Joe, ‘and don't spill any dicky birds yourself.’
‘Not me, Joe me old pal.
What's it to me if you and yer lady friend are goin' in for liftin'?
It ain't custom'ry, yer know, to let on who's one of the lads and who ain't.
You got my best wishes, Joe.
Just keep yer mince pies peeled for the rozzers when yer doin' yer lucky dips.’
‘Don't get demented,’ said Joe.
‘Nuffsaid, eh, me old cock?’
‘So long, Archie.’
‘See yer around, Joe.’
Joe went back and advised Dolly that Blackbeard, having received his wallet, had rewarded Archie and asked no questions.
‘I still ain't happy,’ said Dolly.
‘Well, let's hope he is, now that he's got that letter back,’ said Joe.
‘Now I've got work to do and you've got to stay on that bed.
Your ankle's improving, so keep it that way.’
‘Oh, all right,’ said Dolly, ‘I suppose I'll get a good hidin' if I start runnin' about.’
‘I'll think about it,’ said Joe.
‘That's it, take advantage of a weak defenceless girl,’ said Dolly.
‘You're safe at the moment, Private Smith.
Have you finished that book on how to get yourself a respectable job?’
‘No, I ain't,’ said Dolly.
‘Well, finish it this afternoon.’
‘All of it?’
‘Yes, good idea,’ said Joe.
‘I might as well be dead, I might,’ said Dolly.
‘Wait till you're ninety,’ said Joe, ‘that's the best time to go.’
‘Oh, what a kind thought,’ said Dolly.
‘Think nothing of it,’ said Joe.
‘I'll bring you a cup of tea in an hour.’
‘You're good to me,’ said Dolly.
The man and woman met by arrangement at Waterloo Station, although they did not appear to.
That is, they did not acknowledge each other , but each bought a first-class railway return ticket to Clapham Junction.
She had actually bought hers before he arrived.
They knew each other.
They had been brought together in St Petersburg two months ago.
She knew him to be Alexander Rokovssky, the dark tool of autocratic monarchs and a fanatical servant of Tsarism, a man who could slit another's throat or shoot him at point-blank range without any change of expression.
He was the scourge of socialists and revolutionaries, and had carried out numerous assassinations for monarchist factions of the Balkan countries.
It was said that if the Tsarists of Russia asked him to, he would even despatch his own mother.
Black Wolf he was called, and there was nothing he would not do to make the Russian Empire the greatest the world had ever known.
Or so it was said.
His one weakness was the lack of patience he showed with people he considered idiots.
He knew the woman to be a protégée of Count Zhinsky, head of Russian Intelligence, and the man he had met in Collins Coffee House.
She was also the Count's mistress.
She was clever, capable and resourceful as an agent, and acceptable to Rokovssky as his confederate on this mission of assassination.
She was using a French passport and the name Marcelle Fayette.
She boarded the train in advance of him.
As it was early afternoon there were no madding crowds, and she secured a first-class compartment to herself.
He entered a second-class compartment moments before the guard waved his flag and blew his whistle.
He went through to the corridor, and as the train began to move he sauntered along to the first-class coach.
The train's wheels were churning, the engine rattling over points and spouting clouds of steam.
The service was non-stop to Clapham Junction, ensuring an absence of interruption.
Reaching the compartment occupied by Marcelle Fayette, he entered and sat down opposite her.
‘Your telegram was late,’ she said.
‘My reading of the letter was delayed,’ he responded.
They spoke in French, the pre-eminent language of St Petersburg.
‘Why?’ asked Marcelle.
‘Because the carrier was a fool,’ said Rokovssky.
‘He handed it to me as if it was no more than offering me an apple in a market-place.
I told him to wait until we left, but no, he put it into my hand with a pleased grin on his stupid face.
I put it into my wallet, and my wallet was snatched.’
‘Ah,’ said Marcelle softly, ‘perhaps he did not understand what you said.
I have found one must speak slowly to people who live in the back streets of London.
If one does not, then they say, ‘Eh?
Eh?’
So, your pocket was picked by a thief and you lost the wallet containing the report from our student friends?’
‘It was lost for a while.’
Rokovssky explained in detail, and Marcelle, after a moment's thought, agreed with his conclusion that the man and woman in question had to be agents of a rival power.
‘They are only a nuisance, they have only inconvenienced you,’ said Marcelle, ‘and the letter will tell them very little.’
‘It will tell them enough to alert them if they're working for the British Government.’
‘And if the British know enough about you, as they probably do, they will begin to police you.
Good.’
‘Good?’
Alexander Rokovssky reflected.
‘Yes, in some ways,’ he said.
‘You are a perfect red herring,’ she said.
‘Let them police you.’
‘The British have a law which allows them to deport people whom they consider to be undesirable aliens.’
‘Undesirable aliens?’
Marcelle, looking through the window from her corner seat, wrinkled her sensitive nose at the grimy roofs and façades of houses and buildings, the train steaming towards Clapham at a steady speed.
‘Who but the English could put together two such unwelcome words and make such an appropriate term of them?
You are an undesirable alien, my friend, because of your reputation?’
‘The English are all old women and reputations frighten them,’ said Rokovssky.
‘I have not come here to be deported.
I must find out exactly who the man and woman are.’
‘Very well,’ she said, ‘but I hope there will be no more fatalities.
One assassination is enough for the time being.’
‘He was the kind of man who would have sold his suspicions for money.’
‘His unfortunate death has agitated the police,’ said Marcelle.
‘It has given them work to do,’ said Rokovssky.
‘Shall we discuss our commission, and exactly how we  are going to execute it?’ she asked.
‘I know what was decided in St Petersburg.
Now I must know what you have decided in regard to precise details.
When is our final meeting to be?’
‘The day before the ceremony.
Let us say eleven in the morning at the London Zoo,’ said Rokovssky.
‘We must have that final meeting.
Now, let me talk to you about how we shall do what is required of us.’
He told her at length of what he would do and what she would do.
At Clapham Junction, he alighted from the train and crossed by the footbridge to the platform from which to catch a train back.
She alighted after him, and she crossed the footbridge too, but delayed stepping on to the platform until the train for Waterloo came in.
He found an empty first-class compartment, and she reached it by way of the corridor after the train had pulled out.
During the journey back to Waterloo they continued their discussion.
The plan was basically simple, but they went over the details again and again until mutual satisfaction prevailed.
Then Rokovssky went back to the subject of the man and woman who lived in Newington Butts.
Marcelle promised her help if he required it.
At Waterloo, he was again the first to leave the train.
He departed from the station on foot.
She took a hansom cab, and left knowing he would send her a signal if he definitely required her help in the matter of a man.and woman presently residing in a house in a place called Newington Butts.
CHAPTER NINE
A frisky April breeze, dancing around the houses and backyards of Walworth in search of inlets, found a partly open window and darted through the gap.
Joe was responsible for the gap.
You need some fresh air, he said to Dolly when he brought her a cup of tea, and he pulled the top window frame down a little.
Since when he'd left her alone again, and Dolly was having to put up with the April breeze.
Fresh spring air was quite popular in Walworth after the fogs of winter, but Dolly had her reservations about it at the moment.
It was like a succession of cold draughts, and it was making her fed-up again.
Well, she was generally fed-up, knowing she had to keep resting her ankle if she was to be up and about as soon as possible.
She was desperate to get out, but each time she tested her sprain it told her not yet.
Why couldn't Joe let her sit in the fireside armchair in the living-room so that she'd at least have company?
Why did he always have to work alone?
What was so private about writing letters for business people, l who ought to have clerks for doing it?
Another draught of air entered and rushed about.
Not the most patient young lady in the world, Dolly sat up and swung her legs over the edge of the bed.
She raised her voice.
‘Help!’
There was no response.
But someone was climbing the stairs.
That someone reached the landing and appeared at the open door of the bedroom.
‘Was that you callin', ducky?’ asked Mrs Beavis, her apron doing its best to fit itself around her plumpness, and  a plate containing a large segment of sausage and onion pie in her hand.
‘What d'yer want, a bit of 'elp to get to the lav?
Is yer poor foot still cripplin' yer?’
‘It's not me foot,’ said Dolly, ‘it's me soul that's sufferin'.’
She coughed loudly and said loudly, ‘And I'm gettin' frozen up in all these draughts.’
And she added, even more loudly, ‘He's a hard man, did you know that, Bessie?’
‘What, our Sergeant Joe?’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘He won't let me get up or go out, or even sit in the armchair for a bit,’ said Dolly.
‘I'm not sayin' he 'asn't been a good Samaritan, but I never thought he'd beat me black and blue just for arguin' with him.’
‘Well, I never did,’ said Mrs Beavis in astonishment, ‘I can't 'ardly credit Sergeant Joe doin' a thing like that.
And I don't like 'im doin' it in my 'ouse.
I'll 'ave to talk to 'im.’
She took her full-bodied self to the door of Joe's living-room and knocked.
‘You there, Sergeant Joe?’
There was silence for a moment, then the living-room door opened and Dolly heard him say, ‘What's up, Bessie?’
‘I'll give you what's up,’ said Mrs Beavis, and Dolly, boredom lifted, listened in delight to what she herself had provoked.
‘Well, what is up?’ asked Joe, work on the table and body guarding the doorway.
‘I can't believe what I just 'eard,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I come up with some of me 'ome-made sausage and onion pie fresh out of me oven.
I thought you an' Dolly might like it for yer supper tonight, but what 'appened?
The shock of me life.
I'm downright flabbergasted to know you're treatin' Dolly so unkind an' beatin' 'er as well.
I'm sure I don't know why you took 'er in if yer didn't mean to treat 'er kindly.
What's come over you?’
‘Can't say,’ said Joe, ‘I'm speechless.’
‘Now, Sergeant Joe, you ain't ever been speechless before,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I'm sure you've got something to say about why you're treatin' that poor gel so shameful.’
‘It wouldn't be fit for your ears, Bessie.
She's having you on.’
‘Eh?’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘She's making it all up,’ said Joe, ‘but she can't help it, she's had no family life and it's held her brain back a bit.
She hasn't grown up yet.’
‘Here, I heard that!’ shouted Dolly.
‘Must make allowances for her, Bessie,’ said Joe.
‘Well, I never, what a monkey,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘Not that I mind 'er pullin' me leg, I'm just thankful you ain't beatin' 'er black an' blue, it upset me when —’ The landlady stopped.
A shriek of laughter had come from the bedroom.
‘Well, listen to that, and after she near 'ad me cryin' me eyes out for 'er.
Saucy gel.’
Mrs Beavis tried to look offended.
It was beyond her.
Her happy outlook always prevailed.
She smiled at Joe.
‘Well, would yer like this piece of pie?’
‘You bet.
You're a rattling good sort, Bessie, and a first-class cook as well.’
Joe took the plate, transferred the pie to a dish, and returned the plate.
‘Thanks, Bessie old girl, bless you.’
‘I'll leave you to talk to yer monkey,’ said, Mrs Beavis.
‘I'll start with a beating,’ said Joe.
‘Oh, yer don't mean you 'ave been doin' that, do yer?’
‘No, I'm starting now,’ said Joe.
‘Now it's you that's 'aving me on,’ said the landlady, and went down to her kitchen with a smile.
She guessed what it was all about.
Dolly, like any young lady, wanted attention.
Joe entered the bedroom.
Dolly was lying on the bed.
‘Oh, hello, Joe, nice you've come to see me,’ she said, ‘how's your dear old dad?’
‘Still bringing wages home to me dear old mum,’ said  Joe, who spent the occasional weekend with his parents in their Chatham home and was always there at Christmas.
‘Private Smith, you're playing up again.’
‘Me?’ said Dolly.
‘I beat you black and blue, do I?’
‘No, not all the time,’ said Dolly, ‘just once so far.’
‘Like some more, would you?’
‘You'll be lucky.
Here, be a sport, could you close that window?
It's not fresh air that's comin' in, it's freezin' draughts.’
Joe closed the window.
‘Like another cup of tea?’ he asked.
‘Oh, would I, not 'alf I wouldn't.’
‘Right, tea and a couple of biscuits now, and supper later.’
‘You do treat a girl swell, Joe.
What's for supper?’
‘I'm having fresh sausage and onion pie with fried potatoes and a green vegetable,’ said Joe.
‘You're having dry bread and water.’
‘Could I 'ave just a scrape of marge with me bread?
And could I come and 'ave it with you at the table?’
‘Permission granted, Private Smith.’
But there was no bread and water for her, of course.
He shared the pie with her.
Afterwards, he made her go and rest again, much to her disgust and outrage.
She said she might as well chuck herself out of the window.
He said do it quietly, make sure you don't land on the backyard dustbin.
The noise would upset the hard-working neighbours.
Dolly said his jokes still weren't very funny.
No joke, he said, upset neighbours could get very ratty.
He went out for an evening walk, and that really got Dolly's goat.
When he came back she said she'd go out herself tomorrow, and if he tried to stop her she'd smash up all his crockery.
She also said she'd poison all the food in his larder, only the larder was locked.
Why did he keep it locked?
‘To stop you poisoning the food,’ said Joe.
‘I'll make some coffee now, if you don't mind Camp.’
‘Ain't you lovely to me sometimes?’ said Dolly.
He laughed.
She was a character.
He could imagine her fighting to hold her own in the orphanage instead of letting herself become meek and mousy.
The orphanage was where she'd developed her pert tongue, no doubt about it.
If all her rough times had turned her into a pickpocket, at least they hadn't defeated her.
All she needed to put herself right was a decent job.
George might be able to help there.
When he brought the coffee in, he also brought a rolled bandage, purchased during his morning excursion.
Her ankle needed support and could take a bandage now, he said.
‘Oh, good,’ said Dolly, ‘I'll be able to start waggin' me foot about, will I?’
‘Let's have it,’ said Joe.
Dolly drew her skirts up.
‘Just your foot, I meant, Private Smith, not your legs.’
‘I hope you ain't complainin',’ said Dolly.
‘I met a gentleman once who said me legs were worth 'alf-a-crown a look.’
‘I'm not complaining, but I'm not handing over any half-crowns,’ said Joe.
He wound the bandage around her ankle, making sure it was firmly supportive but not constrictive.
He secured it with the safety-pin.
‘How's that?’
‘A treat, honest,’ said Dolly, flexing her foot.
‘Thanks ever so much, Joe.’
They drank coffee together, sitting companionably on the edge of the bed.
‘You might be able to go for a short walk in a couple of days,’ said Joe.
‘What, two more whole rotten days?’ said Dolly.
‘I'll die, I will.’
‘Can't have that kind of talk,’ said Joe.
‘I've told you  before, it won't do.
Let's have some fighting talk.’
‘All right, then,’ said Dolly, ‘let me tell you that if I 'ave to spend two more rotten days just kickin' me heels, I'll smash the place up.’
‘That's better,’ said Joe, ‘in that kind of mood I could put you on a horse and let you join in the charge of the Light Brigade.’
‘Honoured, I'm sure,’ said Dolly.
‘Did you go out this evening to meet your lady friend?
I bet you've got one round the corner somewhere.’
‘I've got several.’
‘Go on, 'ave you?
Where?’
‘Round the corner somewhere,’ said Joe.
‘Think I'm simple, do you?’ said Dolly.
‘No such thing as a simple woman,’ said Joe, ‘they're all too clever by half.’
‘Oh, 'ave you been done down by one, Joe?’
‘Not yet,’ said Joe, and grinned.
And Dolly wondered why he wasn't married or even engaged.
Later, just before they both retired, he brought her another book.
‘What's this?’ she asked.
‘Some better bedtime reading for you, which you can enjoy now and over the next two days.’
She looked at the title.
The Indian Mutiny .
‘Oh, you daft loony!’ she yelled and threw it at him.
Too late.
He was already out of the room.
The book hit the door.
She laughed.
She stood up and tested her ankle.
Firmly bandaged, it hardly protested at all.
Newington Butts had the dark, deserted look of night far advanced.
The sky was inky with cloudless black velvet studded by a million diamonds.
It was nearly two o'clock in the morning.
Question.
Was the door bolted or not?
It was said that  the working people of London had no need to bolt their doors at any time.
Alexander Rokovssky carefully inserted a skeleton key, and slowly turned it.
It met a little resistance, then the lock yielded.
He pushed the door open.
He stood for a moment, looking up and down the dark street before quietly entering the passage.
He paused for thought.
Yes, leave the door slightly open to ensure that if necessary he could leave at speed.
He waited, adjusting his eyes to the darkness of the house.
He had a picture in his mind of the layout of passage, stairs and landing, a picture unwittingly painted for him by the man who had retrieved his wallet.
He moved forward, hand against the wall of the passage.
It guided him to the stairs, which were straight ahead.
He climbed them, slowly and cautiously.
Dolly jerked awake to find a brutal hand clapped over her mouth and to feel a slight pricking sensation in her throat.
‘Do not move, filthy woman, do not scream,’ whispered a voice with a foreign accent.
Dolly recognized it immediately.
Its menace and her memory of the cold cruelty of the man, together with the realization that it was the point of a knife pricking her neck, made her shudder.
‘You will speak only when I ask questions, and you will speak very softly.
If you shout or scream, you will die.
Do you understand?’
With the hard hand so tight over her mouth, Dolly did her best to nod.
‘Take care, then, if you wish to remain alive.’
The hand lifted a fraction, and she sucked in air.
The voice hissed at her.
‘Why did you open the letter?’
Her blood surged, her body tensed.
‘What letter?’ she breathed, and the point of the knife pricked deeper.
‘You think me a fool, woman?
The letter was steamed open.
Why?’
Dolly, quick-witted, didn't take longer than a second to come up with an answer, and one that didn't incriminate Joe.
‘Well, there wasn't much money in your wallet, not for a gent like you, so I thought there must be a bit in the letter.’
‘Filthy liar.
Pickpockets do not steam open envelopes.’
The sibilance of his whispering voice and the recollection that a certain man had been found with his throat cut, turned Dolly rigid in the bed.
‘Nor do they return a wallet with money still in it.’
‘No, I 'ad to give half of it back,’ breathed Dolly.
‘I knew you'd tracked me down, so I thought if I only took some of it you wouldn't put the cops on me.
You've got to believe me, mister, I'm only a workin' girl without a job.’
‘You are lying.
You attempted to delude me.
It was the letter you wanted, not the money.
You read it.’
‘No, I was just lookin' for a bit more money, honest,’ gasped Dolly, the knife a hideous threat.
Again her quick wits worked for her.
‘I just thought there might be a fifty-quid banknote in that envelope, but there was only a letter, which I couldn't read, anyway, it was in a foreign language.
I don't know any foreign languages, I'm an orphanage girl.’
‘Lies.
What country are you working for?’ hissed Rokovssky.
Outside, the April breeze travelled friskily through the Butts.
The front door, ajar, sighingly opened wider.
‘What d'you mean, what country?’
Dolly was cold all over, icy tremors running down her back.
‘I don't work for nobody, I ain't got a job, honest.’
‘Your accomplice, then.
You work for him.
He had a bag, yes?
The wallet was in it.
Yes?’
Paralysed though she was, not for anything was Dolly  going to drop Sergeant Joe in the cart, not for anything would she even admit he was in the house.
‘Honest, I'd never seen 'im before, I just bumped into 'im in the fog and it made me sprain me ankle.
He carried me here, he knows the fam'ly, and they took me in.
He wasn't interested in any letter —’
‘You are an agent.
So is he.’
Another question.
Should he kill them or not?
First, in any case, he must find out if they had yet informed others of the contents of the letter.
‘I will give you a minute, no more, to tell me if you are working for the British Government or another.
Which is the one that has been informed of the letter?
Give me the truth or I will slit your throat, then go to him and slit his too.
I know he is here, which room he is in.
You have a minute to decide.’
Dolly wanted to scream, to raise the roof and to wake Joe.
As it was, she had to think of something to say that would satisfy a man who was so evil he should never have been born.
What could she say?
Suppose she said she was an agent?
Then what else could she say?
Outside, the night breeze strengthened.
It gusted around chimneys and roofs, and it gusted through Newington Butts.
It blew and it plucked.
The open front door of the Beavis house closed with a thunderous crash.
Rokovssky, for all his tried and tested ability to react to the unexpected, was startled into losing his' concentration.
He jerked up.
Dolly was out of the bed in a flash, on its other side.
Sergeant Joe was awake, so were members of the Beavis family.
Dolly screamed.
‘Ruddy bananas,’ said Mr Beavis, sitting up in his bed, ‘what the 'ell was that, Bessie?’
Rokovssky was out on the landing.
He went down the stairs like a flying shadow, and rushed through the passage.
He pulled the front door open, and out he went.
He ran at speed.
Everyone was awake.
Someone struck a match at the  open door of the landing bedroom.
In the light of its little flame, Dolly saw the face of Sergeant Joe.
‘Oh, come in, won't you?’ she gasped.
Down from the top floor bounced the offspring of Mr and Mrs Beavis, the girls in nightdresses, the boys in nightshirts.
Up from the ground floor, a lighted candle in his hand, rumbled Mr Beavis.
Everyone was heading for the bedroom from which had come the screams.
Fulsome bodies filled the landing.
‘What's 'appening?’
‘What's goin' on?’
‘What was them screams for?’
‘Who done 'em?’
‘Who's 'urt?’
‘Who fell down the stairs, did anyone fall down the stairs?’
‘What went crash?
Who done it?’
‘Is the 'ouse on fire?
Can yer smell smoke?’
Those in the van of the invasion were jammed in the doorway.
Dolly, sitting on the floor against the wall on the farther side of the bed, reached and tugged a blanket free.
Hastily, she covered herself up.
Joe had lit a gas mantle.
From the passage below, Mrs Beavis called.
‘What's 'appened up there?’
Joe saw Dolly, blanket-wrapped, tumbled hair touching her bare shoulders.
Her eyes looked enormous.
‘What happened?’ he asked.
‘Thunder an' bleedin' lightning, that's what it sounded like,’ said Albert.
Dolly found her voice.
‘A burglar got in,’ she said.
‘What?’ said Joe.
‘Ain't no burglars round 'ere,’ said Alfred.
‘Well, there's one or two that live 'ereabouts,’ said Mr Beavis, ‘but they do their burglin' elsewhere.’
‘They'd get done in if they did it 'ere,’ said Nancy, using her healthy roundness to expel herself from the jammed-up doorway.
She shot into the bedroom like a released balloon.
She saw Joe.
Joe, who hadn't stopped to put anything on, was wearing only his long pants, his chest and feet bare.
‘'Elp, look at you, Sergeant Joe,’ she said.
Then she saw Dolly.
‘Crikey, what yer doin' down there?’ she asked.
‘It was better for me 'ealth down 'ere,’ said Dolly, the bedroom getting smaller as more of the family spilled in.
‘Did I 'ear someone mention burglars?’
Mrs Beavis was in the doorway.
Dolly said one had got in, that he threatened to do her in if she didn't tell him where all the valuables were.
Who he was she couldn't say, because the room was too dark, but he must have left the front door open and the wind must have caught it and made it shut with a crash.
That startled him and she fell out of bed to get out of his way.
Then he hopped it quick.
‘I suppose 'e got in by usin' the latchcord,’ she said.
Rokovssky, of course, knowing nothing about the use of latchcords in Walworth, hadn't even looked for one.
‘What a bleedin' cheek, we ain't got no valuables,’ said Mr Beavis, ‘'e didn't treat yer rough, did 'e?’
Dolly said she was more aggravated than bruised.
‘Oh, yer poor young dear,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘life ain't treatin' you a bit nice.’
‘Fancy a burglar gettin' in our 'ouse,’ said Linda.
‘Don't make sense to me,’ said Mr Beavis, a bulging man in his nightshirt.
‘Mind, 'e might 'ave been after all me little gels, they bein' 'ighly valuable.’
‘Wasn't it lucky you 'ad Sergeant Joe down 'ere with you, Dolly?’ said Ella.
‘I'm near faintin',’ said Nancy, ‘can't I 'ave Sergeant Joe upstairs with me?’
‘Gettin' saucier all the time, you are, Nancy,’ said Mrs  Beavis.
‘Charlie, yer best call in at the police station on yer way to work tomorrer mornin'.’
‘Now, Bessie, yer know people round 'ere don't interfere with coppers’ work,’said Mr Beavis.
‘You all right, love?’ he said to Dolly.
‘I am now,’ said Dolly.
‘That's good.’
‘Ain't me Sergeant Joe 'andsome?’ said Nancy.
‘'Ere, leave orf,’ said Ella, ‘Sergeant Joe ain't yours, 'e's all of ours.’
‘I ain't makin' any claims,’ said Alfred.
‘Nor me,’ said Albert, ‘you girls keep 'im to yerselves.’
‘Listen, Dolly,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘would yer like a nice cup of 'ot tea and a slice of apple pie to 'elp yer get over the 'orrors?’
‘Thanks,’ said Dolly, ‘but if you don't mind I'd just like to go back to bed.’
‘Would yer like me to fetch our mum's smellin'-salts?’ offered Linda.
‘Oh, it's kind of you, but no thanks,’ said Dolly, still keeping to the floor and the protection of the blanket.
‘Come on, out you all go,’ said Mr Beavis, and with a rustle of nightwear and a bustle of bodies, his brood rolled out of the room, all talking at once about how could any burglar be daft enough to try burgling them.
Linda said perhaps he was a hungry burglar who'd come after their mum's apple pie and fruit cake.
More like Nancy's dumplings, said Alfred, and received a bash from his eldest sister for being personal.
Mrs Beavis shooed them all back to their beds, and Mr Beavis said to Joe, ‘Well, we'll leave yer to tuck Dolly in, eh?
Good night to both of yer.’
Alone with Joe, Dolly said, ‘I suppose you know you ain't decent, standin' there in your reach-me-downs.’
‘Never mind that,’ said Joe, and closed the door.
‘Here, what's that for?’ she asked in alarm.
‘You can get up now,’ said Joe.
‘I dare say I can, but I ain't goin' to,’ said Dolly, ‘the blanket might fall off.’
‘Like that, is it?’ said Joe.
‘I suppose I should have got hold of a nightdress for you.
Anyway, let's get down to business.
Who was it?’
‘The burglar?’ said Dolly.
‘Look, would you mind turnin' your back?’
Joe put his back to her and she got up and scrambled into the bed.
Then in sober vein she said, ‘It was him.’
‘Blackbeard?’
‘I couldn't see him properly, not in the dark, but it was him all right.
I told you he'd come after us.
He 'ad a knife and said he'd do me in if I didn't tell him why we steamed the letter open.
You've landed us in it, doin' that.
You sure you don't know what language it was?
You must know foreign languages, you've been all over with the Army, 'aven't you?’
‘Africa and India,’ said Joe, ‘and the letter was in Russian.’
‘Here, you said you didn't know before.’
‘Well, I know now,’ said Joe.
‘It's made 'im mad,’ said Dolly, ‘he said we'd read it.’
Why, thought Joe, should Blackbeard think either of them could read Russian?
Exactly what was the letter all about?
Something pretty important to Blackbeard.
Well, George was going to come up with a translation.
Dolly had stirred up a hornets' nest when she pinched the wallet, and he hadn't made it any better by steaming the letter open.
Despite the careful way he'd re-sealed it, Blackbeard had spotted it.
‘Frightened you badly, did he, Dolly?’
‘I thought me last moments 'ad come,’ she said.
‘Well, I don't think he'll come back again, he'll know we're not going to be caught napping a second time.
We'll get Charlie Beavis to bolt the front door at night.
Can't  have a character like Blackbeard popping in and out just as he likes.’
‘I've got a surprise for you,’ said Dolly, ‘he thinks you're a spy.’
‘A what?’
‘A man that does spyin' for his country.’
‘Off his rocker,’ said Joe.
‘Still, you keep yourself very private,’ said Dolly.
‘I mean, sittin' in your room writin' all day.
You don't write spy messages, do you?’
‘They'd be more interesting than business letters, I'll give you that,’ said Joe, ‘but no, that's not me.
It's food for thought, though.
Point is, what's Blackbeard up to that he doesn't want to be spied on?’
‘Don't ask me,’ said Dolly, ‘I'm just 'ere by accident.’
‘And for nicking the wallet,’ said Joe.
‘Anyway, get back to sleep and tomorrow perhaps we'd better think seriously about getting you away from here, after all.’
‘I ain't goin',’ said Dolly, ‘I already told you so.’
‘Why, exactly?’
‘Because nobody's goin' to treat me as kind as you do.’
‘Except, of course, when I beat you black and blue.’
‘Oh, a grateful girl like me can put up with a few bruises,’ said Dolly, sheet and blankets up to her chin.
‘Pleased to hear it,’ said Joe.
‘Good night.’
‘More like good morning, if you ask me,’ said Dolly.
‘What a life.’
Rokovssky, at this moment a man of curses and oaths, knew he had to send a telegram to Marcelle Fayette in the morning.
It was work for her now, dealing with the bitch and the male accomplice in Newington Butts.
CHAPTER TEN
Dolly slept late.
Joe did not disturb her, he went out and bought a paper, interesting himself in its report on the progress of the murder investigation.
The police, having interviewed working colleagues of the victim at the London Docks, had elicited information to the effect that at the end of his shift he met two men outside the gates and said he was going for a drink with them.
He earned a bit on the side, did Dan Pearson.
The fog had not set in at that time, late afternoon, and the dockers were able to describe the men as respectable-looking young gents in peaked caps.
The police were now making enquiries in all the neighbouring pubs.
Joe began to wonder if he should go to the police.
But that would land Dolly in trouble.
And the police had a lead now.
They'd do a thorough follow-up job.
Give them enough time and they'd catch up with Blackbeard, if Blackbeard really was the killer.
Joe took a walk along the Walworth Road, going as briskly as his stiff knee would allow.
Horse-drawn buses and electric trams were only partly full, most people being at their places of work by now.
Night-shift workers were probably in their beds, and late day-shift workers probably having a lie-in.
Many London factories worked a twenty-four-hour day, and their chimneys only stopped belching smoke on Sundays.
What a contribution they made to winter fogs, thought Joe.
It occurred to him then that Dolly might be under greater threat than he was because she could describe Blackbeard more accurately.
He had seen him only in the dense fog.
She had seen him, and the murdered man, in  the Rockingham pub.
Joe had a feeling it wasn't too clever, leaving Dolly alone.
He'd better get back.
He turned and retraced his steps.
Arriving at his lodgings he found she was missing.
Hell, he thought, has she bunked?
No, she'd left him a reassuring note.
‘My ankle's better, so I'm going shopping, behave yourself while I'm out.’
The monkey.
Her ankle still needed another full day's rest.
He went down to see his landlady, who told him Dolly had gone out just about ten minutes ago.
She was dressed quite nice, did she have spare clothes, after all?
Joe said he'd got them from the pawnshop.
There was nothing for him to do except settle down to some work.
He turned to Mary Shelley.
George had drafted a letter in her name concerning her thoughts on her novel Frankenstein .
It was a first-class concoction.
By the middle of the afternoon, Dolly was still not back, and he was worrying about her.
Either something had happened to her or those two fivers had gone to her head and she was on a day-long spree.
‘Now who can that be?’ asked Mrs Beavis of herself when the front door knocker went.
Couldn't be the rent man, he'd come yesterday and been paid.
Couldn't be a neighbour, either.
A neighbour would have opened the door by the latchcord and called out to ask if anyone was in.
Couldn't be a tally man, either, because the family didn't have owings.
Wiping her floury hands, Mrs Beavis answered the knock.
A dark and lovely young woman smiled at her from the doorstep.
She was dressed quite nice, thought Mrs Beavis, but not overpowering, in a three-quarter-length coat and ankle-length dress, and a flat-brimmed hat sort of quietly decorative on top.
You could see outfits like that on shop manageresses.
The young woman, suitcase resting on the doorstep, said, ‘Good afternoon.’
‘Same to you, I'm sure,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I am so sorry not to have made an appointment.’
‘Pardon?’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘To see you.’
The young woman sounded as if she wasn't English.
‘To ask if it is true you have a room that can be rented.
I have not the money to pay for any hotel room — ah, how expensive London hotels are, isn't it so?’
Her smile put warm light into her dark brown eyes.
‘A most kind person told me you might accommodate me.’
‘Well, bless me soul,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘Pardon?
Excuse me?
My English is not very good?
You do not comprehend?’
‘There, I thought you wasn't English,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I said to meself, Bessie, I said, this young lady ain't English.
D'yer mind tellin' me where yer come from?’
‘France.
You do not mind people from France, I hope?
I am here to work in a London drama academy, to teach — ah, yes — deportment.
You know?’
‘What's deportment?’ asked Mrs Beavis in good-natured enquiry.
‘I have not said it right?
Deportment?’
The lovely young woman, with thick lashes an inch long, offered another appealing smile.
‘It is how to walk most elegant, madam.
It is most important for young ladies wishing to become actresses.’
‘Deportment, well, bless me,’ said Mrs Beavis in happy understanding.
‘But I ain't usually called madam, I'm Mrs Bessie Beavis, and I do 'ave a room for rent.
Not that I'm desp'rate, mind, me fam'ly not bein' in want.
Still, I must say I'm taken with yer nice manners and everything.’
‘I have asked at houses near the academy, but to rent a room there — yes, it is most embarrassing to say I cannot afford what is asked, and I shall not be earning until I begin my work in two weeks.
But I have come to London early to make myself familiar with it, you see.
Ah, the boat and the Channel this morning, I thought I would die  of sickness.
Do you say, madam, that I may rent the room?’
‘'Ere, you best come in,’ beamed Mrs Beavis, having made up her mind.
‘I never 'ad a French lady lodger before — mind, it's four shillings a week, being a nice large front room with a comfortin' bed and an 'andsome fireplace.’
‘Four shillings?’
The young woman lifted her suitcase and stepped in.
Mrs Beavis closed the door.
‘Four shillings?
Ah, that is most kind and not at all expensive.
Thank you, madam.’
‘It's Mrs Beavis.’
‘Thank you, Mrs Beavis.’
‘I'll show you the room, which if you like it you can rent with pleasure.
Could I 'ave yer name, love?’
‘I am Mademoiselle Marcelle Fayette of Dieppe.
Please, yes, I should like to see the room.’
Mrs Beavis took her up to the first-floor landing.
She led the way past Sergeant Joe's bedroom to the front room.
It could not be faulted in respect of how clean and tidy she kept it.
Its bed and furniture were entirely homely, however, and perhaps not as dainty as the elegant young French lady might like, but it did have a nice view of the hustle and bustle of Newington Butts, and Mrs Beavis always reckoned that if you could see life going on from your window, you couldn't grumble too much about not having dainty furniture.
‘It's a nice size, don't yer think?’ said the affable landlady.
‘Ah, perfect, yes, perfect,’ said Mademoiselle Fayette.
‘I will take it, if you please.
From now, you agree?
See, I have all my things in this case.
I am to commence paying this moment?
Willingly, Mrs Beavis.’
‘Well, I think I'd best fill some of the 'ot water bottles an' put them in the bed right away,’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘just in case there's a bit of cold about the sheets.
Mind, all the  bed linen's clean, and we don't have no bugs or fleas, I wouldn't 'ave anything like that in any 'ouse I lived in.’
‘Oh, I am sure,’ said Mademoiselle Fayette.
She took a purse from her coat pocket, found two silver florins and handed them to the landlady, who said she'd get her a rent book.
‘Do you have other tenants, madam?’
‘Tenants?
Oh, yer mean lodgers.’
Mrs Beavis nodded.
‘Well, there's just Mr Foster, 'e's got the other two rooms on this landin'.
He's a nice upright gent that people like, and all me gels is very fond of 'im, specially young Linda.’
‘Then I must introduce myself to him, yes?
We have to share amenities, perhaps?’
‘Well, there's the lav and the 'andbasin that's on the landin',’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘but you got your own gas ring in the corner there.
Would yer like to meet Mr Foster now?’
‘He is not at work?’
‘Oh, 'e does 'is work in 'is livin'-room,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I'll take yer to 'im, you might as well meet each other now.’
She led her new lodger to the closed door of Joe's living-room and knocked.
‘You there, Sergeant Joe?’
There was the sound of a chair being pushed back over the floor linoleum.
‘Everyone calls 'im Sergeant Joe, 'e's been in the Army, yer see.’
The door opened.
Mademoiselle Fayette saw a man straight of back, broad of shoulders and handsomely moustached.
And she saw a soldier's face, permanently browned and weathered by sun and wind.
He wore a black jersey and grey trousers, and his dark brown hair was slightly ruffled.
Joe saw a dark-eyed young woman, modestly dressed, with the lush looks of — an Italian, perhaps?
He judged her worthy of finer clothes, for what she did have on she wore with an air.
Her colouring was vivid.
‘Hello, Bessie, who's floated in?’ he asked.
‘Well, it's — what did yer say yer name was, miss?’
‘Marcelle Fayette.’
‘There y'ar, Sergeant Joe,’ beamed Mrs Beavis, ‘this young lady's our new lodger, she's just took the front room, she's just come over from France.
She thought she'd best meet you, would yer like to shake 'ands with 'er?’
Joe shook hands.
‘Welcome,’ he said.
‘What's brought you to London?’
‘Work, you see,’ said Mademoiselle Fayette.
‘Yes.
I am to teach at a London drama academy.
I am most happy to live in the room here, this lady has been so kind in accommodating me.
Ah, your own room looks nice.
Cosy, yes, and with a fire.’
She could not see much of the room because of how he filled most of the doorway, but she saw the glow of the fire and a glimpse of a baize-covered table on which were papers.
‘I'd invite you in for a chat,’ said Joe, ‘but I'm just about to go out.
Never mind, we'll see each other.
I'm Joe, of course.’
‘Joe?
Yes?
How nice.
Then I am Marcelle.’
Her smile was very warm.
She seemed delighted to have met him, and to have found there was no need to be formal.
‘Well, I'm that pleased you've met each other,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘Would yer like a nice hot cup of tea, Miss Fate?’
What a funny name, she thought, and the young lady pronounced it funny, too.
‘I'm just goin' to make one for meself.’
‘How kind.’
Marcelle Fayette hated tea, but one could not say so under present circumstances.
‘You can come down for a nice sit in me kitchen,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘I expect you'd like a bit of rest while you drink yer tea.
Then I'll see about doin' the 'ot water bottles for yer.’
Despite her weightiness, Mrs Beavis got about her house like a two-year-old.
She liked being on the go.
‘No good askin' you to come down an' join us, Sergeant Joe, if yer goin' out, I suppose.’
‘Thanks all the same, Bessie,’ said Joe.
‘I will unpack and then come down,’ said Marcelle.
‘Yes, you do that, love,’ said Mrs Beavis, and down she went to her kitchen.
Marcelle smiled at Joe and went to her room, closing the door.
Joe cleared his table, put his carpet-bag in the larder, locked the door and went out for some fresh air and to get an evening paper, afternoon edition.
Marcelle entered his room seconds after she saw him cross the street from her window.
And she unlocked his larder door with ease.
She pulled out the carpet-bag.
Methodically, she went through its contents.
It took her no more than four minutes to elucidate what kind of work he did in his lodgings.
Name of a magnificent name, he was a forger and a beautiful one.
Such a man, with this talent and his frank and fearless looks, was made for espionage.
Rokovssky was right.
This Englishman, who had once served in the British Army, had steamed that letter open with all the careful deliberation of an espionage agent.
And this was how many such agents lived, in rooms in the back streets of cities.
Where was his confederate, the girl who had stolen Rokovssky's wallet in such daring fashion?
‘Miss Fate?’
Mrs Beavis was calling.
‘Tea's ready to be poured, and there's a nice slice of cake to keep yer goin'.
Miss Fate?’
Marcelle was quietly negotiating the landing.
Not until she reached the door of her room did she respond to Mrs Beavis.
‘Ah, I will come down in one minute, madam.
One minute.’
When she came down, all Sergeant Joe's files of papers were back in his carpet-bag, and the bag had been restored to the larder.
And the larder was locked again.
She ate the slice of her landlady's home-made fruit cake, which she thought delicious, and she drank the tea that  had milk in it, and which she thought only fit for the uncivilized.
Not long after they arrived home from school, Linda and Ella went up to see Sergeant Joe.
Linda skipped up, Ella bounced up.
Linda put her head round the door.
‘Sergeant Joe, Mum says as yer didn't let 'er treat yer earlier, would yer like a cup of tea and a slice of cake now?’
‘Can't say no to that, Private Carrots,’ said Joe, sliding his quill pen into hiding.
While he was careful not to give the impression to the Beavis family that his work was anything out of the ordinary, he nevertheless made sure it was not open to even the most casual glance.
Normally, he only had the Beavises to worry about, and they were typically friendly and unsuspicious cockneys.
‘We're 'aving some too,’ said Ella.
‘Mum says it's to keep our bodies an' souls together till suppertime.
Can we bring ours up and 'ave it with you?’
‘Right, let's have ten minutes of tea and cake for three,’ said Joe.
He shuffled papers, bringing them together and placing them to one side, face downwards.
‘I'll go down an' bring it all up,’ said Ella, whose energy kept her plumpness active.
‘No, I will,’ said Linda, ‘you bump cups of tea up an' down, and it goes in the saucers.
Mum says you'll bump yerself up an' down one day till yer 'ead comes orf.’
Down she went and came back with the cups of tea and slices of cake on a tray.
‘Good carrying job, Carrots,’ said Joe.
‘That's your cup,’ said Linda, ‘it's wivout sugar, like you like it.
Mum says we can stay the ten minutes as long as we ain't a nuisance.’
‘You're not nuisances,’ said Joe, ‘you're good for me.’
‘Mum says we got a new lodger, a nice French lady,’ said Linda.
‘Yes, fancy French,’ said Ella, and filled her healthy  mouth with fruit cake.
A few crumbs flew as she added, ‘Mum says she's ever so romantic-lookin'.’
‘'Ave yer fell for 'er, Sergeant Joe?’ asked Linda.
‘Not yet,’ said Joe.
‘I don't think I'll have time to yet, not till we get Dolly fixed up with a job and lodgings of her own.’
‘She ain't goin' to like that,’ said Linda.
‘Pardon?’ said Joe.
‘Well, I don't fink she will,’ said Linda.
‘Where's she gone?’
‘Shopping,’ said Joe.
‘Is 'er wounded leg all right?’ asked Ella.
‘It had better be,’ said Joe grimly.
‘How was school today?’
‘The teachers told us it was Victoria and Albert lessons today,’ said Ella through her last mouthful of cake.
‘They all told us that, didn't they, Linda?’
‘Yes,’ said Linda.
‘'Ere, you went and ate the biggest bit of cake.
Mum said that bit was for Sergeant Joe.’
‘What, that small bit?’ said Ella.
‘You're always takin' the biggest bits,’ accused Linda.
‘We're goin' to do a Victoria and Albert pageant at school on Empire Day,’ said Ella.
‘Sergeant Joe, fancy Dolly not bein' back yet.’
‘I'll clap her in the guardhouse when she does arrive,’ said Joe.
The girls giggled.
‘Now, you gels!’
Mrs Beavis made herself heard from below.
‘Down you come, the pair of you, I want yer both in the scullery bath before yer dad and brothers get 'ome from their work.’
‘Mum, I don't want no bath,’ called Ella.
‘It ain't what you don't want, lovey, it's what yer goin' to get.
Come on down now, both of you.’
‘Oh, blow,’ said Linda, but she and Ella went down.
The stairs sang to Ella's boisterous descent.
Then the  house vibrated to a yell, a thump and a crash.
Sergeant Joe went out to the landing in haste, and Marcelle also appeared, her skirts rustling.
‘Heavens, what has happened?’ she asked.
Linda's voice supplied the answer to that.
‘Oh, yer clumsy elephant, Ella, yer sittin' on top of me, an' yer've broke the cups an' saucers.
Mum, could yer get 'er orf, she's squashin' me.’
‘Dear oh lor',’ said Mrs Beavis, ‘why don't yer just walk down the stairs, Ella, instead of fallin' down them?
An' look what you done to the china.
Well, can't be 'elped.
Pick all the pieces up, then come and 'ave yer baths.
There's boiled beef an' carrots for supper when yer dad an' the boys get in.’
Mrs Beavis glanced up and saw her new lady lodger and Sergeant Joe looking over the banisters.
‘Lor’, I'm sorry, Miss Fate, Ella makin' all that 'ullabaloo.
Still, she don't do it every day.’
‘Please do not worry, madam, it is nothing except a little accident,’ said Marcelle.
‘I do hope no-one is hurt.’
‘I am,’ said Linda, ‘I been squashed all over and I ain't got no breath left.
Me sister Ella's like an elephant when she falls on yer.’
‘This is me daughter Linda, and that's Ella,’ said Mrs Beavis.
‘Ah, such happy girls, yes?’ said Marcelle.
‘I 'ope it won't disturb yer if they're a bit rackety at times,’ said Mrs Beavis, her girls collecting the pieces of smashed china.
‘Rackety?’ enquired Marcelle.
‘Noisy,’ said Joe.
‘I shall not mind, no, no,’ smiled Marcelle.
The pieces all on the tray, the girls looked up at their new lodger.
‘'Ello,’ said Ella.
‘'Ello,’ said Linda.
‘Hello, yes?
Hello,’ said Marcelle.
‘Shoo,’ said Mrs Beavis to her girls, and the passage emptied.
‘One can always forgive the young,’ said Marcelle.
‘When I was in the Army I sometimes wondered if the young could forgive the grown-ups,’ said Joe, thinking the new lodger a beauty.
‘For what?’ she smiled.
‘For trying to kill each other every once in a while,’ said Joe.
Her eyes opened wide.
‘You are looking at me, Joe?’ she said.
‘But I am not a soldier.’
‘Oh, it's not only soldiers, mademoiselle.’
She laughed.
‘Pooh to mademoiselle, did I not say I am Marcelle?’
‘So you did.’
‘Would you like some coffee?’ she asked.
‘Coffee?’ said Joe.
‘I have a little percolator and some ground coffee.
Yes, it is true.
My parents, you see, said ah, in England they will only give you tea.
Do you like coffee?
There is a gas ring in my room and the percolator is bubbling.
And I have found cups and saucers in a little cupboard.
Please come.’
‘You're on,’ said Joe.
‘Excuse me?’
‘Yes, I'll join you,’ said Joe.
‘Sounds friendly.’
‘Good, we should be friendly together,’ said Marcelle.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Dolly tried to keep her weight off her right foot as she climbed the stairs.
Her ankle, despite the supportive bandage, was aching.
He'd be bound to notice, to give her a look and say black mark, Private Smith.
Reaching the landing, she heard the murmur of voices.
From that spare room, the front one.
She looked into the living-room.
Empty.
So was the bedroom.
Funny.
Was he in that other room with someone, then?
She listened.
A woman's voice.
Yes, and his.
What was he doing in there with a woman?
Mrs Beavis had said he could use the bed at nights, if he wanted, but he'd said no, he didn't want three rooms to look after, he wasn't as domesticated as that.
Dolly, not one to hold back her curiosity, knocked on the door of the front room.
It was opened by Marcelle.
Her dark green dress with a flounced skirt was of a pleasant and conventional kind, such as respectable young women wore.
But she didn't have modest looks.
That is, her face wasn't as ordinary as her dress.
Dolly had to admit she was lovely, with striking dark brown eyes and long thick lashes.
And her jet black hair was magnificent.
‘Yes?’ she said, her smile enquiring.
‘Excuse me,’ said Dolly, ‘but who are you?’
‘I am new here,’ said Marcelle, and Joe appeared beside her.
‘'Ere, what's goin' on?’ asked Dolly.
‘So you're back, are you?’ said Joe.
That's it, thought Dolly, here comes the look.
‘Oh, dearie me, sorry to interrupt,’ she said and went into his bedroom.
‘Ah, a friend?’ said Marcelle to Joe.
She had had a  wickedly subtle conversation with him, a very enquiring one, but he hadn't given a thing away.
Behind that frank countenance of his lay a man who could fence with the best of them, she thought.
‘A close friend, Joe?’
‘Oh, I found her in the fog with a sprained ankle and no home or family,’ said Joe, ‘so I brought her here to help her get on her feet in all ways.
You can't pass every hard-luck case by.’
‘Some might,’ said Marcelle.
What a facile man he was.
The young woman was his confederate, of course.
‘Now I know exactly what is meant by an English gentleman.
Poor unfortunate creature.
Such dreadful clothes.’
Joe showed a little grin.
‘Not as dreadful as what she was wearing when I first found her,’ he said.
‘Well, thanks for the coffee, Marcelle, now I'd better go and talk to her.’
‘Of course.
It is not enough to find a woman.
One must also talk to her.
Myself, I have much enjoyed having you talk to me.’
‘Pleasure,’ said Joe, and crossed to his bedroom.
Entering, he was immediately attacked by Dolly.
If the Victorian era was over, the example set by Queen Victoria during her long reign was still fresh in the mind, and all women who had the right amount of sense and spirit knew that attack was the best form of defence when dealing with men who liked to lay down the law.
‘D'you mind tellin' me what you've been up to all day?’ demanded Dolly.
‘I just go out for a bit, just for an hour or two, and when I come back you ain't even got the kettle on.
When I think of me days of pain and sufferin' here, and how I've kept cheerful and 'elpful so as not to be a burden, as well as givin' you the benefit of me company so that you could 'ave someone to talk to, well, it's a shock to me to find you lazin' about with a gypsy woman on your lap.
Well, as good as, I should think.
Still, I might 'ave known.
I suppose I'll 'ave to get the supper while you go  back and comb the nits out of her hair.
Of course, it ain't my business who she is and what she's doin' here, you probably found her in a gypsy caravan outside Spurgeon's Tabernacle and brought her here while me back was turned.
I don't know what's goin' to 'appen to my respect for you.
I said to Mrs Beavis this morning, I said Sergeant Joe's a hard man, but I've still got respect for him.’
‘Finished?’ said Joe, standing with his back to the closed door.
‘No, I ain't,’ said Dolly.
‘I suppose you know gypsy women do vulgar dancing that's a disgrace?
I suppose she's just done one for you, no wonder you can't look me in the face.’
Joe, in fact, was looking her straight in the eye.
‘Finished now, Private Smith?’ he asked.
‘Yes, I've said me piece,’ declared Dolly.
‘It was me Christian duty to.
Oh, I bought some new clothes today, I 'ope you like them.
There's a flounced skirt with a matchin' jacket in russet brown, and a mushroom-coloured blouse with a lace collar and front.
Oh, and a little velvet 'at with a feather.
Well, I thought I'd spend some of that ten quid.
They're all in these boxes.’
She began to unpack them.
Joe looked at the clothes she was wearing, the clothes he'd bought her.
Marcelle thought them dreadful, but Marcelle was French, and even if she was attired soberly, she would still think no-one outside France could dress at all.
‘You monkey,’ he said.
‘I beg your pardon?’ said Dolly haughtily.
‘Stand to attention and explain yourself,’ said Joe.
Her prolonged absence had affected his concentration, and he'd made a hash of the signature of Percy Bysshe Shelley.
The letter in question would have to be written all over again.
No woman had ever caused him to make that kind of mistake before.
Can't have that sort of thing happening  to me, he thought.
Looking after a young woman with a sprained ankle, no job and no family was one thing.
Letting her become a worry to him was another.
Won't do, Joe.
‘Private Smith, answer up.’
‘I ain't standin' to attention,’ said Dolly, ‘I'm not soft in the head.’
‘You've been absent without leave.
Can't have that, and especially can't have it while you're still on the sick list.
You're confined to barracks for twenty-four hours, and on half-rations.
Right, that over, report on what you've been up to and the condition of your ankle.’
‘Don't make me spit,’ said Dolly.
‘What's that cross-eyed gypsy woman doin' here?’
‘She's French,’ said Joe, ‘with a job in some academy, teaching deportment.
She's a new lodger.
She gave me a cup of French coffee and we had a chat.’
‘Tell me another,’ said Dolly.
‘And what d'you mean, what 'ave I been up to?
I just went shoppin', that's all; I took an 'ansom cab at the Elephant and Castle to save wear and tear on me ankle, and went up West in it.
It didn't 'alf make me feel posh.
I didn't do a lot of walkin', except round the shops, and I treated meself to another 'ansom cab to bring me back.
I mean, fancy an 'ard-up orphanage girl like me 'aving all that money in me purse.
D'you like what I bought?’
‘Very nice,’ said Joe, eyeing the purchases, she'd set out on the bed, ‘but explain why it's taken you all day.’
‘Excuse me,’ said Dolly, ‘but a girl don't buy a new outfit in five minutes.
A day's about right, you ask any woman.
You sure you like mine?’
‘Should make you look like a lady,’ said Joe.
‘Honest?
Imagine you bein' complimentary like that.
Mind, you wouldn't believe some of the prices they charge up West, talk about daylight robbery.
The people who run them shops ought to be tried at the Old Bailey and given years of 'ard labour.
Some of them wanted to charge as  much as twelve and six just for a skirt.
Can't believe it, can you?
Nor could I. Did you miss not 'aving me to talk to?
It wasn't any good askin' you if I could go, I knew you'd 'ave one of your hard-hearted turns.
But my ankle's fine, it just aches a bit, that's all.’
‘It had better be fine,’ said Joe, ‘or you'll cop it.’
‘Yes, all right,’ said Dolly, ‘I'll go and stand in the corner in a minute.’
She sat down instead.
‘Oh, I bought a new coat as well, it's in that other box.
Would you mind if I asked what's for supper, only I'm starvin'.’
‘Chops and two veg,’ said Joe.
‘The chops are in the oven.’
‘Ain't you a love?’ said Dolly.
‘Oh, I bought something for you too.’
She leaned and opened up a flat box.
‘I 'ope you like it, Joe, it's for being me best friend ever.’
Joe looked.
Inside the box, resting on tissue paper, was a folded royal blue cashmere jersey.
‘Well, I'm jiggered,’ he said.
He took the jersey out.
It must have cost her over a quid.
‘It's a 44,’ said Dolly, ‘you 'aving a manly chest, like.
And you like jerseys.
They're 'andsome on you.’
‘What a gift,’ said Joe, ‘I'm lost for words.
You sure I deserve this?’
‘You been kind to me, Joe.’
‘With a bit of an effort, I suppose.
I said to Mrs Beavis this morning, Bessie, I said, I'm a hard man, but —’
‘Oh, you clown,’ said Dolly.
‘Many thanks, Dolly, it's a very generous gift.’
‘Oh, just a little something,’ said Dolly.
They met on the Embankment this time, Alexander Rokovssky and the gentleman known as a diplomatic courier.
He was actually Count Zhinsky, anonymous head of Russian Intelligence.
His kind-looking face concealed a steely dedication to duty and the Motherland.
In the dusk, the street lamps illuminated the long  riverside walk, and patches of light danced on the Thames in the clearness of the evening.
April's inheritance of the winds of March had cleansed the air of London.
Count Zhinsky carried a walking-stick, Rokovssky had his hands in his overcoat pockets.
‘I'm not sure you should have made such an attempt,’ said the Count.
‘It was necessary.’
‘Your audacity is remarkable.’
‘Necessity is always a spur,’ said Rokovssky.
‘Indeed.
But I prefer your alternative and the sensibility of its prearrangement.’
‘I telegraphed the command to proceed.’
‘Excellent,’ said the Count, but wondered if his protégée liked to be commanded.
She was as individualistic as Rokovssky, as much in love with her own competence as he was with his.
‘So, she is there now, sitting on the tails of our suspect foxes?’
‘I am confident she is,’ said Rokovssky.
‘Good,’ said the Count, who was in London himself because of the importance of the venture and the advisability of maintaining direct contact with his operatives.
He would, however, as a self-protective precaution, be back in St Petersburg on the day the assassination took place.
‘I'm happy to inform you, by the way, that there is no agitation inside Scotland Yard.’
‘That comes from our contact?’
‘It does.
I can say positively that the contents of the letter have not come to the notice of the British.
Otherwise the men of Scotland Yard would be moving in all directions.
So, whoever this man and woman are working for, it is not the British.’
‘Another power, then,’ said Rokovssky.
‘That is not unlikely.
But they aren't in a position to harass you as the British on their home ground would be.
I commend you, by the way, for insisting on arriving early, for as the set time approaches they will tighten their surveillance at their ports of entry.
They will take very seriously their responsibility for the protection of crowned heads and deport all known anarchists, as well as people they consider suspect.
You are keeping strictly apart from the decoys?’
‘I promoted this arrangement, Excellency, and don't intend to break it now.
I'm in touch, however, and have warned them not to make use of other idiots.
As their letter informed me, it's enough that they know they're being watched.’
‘Deportation may follow, of course,’ said the Count.
‘I think not,’ said Rokovssky.
‘I think they're being watched in the hope that they'll give something away.
That was the idea.’
‘It appears to be working.’
‘It's a small diversion,’ said Rokovssky, peering at the dancing lights on the moving surface of the dark Thames.
Knowing his man, the Count said, ‘I won't argue that.
Simply advise me when you have finalized everything.
You are keeping no company?’
‘I'm treading a solitary path for the Motherland.’
‘You have my sympathy, admiration and best wishes,’ said the Count, and parted from him a minute later.
Dolly viewed her mutton chop, mashed potatoes and spring greens, then cast her eyes over the table, spread with a plain white cloth.
‘I don't want to be awkward,’ she said, ‘but ain't there no mint sauce?’
‘Should be, shouldn't there?’ said Joe, who'd put his new jersey on and given himself an expensive look.
‘I'll never get to be a good cook.
Hold on.’
He got up, put the plates of food in the range oven to keep them hot, then went down to see if Mrs Beavis could help.
She was at supper with her family.
All seven of them at table together  had shrunk the kitchen, and they were in noisy, exuberant enjoyment of boiled beef and carrots.
Visibly, faces were turning red and shiny.
Feminine plumpness was expanding, masculine girths straining at belts.
‘'Ello, 'ello,’ said Albert.
‘Nice to 'ave yer pop down,’ said Mr Beavis.
‘Come over 'ere and I'll give yer a kiss when I've finished me mouthful,’ said Nancy juicily.
‘Bless the cheeky gel,’ smiled Mrs Beavis.
‘What can we do for yer, Sergeant Joe?’
‘Sorry to interrupt your supper,’ said Joe, ‘but I'm on the cadge.
Got any mint?’
‘In me larder,’ said Mrs Beavis, showing herself beamingly happy to be able to oblige.
‘It's in a jam jar, dried mint that's already chopped up.
‘Elp yerself, love.’
‘P'raps 'e might like me too,’ said Nancy.
‘Not 'ere, though, somewhere private, an' when I've 'ad me afters.’
Ella exploded into shrieks, and her brothers roared with laughter.
Mr Beavis chortled.
‘That Nancy,’ said Linda, ‘I don't fink much of 'er as me sister.’
‘The sauce she's got,’ said Mrs Beavis, as Joe took the jam jar of dried mint from the larder.
‘I'll do some talkin' to 'er, Bessie,’ said Mr Beavis.
‘Not 'ere, though, somewhere private, an' when I've 'ad me afters.’
‘Use yer belt, Dad,’ said Alfred.
‘Well, I tell yer, Alfred, it'll be a relief to get it orf after me afters,’ said Mr Beavis.
‘Thanks for the mint, Bessie,’ said Joe amid the yells of laughter.
‘Pleasure, love,’ said Mrs Beavis.
In the gaslit passage, Joe saw the new lady lodger coming down the stairs, her hat and coat on.
She descended with a natural elegance.
‘Ah, how nice, it is you again, Joe,’ she said.
‘Please to  tell me why the house is rumbling and shaking.’
‘Our landlady, Mrs Beavis, is having supper with her family in their kitchen,’ said Joe.
‘There are seven of them, and they're all talkers.
And they're all healthy.
You're going out?’
‘To the West End, to find a little restaurant that is not expensive,’ said Marcelle, smiling.
‘You would like to come with me, perhaps?’
‘Not this evening,’ said Joe, ‘I'm just about to have my meal.’
‘Ah, so?
Never mind.
Perhaps tomorrow you will take me to the National Gallery?
Would you be so kind?
I am anxious to see its treasures.’
Her smile was winning, her charm delightful.
Joe couldn't see any good reason for not obliging her.
‘Well, it so happens I'm going to town in the morning,’ he said.
‘I'll meet you at the National Gallery at ten o'clock.’
‘I am thrilled,’ said Marcelle, ‘I did not think it would be as easy as this to make friends with an English gentleman.’
‘You're out of luck there,’ said Joe, ‘I'm no gentleman.
Excuse me now, must get upstairs.’
Dolly gave him a suspicious look when he entered with the mint.
‘Well, it's nice you're back,’ she said.
‘I got delayed,’ said Joe, mixing some of the chopped mint with vinegar in a gravy boat.
‘Yes, I heard you bein' delayed, by that French gypsy woman.
Did she do one of 'er gypsy dances for you?’
‘Not that I noticed.
There we are.’
Joe returned the warm plates of food to the table, and Dolly helped herself to the mint sauce.
‘I don't want to worry about you gettin' yourself mixed up with gypsies.’
‘Good,’ said Joe.
‘You're a nice bloke mostly.’
‘Good.’
‘And you've done a nice supper.’
‘Good.’
‘Will you stop sayin' good?’
Dolly shook her fork at him.
‘Eat your rations,’ said Joe.
‘Well, I am.
Fancy you bein' able to cook chops as tasty as this.
Did you learn cookin' in the Army?’
‘No, I learned how to ride a horse and look after it.’
‘Oh, can you ride a horse, Joe?’
‘All dragoons ride horses.’
‘What's a dragoon?’
‘Heavy cavalry able to dismount and fight on foot.’
‘Ave you done much fightin'?’
‘Here and there.’
‘Crikey,’ said Dolly, ‘no wonder you're tall and 'andsome and brave-lookin'.’
‘Yes, no wonder,’ said Joe, grinning.
‘I'll stay in here with you after supper, shall I?’ said Dolly.
‘We can sit and talk.’
‘I ought to do some work,’ said Joe, who felt events were causing him to fall behind with his current commission.
‘You're just sayin' that.
Can I 'elp it if I like talkin' with you?
Besides, people are supposed to 'ave, conversation with each other.
Tell me what it was like in the Army.’
‘Well, for one thing,’ said Joe, ‘we didn't have to have conversations with little old ladies carrying on about talking.’
‘Here, I ain't a little old lady,’ said Dolly, enjoying her juicy chop.
‘No, not yet, just give yourself time,’ said Joe.
‘But all right,’ he said sociably, ‘were there days at the orphanage that were better than others?’
‘Well, there was that boy who saw me legs when I fell  over one day,’ said Dolly.
‘He didn't 'alf like them, he said he'd give me a penny every time I showed them.
I asked him where he was goin' to get the pennies from, and he said he'd nick them from the superintendent's gas money.
Well, none of us ever 'ad money, so I said all right, a penny each time I showed 'im my legs.
And what d'you think?
When I run away twelve months later I took two 'undred and nineteen pennies with me, which meant I'd showed him me legs two 'undred and nineteen times in a year.
Here, are you laughin'?’
‘Not much.’
‘I don't see it was anything to laugh about,’ said Dolly huffily.
‘How would you like to 'ave to show your legs in an orphanage just because you 'adn't got a farthing to your name?’
‘Can't think you'd pay a penny to see mine,’ said Joe.
‘Then what happened?’
‘What, after I'd run away?’
Dolly picked up the chop bone and nibbled at it with sharp teeth.
‘Well, I thought I'd best get as far from Dalston as I could, so I came this side of London Bridge and looked for lodgings.
Well, I had all those pennies, didn't I?’
‘Eighteen and thruppence,’ said Joe.
‘As much as that?
Fancy me legs earnin' that amount.
Here, Joe, you should 'ave seen some of the rooms I was offered, they wasn't fit to keep cats in even.
I 'ad to pay three bob for a decent one.
Then I 'ad to get a job; that's when I saw a notice in a shop window about a Brixton fam'ly wantin' a maid, so I went after it.
I got it all right, but like I told you, it wasn't a maid's job.
I was just a skivvy.
After I run away again, I 'ad real hard times and was nearly starvin' the night you walked into me and did me ankle in.
Oh, lor', that Blackbeard, he's nearly been our doom.
Still, I think you're right, I don't suppose he'll come back again.
Excuse me, but is there any afters?’
‘Treacle tart from the baker's do you?’ offered Joe.
‘Treacle tart?’
Dolly looked delighted.
‘Oh, you really do treat a girl swell.’
Joe fetched the tart from the larder and cut her a large portion.
‘I met a parson once that was good to me, but he never gave me any treacle tart, just a kind message of 'ope.
I've been thinking that if I ever meet the kind of young lady who'd make you a nice wife, I'll get her to come round and introduce 'erself.’
‘That's your idea of friendship?’ said Joe.
‘Well, you deserve a nice wife, Joe, honest you do.
Only if you don't mind me sayin' so, it'll be best if you don't treat her like a private in the Army.’
‘I'll bear that in mind,’ said Joe, giving up any thoughts of work.
Dolly was obviously set on being sociable for the whole evening.
‘Tell me how you came to take up a life of crime.’
‘I'm ignorin' that uncalled-for remark,’ said Dolly.
Joe smiled.
In one way, he and Dolly were two of a kind.