

Up  'th valley in style
DEMONSTRATING the style for which West Yorkshire's Keighley and Worth Valley Railway has become famous , standard Eight 48431 carries out passenger duties as it hauls Pullman dining stock up the five-mile branch.
JOHN FAIRCLOUGH'S picture taken at Keighley on July 18 captures the railway's commercial drive and the atmosphere all in one super shot.
IT'S WORTH THE MONEY
By JOHN HUXLEY
ONE OF the first railway privatisations of the century has finally come of age with the clearance of a unique hire purchase agreement with British Rail.
In 1968 the newly formed ‘Keighley & Worth Valley Light Railway Limited,’ a limited liability company with ten ‘worker directors’agreed with British Rail to purchase the  five-mile-long Keighley to Oxenhope branch line in West Yorkshire for the sum of £45,000 at a fixed annual repayment over 25 years.
‘It was a unique agreement’, said company secretary John G Bradley.
‘We were the second example of 1960's privatisation (the Bluebell Railway in Sussex being the first) but our 25-year hire purchase was the first and only one which British Rail permitted.
The £45,000 doesn't seem a lot today, but in 1968 it was a huge sum for us and the annual repayments of £3,500 were an enormous burden upon the struggling K & WVR in the late '60s and early '70s.
Today, with inflation now increased by at least tenfold, they have become progressively more manageable!’
West Yorkshire's internationally-famous ‘Railway Children’ Line, currently celebrating its 125th year of existence, has now a double reason to be pleased.
Not only has the hire purchase agreement on the Line been paid off a year early, but a new 50-year lease has just been signed with British Rail for Platforms three and four at Keighley Station, where K & WVR steam trains interchange with Regional Railways and the Metro Trains.
Graham Mitchell, chairman of the Preservation Society which is the majority shareholder in the Railway Company, was delighted.
Didcot offers standard fayre
BRITISH RAILWAY'S Standard class seven pacific No. 70000 ‘Britannia’ is to visit Didcot Railway Centre on completion of its summer programme of main-line operations.
It is expected to arrive in early September and will take part in the Autumn Steam Gala on Saturday, Sunday, September 26 and 27 together with a selection of Great Western locomotives.
Ex: GWR diesel railcar No. 22 is also expected to be back in service following extensive body repairs.
Further steaming dates for No. 70000 will be advertised in due course .
Another BR standard locomotive is due to visit Didcot Railway Centre again, albeit briefly.
Class 5 4-6-0 No. 75069 will be moving from its home on the Severn Valley Railway to take part in open day activities on the Southern Region.
In early August the plan was for it to stop at Didcot for servicing on Friday, September 11, prior to leaving for Bournemouth that evening.
There's six of the best
AN ORGY of steam traction comes to Dorset on the weekend of September 19 and 20 with history being made as six locomotives steam at once during a special fund-raising Grand Steam Gala — the most locos ever seen in the Isle of Purbeck.
Among the half century of steam locomotive development contained in the working locomotives going through their paces — subject to availability — will be a rear Yugoslavian ‘Yankee Tank’ rescued from the newly independent republic of Slovenia just hours before the start of the bitter civil war which is tragically still raging.
The fully restored ‘Yankee tank’ is a direct copy of the famous ‘lend-lease’engine that helped the allies  marshal their supplies and manpower before and after the momentous D-Day invasion of Hitler's Europe in June, 1944.
Many examples ran on the Southern Region of BR until 1967 and the end of main line steam traction.
‘It will be a brilliant weekend and a sight not to be missed — certainly heaven for anyone who loves watching steam locomotives in all their glory,’ said the Swanage Railway's Passenger Services Manager David Green.
The six steam locomotives helping to run the train services between Swanage and Harman's Cross during the special weekend cover over half a century of British steam locomotive development — from Victorian times during the time of Gladstone and Disraeli through to the ‘new dawn’ of the 1960s and the era of the present Queen and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
Subject to availability, it is hoped that Victorian M7 No 30053 of 1906 and prestige express locomotive T9 No 30120 of 1899 from the National Railway Museum at York will be running.
Also going through their paces will be Victorian Midland 1F No 41708 of 1880, 1930s tank engine ‘Cunarder’ from Southampton Docks, wartime ‘Austerity’class 0-6-0 ‘Joseph’and the 1960 ‘Yankee Tank’.
But, as well as rail-borne steam, there will also be a fascinating display of brightly painted road traction engines from throughout Dorset adjacent to the restored Victorian goods shed at Swanage station.
Both Saturday, September 19 and Sunday, September 20 will see a frequent train service operating between Swanage station, Herston Halt and Harman's Cross station between 11 am and 5 pm — a round trip of six miles taking in the order of 50 minutes.
Special all-day Purbeck Line runabout tickets are available during the weekend at £5 for adults and just £2.50 for children.
Non-train ticket holders can still see the road traction engine display at Swanage at £1 for adults and just 50 pence for children.
Preserving 47401
THE Class 47 Locomotive Society came a step nearer today to preserving 47401, the pioneer ‘Generator’ engine of the class when it was withdrawn by BR from the petroleum fleet at Immingham depot, writes PETER HILL.
Originally numbered D1500, it was renumbered 47401 in October 1973, the loco emerged new from the Brush Works at Loughborough in September 1962 carrying works number 342.
The Brush Type 4's first depot was Finsbury Park (34G) in North London and early duties included working prestigious ECML expresses.
On entering service with BR the loco wore the traditional two tone green livery that was to become the ‘norm’ on early BR diesel locos.
In December 1970 it received a coat of standard blue paint only to be repainted back into two tone green recently by the dedicated staff at Immingham depot.
It also received the name-plates Star of the East during its repaint. 47401 also carried North Eastern plates between December 1981 and May 1988 when it was a regular performer on Trans-Pennine duties between Newcastle and Liverpool being shedded at Gateshead.
The Class 47 locomotive Society was formed in July 1983 and during 1988 the 47401 project had been formulated with the specific aim of preserving D1500.
Fund raising began in earnest and a shares offer was also launched bringing in much needed cash to help with the loco purchase.
Also a well advanced programme is in hand to acquire spares from BR to help keep 47401 running for many years to come.
Treasurer and 47401 project Co-ordinator, Martin Measures commented: ‘47401 was the first of 20 ‘Generator’ Class 47's built by Brush at Loughborough and the Society thought it was important to try and preserve one of these 20 non standard Class 47's.
D1500 was an obvious choice being the pioneer too.
‘47401 (D1500) is now stored under covered accommodation at Immingham shed pending a formal future release date by BR to the society.’
If anyone is interested in helping with fund raising or membership of the Society they should contact,
Carrying the ‘large logo’ livery is acquired in 1986, 47401 stands at its home depot of Immingham along with 47374 and 37285 on the 3.3.90.
The tale of Britannia and a shunter
THOSE who laugh last, the saying goes, laugh loudest…, writes RICHARD BEAN.
And hundreds of steam fans who see diesels as the soulless railways ogre of the modern age certainly had the last chuckle at Holyhead.
Ex-British Railways Class 7P No. 70000 ‘Britannia’ was simmering into the triangle at Valley on Anglesey to turn around after faultlessly hauling her special express from Crewe Junction when a distress call was sent up to her.
The station pilot at Holyhead, a Class 08 Diesel Shunter, had failed before being able to shunt the rake of NWCE coaches from the sidings and into the platform.
Instead of being directed to Platform Number One, the mighty Riddles designed 4-6-2 engine was attached to the front of the humble BR  workhorse and shunted the shunter into another siding.
She then returned to back into the siding and collected her own carriages, shunting them back into Holyhead Station!
No. 70000 ‘Britannia’ at the ‘Railway Age’in Crewe.
Prodigal sons return to Devon
THE SOUTH Devon Railway saw the return of one of its prodigal sons last week with the arrival back on SDR metals of BR Class 4MT 2-6-4 Standard Tank No. 80064 on Thursday, August 20, writes DICK WOOD.
First restored in Devon by Buckfastleigh-based volunteers and staff of the 80064 Locomotive Group from Barry scrapyard condition during the 1970's, the engine will provide a much needed boost to the SDR's expanding loco fleet.
Following full restoration in 1981, the loco group hoped to run the engine on the Totnes branch, but the Dart Valley Railway plc management decreed the loco was too heavy for the 16-ton line.
After only seeing infrequent use at Buckfastleigh steam galas and one trial run to Totnes during 1981/82, the group agreed to transfer the engine to the Torbay line in 1983.
The liaison was not a happy one however.
The immaculately restored Standard moved to the Bluebell Railway after one season of service on the Paignton to Kingswear line following a dispute over operating terms with the management of the Dart Valley Railway plc.
But the return to Devon of the engine after expiry of its ten-year boiler ticket is seen as a shot in the arm for the loco-starved South Devon Railway, reliant on externally hired motive power since it came into existence two years ago.
Moreover, many of the workers who spent ten years restoring the machine are now actively involved with the volunteer-run SDR or other preserved railways in the South West, so the return home is doubly welcome.
An initial inspection of the loco, still in impeccable condition externally, has revealed a few problems and it is hoped that the Standard will be back in service sooner than the two to three years expected for overhaul.
SDR General Manager Richard Elliott commented: ‘Having only run some 22,000 miles since its rebuilt, No. 80064 is in good condition which speaks volumes for the quality of the  original restoration led by our Chief Engineer Alan Gosling and the subsequent care by the Bluebell Railway.
‘Once we've upgraded our line's axle loading and slightly reduced the engine's water capacity, No. 80064 will enter service  as more than a match for any of the trains we are likely to run.’
The South Devon Railway now has twelve locomotives based on the railway undergoing restoration, including five main line types, so the proverbial light is certainly at the end of the tunnel for their future needs.
The locos are:
RIGHT AWAY!
InterCity Managing Director Chris Green tries his hand at firing former GWR heavy freight loco No. 3822 during a footplate trip on the West Somerset Railway on Saturday, August 22.
FOUR RAILWAYMEN have plumped for a ‘busmen's holiday’ this autumn…by organising a charity rail tour to delightful Poole in Dorset which will be picking up at Wigan North Western.
The InterCity-style ten coach charter express, which will also be putting down at Winchester, Southampton and Bournemouth, will pull into Wigan at approximately 7.50 a.m. on September 12.
Costs are £25 return for adults, £20 for children and £21 for senior citizens.
All profits from the event, under the Lancaster Rail Tours banner, will go to Guide Dogs for the Blind and M.S. research.
‘BR used to organise these type of specials themselves but when they stopped doing them we thought we would step in,’ added one of the organisers, Lancaster Railman Nigel Bryer.
Tickets and further information from him at   
JOHN GOSLING'S STEAM REPORTS
Leicester's stars of the show
TWO ‘Star’ locomotives are  scheduled to make an appearance at the forthcoming Open Day at Leicester British Rail depot on Sunday, September 6.
This is the replacement fixture for the abandoned and highly successful Coalville Open Days of many previous years, which raised many thousands of pounds for charity.
71000 ‘Duke of Gloucester’ will appear a mere 12 miles from its birthplace of reincarnation at the Great Central Railway at Loughborough, along with Jubilee Class 45596 ‘Bahamas’.
The latter engine will then travel to the Midland Railway Trust headquarters at Butterley and is proposed to be in operational traffic on MRT tracks during the weekend of September 12 and 13.
This locomotive will stay for one week only.
Like the previous week's Bescot Open Day held on Sunday, August 30, an excellent display of BR locomotives and preserved examples are also planned.
This will probably include Type 1 Class 20, 20227, English electric Class 40 40012, ‘Peak’ Class 45, 45133, and Deltic Class 55, 55015 ‘Tulyar’all from the Midland Railway Trust.
The above engines were also scheduled for the Bescot Open Day list.
45133 and 50015 will then move on for a short period to the North Yorkshire Moors Railway before returning to Butterley.
Three special ‘circular’ charter trains are also expected to run with tickets costing £12.50 each.
Tour one will operate a route from Leicester to Derby, Nottingham and back to Leicester.
Tour two will run in the opposite direction; while tour three will take the route to Kettering and back via Corby and Syston Junction.
Double-headed ‘special’ motive power is scheduled.
Another charter originating in Manchester is booked for two Class 37 locomotives working in multiple, bringing enthusiasts to the Gala Day.
In addition, Birmingham New Street via Nuneaton shuttle services will be operated by British Rail.
Vintage buses will take visitors between Leicester London Road station and Beal Street, adjacent to the British Rail depot.
JUBILEE Class 5593 ‘Kohlapur’ and Pannier Tank locomotive 7760 are both scheduled to return to the Birmingham Railway Museum at Tyseley in the near future.
No. 7760 is planned to make its journey southwards during December of this year, with the 4-6-0 following a month later in January 1993 at the conclusion of its two year contract working on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough.
In the interim period, un-rebuilt West County Pacific 34105 ‘Swanage’ based on the Mid-Hants Railway at Ropley in Hampshire, is scheduled to operate services at the GCR during the forthcoming Autumn Steam Gala weekend of Saturday and Sunday October 3 and 4.
The locomotive is also expected to be used during the night steam event on Saturday, November 7.
DELTIC No. 9019 (55019)‘Royal Highland Fusilier’ presently preserved on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough, has celebrated 10 years under the ownership of the Deltic Preservation Society.
Birthday celebrations fell on Saturday, August 22, when the locomotive operated a third train-set to be run to Leicester North.
Using the Mark 1 blue/grey set, complete with a Network SouthEast liveried coach, the scene was set for a return history period piece.
Martin Harris, head of the GCR based group, should be congratulated along with the DPS volunteer force, for the excellent preservation of one of the most complicated diesel/electric locomotives in preservation.
Two other Deltics are in ownership by the DPS,— 55015 ‘Tulyar’ is based at the Midland Railway Trust headquarters at Butterley, and 55019 ‘Alycidon’on the North Yorkshire Moors Railway.
The GCR board of directors have recently refused quite a number of offers of English Electric Class 50 locomotives at Loughborough.
The refusal is apparently based as being unsuitable for the railway and not of an era that is presently being sought.
Pannier tank No. 7760 which is scheduled to return to the Birmingham Railway Museum during December.
Group makes progress on 5637
OVER the last year a considerable amount of progress has been carried out on the Ex-GWR 0-6-2T 5637 locomotive.
All the parts necessary for the re-erection of the engine machinery have now been obtained.
The pistons, connecting rods, big ends, eccentrics and all the valve operating mechanism are now in place.
Due to its dismantling at Barry and other locations, several components had gone missing and these needed movement and others had to be manufactured from new.
Thankfully the restorers have been in a position to obtain help from local industry and many items came cheaper than they had originally anticipated.
The boiler  has been surveyed by an Eagle Star Boiler Inspector and the results very encouraging.
He did require one condition to be satisfied, all the bottom row of steel stays, 56 in total, had to be removed for examination.
If more than 10% showed a marked deterioration then all 700 plus steel stays would need replacing.
Luckily every one of the 56 removed proved to be in good health.
Eight copper firebox lap rivets had to be renewed and the six large flue tube holes rethreaded.
A certain amount of welding to make good the  outer shell has to be carried out and then of course we only need 218 small tubes and six large flue tubes to allow the boiler to be ready for hydraulic testing.
Compared to some boilers in preservation 5637's is in excellent condition.
Should anyone wish to assist 5637 in any way through donations or labour please contact the group via the Swindon and Cricklade Railway .
Southern steam in centre stage
South East Special Videolines Running time 60 minutes Price £20.90
THE SOUTH EAST of England has not been well blessed with main-line steam action but it was different in June this year when there was action at Ashford, the Folkestone Harbour branch and the Andover-Eastleigh to Exeter Specials.
And Videolines were there to capture all the action.
In this worthwhile presentation they have given the steam enthusiast a good variety of shots and locations which keep the interest for the full extent of the film.
I was particularly taken with the Folkestone branch specials.
The sight of a Bullied pacific and standard tank bringing the sight and sound of steam back to one of the best known locations in the south was particularly attractive.
I like the way that Rob McCaffrey's commentary allows you time to enjoy the action, although I thought he could pay a little more attention to his scripting in places.
The standard of photography is good and some of the long-distance shots are particularly welcome.
There is also a smattering of modern traction which helps break up the feature so that all railway enthusiasts will find the film worthwhile.
THE WORKS OF ART
By MERVYN TURVEY
ONE of the joys of being responsible for a column like this is that the search for news creates opportunities to become involved in developments which are normally outside the availability of most enthusiasts.
Recently, I was invited inside the hallowed walls of Eastleigh Works, usually the domain of British Rail Engineering Limited but during weekends partly dedicated to ERPS, the Eastleigh Railway Preservation Society.
In fact, ERPS has lived in a small corner of the works property since it took delivery of ex-Southern Railway 30828 4-6-0 the Maunsell development of the Urie S15 Class from Barry in March 1981.
Now it is approaching completion and return to steam and every effort is being made to ensure that his locomotive is operating in steam at the works Open Day on Sunday, September 27.
The present state of the locomotive is that it is almost complete.
It has passed its steam test and has been checked by British Rail engineers for quality.
It is intended that 828 will be working on the main line as soon as possible and consequently it has been rebuilt to British Rail Main Line standards.
There is much speculation where it will be found running once it is complete.
The tender has been in a finished condition for some time and was seen at the last Open Day some two years ago.
Since that time the shop at the works receiving another coat of paint and final decoration.
This is undertaken by supporters of the project who are works employees during the spare minutes they may have available.
They also come into the works voluntarily on Sunday mornings to assist the ERPS team who are working on the locomotive.
Normally this rests in a make shift shed out the back beside the running lines to Fareham but during the recent works holiday and over more recent weekends it is pushed into the erecting shop where it was originally built 65 years ago.
This has been made possible with the support and co-operation of the works manager who is keen to see the locomotive back in working order for the open day.
The ERPS team are very fortunate that this facility is available to them because it has enabled the reconstruction work to be undertaken more efficiently.
However, it must be remembered that much of the work until  these last few weeks has been undertaken outside in the kind of conditions experienced by most preservationists.
IT was on a very wet Saturday afternoon that I found myself on the top of the North Downs observing  whiffs of smoke emerging from a boiler which to all intents and purposes was standing among a mountain of waste metal in a field almost miles from anywhere.
In fact it was only a minute or so from the M27 and we had just passed over the Queen Elizabeth Bridge at Dartford.
The rain was pouring down in torrents and visibility was poor.
Yet there was smoke and steam and human figures dressed in what appeared to be deep sea  fishermen's bad weather gear, yellow oilies and wellies.
My wife couldn't believe that I was actually going out to see what was going on.
I had arrived for my first meeting with the North Downs Steam Railway which is managed by a friendly group of enthusiasts who are not prepared to be put off by a drop of rain, even if it was one of the heaviest storms of the summer.
They were  testing out the boiler of their Robert Stephenson and Hawthorn Ltd .
After spending considerable effort getting the boiler back into working order it was important to give it a steam test, obtain an insurance certificate and get it back on the chassis so that it could be used to haul trains.
All of this effort was successful and after further work the locomotive may be in steam next weekend, Saturday, September 5 and Sunday September 6 during a special Children's Weekend.
The team at Stone Lodge Park have experienced difficulties obtaining help with the  metalling of the rods and bearings.
This has been completed but they still have to be fitted.
If all goes well over the previous weekend their namesake ‘North Downs’ will be in steam.
The Children's Weekend offers sideshows ,stalls and other attractions, as well as rides on the railway.
The railway is off Cotton Lane in Stone Lodge Park.
Well signposted from the M27, it runs beside the observation point for the aforementioned bridge and a trip on the train gives an even better opportunity for viewing this new feature.
I TRAVELLED 350 miles the other weekend just to see and photograph ‘Blue Peter’ on the Settle and Carlisle.
A few days later ‘Bahamas’ passed by on the North West Coast Express before it was time to return to base.
I suppose we have had a share of the steam action down south this season and it was good to see these trains back in action after the threats of cancellation owing to fire hazards?
It is good, therefore, also to see that another part of the growing preservation tradition is coming south, an auction of Railwayana.
On Saturday there will be an auction in Wickham in Hampshire, the first in the south.
Alan Tonke who has set this one up says that it hasn't been easy getting together a viable collection of items to auction.
It is his intention to run one every quarter if there is enough interest from enthusiasts in the south.
This is our chance therefore to  bring another aspect of the developing culture to our own doorsteps.
Support Alan on Saturday and contact him with details those items you would like auctioned at the next opportunity in December.
Full details were advertised in this newspaper over the past two weeks.
Human figures dressed in what appeared to be deep sea fishermen's bad weather gear, yellow oilies and wellies work on the boiler of Robert Stephenson and Hawthorn Ltd 0-6-0T (Works No. 7846 or 1953) No. 3 ‘North Downs’ at the Stone Lodge depot of the North Downs Steam Railway.
The Eastleigh Railway Preservation Society ex-Southern Railway 30828 4-6-0 the Maunsell development of the Urie S15 Class in the erecting shop at Eastleigh Works.
It is receiving its first coat of Olive Green paint and stands where no steam locomotive has stood for over 25 years.
ELBOW GREASE
John Fairclough joins the Bahamas Support crew for the day…and discovers hard work
HOW many passengers spare a thought when joining their train for a main-line run for the effort which has gone into the preparation of the locomotive, turned out to perfection at the head of the train.
With this question in mind, I joined the support crew of the Jubilee, 45596 ‘Bahamas’ at Crewe and mucked in (literally) with them.
Bahamas has arrived from Keighley the previous day, travelling in tandem with ‘Princess Margaret Rose’ from Blackburn and had been kept in light steam.
Before my arrival, the crew had already removed a top feed delivery pipe and had a repair carried out.
Steve Peach was in the process of refitting what he called ‘the copper python.’
The loco had received a new rear damper door before leaving Howarth.
 This was working perfectly and the repair was tested.
 This too was fine.
Now was the time to begin preparation in earnest, a pair of overalls was pressed into my hands.
The team of six were already busy cleaning the loco and tender frames and wheels.
I was asked to clean down with blanket wash and then run over with a clean polishing rag.
This tin of Day and Martins metal polish gave me some trepidation looking at the vast areas of iron ferrous.
A couple of hours and aching arms later the copper and brass was gleaming and sitting back to bask in satisfaction a voice soon broke the momentary pleasure.
‘In the coach you'll find a roll of Scotch bright.’
‘The motion needs cleaning, use plenty of blanket wash!’
Well if I thought that there were areas of non-ferrous well…
Gritting my teeth, I set to the task removing only trace of red rust and finally the whole job was completed with a coat of de-watering oil.
Now the same treatment for the wheel centres and tyres completed the bright work below the running plate.
While all this had been going on, Steve had carried out a thorough inspection of the locomotive, had oiled up the axle boxes and attended to the brake gear.
It was mid-afternoon before confirmation of the following day's run was received.
With added vigour the crew set to their tasks among a constant stream of humorous banter.
The traction inspector arrived, carried out his tasks and passed the loco fit.
The coaling was the next task to be completed.
Following on the next step was to wash down the tender tank, cab and boiler before waxing all the paintwork.
Burnishing the paintwork on a hot loco on a warm day, I can recommend as a way to lose those extra pounds.
The evening shadows were now lengthening and the support crew had thoughts of a few points in their heads.
I declined the invitation the only thoughts in my head were finding my bed to soothe away the aches and pains.
My initial question was answered and these dedicated crew members who give so much time so freely can only be described as the salt of the earth.
The ‘Bahamas’ crew have worked out that for every hour on the main line, 30 hours of maintenance  are required, quite a daunting thought.
Getting down to it!
One of the support crew reaches some of the less accessible points.
The support crew take a well earned break after their long day at work on the Jubilee.
And this is the shining story…
Bahamas glistens in the sun after the support  crew's attention.
Steve Peach inspects a running repair to a minor problem with the water delivery pipe.
Steam winter wonderland
ENTHUSIASTS can bid a fond ‘Au Revoir’ to Britain's best known preserved main line steam locomotive this October with her final workings the highlight of the autumn and early winter time tables.
Gresley's Magnificent A3 Pacific No. 4472 ‘Flying Scotsman’ brightens up the season of conker fights and dark evenings with three journeys North, South and West in October.
She will work the Cumbrian Mountain Express, the South Yorkshireman (doubling as a positioning tour) and then her final will be Ealing Broadway to Warwick return for the William Shakespeare Limited pending a return to her Southall Railway Centre home.
These will be the striking black and apple green ex-LNER express's finals workings before the expiry of her seven-year-long boiler certificate.
And represent the last chance to travel behind 4472, undoubtably our best known lady of steam, until 1995…at the earliest.
FFS's winter programme to date:
Steam haulage Carnforth to Sellafield return with Flying Scotsman.
Steam haulage Sheffield to Ealing Broadway with Flying Scotsman (positioning tour).
Steam haulage Fort William to Glasgow (Cowlairs) with Stannier  Black Five 5407.
Fare includes sleeping car  accommodation on Friday and Saturday nights (twin cabins) with on-train meals to be booked in advance.
No reduced rate travel available.
Steam haulage throughout with Flying Scotsman — its last appearance!
Steam haulage throughout with 70000 ‘Britannia’ hauling a special Christmas luncheon train with traditional menu.
IN A CLASS OF THEIR OWN
As the oldest  solder manufacturer in the United Kingdom, and almost certainly in Europe, Geo W Neale  Limited has had over 100 years experience of successfully supplying a wide range of industrial users with most of their solder and bearing metal requirements.
Their many satisfied customers include gas and electricity companies, motor manufacturers, circuit board makers and steam railway maintenance organisations.
Bearing metals are supplied to both British and ASTM specifications, and are manufactured under the strictest quality control.
All metals are monitored during alloying and before despatch, using the most modern analytical equipment in their own laboratory.
EAST LANCS AID FOR COMMUNITY
By EDDIE BELLASS
THERE is nothing more soul-destroying than being unemployed for a long period, as no doubt some SRN readers can readily confirm.
However, a group of 50 or so Unemployment Benefit claimants are now busy dusting off their old skills and even learning some new ones on the East Lancashire Railway, thanks to Practical Skills Development Plc.
PSD is funded by Bolton & Bury Technical College, acting as the regional office for TEED, the Training & Enterprise Education Department which has succeeded the erstwhile Manpower Services Commission.
It contracts to deliver training and employment opportunities for YT, ET and Employment Action schemes the last of which covers PSD's current activities on the East Lancashire Railway.
To qualify for engagement on an Employment Action scheme applicants must be between the ages of 18 and 59 and have been registered as unemployed for at least six months.
On commencing work on a project they receive their normal, weekly unemployment Benefit (according to status and dependants) plus the sum of £10.00 out of which they are expected to spend up to £4.00 on travel to work costs.
PSD itself will then provide up to an addition £8.50 per week towards excess travelling costs.
PSD also provides all protective clothing and footwear, all safety equipment, and the supervisory staff, while the sponsor of the work — in this case the East Lancashire Railway — devises the project and supplies all materials required.
WHEELCHAIR passengers do not have an easy time when they travel by rail.
West Somerset Railway should be congratulated on their new special coach for disabled passengers.
The usual fate of such passengers is to be carried in the  guard's van, and although  there are other enlightened railways, which make provision for their wheelchair passengers to travel with dignity, these are also private railways, run by enthusiasts.
But now we are happy to be able to announce that, at last, we understand that Scot Rail and British Rail are prepared to remove a seat to allow a wheelchair position in the main carriage even though the wheelchair will be unsecured.
The country that is leading the way is Sweden.
Distributors, Rampus, tell us that Swedish Railways who are supplied by British company G.N. Unwin, have already fitted out about 50 carriages and that more will follow.
Each carriage is equipped with a hydraulic lift and places for two passengers in their wheelchairs.
At two separate locations in the carriage, one of the standard seats is deleted, to leave space for a wheelchair.
At each location, a pair of Unwin surface rails is mounted in the carpet.
And a set of four clamps are located in the wall-mounted rack nearby.
On most trains the wheelchair passengers will be cared for by the ticket collector.
But the real treat is the new Stockholm to Gothenberg Express, the D2000.
This is a prestige train that covers the 500 km (312 miles) in three hours.
On the D2000, wheelchair passengers will be looked after by a hostess.
(Yes, really — a hostess) who has been fully trained in the use of the lift and clamps.
Well done Sweden!
But it's now more than ten years since ‘The Year of Disabled People’.
Isn't it time this sort of facility was universal — at least in the technically advanced world?
So can we expect to hear soon that other national railways are introducing similar schemes of their own?
We certainly hope so.
Footplate comfort and joy
JOHN BEESLEY is a manufacturer and stockist of many items that assists train-crews, drivers, firemen and guards, carry out their duties within the authentic atmosphere that preserved railways aim to portray.
‘It is important that the public sees the steam railway just as it was, the details are as important as the Liveries and Locos,’ said John.
Great care is taken to ensure the accuracy of each item.
Special tools have had to be made, an expensive process, also tools and machines from Swindon works have been refurbished to allow them a new life-serving the needs of preservation.
JOHN BEESLEY'S range has been extended to include virtually all items of footplate equipment, the largest item being a 9-foot long clinker shovel!
Perhaps smaller and more common requests might be Locomen's overalls made to authentic style, driver's bags and smaller  things , footplate brushes.
Soon in stock will be ‘barrell’ oil feeders and ‘double home boxes’these being ideal for keeping coal dust and  muck out of your camera, food or drink!
Guards and TTI are not ignored as flags, ticket nippers and leather bags are all part of the range, John Beesley is always interested to discuss future requirements and possible additions to his range, volunteers or railway companies are advised to get in touch.
MAUDE IN STEAM AGAIN AT BO'NESS
By MIKE JODELUK
FOLLOWING a hydraulic test earlier in the month North British Railway 0-6-0 No 673 ‘Maude’(built Cowlairs 1891) passed its static steam test at Bo'ness on Sunday, August 16.
Designed by Matthew Holmes, 168 of the 18 inch goods locomotives of N.B.R. class ‘C’(later LNER class J-36) were built between 1888 and 1900, with 25 of them serving with the Railway Operating Division in France.
They hauled munitions trains behind the lines between October 1917 and July 1919 (No 673 serving in France between November 1917 and June 1919).
On their return they received names in recognition of their war service, ‘Maude’ being named after Lt Gen Sir Stanley Maude, who revived the faltering campaign against the Turks in Mesopotamia and led the British forces into Baghdad in March, 1917.
The General, unfortunately, died of cholera shortly after but the locomotive survived until the 1960's at Haymarket Shed; Edinburgh, hauling the daily goods service on the South Queensferry branch before final withdrawal from Bathgate shed.
For over a year ‘Maude's’ boiler has been undergoing a complete overhaul at a works in Cornwall at a cost of £70,000, which included the installation of a new steel firebox.
A new ashpan was added at Bo'ness and extensive work completed on the motion and tender.
Several weeks of minor remedial work and test steamings are planned before ‘Maude’ is back in full service.
A major celebration for ‘Maude's’ return to service is planned for Sunday, November 8 when the locomotive will haul trains throughout the day, along with up to four other loco's in steam, followed by a special train for guests, members and contributors to the ‘Maude’appeal fund including a buffet and fireworks display.
As this will be  Remembrance Sunday trains will be stopped briefly as a mark of respect and while a short ceremony and two minutes silence are observed at 11 am.
The Scottish Railway Preservation Society has made contact with General Maude's Regiment, The Coldstream Guards, and it is hoped that members of the Maude family to be guests at the locomotive's celebration.
If relatives survive they would be great, great, grandchildren of General Maude.
Anyone having information about the family or surviving relatives are asked to contact Mike Jodeluk on 
The weekend of November 7/8, will be a busy one for the SRPS as the Society's railtour train will be hauled north by diesel to Fort William on Saturday, November 7 to return behind K-1 No. 2005, later in the day,(for a booking form send 9 × 4 SAE to:).
BLACK 5 No 44871 ‘Sovereign’ which has been hauling the ‘Northern Belle’for Grampian Railtours between Aberdeen and Elgin on Sundays, August 2 to September 6 was due to return with the SRPS railtour stock to Bo'ness on Monday, September 7.
This will be followed by a further return to the mainline on September 12/13 for the ‘Scottish Power’ open weekend at Longannet Power Station when the loco may haul trains on the Dunfermline — Culross branch along the northern shore of the Firth of Forth opposite its home base at Bo'ness.
Wagon museum moves forward
By MIKE JODELUK
THE S.R.P.S. are currently moving ahead swiftly with plans for a wagon storage and display building.
Some grant funding has been successfully arranged and the building should be completed by March, 1993.
The Society has a unique collection of pre-grouping wagons and is very keen to store them away from the ravages of salt sea-spray, weather and vandals.
But, at the same time, put them on show to the public in a similar manner to the Great Railway Show at York NRM, with occasional use on demonstration freight trains on the Bo'ness and Kinniel Railway.
Many of the wagons, dating back to the late nineteenth century, were requisitioned during the First World War and purchased, from R.N.A.D. Bandeath on its closure, by the S.R.P.S.
The G. & S.W.R., L. & N.W.R., G.N., M.R., G.W.R., L.N.E.R., L.M.S., as well as former private owner wagons.
The B & K.R. has achieved ‘provisional registration’ status as a museum and this is a major stage in the Society's museum development plans, the next stage being the final planning and erection of the main museum building itself.
The main museum building, which started life as the machinery hall at the first Glasgow International Exhibition of 1888 in Kelvingrove Park, moved to Dalmarnock in 1889 to become the Penman Boiler works for almost 100 years.
The dismantled building is now at Bo'ness so watch this space…
K1 2005 stands at Mallaig ready to run back to Fort William with the return Lochaber train in very wet conditions.
Truro returns to the NRM
GREAT WESTERN 4-4-0, 3440 ‘City of Truro’ was due to rest its driving wheels in the National Railway Museum in York by the end of August.
The locomotive was recently active on the West Somerset Railway out of Minehead for 16 working days during late July and early August, with up to 100 miles being clocked daily!
NRM staff were in attendance on all steaming days, with operating costs being met by the WSR.
No further steamings are planned for the locomotive after its return to York, due to the fast-approaching expiry of the boiler ticket.
Improved Director Class D11, 506 ‘Butler Henderson’ is now resting in the Great Hall flanked by two other famous locomotives .
‘Butler Henderson’, which ended its working days on the Great Central Railway at Loughborough back in February, is likely to remain in the Museum for the  foreseeable future.
‘Rocket’ which attended the major weekend gala celebrating Ashford 150 at Chart Leacon depot in Kent back in June, was transported to and from York as a ‘TA’and ‘REME’exercise.
The engine has since visited the Great Show at Harrogate during July, and is now back at the NRM.
The Class 71 electric locomotive E5001, which also attended the Ashford Celebrations is presently being made ready for main line operation over Network SouthEast metals, in conjunction with the NRM.
The brand new two-car Networker Class 456 Electric Multiple Unit recently on exhibition inside the Great Hall at York, has since relinquished its pride of place beside the Channel Tunnel section.
This has now been taken by a full scale ‘mock-up’ nose cone of a Trans-Manche Super Train (TMST).
Another arrival at the Museum is heritage Class 108 Twin Diesel Multiple Unit set S941: 51922/51562.
This arrived at York under its own power from Cardiff Canton depot, and being asbestos free, will need no refurbishment in this respect.
It is presently stored outside the Peter Allen Building near Leeman Road.
Princess Coronation Class 46229 ‘Duchess of Hamilton’ which was originally hoped to be steamed between Carlisle and Perth later this year, has been withdrawn due to restrictions being imposed on the locomotive by ScotRail engineers.
In conjunction with FSS, it was hoped to arrange a completely different tour itinerary.
However, on Saturday, October 10, it is pencilled in for a proposed Newcastle to Maryport via Leeds, Skipton and Workington special, returning to Bradford Forster Square.
Two of the Museum's 4-4-0 exhibits Butler Henderson (centre) and 4003 Lode Star (right centre) in the great hall.
The Cymru Coaster No. 46203 arrives for a brief stop at Bangor on the down run on August 23.
Head of the NRM Andrew Dow in front of the Class 400 diesel D200.
‘Charlie’ gets his big date
A PROPER ‘Charlie’ which helped Britain defeat the Nazis and is the most powerful loco of its type in preservation now has a date for its return to passenger hauling status.
Bullied's ex-Southern Railway Q1 class No C1, a National Railway Museum loco resident and restored at the  Bluebell Railway in Sussex, will be formally in traffic on September 9.
After a short ceremony at their Sheffield Park Station at 2.00pm in the presence of Mr Andrew Dow, head of the NRM at York, she will haul a VIP train over the full length of the recently extended Bluebell.
Much more fittingly, when you consider the vital role she played hustling war time munitions and supplies between depots and docks, she will then haul a demonstration goods train.
The loco is a bit of an ugly duckling.
Its massive and austere functional appearance belied, though , a very successful design.
‘Charlie?’
Well, Oliver Bullied, the SR's Chief Mechanical Engineer devised the continental-style numbering system for his locomotives and the ‘C’ prefix soon earned that unflattering nickname.
Racing the train
HUNDREDS of runners turned out for the annual Race The Train cross country event on the Talyllyn Railway on August 15.
Spectators packed the special race train, double headed by No. 1 Talyllyn and No. 2 Dolgoch, despite the heavy rain.
The race was organised by Tywyn Rotary Club.
Two senior buyers from Walt Disney in Florida travelled by Talyllyn Railway special train during a buying trip organised by the Development Board for Rural Wales in July.
Replacement exhaust pipework on Talyllyn Railway No. 3 Sir Haydn has proved highly successful, with the engine now being both more powerful and more free-running.
West Country pacific Boscastle under restoration at Loughborough on the Great Central Railway.
MAUDE BACK IN STEAM
Former North British 0-6-0 Maude No. 673 is due to return on the Bo'ness and Kinniel Railway after a year-long boiler overhaul.
Full report see page nine.
S & T THEFT BLOW FOR M.R.C.
By ROBIN STEWART-SMITH
THE MIDLAND Railway Centre suffered a disastrous break-in over the weekend of August 15–16 and several major items of Signal and Telegraph equipment stolen.
Known collectors and the Railwayana Auction have already been contacted and advised.
The following lists the  items now missing:
SWANWICK JUNCTION SIGNAL BOX
One long cased clock.
14″ brass bezel on face.
Fusee movement.
Value £300.
One brass block phone 18″ long with 4″ wooden box on top.
Value £50.75.
One brass indicator 4″ diameter face.
Inscription ‘Off Wrong On’ on face.
Wooden back with Bezelled edge to case.
Value £30.50.
Two  Bakelite cased telephones — 1930's style.
Cradle type with chrome dial (manufacturer: Reliance  Telephone Company) Value £40.80.
BUTTERLEY SIGNAL BOX
One 14″ Dial Fusee movement clock with inscription: ‘W Potts & Sons, Leeds’.
This clock has a new face, distinctive mark on left hand side of one case — when  reviewed from front!
Value £300.
One brass block telephone 18″ long with 4″ wooden box on top.
Marconi handset fitted.
Value £50.75.
These items have an approximate total value of £800.
They can be identified and described by the S & T Dept at Butterley from unique identifying marks.
Any information and queries please contact   .
As a result of these thefts the S & T department are reviewing the issue of public access to Signal boxes at MRC.
This theft can only be bad news for the preservation movement.
WELSHPOOL AND LLANFAIR No 14 (SLR 85) was scheduled to return back in passenger service for the annual steam Gala last weekend, after a five year major overhaul.
Now painted in North Staffordshire Indiana livery it was rescued from the scrap merchants torch on the closure of Sierra Leone Railway and returned back to England together with four of the West African coaches in 1975.
Built by the Hunslet Engine Co Ltd Leeds in 1954, it was the last of 32 similar locomotives that worked on banking and freight duties.
The straight forward design and short wheel base made it ideal for negotiating the sharp curves of the Welshpool line.
SO MANY bookings have already been received by the Midland Railway Trust for its Christmas Shopping Excursion from Butterley Station to London on November 21st that a second train has now been arranged with Regional Railways for Saturday November 28th.
The special Christmas shopping service, which will be hauled by British Rail diesel power direct from Butterley Station via Nottingham, Beeston and Loughborough to London, was announced only a few weeks ago and is already nearly full.