

Steam goes back to work!
Report: RICHARD BEAN
ONE OF King Coal's faithful servants returned ‘home’ for the weekend — and immediately took the strain of a 1000 tonnes plus trains…
Foxfield Railway stalwart Steve Turner's ex-NCB Hunslet Saddle Tank ‘Whiston’ was invited to spend three working  days' holiday at British Coal's Littleton Colliery near Cannock, Staffs by its enthusiastic Manager, Mr Robin Dean.
Piloted by BC's own GEC Stephenson diesel shunter, the 1950's built tank heaved 16 wagon-long loaded trains down their three and a half mile long mineral line under the M6 Motorway to exchange sidings with British Rail.
The loco, who was on her way back from a  three-months-long loan spell at the Battlefield Line in Market Bosworth, also shunted at the Colliery, currently producing 30,000 tonnes of power station rail-borne coal every week.
But because of  incompatibility problems  she was unable to pull the wagons under the automatic loader.
The heaving Hunslet certainly proved to be a nostalgic  sight at the colliery, former home of Whiston's sister loco Robert, and a base where steam-power reigned until 1978 — with a back-up steam loco surviving there until just six years ago.
Littleton Surface supervisor Mr. Brian Sutton explained: ‘She did look at home here particularly as there aren't many industrial sites like ours left in the country with sidings and our own mineral line.
‘Railway enthusiasts were given the chance to take pictures of the loco during the weekend and that was very popular.’
•The  sight of Whiston's swirling exhaust proved too much for car phone toting motorists shooting down the M6…at one point there were three fire tenders parked on the hard shoulder above the mineral line after false alarms calls from panicking motorists!
Her exhaust also set off the colliery's underground fire alarm after simmering near the down-shaft ventilation screens!
Pictured left: Whiston hard at work in Littleton Colliery yard.
G.W.R. RACE ON
By DAVID MEE
WORK IS now proceeding on the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway's 1.4 mile extension to Far Stanley, which is part of the long-term aim of re-opening the line to Cheltenham.
All required materials are now in situ at the intermediate station, Winchcombe, the trackbed has been prepared, and to date over one third of a mile of track has been laid.
Once the line reaches Far Stanley a new loop will be installed and the one at Gretton will be clipped out of use and eventually removed.
Passenger boarding and alighting will not be possible at Far Stanley as is the case currently at Gretton.
The policy is to keep laying track until Cheltenham Race Course is reached and build any stations or halts ‘on the way back’.
Volunteer members of the Permanent Way department are now working in some of the most beautiful countryside in the Cotswolds.
THE WEST SOMERSET RAILWAY are taking the Severn Valley's former LMS 8F 48773 on loan for the 1993 summer season.
IT IS understood that this is the first time a former LMS type has been on the line and follows the successful hire of former GWR 2-8-0 3822 by the WSR this year.
THE LMS locomotive will arrive in time for the West  Somerset's Spring Gala on May 1 and will stay until the Autumn Gala on September 19.
A blast from the S.V.R. past
ON SUNDAY November 22, the Bath Area Group of the Swanage Railway Project chartered a ‘Brakevan Tour’ on the Severn Valley Railway for a return journey from Kidderminster to Bridgnorth taking in some loops and sidings that are not normally traversed by passenger trains.
The train was hauled by BR Standard 75069, and was formed of five goods brakevans comprising one LMS, one SR, one GWR ‘Toad’ and two BR Types of van which give ample space for the party of 43 that were carried, the majority of whom had travelled up from the Bath-Bristol area by coach.
There was also, however, some participants who had travelled from Derby, Manchester and London.
The train resembled a site from the late 50s–early 60s when numerous tours were staged on branch lines in this manner and with 75069 in a slightly weather worn condition it certainly looked authentic and fitted the part well.
After leaving Kidderminster the train ran to Bewdley where a reversal took place for the train to run onto part of the spur of the former Stourport line.
It then continued north including a photographic run past just north of Bewdley before traversing the loop at Highley.
On arrival at Bridgnorth the train was propelled to the limit of the line when the buffer stops were reached at the Hollybush Road siding.
Diesel traction then took over briefly to enable the train to traverse the boiler shop road and Bridgnorth Head Shunt using two separate shunters.
On the return journey again with 75069 in charge another photographic runpast was arranged at Borle viaduct just south of Highley, and then the train traversed the tracks of the remaining spur of the former Tenbury branch and also Rock Siding at Bewdley before its return to Kidderminster.
RESERVED seating and a smoking ban on all trains are new developments for the Foxfield Steam Railway's ‘Santa Special’ programme which starts on November 28th.
The special trains depart from Caverswall Road Station at 11.00 am, 12.30pm, 2.00pm and 3.30pm on November 28th and December 5th, 6th, 12th, 13th, 19th and 20th.
Some of the programme on Saturday, November 28th has been given over to residents of several old  people's homes and approximately £500 worth of tickets for the 2.00pm service have been donated to the residents.
Details of Foxfield services can be obtained by telephoning   
Former BR Standard 75069 on a photographic runpast with its special train of brakevan, which had been sponsored by the Bath area groups of the Swanage Railway.
The tender touch means success for A1 Trust
A1 Locomotive project (1990)— update
BY JAMES SHUTTLEWORTH
A lot of ‘behind the scenes’ work has meant there has been little news to report for some months on the A1 Locomotive Trust's plans to build Peppercorn Pacific No 60163.
This period of consolidation has however, seen considerable work on technical specification, and things are beginning to happen once again.
‘Flying Scotsman's’ spare corridor tender has at last been purchased and delivered to the Morpeth works of Ian Storey Engineering.
The delay had been caused by difficulties in resolving contractual problems between the A1 Trust and the Flying Scotsman Services.
At Morpeth the existing tank will be removed, as it is considered fit only for scrap, although it will be offered to the National Railway Museum, for the possible use as a corridor tender display.
A new tender tank will be constructed in 1993.
The project management have decided that 60163 will be constructed to BS 5750, the first standard gage steam locomotive to  achieve quality assurance.
Necessary documentation is being prepared, and should make things easier for insurance and other certification.
Non-availability of materials to 1940s specification may well necessitate the re-designing of some parts and establishment of suitable equivalents, although care is being taken not to  impair the outward appearance.
It has already been established that the boiler will be of an all welded design, and, in addition to BS 5750, it will comply with UIC standards; this could pave the way for use of the locomotive in Europe, as air braking is almost certain to be incorporated.
A meeting with BR Locomotive Inspectors, Brian Penney and Sam Foster proved very beneficial, a number of suggestions coming from BR to consider for construction L D Porta, the Argentinian locomotive engineer, and have provided many helpful suggestions, particularly with regard to low-grade coal, and JF Harrison, an assistant to A H Peppercorn at Doncaster works during construction of the A1s, has offered a number of useful ideas and suggestions.
Erection will be undertaken ‘somewhere within the UK’ although, in order to qualify EC grants, a number of components may require manufacture elsewhere.
MID-HANTS IMPROVE
JAMES FREEMAN, chairman of the Mid-Hants Railway plc, the company which runs the Watercress Line between Alresford and Alton, has reported favourably on the past six months trading in a briefing for shareholders and members, writes RICHARD BEAN.
‘Despite a difficult trading position caused by a considerable drop in customer numbers, I am pleased to be able to tell you that the strenuous efforts of the management team, staff members of the associated Preservation Society have brought success in reducing costs to a level less than the revenue that we have earned,’ he said.
‘This means that we have been able to deal with the cash position, which earlier in the year had reached crisis proportions.
‘As a result of very careful housekeeping, we have been able to deal with our list of creditors and to bring the cash problem under firm control.
‘We presented a revised budget to the bank in June and are confident that we can produce a result by the year-end that will ensure that future long-term security of the company.
‘We are now looking forward to seeing 36,000 customers riding on our special trains to Santa Land this Christmas.
Seats are selling fast, but anyone who wants to help the Watercress Line can do so by booking a trip to see Santa,’ says Freeman.
4422 goes to Embsay
by RICHARD BEAN
THE NORTH Staffs Railway's ‘Gypsy’ Derby Four, No 4422, will settle in Skipton for the summer season.
She has the honour of becoming the Embsay Steam Railway's first tender engine to operate on the branch line since BR departed and the Trust was formed in 1967.
Cheddleton Chairman Mr Phillip Oldfield commented: ‘We have had far more requests from railways for use of the engine than we imagined we would have, it's been a matter of accepting what we feel is the best offer.
‘There has certainly been nothing wrong with its stay at the East Lancs Railway.
‘It's fair to say that we liked the thought of it going to somewhere like Embsay, which doesn't have any other big engines, because it will do a good bit of flag flying for us there.’
Embsay General Manager Mr Stephen Walker explained: ‘We certainly do celebrate our 25th anniversary next year but we won't be holding any big anniversary events and the loan of the 4F isn't really anything to do with this.
Members here said that they would like to see a tender engine operating on the railway for the coming season, it really was as simple as that.’
The Knotty's 4F society are now looking for another ex-Barry hulk to fuel the restoration fires with.
Their celebrity Class 25 diesel, ‘Tamworth Castle’, will remain on the Kent and East Sussex Railway for another season.
It was recently visited by a group of members from Cheddleton, including Mr Oldfield, who were ‘quite pleased’ with the way it was being looked after.
North Staffs are continuing their search for a mainline diesel but a recent visit to MC Metals in Glasgow to examine their ‘Peaks’ found a disappointing collection of cannibalised, sorry looking, Sulzers.
‘We believe there's a Class 46 at the Technical Centre in Derby and that will be worth having a look at,’ he added, although, with RFS sub-contracting in the Channel Tunnel, BR are now likely to take an increasingly dim view about selling off withdrawn Class 20s, another Knotty target.
‘Anybody with a mainline diesel for sale should get in touch with me on Stoke-on-Trent 838362,’ added Mr Oldfield.
Former LMS Jubilee ‘Kohlapur’ rests at Loughborough.
It now looks set for an extended stay on the Great Central Railway.
JOHN GOSLING'S MIDLAND SCENE
B.R.M.'s SANTA SUCCESS
THE COMBINED Birmingham Railway Museum and Birmingham Mail ‘Santa Specials’ were enjoying good publicity and seat booking for the first two Sundays in December.
The ‘Santa Specials’ are the first to be arranged for the British Rail main line in the area for quite some time, and a first for the North Warwickshire Line between Hall Green and the Shakespearean town of Stratford-upon-Avon.
To complete the scene, two main line steam locomotives are being utilized, number 6024 ‘King Edward I’ from the Berkshire based Didcot headquarters of the Great Western Society, and 46203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose’from the Midland Railway Trust at Butterley, Derbyshire.
On the first Sabbath Day, 6024 was booked facing southwards towards Stratford, with the Princess Royal Pacific heading northwards.
For the second Sunday, the engines are due to be changed, thus many excellent opportunities for photography en-route exist, providing decent prevailing weather conditions at this time of the season.
Four trains are scheduled to operate on both December 6th and 13th departing from 
In the opposite direction trains are booked away from Stratford-upon-Avon at  to arrive at Hall Green at  hours.
The trains will run empty coaching stock to and from Tyseley Sidings to Hall Green, locomotives being exchanged in the loop adjacent to the museum.
46203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose’ will depart Tyseley light engine at 08.40 for Stratford-upon-Avon (arrive 09.20).
All other light engine movements will follow the main  train .
The exclusive round trip from Hall Green or Shirley to Stratford-upon-Avon is priced at £14.00 (no reductions for children), Hall Green or Shirley to Henley-in-Arden at £9.00 and Henley-in-Arden to Stratford return £7.00.
Babies in arm are free providing no seat is occupied.
These prices also include a gift from Santa Claus, and Christmas Fayre for the adults.
An Enthusiasts special is also being organised at £35.00 which includes an Express Passenger Locomotive Course at the Museum, or a Tank Engine Course at £27.50.
Gift Vouchers are on sale for Driving Courses between £30 and £95.00; Limited Edition print (unframed) of GWR Castle Class 5080 ‘Defiant’ at £55.00, plus a limited edition plate, again of 5080 costing £25.00.
In addition, a £100 prize is being offered for the best photographs taken of these two events to be judged by the experts at the Museum.
Entries are requested to Tony Thomas (Trustee BRM).
There is a  £100 entry fee for each photograph entered.
This is an extremely ambitious programme of events to be organised by any Preservation Society, in recent years using the British Rail main-line, plus main-line steam locomotives providing the excellent opportunity to travel on this little used steam route in Warwickshire.
THE FIRST steam gala that the Birmingham Railway Museum at Tyseley has organised in several years, took place over the weekend of Saturday-Sunday November 28/29th, and was acclaimed as an outstanding success in every respect.
The steam centre based in the Warwick Road, Birmingham is situated in between the main British Rail diesel multiple unit maintenance depot and  re-fuelling sidings, complete with a large car-park for several hundred cars.
The museum is also one of the few that is equipped with a full-sized turntable, a left over from the original steam shed on the same site, which is complete and in full working order.
This is one of the main show pieces for the gala weekend with no less than three large visiting locomotives in steam and working around the Museum site during the course of the two-day event.
Without doubt, the ‘star’ attraction must have been 4472 ‘Flying Scotsman’which was screened on the ‘Midlands Today’TV news on the Saturday evening, thus further advertising the extravaganza.
The two other main line attractions in their own right were 46203 ‘Princess Margaret Rose’, which is normally resident at the Midland Railway Trust at Butterley in Derbyshire, and 6024 ‘King Edward I’ from the Great Western Society headquarters at Didcot in Berkshire.
The ‘Early Bird’ photographic sessions saw all three locomotives plus the BRM's own No. 5080 ‘Defiant’ lined up around the turntable in the November sunshine.
Later the same four were all coupled together and ran full length of the Museum trackwork light-engine, again especially for the photographers present.
Three different original Railway Companies were represented, the Great Western, London Midland and Scottish, and the London and North Eastern Railway!!
‘CADBURY NUMBER 1’ an old 0-4-0 tank locomotive liveried in maroon and lined-out in yellow and black and locally known as ‘Lolloper’due to its riding qualities, or ‘The Fruit and Nut Case’from its original long association with the chocolate factory at Bourneville in Birmingham, hauled a short freight train on another adjacent road to the ‘Main Line’.
This was yet another most unusual event, as not too many preserved railways in Britain can actually operate a demonstration freight using industrial steam power.
The sight of this train-set was greeted with much pleasure amongst the huge audience.
Based around the museum site was No. 7027 ‘Thornbury Castle’ awaiting restoration, plus modern preserved diesel/electric motive power in the shape of No. 40118 and No. 50043 =Eagle’, the latter externally turned out for the extravaganza in Network South East colours.
This was repainted earlier in the year for the BR Bescot Open Day at Walsall while 0-6-0- shunter 13029 was also used for various duties around the Museum site during the course of the weekend.
Inside the Visitors' Centre, a beautiful scale model of number 70000 ‘Britannica’ built by Mr G Kirkby to a 10¼ inch gauge rested and it still retains its boiler certificate.
This was undoubtedly the major show-piece!
Two other show cases depicted further ‘oo’ scale models some complete with coaching or freight stock from the 1960 steam period from both GWR and LMS days.
Sale stalls with railwayana, a booking office and a mock-up of a steam locomotive cab with basic controls were also part of the attractions.
The other main steam exhibit at the museum is No. 6115 ‘Scots Guardsman’ liveried in lined-out black.
Tony Thomas, the BRM Trustee told SRN that this 4-6-0 is to remain at the museum for the foreseeable future.
The main intention is to have the former LMS locomotive restored back to full working order, hopefully in 18  months' time.
This engine is only one of two Royal Scots in preservation, the other being number 6100 ‘Royal Scot’ at Bressingham Bardens, Diss, Norfolk.
Work also continues on the replica 2-2-2 ‘Bloomer’, Pannier tank 7752, presently on loan to the South Devon Railway at Buckfastleigh will shortly return to its home base when some routine work will be carried out.
The original idea of running Day Driving Courses at the Museum has proved enormously successful, well beyond the bounds of belief, with substantial bookings already well in to 1993.
4472 ‘Flying Scotsman’ has been in use for seven day periods, often utilising fourteen hours per day.
This demonstrates the course's financial success.
To drive Scotsman costs £95.00 per day with £90.00 per day for 5080 ‘Defiant’(£60.00 half day).
The resident tank engine costs £30.00.
Tony also told SRN that due to the enormous success of these courses, 4498 ‘Sir Nigel Gresley’ will be visiting the BRM during March and early April next year, followed by 35005 ‘Canadian Pacific’in April and May.
West County Pacific 34026 ‘Taw Valley’ is booked for a similar appearance in August 1993 for Day Driving Training courses, providing much valued finance towards the continued success of the BRM.
FOLLOWING the success of the Midland Railway Centre two excursion trains to London for Christmas Shopping which both departed from Butterley Station, the Trust is now discussing the possibility of operating a number of other trips during the summer months with Regional Railways for 1993.
The MRT are hoping to create a series of excursions during the year which will conclude with two further charter trains to London for Christmas 1993.
Further information is available in the near future from .
THE MIDLAND Railway Centre has recently been awarded ‘Registered Museum’ status by the Museum and Galleries Commission.
This registration procedure is part of the Museum and Galleries Commission work to ensure that all Museums come up to a certain level of competence, and to ensure the future well being of their collections.
The spectacular rare line-up at the Birmingham Railway Museum for the ‘Early Bird’ photographers at the start of their Gala Weekend.
Three different original Railway Companies are represented in the picture 
One of only two ‘Royal Scot’ class 4-6-0's preserved 6115 ‘Scots Guardsman’in lined-out black livery, is to be restored to full working order.
The locomotive was on show during the Birmingham Railway Museum's Gala Weekend.
Restoration of 4247 moves forward
THERE were smiles and sighs of relief, as well as exhaustion, at Wallingford on Sunday, October 18th, when both the pistons and valves of 4247 were manoeuvred into place and secured.
The fitting of these items, newly manufactured at Severn Valley workshops, Bridgnorth, made completion of this ex-Great Western 2-8-0 tank engine seem much more believable.
The small, but dedicated team of workers fulfilled this vital stage of the reconstruction with a bare minimum of equipment yet maintained professional standards, symbolising their determination to restore 4247 to GWR specification.
The two 19″ × 30″ cylinders with a capacity of approximately 23 litres will give a tractive effort of 33,170lbs, when in steam, the same as a class 52XX, and more than an A3 Pacific or a Castle, although without their top speed.
Renovated
Progress is also being made on fabricating a new cab roof, following the successful completion of the bunker earlier this year.
At the Swindon Railway workshops, the expansion links have been renovated and the rocker arms just require machining for completion.
The Society was awaiting a quote from Severn Valley for remetalling the main motion  bushes , for which funding is being sought.
All enquiries regarding membership of the 4247 Preservation Society to  
The 4247 team perform a balancing act to place the piston back in the cylinder.
W.S.R DRIVER COURSE
HOT ON the heels of much-vaunted footplate training courses on other preserved railways and steam centres, the 20-mile West Somerset Railway has just launched its own ‘dirty hands’ version for would-be enginemen.
The first intake of learners for the two-day courses took place last week  by invitation only, with five committed beginners trying their hand at firing and driving.
The course wasn't advertised because the WSR has received so many requests from people wanting to ride on the footplate that it was able to pick out only serious enthusiasts.
The pilot course was very successful with all of the trainees realising their boyhood fantasies of driving a steam railway engine in realistic conditions.
Another course for six people will run in a fortnight.
All five trainees — including a student, civil engineer, architect and pensioner — were taught the basics of railway safety and signalling, how to start and stop an engine, plus firing and driving techniques.
With a strong emphasis on value-for-money, this opportunity to take the controls of a locomotive on Britain's longest preserved railway should prove popular with those who really want to get their hands dirty.
WSR Managing Director Mark Smith explained: ‘You won't see grown men playing with glamorous engines and trains over short lengths of track here.
‘We're offering a serious training course for real enthusiasts who know you only get out of a course what you put into it.
‘We are interested in serious-minded people who want to get down to the ins and outs of driving a steam locomotive — filth, heat, sweat and all.’
The two-day course culminates in a six-mile round trip from Minehead to Blue Anchor where the trainees have a go at supervised driving and firing.
Just to make sure no-one gets the wrong idea, the loco carries an ‘L’ plate headboard to distinguish it from other trains!
All future courses will take place on the popular ex-Great Western design Collett 0–6–0 No. 3205, built in 1948, which has a large well laid out cab and easy-to-use controls.
Open to men and women, students will receive a souvenir certificate at the end of the course to mark their achievement.
Further details about the courses can be obtained from .
One of West Somerset's leading attractions, the West Somerset Railway, has been recognized by an award in the annual Holiday Care Awards for facilities for disabled holidaymakers.
The railway received a Highly Commended certificate at a ceremony at World Travel Market for its special coach for disabled passengers — Lorna Doone.
The railway was nominated by West Somerset District Council Tourism Officer Tim King who collected the award from John Lee and Judith Chalmers of the Holiday Care Service.
Lorna Doone was converted for use as a special vehicle for disabled passengers from a coach supplied by the line's supporting body the West Somerset Railway Association.
Designed by the company's engineering staff the coach has electric lifts, wheelchair locks, a non-slip floor and toilet.
The vehicle is in regular use during the season and has become very popular with disabled  passengers who can now enjoy the views of the passing countryside in comfort.
Reservations for Lorna Doone are handled by the railway company's commercial office at Minehead station.
British Railfreight locomotive 37,699 was an attractive visitor to the West Somerset Railway's  diesel weekend hauling several trains on the preserved railway.
It is pictured at Samford Brett Bridge south of Williton bound for Bishops-Lydeard.
Steaming to Oxford
On Saturday, January 2, 1993 a series of  four steam trains will be run between Oxford and the Steamday at the Didcot Railway Centre.
The trains will be hauled by the GWR locomotive No. 6998 ‘Burton Agnes Hall’ which had the distinction of working the very last British Railways passenger train from Oxford on 1 January 1966.
They are expected to leave Didcot Parkway at .
Tickets include free admission to the Steamday at Didcot Railway Centre which is open from 10am to 4pm.
Fares for a return journey starting at Oxford or Didcot purchased in advance are £12 for adults, £5 for children aged 5–15; tickets will be sold on the day subject to space being available at £13 adult, £6 child.
JOIN THE HUNT FOR WALKERS' SECRETS
The gentle magic of Irish rails  have touched Geoff
Report: RICHARD BEAN
IRELAND in 1920.
Tumultuous times.
And canny manager Henry Forbes wasn't going to let that long  overdue overhaul of the County Donegal Joint Railway's sole petrol-powered inspection loop go to waste.
He decreed that the loco be fitted with an enclosed body which would be able to shelter 10 passengers from the Celtic mist and rain, busting steam's monopoly on the north-western metals.
And it went on to enjoy sporadic mail and fare-payers use before being put into regular use six years later to bolster lightly loaded services serving this most rural of communities.
From then until his death in 1943, Forbes and his railway were to begin  an illustrious love affair with railcars from Walker Brothers in Wigan, Lancashire, which played such a big part in keeping the County Donegal Railway rattling on…
Now an enthusiast from Wigan is appealing to the town's former loco engineering brains-trust to help him return a currently heavily corroded  expatriate railcar to service deep in the Emerald Isle…
 Forty-five-year-old Wigan quality area engineer Mr Geoff Jones, a member of Liverpool Loco Society at Streamport, has joined fellow former narrow gauge railway and diesel railcar which used to run through the county.
The original trailer-hauling railcar was made in 1945 by Walker Brothers at their famous loco and wagon works, the Pagefield Ironworks in Springfield, Wigan.
And later exported to Ireland for service on the three-foot gauge CDJR which was entirely steam operated until 1907.
Powered by a six-cylinder Manchester Gardner 6LW diesel engine, these economical units are historically important.
That's because they played such a very big part in preserving the viability of small railways with scattered populations like the County Donegal…the sort of fascinating little operation that investors would have to think twice about before investing just one rail-spike in.
Seating 43 passengers, the power unit, driving through a mechanical five-speed gearbox, was at the front, with the coach body hinged to the power unit.
It drove two four wheeled bogies.
One even ran nearly one million miles.
Members in Ireland have tracked down the original carriage ;it was acting as a holiday home, and was virtually intact!
But they are going to have to rebuild the engine cab from scratch, along with the chassis.
And need as much information as possible to help them.
Ex-Walkers staff to have come forward so far include Alfred Donaldson (who started at Pagefield in 1934), Bob Smith and Ted Porter, who still works for parent company Beloit Walmesley of Bolton, who now make giant paper making machines.
Geoff, of Abram, near Wigan read about the South Donegal Railway Preservation Society and immediately contacted members to see if he could help despite the little matter of 150 miles of murky Irish Sea.
He has been working with Wigan Metropolitan Council's industrial history officer, Mike Haddon.
The pair have tracked down a lot of information about the Pagefield Ironworks including some of the original  draughtsmen's drawings.
Indeed Geoff plans to write an article about the history of Walkers' in conjunction with them.
‘Wigan Metro Heritage Service is particularly interested in the cars supplied to overseas railways as all the Irish cars are very well documented,’ commented Mr Haddon 
‘SRN readers may have some specialist knowledge of the railcars’ actual operational history on foreign lines, be it personal knowledge or known literary sources.’
Railways include the Peru Central Railway (‘Paita Pivra Lin and Pacasmayo Trujillo line); Libya (Cyrenaica); Tasmania (Emu Bay); Australia (Victoria Government).
Geoff, a quality assurance group leader at British Aerospace in Lostock near Bolton, explained: ‘After a series of extremely expensive phone calls to the Society's Chairman, Mr Joe Carroll, in Ireland, last month, I was so bitten by the bug I wanted to do everything I can to help from my armchair here in Wigan, so to speak.
Because I've yet to travel to Donegal.’
‘Rebuilding the cab and engine without advice or drawings would be very difficult and I'm sure there would be something to be gained by appealing for some personal recollections.’
Anyone with any memories or information about Walker Brothers, the Pagefield Ironworks and  in particular the railcars which were their post-war bread and butter, should contact him on 
Railcars themselves, which entered service in Donegal in 1926, were certainly a fore-runner of the modern ‘Sprinter’…a bus on wheels.
Articulated with an engine cab towing a carriage behind it, they enjoyed heavy use in country pastures or peat bog, areas where they could stop to  pick up passengers anywhere along the way, with good enough acceleration to then hold onto a time-table.
The original hail and  and ride!
He added: ‘It was particularly useful for places like Donegal  —they were a Godsend.’
‘What we are trying to do is to relay  six miles of track from Meenglass to Donegal…the Barnsmoor Gap, plus  renovate the old coaches still in  existence , some of which are now holiday homes and hen houses!’
The County Donegal Joint Railway closed due to road competition in 1959.
Severn Walker Brothers built railcars are known to have been preserved and are in various states of repair.
They are 5ft 3in gauge No. 2509 (1947) at the Great Southern Railway, Mallow, No 12 (1934) at Shanes Castle, No 4 (1935) at South Donegal, No 16 at the Foyle Valley Railway in Derry, No 18 (1940) at Shanes Castle and No's 19 and 20 (1950) on the Isle of Man Railways.
AS CHRISTMAS approaches the South Donegal Railway Restoration Society has several  times available at very reasonable prices which will make excellent presents, writes JAMES SCANNELL.
How about a set of six monochrome Christmas cards featuring photos from the County Donegal Railway?— An unusual and delightful way to send greetings to your friends price £2.50 post paid.
THE 1992 Calendar was a great success and an improved calendar for 1993 is now available with 15 black and white photographs.
Photos on this year's calendar are — Cover: County  Donegal Class 5A loco No. 21: January: Railcar No. 20 at Inver: February: Meenlas outside Strabane shed: March: Railcar No. 12 approaching Letterkenny Station: April: Loco No. 8 ‘Foyle’ waiting to depart from Victoria Street Station, Derry.
May: Railcar No. 16 at Donegal Station: June: ‘Meenglas’ and ‘Columcille’standing amongst the weeds at Strabane, 1964: July: Trailer No. 2 and Van No. 12 being turned on the turntable at Killybegs: August: 1958 view of Strabane looking northwards showing the track layout and rolling stock there: September: Loco No. 3 (Lydia) receiving attention at Strabane: October: Railcar No. 14 at Strabane: November: ‘Columcille’shunting coaching stock at Strabane: December: Articulated railcar No. 19 standing outside the overall roof of Killybegs Station.
Inside back cover: Carriage No. 28 at Strabane in 1958 and being lowered onto a flat-bed truck in 1992 for removal to the SDRRS restoration workshop.
Back cover: Diesel tractor Phoenix at work in Strabane in the 1950's.
All photos, unless otherwise stated, date from the 1950's and come complete with informative test.
Price of the calendar is £3.50 post paid.
Still available are copies of the limited edition poster ‘The Land of Tyrconnell’ which will be despatched in a stout cardboard tube.
Price post paid is £11.50.
Mail orders should be sent to .
DID you know that UK readers can become members of an Irish railway society and attend some of their meetings which are held in London.
Yes indeed the Irish Railway Record Society which is based at  Hueston Station in Dublin has a very active London Area Group who hold regular meetings.
Membership of the Society for Britain including Northern Ireland is £11 Stg per year and all members receive the Society's thrice yearly journal.
Inquiries about the London Area Group can be sent to  and please don't forget an SAE for reply.
TRANSPORT OF DELIGHT
TWO of Walkers' railcar power bogies built for the Great Northern Railway Company of Ireland (No's C2 and C3) and pictured in 1935 inside the Pagefield Works following final assembly.
Passenger saloons built by the GNR were attached to these power units to form articulated railcars, a speciality of Walkers, which greatly reduced noise and vibration levels for passengers.
A subsequent development was known as the Central Power Bogie which had the power unit bogie articulated to passenger saloons at both ends, thus retaining the noise and vibration reduction advantages while doubling the seating capacity.
Photo courtesy of WIGAN METRO COUNCIL HERITAGE.
Black Five set for service in Ireland
BOB PUE the chairman of the Belfast and County Down Railway Museum Trust has just presented his annual report and we believe it is so interesting S.R.N.
readers should have the chance to read of the project's progress.
‘THE YEAR 1991/92 has been a difficult, and in many ways a frustrating one for the Trust.
We began the year with the Department of the Environment withdrawing the Comber-Dundonald portion of the track-bed from the market and refusing to come to any form of agreement with the Trust regarding the future of this portion of the line.
The study of the proposed L.R.T. system had been ordered by the Department of the Environment, and it appeared to all intents and purposes that any future for the Comber-Dundonald portion of the line, at least as far as the Trust was concerned, were dead and buried, as it seemed evident that the D.O.E.
was going to extend the proposed L.R.T. system as far as Comber once this study was completed.
Following this there was considerable despondency amongst the committee as there seemed to be little hope for the future.
We had several pieces of rolling stock stored at Councillor Jim McBriar's farm, and as he was considering selling the land on which they were sitting, we were asked to remove them as quickly as possible.
As a result of this three of the vehicles have been sold to a group of enthusiasts at Downpatrick.
The remaining two B. & C.D.R. carriage bodies, which because of the terms of the Trust Deed we are not permitted to sell, are still at Mr McBriar's, and a home for these is urgently being sought.
There then appeared a chink of light when we were advised by Mr F. Musgrave of Saintfield that he wished to sell the site of the former Ballynahinch Junction Station, a site which the Trust had been trying to secure for the past 20 years.
The station was offered to us for the sum of £20,000, but when we asked for a private valuation in the hope of securing a loan to purchase the site, the valuer valued the site at only £10,000.
We have just been advised that the study of the proposed L.R.T. system has now been completed, and that this has resulted in a proposal that the L.R.T. lines will only extend as far as Dundonald.
We have also been advised by the Department of the Environment that the trackbed between Comber and Dundonald, in its entirety — not just the portion in the Ards Council area, is to be offered for sale in the near future.
Ballynahinch Junction in the 1930s
This now leaves the Trust with two possible options:
1)
The possibility of restoring the Saintfield–Ballynahinch line.
2)
The possibility of restoring the Comber-Dundonald line.
Of these, the Saintfield–Ballynahinch portion would be the cheaper as there are no bridges requiring replacing, but against this is the fact that there would be no possibility  of support from  Down District Council, who are already committed to the Downpatrick development.
The Comber-Dundonald line on the other hand has much greater tourism potential, particularly if it could be linked to the Ice Bowl and Leisure Complex development at Dundonald.
It would also have the advantage of linking into the proposed L.R.T. system at the Ice Bowl, and could, therefore, serve the dual purpose as a tourist facility, and a peak-time commuter line for the people of Comber.
The disadvantages, however, are that it would be much more expensive to construct, requiring the construction of several bridges, and the fact that while it straddles two council areas, there will be no possibility of support from Ards Borough Council as their Tourist Officer has an agreement with Down District Council not to support a tourist railway in the Ards area as there is already one under way in the Down District area at Downpatrick.
It would appear, therefore, that the only hope of support from any local council might, and it's a big might, come from Castlereagh who have refused to move in the past because of the failure of Ards to make any positive move towards the point.
Failing council support therefore, it is up to the Trust to muster what support it can from local enthusiasts, and from local groups and individuals.
It will simply be a case of which of the two areas can muster the greatest amount of support in order to secure the development for their own area!
You will remember that a decision was taken a few years ago that we would lay our track to the standard British gauge of 4′ 8½″ rather than to the Irish gauge of 5′ 3″.
Well, I can report on that front that we have been offered the opportunity to secure a few locomotives (one has already been given to us), and a number of pieces of rolling stock.
We have also been offered the opportunity to have a former L.M.S.
‘Black 5’ on loan for a period once our line is operational!
As far as operation of a preserved line is concerned we have practically all the elements necessary.
It is now a case of getting the support, and raising the funds to secure one of the two routes which are available to us.
PRAISE FOR THE K & WVR
BBC TELEVISION'S premier religious programme Songs of Praise was recorded on the Keighley & Worth Valley Railway at the end of October.
The programme will recreate the traditional Carol Service train, which the Railway has run for over 20 years as worshippers travel by steam  train from Keighley to Oxenhope, singing carols at each of the Railway's six award-winning stations.
The location filming took place over three evenings with Keighley, Haworth and Oxenhope stations being used.
Separate recording of local choirs were also made at Damems and Oakworth stations.
The train was specially made up of TSO stock, the rear coach was used to house technical equipment and a mobile studio gallery.
8F class steam locomotive No. 48431 was used to haul the special train.
Over 500 local church-goers took part in the recording.
The programme will also feature several interviews with KWVR staff including Society chairman Graham Mitchell, Vice-Chairman David Pearson and Clerk of Works John  Downs .
The programme presented by Pamela Rhodes will be transmitted in stereo on BBC-1 on the evening of Sunday, December 13.
Among the founders of the preservation society which saved the line 30 years ago was ‘The Railway Bishop’, the Rt.
Rev. Eric Treacy.
After his death in the 1970s, a mobile Carol Service was initiated on the railway, with every Christmas, a steam train taking a brass band, carollers and local clergy for services on the gas-lit platforms.
Over the years, the mobile service has become an institution in the Pennine communities served by the line, actively supported by local clergy and  Christians .
The programme opens with While Shepherds Watched sung to the tune of ‘On Ilkley Moor Bah't 'At’, and an interview with the man who has been Santa Claus to generations of children travelling on the Worth Valley Railway's ‘Santa Specials’: Jack Rowell, who lives on the railway in the Station House overlooking its terminus at Oxenhope.
After singing Come, Come Come to the Manger, and interviews with some of the volunteer railwaymen whose unpaid efforts keep the trains running, the songs of Praise special arrives at Britain's smallest standard-gauge railway station, Damems.
There, Pam Rhodes interviews 14 year old Rebecca Williams from Oakworth, and her 13 year old sister Melanie who have written a carol Bethlehem Road to be sung (with other local children) at Damems Station.
The train moves on to Ingrow West station.
It then steams to Oakworth where even the Station Master's reading lamp is powered by gas and the atmosphere is captured by the Aire Valley singers .
As the train arrives at Haworth, K & W.V.R. vice-chairman David Pearson, reads Anne Bronte's poem Music On A Christmas Morning.
Newly restored former BR Standard 2-6-0 No. 78022 leaves Keighley Station on October 17.
Darlington setting the standard!
DUNCAN YOUNG in the North East
THE DARLINGTON Railway Preservation Group have been making good progress on their principal asset Standard 2MT Mogul No 78018.
The Darlington-built loco of 1954 is the ‘ raison d'être ’ of the group which formed with the purpose of bringing a Darlington North Road Works locomotive back to the town and restore it for use on BR metals in the North East.
This is a laudable aim as the ex-NER metals are virtually devoid of mainline steam.
The recent 25 KV electrification has made steam movements using ECML junctions like Newcastle and Darlington virtually impossible.
The aim with 78018 is to use her on the former Stockton and Darlington, Stanhope and Tyne Wear Valley routes which are used for summer Sunday pacer trains and cement traffic to Blue Circle's Eastgate Cement Works the current limit of the line.
The historic route may be under the accountant's scrutiny shortly: the recession in the building industry has  led to a falling demand for cement and traffic is down to two or three trains per week.
Mr. Barrie Lamb of DRPS likened closure of this line to bulldozing the pyramids: so much of the old S & DR and S & T has been obliterated and this last remaining relic must survive.
The mogul's chassis is  approaching readiness for re-wheeling but will undergo a BR inspection beforehand.
The tender is undergoing some further work and the boiler is the final obstacle in this protracted restoration.
£8,000 will be spent on boiler repairs and DRPS is then seeking £10,000 to finance the retube.
The target is to have 78018 in steam within the next two years.
Barrie Lamb stated that the job would have been completed earlier had DRPS not been diverted into rescuing additional rolling stock such as their current working steam loco, a Peckett 0-4-0 ST which is undergoing extensive winter repairs .
This little loco will be running at North Road Station Darlington from Whitsuntide weekend 1993.
Darlington Railway Preservation Society would welcome practical or financial help with the Standard Mogul.
Those wishing to help or enquire should contact Barrie Lamb on 
Thieves strike
THE FOREMARK HALL Locomotive Associates suffered a major blow in the restoration of their locomotives when thieves broke into their temporary work shop at the Swindon and Cricklade Railway — and stole vital parts.
Chairman Jim Clark told S.R.N.
‘They stole a complete cylinder valve assembly which were original parts, deep stamped with our loco's number 7903.
An attempt was also made to take the vacuum pump body, but  its weight and bulk seemed to defeat the thief, who nevertheless hid it in nearby bushes .
‘The fact that such specific parts were targeted, useless to anyone else, seems to indicate that this dastardly deed was carried out by a steam preservation ‘colleague’ with a view to fitting to a similar GWR-designed loco — quite sickening if so.
‘Can we ask all preservationists to keep their eyes out for anyone trying to pass on these parts and a reward will be offered to anyone supplying information.
‘Should the thief read this and comprehend the distress he has caused as well as the futility of his action, if he organises the return of our parts, perhaps through a third party, then we will take no further action.’
The Irish join in
SANTA SPECIALS which are a great source of revenue for many railway societies throughout the British Isles arrived in Dublin for the first time on Sunday, December 6th.
The Railway Preservation Society of Ireland will operate three Santa Specials from Dublin's Pearse Station in Westland Row to a country destination and back.
All the children on board will have the opportunity to meet Santa, receive a gift from him and enjoy the seasonable atmosphere while all the adults will receive a complimentary drink.
The R.P.S.I are providing a return ticket for an adult or child at £5 which are being sold from several branches of the Irish Life Building Society located around Dublin City.
Trains on Sunday will depart from Dublin Pearse at:— 11.00 a.m. 1.45p.m. 4.15 p.m.
The Specials will be repeated by the R.P.S.I in Dublin on Sunday, December 13th.
Power up front will be former Dublin & South Eastern locomotive 461 which is now kept at Mullingar, pulling the society's 1950's style carriages with their distinctive green livery of that period complete with C.I.E.
‘flying snail’ logo.
Postal bookings for these trips can be made to   NB fare is Irish pounds price.
AFTER three years of negotiations with Irish Rail, the Irish Traction Group has taken delivery of its first locomotive, 201 (c) class No. 226, the first Irish mainline diesel to pass into private ownership.
Santa in Welshpool
THE 2ft 6ins gauge Welshpool and Llanfair Light Railway will be running their Santa Special train.
Services on Saturdays, December 12 and 19 as well as Sundays, December 13 and 20.
THE three-coach fair will be hauled by newly  painted locomotive No. 85 and it will be steam-heated.
Win a Euro-prize
THE LAST meeting of the Morgan Commission was held in Brussels on Saturday, November 15 when the  principles underlying the proposed constitution for the European Federation of Museum and Tourist Railways were finally agreed.
The meeting was attended by delegates from Belgium, France, Holland, Italy, Sweden and the United Kingdom, and followed a meeting between the Group's acting chairman, David Morgan, and its Belgian Field Officer, Rik de Gruyter, with the relevant officer at the European Commission's DG IIXXX, the Directorate Generale responsible for tourism.
It is hoped to finalise the constitution at the next meeting of the working party due to take place on Saturday, January 16th 1993, when it is hoped to settle a draft budget once it is known whether any assistance will be provided by DXGIII and also to fix the date of the launch of the new Federation.
The French delegation led by M. Jean Arrivetz of FACS stressed the desirability of using a mnemonic one could say as a word.
Unfortunately none of the four languages provide the initials in the desired way (cf: EFMTR, FEM).
So, they have decided to throw it open to Europe-wide competition to decide our ‘trade name’.
Thus the Historical European Railway Organisations would spell HERO, or a cryptic word  ‘Eg ‘Eurddrail?’) might provide a solution.
The winner will receive two free wine and dine tickets on the preserved railway of his/her choice.
Entries to be sent to   before 12th January 1993.
For further details please contact    
Steam in the south
with MERVYN TURVEY
THE BEST LAID PLANS…
NO SOONER had the new organisation ‘After Dark Railtours’ sent off their advertisement for publication than it became necessary to cancel the operation.
The 34027 Locomotive Group found themselves in a similar position with a well-loaded train being cancelled within sight of the locomotive being prepared, so to speak.
What is the present position with the proposed series of steam operations out of the old Southern Railway termini?
Talking to the locomotive owners and train organisers direct, as far as can be ascertained, the following trains have been agreed and authorised although not all of the departure times and routes have been fully confirmed.
The two trains planned for December have been cancelled and alternative dates have been, or are to be, offered.
The 34027 Locomotive Group still retain the prestigious opportunity of being able to say that it was their locomotive which took the first train hauled by a steam locomotive into Waterloo after some 25 years.
It is important to remember that the last steam train to arrive at Waterloo was the 14.07 ex.
Weymouth headed by Merchant Navy Pacific No. 35030 ‘Elder Dempster Lines’ on Sunday July 9th 1967.
However, the last West Country-hauled Waterloo to Salisbury service ran the day before with the 18.45 being headed by No. 34025 ‘Whimple’.
So there are two records being achieved here with the operation of ‘The Sarum’ being hauled from Waterloo to Salisbury and back on Friday, February 5th.
Those who had obtained tickets for the December train have been offered a straight transfer for February 5th.
Very few have turned down the offer but anyone interested can contact the operators of the train on  for up to the minute information.
‘AFTER DARK Railtours’, operators of King Arthur No. 777 ‘Sir Lamiel’ are offering transfers direct to those who had booked the December train.
This was to have travelled to and from Waterloo via Havant, Fareham and Eastleigh and no doubt many enthusiasts in that area will be disappointed that it has been cancelled.
Further, there has not been a date allocated for the future although its replacement is expected to run in April.
There is some doubt also whether it will operate over the above route when a date is eventually confirmed.
The transfer tickets are, therefore, being offered for the Waterloo to Portsmouth return run on Friday, February 12th.
Named the ‘Pompey Knightrider’ this train has been confirmed.
It will run from Waterloo departing at about lighting up time around five p.m. and will run along the direct route through Clapham, Woking and Guildford to Portsmouth Harbour.
Some interesting manoeuvres will be experienced here as the locomotive has to be released so that it can run to Cosham and Havant to turn on the well known triangle formed by this route.
The return departure from the Harbour will be quite late so the organisers are asking for intermediate stops at Guildford, Woking and Clapham Junction on the return run to enable passengers to detrain and catch the last suburban services home.
Similar thought has been given to the next run of ‘Sir Lamiel’ scheduled for Friday, March 12th.
This has yet to receive a name and will depart from Waterloo again about lighting up time, 18.00 ish, heading for Southampton but via Andover, the Laverstock avoiding line and Romsey so that the locomotive is facing the right direction for the homeward journey.
This time stops are requested  for Basingstoke, Woking and Clapham Junction.
I am of the opinion that it should be stressed that these are the intentions of the organisers who are in the hands of the operators of Network SouthEast.
The December run of ‘Taw Valley’ had been organised and agreed some three months before but failed owing to operations problems in the end.
Bear with the organisers who are running these trains both for our benefit and fun but also to raise funds to maintain their locomotives.
Considerable effort goes into the organisation of the operations and if things go wrong it isn't their fault.
To obtain further details of the two runs by No. 777 write to ‘After Dark Railtours’, enclosing a self addressed and stamped envelope.
Full details of the trains and application forms for tickets will be forwarded by return.
All tickets are priced at £35 enabling easy transfers.
If you need urgent information you are invited to use the following telephone number but, please, only use it between 19.00 and 21.00 on Mondays to Thursdays and only if it is absolutely necessary…
THERE is always much excitement in steam operations on the main line but we should not forget the amount of effort taking place on the preserved lines especially as now the Santa Season is in full swing.
Remember the preserved railway near you will be operating some form of Christmas promotion this weekend.
A quick telephone call will give you details and confirm the availability of seats on trains or opportunities to visit Santa, whichever you are seeking.
Of interest to note this weekend is the operation on the Mid Hants Railway where two Santa Specials operate more or less simultaneously, one starting from Alresford and the other from Alton.
They do not travel the length of the line with the former reversing at Ropley and the latter likewise at Medstead and Foremarks.
The trains pass at Ropley with the  Alresford return service working wrong line through the station.
Consequently two locomotives are in steam which adds to the fun.
On Sunday there is an additional train for grown ups who perhaps want an opportunity to celebrate in a seasonal way but without the children.
The ‘Countryman’ undertakes a complete run departing Alresford at 13.10 and returning about 15.00 supplying mince pies and sherry along the way.
You need to be warned that seats on the Santa Specials are at a premium during the weekends of Christmas week when the railway is enterprisingly capitalising on the school holiday period as well as the season of celebrations.
Seats on the ‘Countryman’ are available each Sunday.
Reading of the specials on the Cholsey and Wallingford Railway, there is a suggestion that Santa Specials may be running into Cholsey.
Not just yet, I'm afraid.
If you want to participate in their fun a vintage bus service operates from Cholsey Station on the main line to Wallingford where steam Santa Specials are operating.
The bus will meet all services between 11.00 and 15.00.
However they may not need a bus much longer.
There is promise that the tracks may return to Cholsey bay platform within the next 12 months or so.
the long-standing problem with the Mercury cables under the ballast seem to be resolved and it is understood that these are being moved now and the route could be clear within days.
BACK to the mainline for the last words.
I wonder if the friendly gent from Gloucester I met on the bank at Bo'ness some days back has noted that steam is heading his way on Saturday?
Regional Railways is operating a steam special from Didcot to Kidderminster using the ‘Mickey Mouse’ No. 46521.
The train starts from Birmingham and runs to Didcot diesel-hauled.
The return journey is steam-hauled and runs to Oxford and then along the Cotswold route to Worcester for Kidderminster where the diesel will take over to return the train to Birmingham.
The operation returns 46521 to its home base, the Severn Valley Railway after working the Network SouthEast Henley Branch shuttles early in November.
At the time of writing tickets were available at £38 from Flying Scotsman Services on  
Perhaps it is worth remembering that most steam trains on the mainline need support from modern forms of traction.
Sometimes when the two meet it forms an interesting scene as on the occasion that the recent Waterloo to Exeter service arrived at Andover and there was a momentary pause as the diesel locomotive came off the train and passed ‘Sir Lamiel’ waiting to take over.
RAILWAY BOOK SHELF
By JOHN HUXLEY
YET ANOTHER BOYD CLASSIC
Wrexham, Mold and Connah's Quay Railway By James I.C. Boyd 
IT IS always a daunting task to review the work of an author who has achieved the pre-eminence of James Boyd.
An acknowledged railway expert and social historian he has assumed giant-like status within the railway fraternity.
I confess to not being in a position to bring his painstaking research into question so I shall confine myself to what is set before me.
For his first work on a  standard-gauge railway Boyd has remained in that favoured territory, North Wales, and almost fittingly he has chosen one of the Principality's less well known routes.
It is, however, a fascinating tale and provides the explanation for one who knows the area well as to why the LNER was able to establish a toehold in a region when the Great Western and LMS constituents held sway.
Boyd's ability to take a controversial subject and set it down into explicable proportions is tested to the full in this work and the way in which the line fell into the Great Central's hands together with the relationship of Benjamin Piercy's trustees provides the kind of issues that keeps historians in correspondence for years to come.
In common with Boyd's previous works the text is authoritative while at the same time highly readable.
The border counties were a cradle of industry for many years and the line's picturesque position belies its importance to the region.
The depth of Boyd's research remains one of the great strengths of his books.
Little or nothing escapes his eye and that makes any book he writes doubly valuable to the serious students of railway history.
But in this book there is more than just the history of the WM & CR.
Because so many other lines were dependent upon and linked to its operations they are brought into the story.
The Buckley Railway, Sir Sam Glynne's Railway and other private lines all find a place.
It is, however, hard to make a recommendation to read this fine offering by Boyd without issuing a warning.
I believe that an element of local knowledge is essential if you are to acquire maximum enjoyment from this volume.
That's not to say that it is a waste of time reading it even if you have never been to the remote geographical placement.
The full story of the WM & CR is more than just a recalling of the day-to-day running of a railway.
There are other elements such as national politics, local politics, intrigue, financial struggles and personalities aplenty.
Boyd has not disappointed us.
His touch remains as sure as ever and, obscure though his subject may be, it is another masterpiece from his pen.
The North Berwick and Gullane Branch Lines By Andrew M Hajducki 
MOST BOOKS on branch lines record enterprises that have not stood the test of time and are no longer with us.
But in the North Berwick branch's case it is not only still functioning but has been electrifies.
This is essentially the story of two North British Railway branch lines who carried the people of East Fife, together with generations of golfers, to the coast.
The North Berwick line enjoys a spectacular claim to fame because it has at some time or other in its history been powered by every possible form of motive power; horse, steam, diesel and electricity.
But, while the North Berwick line has struggled and now thrived, the book also records the life and death of Gullane branch.
Published in the comprehensive Oakwood style with maps, illustrations and well laid-out statistical tables this book represents excellent value given that little attention has been lavished on NBR affairs.
The Heyday of Nine Elms and its Locomotives By Colin Boocock 
TO THOSE of us born and bred away from the capital the mention of the name Nine Elms conjures up visions of leafy glades and the home counties.
To the railway enthusiast, however, it was the location of a crack Southern Railway and Southern Region steam depot.
The depot and its locomotives have a high place in the Southern  enthusiasts' hearts and Boocock has brought together a collection of pictures that illustrated the life in and around the depot as well as its varied locomotive stud out and about on the system's metals.
Because Boocock has concentrated upon colour photographs it has a disturbing quality of being particularly modern although the last day of steam at 70A, the depot which served Waterloo, was 9th July 1967.
This is an interesting book even for non-Southern devotees as he takes us through from the most menial shunting operation with grimy British Rail survivors to sleek passenger workings with shiny green locomotives.
The album format was designed for books like this.
71000 Duke of Gloucester — The Impossible Dream Part Two By Peter King 
Nothing, simply nothing, is calculated to put a railway enthusiast on his mettle than for somebody or some organisation to say that something is impossible.
And if anything fell into the category of being impossible it was the former BR standard pacific Duke of Gloucester.
In 1973 the Duke was left abandoned in the Barry scrapyard and  its remaining hulk looked beyond recovery.
As we all know now the group was formed to save it from extinction and now ‘Duke’ is happily not only still with us but thriving.
In the first volume of  ‘The Impossible Dream’ Peter King told of the rescue and repair of the Duke taking the story through to 1985 and in the second volume he tells of the return to steam culminating in the blue riband run over the Settle and Carlisle in September 1990.
A worthwhile publication well illustrated and written.
A fine record of a locomotive's return from the grave.
A new look at the ‘Pug’
Scottish Colliery Pugs in the seventies By Bill Roberton 
RECENT developments in the British coal industry have added considerable value to this photographic study  following the death throes of the Pug as well as Scottish steam.
 Photographer Bill Roberton started industrial photography in 1971 just in time to catch the final act by the workhorse of the Scots mining industry.
‘The wee pug’, which translated into language sassenachs understand, means little saddle or tank engines who worked their lives in the washeries, sorting yards and transfer to main line.
Roberton has taken what can best be described as an artistic look at this subject and I must compliment him on his approach because it provides a valuable visual record of what can never be again.
He has bravely published his own work and copies of this delightful little album style publication can be obtained direct from him at  adding 90 pence for postage.
Southern Railway No 24 Calbourne 100 years of service By Alan Doe 
IT IS still a comparatively rare event for a locomotive to have a book devoted to its entire lifespan but this A4, 28 page publication certainly fills the bill as far as the 09 class 0-4-4T Calbourne is concerned.
The  foreword is supplied by artist David Shepherd OBE and proceeds from the book are being devoted to continuing the restoration of this wonderful little locomotive that lives at Haven Street on the Isle of Wight railway.
Written in a very attractive style this little publication is the ideal vehicle to while away a quiet few minutes and, at the same time, does something practical to help with the preservation of steam.
Copies post 39 pence are available from .
Southern Railway Passenger Vans By David Gould 
ROLLING stock is a much neglected area in the publishing area.
Locomotives and the routes themselves have always attracted authors in profusion but in recent years that trend has been punctuated by some useful and illuminating titles on passenger and freight vehicles.
This little volume represents another major step forward in the chronicling of such vehicles.
The author states, quite correctly in the  reviewer's opinion, that the Southern Railway's passenger  ancillary vehicles had a character all of their own and he has meticulously chronicled their fleet.
MEETING POINT
New sleepers laid out for loco road at Tywyn Wharf.
Talyllyn volunteers load sleepers.
New rails ready for spiking at Quarry Siding.
All pictures:
Outdoor Talyllyn
THE TALYLLYN Railway held a highly successful fifth annual outdoor week at the beginning of November.
A core gang of 15 spent the entire week at Tywyn, with many more volunteers helping for part of the week.
The gang tackled a wide variety of tasks including complete replacement of 80 yards of track west of Quarry Siding.
The loco road points at Wharf were rebuilt and other track repairs in the station yard carried out.
Trenching and laying of cable trunking was done at Pendre for the installation of new signalling.
DOUBLE FREIGHT BLOW IN THE WEST
BY DICK WOOD
TWO WEST Country private freight connections will end this year as a result of claimed inflexibility in the working arrangements with British Rail.
Taunton Cider, which is physically linked with the West Somerset Railway at Norton Fitzwarren, and Fitzgerald Lighting from Bodmin will now be sending their goods by road instead of rail.
Seen as a retrograde move by many rail supporters, the Fitzgerald decision marks the end of the only freight service operated by a private preserved operator, the Bodmin and Wenford Railway.
 It is estimated that another 40 heavy lorries will be on the roads every week to replace the 24 wagon train which runs to St Helens and Edinburgh carrying 520 tonnes of cider and four loads of electrical light fittings.
Taunton Cider has said it will have to run six lorries a day with a road haulage company in place of the once a week service to Scotland.
Both companies had been using BR's Railfreight distribution network after the cessation of Speedlink in 1991 and subsequent collapse of TigerRail operations.
A Taunton Cider Spokeswoman said: ‘The facilities offered since 1992 gave us reduced service levels with less flexibility and financial efficiency.
As a result, Taunton Cider has decided to return to 100% road transport.
‘There was one train a week, we did not have the flexibility we had with Speedlink — it was not economical.’
The decision is regretted, particularly by Fitzgerald Lighting whose three year  link with the Bodmin and Wenford Railway had been a major boost to the embryonic steam line's fortunes.
The Fitzgerald decision was prompted by Taunton Cider's move to end the service as Fitzgerald traffic loads are added to the cider company's own 20-vehicle train.
Fitzgerald chief and B&WR Finance Director Peter Fitzgerald said: ‘BR cannot run traffic with less than a full train.
As we have only four wagons, we cannot by carried by railway without Taunton Cider.
‘It is with much regret and not a little sadness that we will witness the last departure of wagons from our sidings later this month.
‘Despite some difficulties and major changes, it has proved reliable and cost effective in the main.’
Taunton Cider will cease operations quietly on January 1, but Fitzgerald Lighting will mark the end of their connection on December 1 in style with a steam hauled run by the last train from Walker Lines Industrial Estate to Bodmin Parkway.
It's not all bad news, however, as Taunton Cider are ‘mothballing’ their rail connection and Fitzgerald Lighting intend to ‘actively pursue any realistic method of returning traffic to rail in the future.’
Both companies are known to be pro-rail and hopeful of putting their goods back in the tracks  if a more  realistic service can be offered in the future.
Certainly, both connections to the BR network are valuable to the Bodmin and Wenford and West Somerset Railways.
For example, the WSR now sees regular through trains via the Norton Fitzwarren link, and is expecting an HST charter across on Saturday January 16.
The Bodmin Parkway connection had been used regularly by main line diesels visiting the B&WR for special gala events, including locos from the West Somerset Railway owned by the D&EG.
WSR Managing Director Mark Smith commented: ‘We note the changes Taunton Cider have had to make, but we have always enjoyed a very amicable and successful working relationship with them.
There is no reason for that to change and we fully understand their decision.’
BR have answered the inflexibility criticism with claims of unprofitability despite various Government exhortations encouraging companies to move freight by rail.
It's a sad end for this sort of freight traffic which also provides important links with two of the South West's important steam lines.
Heritage Awards: all the winners
SOME OF the great and good of the British railway preservation movement gathered in London on November 24 at the 12th annual Railway Heritage Awards, writes DICK WOOD.
Twenty-three different awards were presented by HRH The Duke of Gloucester to practical preservationists across the country, including British Rail, private railways and groups, and even two private home owners!
The competition is run by the Association of Railway Preservation Societies and primarily sponsored by publisher Ian Allan.
This year's top awards went to the Tramway Museum Society at Crich, Derbyshire for their work on the rebuilt cast iron span of the Bowes-Lyon bridge, the British Rail Property Board and Craft-Kind Ltd for the Cathedral Arches pub and restaurant conversion in Salford.
Other awards were as follows:
FIRST CLASS AWARDS (both sectors)
Die-cast metal plaques presented by ARPS and in the Volunteer Sector a cheque for £750 presented by Ian Allan Ltd.
Special Award to Fencote Station, Herefordshire (converted and restored into a home by its owner,)
RAILWAY TRUST HERITAGE AWARD for the best restored listed structure of special historic interest in the Public and Commercial Sector, receiving RHT assistance, Inverurie Station (Internal Refurbishment; Grampian (ScotRail)).
They won a gilded die-case plaque presented by the Railway Heritage Trust.
Special commendations were received by:
RAILWAY WORLD PRIZE for best incomplete Volunteer Sector project showing the most promise:.
They received a metal plaque and a grant of £1,000 presented by Railway World Magazine.
There was a Special Commendation for Stogumber Station, Somerset (West Somerset Railway).
Framed certificate.
WORTH VALLEY RAILWAY AWARD for best new project carried out solely by volunteers:.
WESTINGHOUSE BEST RESTORED SIGNALLING AWARD for best restored signal box and/or signalling installation,.
They won a die-cast metal plaque and a cheque for £250 presented by Westinghouse Brake & Signal Ltd.
There were commendations for:
INDEPENDENT RAILWAY OF THE YEAR AWARDS:
At the presentation by HRH The Duke of Gloucester GCVO in addition to the Ian Allan Railway Heritage Awards and those made by the Railway Heritage Trust Westinghouse Signal Limited and others, the Association of Railway Preservation Societies Limited (ARPS) made its own presentation of the Peter Mainsty Award for Excellence to British Rail for their imaginative restructuring, refurbishment and revival of Liverpool Street Station.
The award was made in memory of the late Captain Peter Mainsty MBE DSC (RN Retired), formerly chairman and vice president of ARPS who dies in June this year.
Rawtenstall Stationmaster Dave Russell receives the East Lancashire Railway's heritage award plaque from the Mayor and Mayoress of Rossendale Councillor David Easton and Judith Bradbury.
ARPS chief starts the countdown
WITH NEW legislation due on the statute books in the New Year  the time available to make application for Light Railway Orders is running out.
David Morgan, the chairman of the A.R.P.S. has emphasised the need for speedy applications to be made.
He said: ‘I should also be grateful if you would inform your readers that the Department of Transport have now agreed to reduce the fees for the new Transport & Works Act Orders which replace the old Light Railway Orders with effect from January 1 and the fees which will be payable in respect of applications where no compulsory purchase order is being sought will now be £750 for the first hectare (or part of one hectare) and thereafter £250 for each 0.5 hectare (or part thereof) with a maximum fee of £80,000.
‘Applications for Light Railway Orders will continue to be charged at the flat fee of £50 until the end of this month.
Organisations seeking to avail themselves of this opportunity need to catch a high speed train pretty quickly!’