

Sir Nigel on the S.V.R.
By JOHN GOSLING
THE Severn Valley Railway have announced that they have obtained the prestigious A4 Pacific 4498 ‘Sir Nigel Gresley’ for their forthcoming Autumn Steam Gala weekend on Wednesday, September 23rd, and in addition to the main Gala Days, will work service trains between Bridgnorth and Kidderminster Town on Sundays October 4/11/18/25th.
If demand is sufficient, the engine may also be utilized on other occasions during its period of stay on the Railway.
The ex-LNER Pacific is scheduled to leave the SVR on Monday, November 2nd for other duties.
Farewell Scotsman
By RICHARD BEAN
‘FLYING SCOTSMAN’, undoubtedly Britain's most famous steam loco, won't return to mainline running until 1995 ‘at the earliest’ after it completes its three last British Rail assignments in October.
The striking apple green Gresley designed A3 Pacific loco sees its boiler ticket expire in the autumn after a hugely successful seven years which has reinstated steam — as a regular  site on national metals.
Mr Bernard Staite, boss of the consortium who operate the loco, commented: ‘From November No 4472 will embark on a year long tour of private railways after which she will have a major overhaul.
I cannot see ‘Flying Scotsman’ returning to the main line until at least 1995.
Flying Scotsman who will soon go into temporary retirement in action on the Ynys Mon Express.
‘These three trains really are the main line behind  what is probably the most famous steam locomotive in the world.’
TURN TO PAGE TWO
FROM FRONT PAGE
Saturday, October 17 sees the locomotive running a journey from Carnforth (its ‘mainline’ base is steam-town) to Sellafield and return, with the train starting and finishing in London.
 While on Wednesday, October 21 has 4472 on the return leg of a London to Sheffield itinerary the half term special ‘South Yorkshireman.’
The final trip is on Sunday, October 25 when ‘Flying Scotsman’ performs on the classic ‘William Shakespeare Express,’from London (Ealing Broadway) to Stratford-upon-Avon and back.
All three trains are part of the ‘Nostalgic Steam Days Out’ banners of steam-haulage on the main line, jointly sponsored by Flying Scotsman Services Limited, InterCity and the steam Locomotive Operators Association.
FSS technical staff know of no mechanical problems which could complicate Scotsman's rebuild.
‘The truth of the matter is that until we start to strip her down we don't know what we will find, nobody ever does,’ commented Mr John Leech.
‘When they started stripping the Duchess of Hamilton they started to find so many things that they virtually wished they had never started!
‘But as far as we know, she is still mechanically fine and she has still got some running life which is why she will be touring the preserved railways.’
No 4472's insurance certificate granted her a 10-year ticket for her boiler (ratified with an MOT style test every six months) but only seven years of that covers main line running.
ARPS consider White Paper
FOLLOWING the passing earlier this year of the Transport & Works Act 1992, the Government are now completing preparation of detailed regulations for the new system of orders for new railway works which will replace both the old system operated under the Light Railway Acts and the former Private Bill procedure for larger scale works.
The ARPS has already responded to the dramatic increases in the costs of obtaining an order for new works under the new system which were due to come into force from September 1st.
These fees included a charge of at least £2,500 which increased on a scale related to the length of the proposed railway, to anything up to £75,000 and also included the cost for holding any public inquiry that was deemed necessary.
LODGED
A detailed study of the White Paper proposals is being made by the ARPS Legislation Committee and also by a special Privatisation Sub-Committee set up by the Association of Independent Railways.
The aim is that these discussions will lead to action being taken by the newly formed Railway Clearing House which consists of members from both organisations.
An encouraging development is that the opportunity has been given for a submission to be made in early autumn on behalf of the preserved railway movement to the House of Commons Select Committee which will be dealing with the Government's privatisation proposals.
A written submission has to be lodged at the beginning of October with oral hearings by the Select Committee at a later date.
As a result, the programme for the ARPS Autumn Meeting at the Isle of Wight Railway on Saturday, October 3rd, has now been changed and the major subject under consideration will now be the White Paper.
It is expected that a draft of the proposed Railway Clearing House submission will have been completed prior to the meeting so as to form a basis for discussion.
WELSHPOOL GALA 1992 Pictures: JOHN FAIRCLOUGH
‘Superior’ heads ‘The Countess’as they drift downgrade to Llanfair Caereinion with their train from Welshpool.
Hunslet-built tank No. 14 eases its train for Llanfair Caereinion away from Castle Caereinion.
FR go back in time
THE MIDLAND Group of the  Ffestiniog Railway Society will be operating a special train on the Ffestiniog Railway in Porthmadog, North Wales on Sunday, October 4th.
The train will be the Ffestiniog's Vintage Train, made up of the oldest vehicles on the railway, some dating back to the 1860's.
The crew will be volunteers from the Midlands and a special headboard will be carried on the front of the locomotive, one of the Ffestiniog's unique double engines.
The Midland Group has been an active supporter of the railway since 1955, both practically and financially.
Regular working parties travel to North Wales to help run the Railway, participating in a variety of tasks from dry-stone walling to operating the trains.
Over the last four years the Midland Group have provided a crew for the Vintage Train on several occasions and for last September also handled their own marketing and ticket sales, as they are doing again for this October.
They consider themselves to have considerable expertise in operating trains, many of their crew being regular volunteers on the Railway and will dress in Victorian costume for these special events in an endeavour to recreate the period of the Vintage Train.
Steven Holmes, a pupil of Handsworth Grammar School in Birmingham, designed and painted a headboard which we carry on the front of the locomotive.
In October, the Midland Group ‘Vintage Special’ will be a return trip to Blaenau Ffestiniog, departing Harbour Station, Porthmadog at 11.35 and returning for 16.30.
The five spent on the line is to enable them to have three photographic run-pasts where passengers will be given the opportunity to  disembark , stand clear of the track and photograph the train at some remote and picturesque location.
This is a privilege not available to travellers on normal ‘service’ trains.
In addition, the train will be parked on Dduallt siding for lunch to enable their passengers to watch the service train climb Britain's only spiral.
Tickets for the ‘Vintage Special’ are £7 Third Class, £8 Buffet Car, £9 First Class and £10 Observation Car.
There is a £2 reduction for children and OAP's.
The crew of the train will be made up of the following people: Keith Dawson (organiser of ‘Vintage Train’);.
For further information contact:
THE KEIGHLEY & Worth Valley Railway started taking bookings for its Santa Special services on 1 September and by the close of business on Wednesday September 9th 40% of seats had been sold.
The Railway had only sold this number of seats by mid-October last year.
Santa Special trains travel the full  five miles of the line, customers can join trains at Keighley, Haworth or Oxenhope stations for a one-hour return steam train journey.
Santa trains are now run by every independent railway in Britain but were ‘invented’ by the KWVR in 1965.
In December of that year the KWVR ran Santa by Steam trains on a stretch of line in Haworth yard and attracted around 500 passengers to the Railway in the quiet winter months before the Railway re-opened — the rest is history.
This year the Railway has introduced a fully computerised reservation system to handle bookings for the 11,000 seats that are available.
A KWVR member and computer programmer has designed a sophisticated program that is cutting significantly the time taken to process bookings.
It prints personalised tickets for customers, seating plans and passenger details for train stewards and credit  card and cheque details which can be sent straight to the bank.
Taking a booking and issuing a personalised ticket now takes just one minute compared with up to 10 minutes using a manual system.
Credit card reservations can be made by calling Haworth Station between 1000 & 1600 weekdays and 1200 & 1700 at weekends.
28XX movements
IN MID SEPTEMBER, 28XX class No.3822 returns to the Great Western Society from the West Somerset Railway where it has been on loan since March 19th this year.
The heavy freight loco has been rostered to haul most of the W.S.R's heaviest trains, particularly during the summer peak services, running with smokebox facing Minehead.
During its stay on the North Somerset line 3822 took part in the large cavalcades of motive power staged as part of the Taunton 150 celebrations on July 4th and 5th, but will return to Didcot prior to the Autumn Steam Gala weekend of September 26th/27th.
Meanwhile on the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway, in the Cotswolds, the other preserved 28XX, No.2857, still has some time to run of its loan period.
Visitors wishing to ride behind this powerful loco should not delay too long however as the G.W.R.'s operating season finishes on October 11th.
Santa services will be available in December.
During its visit 2857 has provided the primary motive power on the railway.
Television film crews have twice requested the engine for their programs including Granada TV for an episode of Sherlock Holmes.
2857 will operate on most Sunday services and will star in G.W.R.'s end of season steam weekend on October 10th and 11th.
THE MODEL PIONEER!
By MERVYN TURVEY
Birth of a new loco from Kingsmere Works
TO be at the birth of Britain's newest steam locomotive must be impressive.
Actually when is one born?
Is it when i t has been built, or completed its testing or hauls its first train?
Jim Haylock on the Moors Valley Railway near Ringwood introduced me to his latest machine last week.
It is a narrow gauge Pacific 4-6-2 locomotive designed to operate on the railway and way built in the workshops at Kingsmere, the headquarters of the railway in the Moors Valley Country Park.
It was on display for the day and was being steamed so that the boiler inspectors could check it out and issue the necessary documents confirming that it was tested and available to work.
It went straight into operation during this afternoon.
The workshops at Kingsmere carry out all maintenance work on the railway as well as building its rolling stock.
If you want to build a railway then Jim and his team will consider manufacturing the rolling stock for you.
Only the day before a new coach had been delivered to Clive Upton at the Eastleigh Lakeside Railway.
This new locomotive was an impressive machine gleaming in its blue livery not quite complete with lining but ready for action.
Jim was keen to impress that it was not a scale model of anything but a real small narrow gauge locomotive in its own right.
Design work was undertaken more or less in his head with little or no paper drawings.
He reckoned that he had built so many locomotives in his time that it was no longer necessary to undertake normal design work.
The boiler is 120lbs per square inch pressure with two cylinders of three and a half inch diameter, four and a quarter stroke working on driving wheels which are ten inch.
It is all outside frame with vacuum brakes on the rear bogie.
It has a single lubricator for the cylinders and a single safety valve which divides out like a Drummond safety valve on top of the dome.
It is top feed to the boiler and proves to be a very efficient design.
The tender carries 80 gallons of water and a hundred weight and a half of coal.
I was interested in discovering whether Jim was exploring developments in efficiency with steam powered machines.
He declared that the boiler was a straightforward Stephenson saturated design which couldn't really be improved.
However, the loco does have Baker valve gear which is rare in this country but very popular in the USA.
There are sealed for life bearings all over the valve gear and coupling rods.
This means that it is not necessary to oil them regularly.
This results in improved maintenance.
Jim described it as a ‘user friendly’ locomotive, it is possible to keep on using the machine continuously without having to take it out of service for maintenance.
He considers that it is not necessary to consider the development of combustion technology in this scale because only relatively small quantities of fuel are used on comparison with the number of passenger journeys.
The new locomotive is No. 12 in the fleet at the Moors Valley Railway and in the publicity leaflet it is suggested that it will be named ‘Pioneer’.
During the visit a glimpse of the future Garratt type locomotive was obtained.
That will prove to be another interesting machine to review.
IF you are down in the South West sector of the region over the next weekend the Swanage Railway is having a Steam Gala weekend.
Every effort is being made to have six steam locomotives working during the two days.
The date for the reopening of the Public Enquiry into the future of the Swanage Railway has been declared and will be on October 12 in Swanage Town Hall.
A successful conclusion to this will enable the railway to obtain a Light Railway Order and extend services to Nordon, west of Corfe Castle where the foundations of a park and ride facility are beginning to appear.
If you are visiting the railway for the gala weekend it will be possible to let the train take the strain to Corfe Castle, so to speak, by using the bus which operates from Harman's Cross on Sunday.
This facility has been available for most of the season running on certain days of the week using a vintage bus supplied by the Wilts and Dorset Bus Company.
The bus has quite a history of service and is described in the Autumn 1992 edition of the ‘Swanage Railway News’, just published and obtainable from the bookshop at Swanage Station.
That same magazine carries front and back cover photographs from the author of this column.
HOWEVER, if you are down in the South East corner, the Kent and East Sussex Railway invites you to return to the ‘Good Old Days’ on Saturday and Sunday at Tenterden Station from 10am to 5pm.
There will be a wealth of attractions in the form of traction engines, vintage cars, Punch and Judy and many more.
Pop Larkin's Rolls Royce from the ‘Darling Buds Of May’ TV series is another attraction and it is possible to travel in Ma Larkin's carriage.
Trains will operate on the 14 mile track to Northiam.
The ‘Wealden Pullman’ will be in service and Terrier Tank No. 10 ‘Sutton’with 1556 carrying authentic 1930's livery will be in charge for the two day event.
STEAM returned to Main Line operations over the Bank Holiday weekend between Aylesbury and Quainton Road.
It returned to the main line proper between Waterloo and Bournemouth last weekend with a seat sell out operation in support of‘Taw Valley’.
The next main line run down here in the south will see another Waterloo to Exeter operation on Sunday, October 18.
The train will be diesel hauled both ways  between Waterloo and Andover.
It will stop at Clapham Junction (09.20), Woking (09.40) and Basingstoke (10.05) en route to Andover.
‘King Arthur’ Class 4-6-0 No. 30777 ‘Sir Lamiel’will head the train to Exeter leaving Andover at 10.35 and arriving Exeter at 14.00.
The return from Exeter departs at 15.00 and will be headed by West Country Pacific ‘Taw Valley’ arriving Andover at 18.05.
Departure from Waterloo is 09.10 with an expected return arrival at 20.10.
Fares are £90 Premier Class, £55 First Class and £45 Standard Class with a £5 reduction for juniors etc.
Bookings should be made through Flying Scotsman Services.
FINALLY, in anticipation of the Eastleigh Open Day on September 27, it can be confirmed that the M7 tank from the Swanage Railway will be attending with S15 828 from the Eastleigh Railway Preservation Society.
At the time of writing negotiations are taking place for another Drummond locomotive to be at the show.
It will be confirmed in this column as soon as possible.
The new narrow gauge Pacific 4-6-2 locomotive outside the workshops at Kingsmere, the headquarters of the Moor Valley Railway.
The new locomotive is No. 12 in the fleet of the Moors Valley Railway and in the publicity leaflet it is suggested that it will be named ‘Pioneer’.
The vintage bus supplied by the Wilts and Dorset Bus Company.
Nicknamed ‘Nellie’ the 1961 ‘Lodekka’was built by Bristol Commercial Vehicle.
After considerable travels the bus is now based on the Isle of Purbeck.
It is seen at Harman's Cross waiting for passengers to arrive off the train to take them on to Corfe Castle.
The project is a good example of co-operation between a preserved railway and a local bus company.
LEICESTER OPEN DAY Words and pictures: PETER HILL
An impressive line up of preserved diesel power at Leicester BR open day.
From left,
Preserved steam and diesel rubbed shoulders at Leicester.
Class 40, D212 Aureol is pictured with ex LMS Jubilee ‘Bahamas’.
Immaculate Class 25, D7523 in two tone green livery stands next to English Electric built Class 50, 50043 both ex BR  locos now in private preservation.
SOAKING UP THE DAY OUT
IN TORRENTIAL rain Leicester BR diesel depot had its first open day last Sunday.
It  superseded the very successful Coalville open  days which have raised  thousands of pounds for charity over the last nine years.
Coalville depot closed its doors last year and work was transferred to Leicester.
BR staff and preservationists pulled out all the stops to have everything right on the day even though they were hampered by high winds and heavy rain.
The event was well attended with people queuing at 9.00 am despite the atrocious conditions.
The Open Day Committee hope to be able to present a substantial cheque to local charities later in the year.
The latest modern BR traction was on view and included the Class 60 freight workhorse alongside Class 90 electric  locos .
Many preserved diesel engines were on view including Class 20/25/40/45/47/50 and 55.
The sole surviving Metrovic D5705, withdrawn after just 10 years service on BR, was stabled between former ECML Deltics D9016 and D9000.
Crewe Heritage Centre's former Class 81, E3003 in its original ‘Electric Blue’ livery was a popular attraction.
Preserved steam was also represented with former LSM ‘Jubilee’ 45596 Bahamas.
FOCUS ON THE AYLESBURY CENTURY EXPRESS Words and pictures: PHILIP MARSH
AN ‘ACE’ DAY OUT FOR QUAINTON STEAM
Ex-GWR 0-6-0PT 9466 on a run-past at Quainton Road.
King Edward I hauls a rake of Network South East coaches at Quainton Road.
THE FIRST regular steam-hauled passenger services over the old Great Central Route between Quainton Road and Aylesbury for over a quarter of a century were run on August 30.
Regrettably, most of the times the ACE arrived at Quainton, the rain poured and the wind blew but about 1,500 people still travelled on the train.
Not a drop of rain fell on Bank Holiday Monday and about 2,200 people travelled on the ACE.
One train, the 15.4 hrs from Quainton and the 16.15 hrs from Aylesbury on Sunday was cancelled on Sunday for several reasons while the gauging run for King Edward was only carried out an hour prior to departure from Aylesbury of the first ACE.
Bucks Railway Centre staff could fairly be described as confused when Ex-GWR 6024 arrived at 08.55 hrs at Quainton without any coaches on Sunday morning.
After watering, 6024 returned to Aylesbury  and,the first ACE departed about 10 minutes late.
Both 5029 and 6024 needed water at Quainton during the day, further time was lost and so it was decided to cancel one round trip.
Sunday saw guests from Network SouthEast, sponsors of the Buckingham Railway Centre, entertained in the  centre's Victorian-built dining car which was once part of the Royal Train.
Several prospective schemes were suggested and will be worked on over the winter.
To use a well known phrase, ‘unusual motive power’ may well be featured again next year on services from Quainton Road on the BR main line.
Further information will be made available nearer the time.
Phil Marsh, the Buckinghamshire Railway  Centre's Publicity Officer, managed two live radio broadcasts, one from No. 6024 on Sunday morning and met many media people who covered the event.
A highlight of the weekend was arranged by Keith Lobley, the Buckinghamshire Railway  Centre's Open Day Manager and Network SouthEast, in the form of an unadvertised excursion to Princes Risborough and back from Quainton Road.
This arrived back at Quainton at 21.00 hrs after a wonderful run.
The other engines in steam were 4-4-0 Metropolitan Railway No. 1, Pannier 9466, Peckett 2087 and Susan the Sentinel.
Several runpasts were arranged with 9466 and the ACE to recreate a GWR main line and branch line flavour.
Every train ran to time on Monday with the exception of a slight delay to the last train of the day from Quainton.
This was due to the Castle failing and the need for watering.
This explains the storming exit from  Quainton at 1800 hrs with much whistling and cap waving from the footplate.
A Great Western saloon was positioned at Aylesbury but, in spite of efforts from many people, could not be used.
A special service to Great Missenden on Monday afternoon was cancelled due to operating difficulties and members of Aylesbury Vale District Council, including the Mayor, travelled in Victorian costume to Quainton and back at lunchtime.
Nick Illesley, the Network South East manager with whom the Bucks Railway Centre worked for this weekend, also dressed in top hat and tails for the day.
Judge Verney, the grandson of the Great Central Mr. Verney fame travelled on the train and made a speech at Aylesbury prior to cutting a ceremonial cake at the Station.
Many visitors to Quainton Road expressed surprise at the amount of change that has taken place at the Centre over the last few years.
It was also mentioned that main line steam trains fitted better at Quainton Road than at today's BR stations because Quainton exemplifies a country station from the steam era.
The weekend was all  too much for Peckett 2087 which had virtually failed by the end of Monday, but managed to carry out  its demonstration goods train duties on both days.
On Monday, Phil Marsh used the train as a taxi to ferry the media to lineside locations for photographic purposes.
Several deputy editors and the press had footplate rides.
One Buckinghamshire Railway Centre Travelling Ticket Inspector put a passenger onto the London train at Aylesbury after travelling to Quainton in error.
A brick was thrown at the ACE on Monday from a bridge outside Aylesbury, but hit  6024's tender and bounced onto the roof of the first coach.
Nobody was hurt and luckily a picture was taken of the offender who is being actively sought.
Monday morning curiously saw only engines built in Swindon and Bristol working at Quainton and on the ACE.
There were three ex-GWR locos and the Peckett.
The  Centre's miniature railway was swamped with customers over the whole weekend.
It featured more than five locos in steam at one time or another.
The Centre refreshment vehicles had virtually sold out by Monday evening and record receipts were taken on Sunday and then Monday.
Phil Marsh would like to record thanks to Steve Underhill and the 6024 Society for all their help while not forgetting the vast amount of work done by Keith Lobley and Nick Illesley.
2087 tags a demonstration freight train viewed from Quainton's signal box.
Peckett 0-4-0ST 2087 on shed
Metropolitana Railway No 1 with headboard and Ex-GWR 9466 on shed at Quainton.
Ministers ‘right-away’ for Westrail By JAMES SCANNELL
IN AUGUST The Irish Minister for Transport, Mrs. Marie Geoghegan T.D., launched the Westrail service from Galway to Athenry, operating on Saturdays until mid-September.
Due to the down-grading of the Athenry-Tuam-Claremorris line because of engineering possession earlier in the year.
Westrail sought permission to operate over the Galway-Athenry section and this request was approved.
In the long term it is intended to operate over the Athenry-Tuam section as soon as it has been cleared for service trains.
Servicing of steam locomotive No. 90 was carried out at the Severn Valley Railway Works at Bridgenorth where a complete new firebox and boiler was made and then shipped to Galway for installation.
Westrail wish to extend special thanks to Alun Rees, C.M.E. of the Severn Valley Railway and his team of craftsmen who worked unstintingly to complete the new boiler in time for this year's season.
Passenger rolling stock has also been upgraded with the installation of new electrical system and P.A. system and the carpeting of carriage aisles.
Back-up in the event of locomotive failure is provided by the Maybach diesel E428. which is owned by Westrail.
On board the inaugural train were the Mayor of Galway, Padraic McCormac, Galway County Council chairman Michael Mullins and Irish Rail Managing Director David Waters.
Passengers included 47 descendants of Meiler de Bermingham who built Athenry Castle in 1235.
On arrival in Athenry  eight miles from Galway City, the train was greeted by the English steel band ‘Listen to the Noise’ who were performing at the Athenry Festival after which the party was formally welcomed by the acting chairman of the Athenry Community Council, Fr.
Michael O'Malley.
President of Westrail, Professor T.P.O'Neill described the locomotive as ‘a mobile interpretive centre.’
Being environmentally conscious, smokeless steam coal from Wales was imported thus ensuring that Westrail will cause the least possible impact on the environment.
Such is the popularity of the Railway Preservation Society of Ireland ‘Sea Breeze’ one-day steam train excursions from Dublin Connolly to Wexford, that the August trip was sold out about a week in advance of departure.
Passengers were brought to Wrexford town where they could spend several hours sightseeing or take part in an optional trip from Wexford to Rosslare and back.
On September 13th the Society will operate three ‘Maynooth Shuttles’ from Dublin Connolly to  Maynooth , Co.
Kildare and return and booking at the moment is reported to be  brisk .
Kinlet Hall has moved on By Steve Standbridge
ON Wednesday, August 26 ex-GWR Hall Class 4-6-0 No 4936 ‘Kinlet Hall’ left the Toddington, headquarters of the Gloucestershire Warwickshire Railway, for pastures new on the Llangollen Railway.
The engine was built at Swindon in 1929 and worked all over the Great Western before withdrawal in 1964.
RESCUE
After rescue from Barry, the loco moved to Matlock, Derbyshire where some preparatory restoration took place.
In 1985 it was decided to move the engine to a Great Western line and so Kinlet Hall arrived at Toddington.
Since then little work has been done on the loco by the small group of owners who like everyone else have been hampered by lack of funds.
THE Exmoor Steam Railway, between Blackmore Gate and Brayford in the heart of Exmoor, gives the opportunity to ride behind 12¼″ gauge steam locos over a mile of track with superb moorland views.
The centre is family run and has only recently come onto the steam map.
The first track was laid in 1990 and the visitor can see a fascinating photographic display of the line's development.
The railway is open on Sundays throughout the year, Saturdays in the Spring and daily during the summer months and boasts three locomotives Lorna Doone, Yeo Valley and Exe Valley.
The station platform is under cover adjoining the large dining area and shop.
Also on show are a steam roller and vintage farm vehicle.
POND
Outside the visitor can stroll near the track or relax by the pond and picnic area while the younger members of the family can enjoy a large adventure playground.
The railway holds a steam gala event in May when all locos are in steam together with traction engines and steam rollers, while Santa Specials operate in December.
Steam and Exmoor are an enjoyable combination.
No 4936 Kinlet Hall at Toddington during 1992 — it has now left for the Llangollen Railway.
Loco Lorna Doone giving rides on the Exmoor Steam Railway.
Well done folks!
MUCH has been said in the Steam Railway press about the financial and management trouble of the ‘Mid-Hants Railway’, some of it even forecasting the forthcoming demise of the Watercress Line.
On the Sunday of the recent Bank Holiday weekend, I took my young grandson to Alresford, in the hope that something would be running!
To my great delight, I found that not only were trains running, but to outward signs at least, the Mid-Hants does not have any problems.
It is with the greatest pleasure that I wish to throw a large bouquet in their direction.
A three-train timetable was being operated, with ‘Swanage’, the ‘S15’, and BR Standard four Mogul working and in fine fettle.
The stations and stock were in immaculate condition, and all the staff we met were welcoming and more than polite.
I was particularly struck by the fine, and nostalgic sight of ‘Swanage’ at the head of an all SR green set, offered as ‘The Countryman’.
The purist may object to Mark II BR coaches in SR green, but for the general public, this would be unnoticeable, and presented a clean and coherent look to the whole train.
Well done, ‘Mid-Hants’, and I look forward to an early return visit.
American Express
AS the busy part of the tourist season draws to a close, the Ravenglass and Eskdale  narrow-gauge railway on Cumbria's west coast is once again preparing to receive a visiting locomotive to its tracks.
Over the years the exchange of engines between the 15″ gauge railways in England has become quite a feature of the little railway scene.
Locomotives which have operated at  Ravenglass have included steam engines from Steamtown, Carnforth, the Lakeside Railway at Southport, Lightwater Valley at Ripon, the Fairbourne Railway in Wales and, quite regularly, from the Romney, Hythe and Dymchurch Railway in Kent.
Ravenglass engines have been seen at Romney, Steamtown and at the National Garden Festivals at Liverpool and Gateshead.
REPEAT
On September 19 and 20, Erich Thomsen, who runs the Redwood Valley Railway near Berkeley, California, is making a repeat visit to Ravenglass with a second loco from his line.
This one is a truly beautiful model of an American ‘ten-wheeler’ called ‘Sequoia’which has been completed recently in his railway's own workshops.
On the Saturday and Sunday it is intended that ‘Sequoia’ will be operating special trains on the Eskdale line — along with‘Synolda’, the Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway's 1912 Bassett-Lowke engine.
‘Flower of the Forest’, an unusual vertical-boilered engine, built at Ravenglass for a garden railway in Arbroath, should also be on parade.
Erich Thomsen says that his ‘1988 visit is remembered so fondly’ and the staff at Ravenglass will be doing their best to make sure that this is another memorable weekend.
From Ravenglass ‘Sequoia’ and her caboose will be travelling by road to Aylsham in Norfolk to run on the Bure Valley Railway.
She will share the wagon with one of the Ravenglass locos, ‘Bonnie Dundee’, both engines attending the Steam Gala there on October 3 and 4.
American ten-wheeler ‘Sequoia’ which will visit the Ravenglass and Eskdale Railway.
EAST LANCS' CRAB FOR CHRISTMAS?
THE East Lancashire Railway know exactly what present they want Santa to winch off the back of his low-loader this Christmas.
It's an ex-London Midland and Scottish Railway Class 5P4F 2-6-0 No. 42765 which was born between the wars at Crewe Works in 1927.
Andrew Wilson's privately owned ‘Crab’— whose year-long restoration should be completed by December — is still ‘line-less’ at the time of going to press.
Although negotiations continue to take it permanently to Bury Bolton Street headquarters of the East Lancashire Railway.
New life is being breathed back into the Crab at Ian Riley Engineering's Kirkby base.
ADVANCED
‘We are certainly at an advanced stage of negotiations,’ admitted Mr. Riley, who is Chief Mechanical Engineer with the ELR.
‘But nothing is signed and sealed yet.’
No. 42765's boiler is now ready for inspection by British Rail, which will then see the re-tube.
Stays and patch screws have been checked and defective examples replaced, new wash out plugs have been tapped and fitted and the fire-box tapped out to welcome this flue.
The chassis has now been checked and passed by British Rail's Chief Mechanical Inspector Mr. Brian Penny.
East Lancs spokesman Mr. Graham Vevers commented: ‘Many people seem to think that it's already a foregone conclusion that it will come here.
I wish it was quite so simple but it would certainly be a boost for us.’