

News
I don't believe in Father Christmas
One has to feel sorry for Peter Brooke, Britain's Secretary of State for National Heritage.
There is a highly respected politician who has done honourable service in that most sobering of posts, the Northern Ireland Office, and now he is expected to play Father Christmas, with a lovely sack of surprise goodies to dispense to good children.
The goodies, of course, are the potential benefits of the National Lottery, the introduction of which is now official government policy.
This wonderful device is supposed to do great things for Britain's arts and architectural heritage, among other good causes; it is to provide the jam on the plain bread and butter the Treasury says it will continue to provide.
Already the ‘What I want for Christmas’ letters are pouring into Mr Brooke, although the goodies (we don't know for certain what they will amount to — that would spoil the surprise — but if we are lucky they may amount to £36 million per sector) will not be dispensed for two years at least.
Why does one feel unease?
The scepticism is born out of two small signs over the last ten years.
In 1980 the National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF) was put on an independent footing, with what was then a large sum to spend on Britain's art and heritage.
All went well until 1985, when museum purchase grants were frozen at the level at which they have remained, the reasoning being that for anything really important, they could go to the NHMF.
This meant that museums not only became progressively poorer, but also less in control of their purchasing policies.
Then, only two months ago, Peter Brooke himself announced that they were to have no purchase grants as such, but that these were now merged with the vote which pays for running expenses.
The theory is that if museums save on salaries and paper clips they will have more money to spend on works of art; the reality is that they will almost certainly be saving on the works of art to make up for inadequate funding overall.
The National Lottery will be the enemy of proper planning in all areas; it will encourage short-term thinking, and it will be the perfect excuse for the Treasury to go in for the kind of sleight-of-hand just described.
Peter Brooke and his department deserve serious, consistent, conventional funding.
The National Lottery is a dangerous and frivolous distraction.
Exclusive to The Art Newspaper and Il Giornale dell'Arte
430 unknown drawings by Modigliani brought to light
Collected day by day, from 1907 to 1914, by his friend Paul Alexandre, during the artist's stay in Paris
The history of art rarely sees such an important discovery as this group of works presented here (see pp.16–18).
They are exceptional in their quality, their number and the personality of the artist who executed them.
At a stroke our artistic patrimony has been increased by a treasure which is about to go on display after being unseen for seventy years.
It seems providential at a time when good news and dreams are in short supply: 430 unknown drawings by Amedeo Modigliani from his eight crucial years in Paris (1906–14), which will be published by Noel Alexandre in September.
The art history books mention, but under-estimate, the role of the person who was daily by the side of the artist while he was in France: the doctor Paul Alexandre.
This physician, friend of art and artists, established and maintained a close and trusting relationship with the painter, visited him every day, bought his drawings as soon as they were finished, shared his daily life, his friendships, his moods and experiences.
He also collected documents which now give us information and eye witness accounts of the artist that transform the traditional view of him.
Dr Paul Alexandre died in 1968 without having been able to write the book he would have liked to dedicate to Modigliani.
One of his sons, Noel, a retired university lecturer, decided to sort out and study all the documents, including the stories which had been confided to him by his father, to whom he was very close.
He also gathered together nearly all the drawings formerly in his father's collection in order to present them to the public.
He has had the opportunity to reproduce 430 of the 500 drawings which originally constituted that collection and to mount a touring exhibition over three years: for the first, and probably only time therefore, they will all be seen together right across the world.
The programme is currently under discussion, but after the opening at Palazzo Grassi in Venice in September it will probably include the Royal Academy in London, the Museo Nacional Reina Sofia in Madrid, the Museum of Fine Art in Montreal, the Metropolitan Museum in New York or the National Gallery in Washington, two museums in France including Rouen museum, and one or two Japanese museums.
Legislation
Move to amend Britain's archaic law of Treasure Trove
British Museum backs Bill in House of Lords
A Bill has been proposed by the British Museum and Surrey Archaeological Society which will remove the anachronisms from the existing law of Treasure Trove which applies to finds of ancient gold and silver in England.
This law dates back to the Middle Ages, when it was a means of filling the royal coffers, and until now it has allowed the State (today the Treasury) to claim possession of valuable objects whose owners cannot be traced.
The new legislation, to be introduced to Parliament by Lord Perth as a private member's bill, will address three areas that have concerned archaeologists.
First is the inadequate definition of gold and silver, which leaves it up to the jury empanelled by the coroner, to whom the objects have been handed over, to decide if they are treasure or not.
The new bill suggests that coins containing 0.5% precious metal or over, and objects containing 5% or over, should be eligible to be classed as Treasure Trove.
Second, the need to establish that the items were concealed with ‘animus revertendi’(ie; with the intention of retrieving the objects), which is essential to a verdict of Treasure Trove, would be abolished.
At present the coroner's jury has to decide if the precious objects were buried with the dead, given to gods as a votive offering, or buried for safety to be dug up later.
Only in the third case can they be classed as Treasure Trove and therefore property of the State.
The important ninth-century Anglo-Saxon jewel found on a beach in Dorset in 1990 and sold at Sotheby's on 10 December (see p. 24) is a case in point.
Because it was deemed to have been lost in antiquity, the finder was allowed to keep it, although happily the British Museum was able to buy it at auction.
Again, in Roman and later times, deposits were often made in temple precincts with intent to recover them later, in the belief that hallowed ground would provide special protection; the distinction between these and votive deposits is often unclear.
The new Bill proposes that all gold and silver be Treasure Trove.
The third problem with the existing legislation is that it is confined to gold and silver only, giving archaeologists no control over accompanying objects in other materials which are often of equal archaeological importance.
The Bill proposes that hoards be kept intact and that the practise of paying the full market value of the objects to the finder should be extended to the entire hoard.
Failure to declare a find of treasure to a local coroner would carry a maximum one month jail sentence or a fine of up to £5000.
In addition, and in recognition of the difficult position of the landowner on whose land the find is made but who in law has no claim to any precious objects, trespassing in search of treasure would carry a maximum £5000 fine.
Richard Morris, Director for the Council for British Archaeology, welcomes the proposals: ‘In archaeological terms the emphasis on gold and silver does not make sense as archaeologists are just as interested in leather and wood’.
Isabel Boucher
Things one might have wished left unsaid
Jocelyn Stevens, Chairman of English Heritage, the government-funded body responsible for the architectural and archaeological patrimony, to The Independent on Sunday last month: ‘I don't care a fuck what you believe about me…
You can go and pee out of the window.
You are bothering me.
You are awful.’
Berlin
America gets to know Germany
An American Academy to open in Berlin: its mission, to research into the arts and humanities
With the approval of various congressional and academic national committees and the support of private sponsorship, the American Academy for the Humanities, Central European Institute, Berlin, will open in the autumn of 1994 as a centre for advanced research in German studies.
A member of the Council of Overseas Research Centers of the Smithsonian Institution, the Academy's mission will be to support research in the arts and humanities by American and Central European scholars and to become an important part of a new American presence in Europe.
The Academy will express American ideals in the arts and humanities: its research will interpret the culture, history and ongoing changes in Eastern Europe.
Framing the articles of incorporation for the non-profit foundation and its initial policies has been the responsibility of Dr Steven Mansbach, currently Associate Dean of the National Gallery of Art's Center for Advanced Studies in the Visual Arts.
Dean designate of the Academy in Berlin, Mansbach summarised the circumstances leading to the creation of the centre and its goals: ‘Despite four decades of close relations with the Federal Republic of Germany and cooperation in many academic fields, there is no American research institution in Germany or Austria, while academic contact with former East Germany and Eastern Europe is at a formative stage.
At this time of dramatic intellectual, political and social change, the American Academy will foster collaborative research and the exchange of scholarly information’.
Applicants to the Academy may apply from any area of the humanities.
Half the positions will be reserved for scholars from Eastern Europe and former member states of the Soviet Union.
Such reservation of positions for non-Americans is a divergence from the policies of the other United States' foreign academies.
Openness to all humanistic disciplines will also make the Berlin Academy a unique institution, as will its planned cooperation with research institutions in various Eastern and European centres.
Locating resources for the broad range of anticipated interests has brought about federation with various institutes and libraries in Berlin.
Often assumed to have been lost during World War II, East Berlin's historical research archives, like its art collections, have actually survived in remarkable completeness.
These archives were the basis for acquisitions which now rank Berlin as one of the world's foremost centres for research in humanities.
Rather than building new material and research collections, the Academy will coordinate access by its Fellows to these existing resources.
Buildings for the Academy's administration and housing have not yet been acquired, although a complex in Berlin-Dahlem is being considered.
Given the rise in Berlin property prices, choosing a site is as important as getting major funding.
Approval from appropriate federal and academic committees did not include a cheque, so Steven Mansbach anticipates support coming from corporations, foundations and private individuals.
The announcement of the American Academy in Berlin coincides with the opening of other significant German facilities in the States.
Harvard's Busch Reisinger Museum has inaugurated a new museum, designed by the New York firm of Gwathmey Siegal and Associates, for much expanded installation of its modern collections.
Director Peter Nesbit has also announced plans to renovate the original museum which will then house medieval and Renaissance collections.
Other centres for European and German Studies have been established at Georgetown University, and the University of California, Berkeley.
Offering courses of study on both graduate and undergraduate levels, the Centers enjoy direct sponsorship from the Republic of Germany.
At the opening of the Berkeley Center, German Chancellor Helmut Kohl noted, ‘Germany owes the recovery of its unity to the untiring commitments of America and its presidents for more than four decades’.
The American Academy in Berlin will be a legacy of those commitments.
Prague
New Czech tax law to encourage private sponsorship for the arts
An eagerly awaited new tax law that includes a provision for tax relief on personal and corporate donations to cultural, educational, scientific, sporting, religious and humanitarian institutions and events was introduced in the Czech and Slovak Republics on 1 January, the first time that such provisions have been made in Czechoslovakia since 1938.
The country's hard-pressed cultural and artistic institutions, who have seen their State subsidies drastically lose value in the new market economy, with declining ticket sales and intense competition from Western-style popular entertainment, hope that the new law will encourage private patronage of the arts.
Under its dispositions, an individual may deduct from his tax base the value of donations granted to, for example, a gallery, museum, opera house or theatre.
The minimum donation eligible for tax relief is 2,000 Crowns (£50; $80), approximately one week's average salary in Czechoslovakia.
A maximum of two per cent relief is allowed against his or her entire taxable income.
For companies, the minimum tax  deductible donation is 2,000 Crowns in any tax period, the maximum being ten per cent of total taxable income.
Mr Jan Sekera, director of Prague's Stredoceska Galerie, one of the city's leading contemporary galleries, said of the new tax law, ‘I'm afraid that there will be no great movement as the relief is limited to only two per cent.
Our only hope is sponsorship but even here I feel that most corporations would prefer investment.
Culture will come last on the list of charitable sponsorship.
I am not optimistic’.
Of the situation regarding museums, Mr Sekera explained, ‘Since 1989 state support has been nominally more or less the same after allowing for inflation.
However, from next year museums will have to pay tax and national insurance contributions on behalf of their staff, which was not applied previously.
This means that, whereas previously about fifty per cent of a museum's budget would go on staff costs, next year almost the entire budget — over ninety per cent— will go on wages and staff costs.
It is a critical situation’.
Government policy
Have a flutter for the arts and heritage
The Secretary of State presents the National Lottery Bill which may provide an extra £36 million in both areas by the end of 1994
Last month, Peter Brooke, Secretary of State for National Heritage, announced the National Lottery Bill.
He gave important, but merely verbal assurances that the proceeds from it for the arts, heritage, sport and charities would not substitute other government funds for these areas and that he expected the cash to begin flowing at the end of 1994.
Hundreds of applications have already been received by the Department from organisations which feel that they qualify for this largesse.
In the Bill, the lottery will be run by a single private sector body and offer a range of games.
Brooke stated that a ‘substantial part’ of its turnover would be devoted to ‘good causes’, but the Bill does not set out what proportion of the proceeds will be allocated respectively to prizes, to administration and to the said good causes.
Of the funds allocated to these, 20% will be awarded to the arts through the Arts Council; 20% to the national heritage through the National Heritage Memorial Fund (NHMF); 20% to the millennium projects through a new Millennium Commission; 20% to sport, and 20% to charities.
The Secretary of State may change the distributing bodies and alter the percentages for the five categories, but none is to receive less than 5%.
The powers of the NHMF trustees are to be enlarged to fund the construction, acquisition or improvement of buildings to house objects of outstanding heritage value.
The Millennium Commission, consisting of nine members appointed by the government, including two Ministers and the Leader of the Opposition, is being set up to consider projects to celebrate the year 2000.
The likely size of the turnover of the lottery is unknown.
Estimates vary from £1.5 billion to £4 billion, depending on how popular the lottery is.
This in turn depends on the price of the tickets, the size of the prizes and whether these are taxable or not, all details which are not laid down in the Bill.
Assuming proceeds of £1.5 billion, around 50% of the proceeds may go in prizes, as a smaller proportion would not make the lottery attractive enough.
Administrative costs are estimated at between 14% and 18%.
It is likely that a turnover tax will be levied on the proceeds, but a tax on winnings, or split between the two is not ruled out.
It is widely thought that a turnover tax may range from between 15% and 20%.
On these assumptions, the lottery will bring between £36 million and £63 million a year to each of the above five categories.
Given these areas of uncertainty, the Bill is expected to be fought over vigorously in Parliament, where its opponents will be the anti-gambling lobby and the lobby for the football pools, which feel seriously threatened by its introduction.
Both are well represented.
Loans for art
In 1988, Northern Arts, the regional arts board for Cleveland, Cumbria, Durham, Northumberland and Tyne & Wear devised an enterprising scheme to provide interest-free loans to commission and purchase new works of art.
Now the limit available to lend has been raised to £2,000, repayable over twelve months (with a 25% deposit).
The limitation on the scheme is that the works must come from galleries or artists operating within the region covered by Northern Arts's territory.
A slide index of artists' work is available to help the potential purchaser.
New York
Enter the craft police
Federal law seeks to protect American Indian artists, but not all Indians are federally-recognised Indians
American Indian crafts and works of art are an $800 million-a-year business in the United States.
Ever since the 1930s, when tourists in large numbers began visiting the American Southwest, counterfeit Indian artifacts have been part of that market.
The Japanese began shipping beaded belts to the US soon after World War II.
Under careful examination, moccasins, Navajo patterned rugs, and costumed kachina dolls often turn out to be woven or simply stamped out by factories in Taiwan or the Philippines.
Those imports are estimated at 20% of the Indian crafts trade.
Two years ago the United States Congress voted to outlaw this counterfeiting by passing the Indian Arts and Crafts Law of 1990.
The legislation mandates that imported or factory-made goods be identified as such and required that any objects offered for sale as ‘Indian’ must be accompanied by proof that their maker or makers are of Indian ancestry, i.e., members of a federally recognized tribe.
The law's supporters call it a victory for truth in advertising, which they predict will protect the market for authentic Indian crafts from cheap imported imitations.
They also say the legislation may help ancestral Indian weaving, jewellery, and design styles to survive — a surprisingly high amount of domestic US Indian crafts already looked like imitations of gift-shop baubles imported from overseas.
As with most legislation, however, economics lies beneath the new Indian Arts and Crafts Law.
Handicrafts are among the few activities that employ Indians on their reservations.
Today unemployment on those lands stands at around 90%.
About 60% of Indians in towns are out of work.
While the new law may succeed in exposing the burgeoning volume of ‘Indian theme’ objects coming to the US, in the fine arts it has sent some Indian artists on the warpath.
The Five Civilised Nations Museum in Muskogee, Oklahoma, that normally shows and sells Indian art, closed down an exhibition in 1991 when it found that at least a third of its ‘Indian’ artists had no tribal documentation.
One of those was the celebrated woodcarver Willard Stone, a full-blooded Cherokee who had never bothered to register with a tribe.
In San Francisco, the American Indian Contemporary Art Gallery cancelled a show by the sculptor Jimmy Durham, who likewise could offer no certification for the Cherokee ancestry he claimed.
Now that‘minority’ status has become an effective promotional tool in the visual arts, losing the legal right to label one's art as ‘Indian’can mean losing the chance to distinguish oneself in an overcrowded market.
Some of the responsibility for resolving these complications falls on the shoulders of the law's chief sponsor, Ben Nighthorse Campbell, a northern Cheyenne Jeweller from Colorado and the only Indian member of the United States Congress.
Campbell has no apologies about seeking to keep non-Indians from cashing in on what has now become an international mania for Indian objects.
The congressman's office recognises, however, that many Native Americans are unable to document their Indian ancestry.
Official documentation depends on a tribe's recognition by the United States government, and for tribes that never signed official peace treaties with Washington (and many did not), members of those tribes lack certificates of official Indian ancestry.
Already Congressman Campbell's office is considering alternative proof of ‘Indianness’.
One of those alternatives might be the ‘adoption’ of an artist by a recognised tribe.
While the law has not yet been enforced, individuals offering counterfeit Indian objects for sale now face fines of $250,000 and prison terms for first offences.
EC
The UK blocks VAT Directive on sales of works of art
‘It will drive the art market away from Europe’
1993 has arrived without the planned agreement between European Community members on Value Added Tax on sales of works of art, antiques and collector's items.
At the meeting last month of the Economic and Finance Council of Ministers, the UK opposed the Directive (a measure requiring the unanimity of all member States) on VAT on second-hand goods — which includes art.
It is not surprising that this controversial Directive has not met the 1993 deadline, which the UK, centre of the European art market, says will drive the trade to the US, Switzerland or elsewhere.
The EC proposes to tax imports from outside the EC by applying the reduced rate of tax to the full price, or, in the case of those countries like the UK and Denmark which do not have a reduced rate, the standard rate to 30% of the price.
Exports from the EC, on the other hand, would be exempt, which, the UK maintains, in the long run will leach works of art from the EC countries.
At present, the UK operates a margin scheme (ie; it applies tax only to the difference between the purchase and the sale value) and exempts from VAT imports of paintings and works of art created before 1 April 1973 and items older than one hundred years.
It argues that, even at a reduced rate, VAT on imports from outside the EC would seriously damage the London art market.
It is uncertain when this disagreement will be resolved, as the issue is unlikely to be discussed by the Council of Ministers at their next meeting on18 January.
News in brief Sidney Nolan, the Australian artist, died in London 27 November, aged seventy-five.
He is best known for his series of paintings, begun in 1946, which celebrated the life of the outlaw Ned Kelly, who appears with a huge square helmet on his head in the burning wastes of the outback; ‘Rousseau and sunlight’ was how Nolan characterised his own intentionally naive style.
Although he was the first artist to depict Australia in an original, Australian way, he was largely rejected by his own countrymen after 1955 when he came to live in England.
There he accumulated Establishment honours: a knighthood, then the Order of Merit, and, in 1991, fellowship of the Royal Academy.
In the Eighties he designed productions of the operas Samson and Delilah, Die Entführung aus dem Serail and the ballet The Rite of Spring at Covent Garden.
The Hofburg in Vienna, residence for centuries of the Habsburg emperors, burnt on 27 November.
Fortunately it was possible to contain the flames so that only the Redoutensaale, relatively uninteresting eighteenth-century reception rooms remodelled in the nineteenth century and latterly used for conferences, were destroyed.
Dr Leithe-Jasper of the Kunsthistorisches Museum told The Art Newspaper, ‘If the fire had continued out of control for another ten minutes, we would have lost the marvellous frescoed library.
There was no damage to the contents of the imperial treasury, but behind the scenes, the water has destroyed the complex new security and the air conditioning systems, so it will be closed for a considerable time’.
The Austrian State will be footing the repair bill, estimated at $100 million; rumbles of protest of some of the regions are considered irrelevant.
In Britain, popular and media objections to the State paying for all the repairs to the fabric of Windsor castle, severely damaged by fire only a few days before the Hofburg, continued into December.
The official report said that the origin of the blaze was in the Queen's private chapel where a spotlight set fire to a curtain which had been drawn in front of it.
Controversy has now settled on the issue of whether the damaged parts should be reconstructed exactly as they were, or in a contemporary style.
The Tate Gallery's Turner prize, was awarded to Grenville Davey (b.1961), a generally unpopular choice, on 24 November.
The award, worth £20,000, is given to ‘a British artist under fifty for an outstanding exhibition or other presentation of their work in the twelve months preceding June 1992’ and was granted by a jury consisting of Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate Gallery, Marie-Claude-Beaud, director of the Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain, Robert Hopper, director of the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust, Sarah Kent, art critic of Time Out magazine and Howard Karshan, representative of the patrons of New Art.
Fellow nominees were Damien Hirst, David Tremlett and Alison Wilding.
Davey's submissions were huge, slightly differently shaped steel cylinders, one crushed; and an  elliptical table in steel covered in asphalt, with an opening at one end which revealed an interior with two shelves made of steel mesh.
Richard Dorment of the Daily Telegraph said: ‘What a pity a dealer did not take him aside and tell him the work he proposed to exhibit was unexhibitable…a visual boredom so total that no amount of metaphor or allusion can give it the kiss of life’.
The art historian Nigel Glendinning, in a letter to The Independent, said in defence: ‘It is no good pretending that there is a tradition of positive response to innovatory art (or innovatory anything) in this country.
Nearly half a century ago, J.M.W. Turner — he of the prize — was subject to the same patronising disparagement as Mr Davey today’.
Giuliano Briganti, art historian and critic, died suddenly 17 December in Rome, aged seventy-four.
He was, with Giulio Argan who predeceased him by a month, and Federico Zeri, perhaps the leading opinion-former in the Italian art world, known to the general public from his articles in L'Espresso and then, from 1977, La Repubblica.
Trained by Roberto Longhi, he took part in the 1950s, together with Longhi and Argan, in the legation for the restitution of works of art removed to Germany during the war.
His academic career included the Chair in Contemporary art history at the University of Siena and his bibliography ranges from Mannerism to the Metaphysical painters and Guttuso.
Outside Italy he was best known for La Maniera italiana (1962) and I Bamboccianti (1983).
Italian premier confirms the $1.2 billion voted for Venice will flow.
Despite the Italian economic crisis, Giuliano Amato promised 19 December at an interministerial meeting that not a lira would be cut from the special funds voted for the protection of Venice and that the money would become available immediately, none having been provided during 1992 (The Art Newspaper No. 23 Dec 1992, p. 3).
Top of the agenda are the booms across the mouths of the lagoon for when the tides are especially high, and for the canal dredging, which has been neglected for the last forty years.
Meanwhile, the former Socialist Foreign Secretary, the Venetian Gianni de Michelis, who tried hard to get Expo2000 sited in Venice, is under investigation for corruption.
Russia
Yeltsin supports top museums
The Hermitage, Kremlin, Tretyakov and Pushkin given privileged fiscal and financial status
This November Russian President Boris Yeltsin confirmed by special decree the special status of nineteen cultural institutions including the Hermitage in St Petersburg, and the Kremlin Museum, the Tretyakov Gallery, and the Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, all in Moscow.
This involves significant benefits with regard to financial and foreign trade operations, as well as financing.
In particular, major tax breaks are planned, including removing customs duties on transport of works of art for exchange exhibitions.
A small but at least regular amount of funding has also been allocated; for example, the Pushkin Museum is to receive 200 million roubles.
Academic staff at the museums will be paid the maximum wages for civil servants plus a fifty per cent supplement.
A number of Moscow museums on the list are also included in a municipal programme with extra finance for their rebuilding and running.
This new status may enable the museums to get themselves out of their present crisis situation and implement some plans.
This year, for example, the Pushkin Museum is intending to organise a number of important exhibitions: the first show of Botero's works to be held in Russia, and an exhibition of Kandinsky in Italy.
Unesco, despite Russia's $56 million debt to the organisation, is also intending to help a number of institutions including the Hermitage, the Russian State Library and the Bolshoi Theatre.
This was reported by Izvestiya in an interview with Unesco Director General Federico Mayor.
He announced that a security expert is to be sent to the Hermitage to collaborate on improved security.
Unesco's proposals for helping the National Library are also of interest: one suggestion is to connect the library's book stores by satellite with the information network in other countries.
In the meanwhile, the library's users are forced to bring their own electric lights to the reading room.
Art historians' conferences in 1993
Worrying about identity and display
5000 American pros to gather for C.A.A.
conference in Seattle 4–6 February and Britons meet at the Tate 2–4 April
The annual conference of the  Association of Art Historians will meet at the Tate Gallery this year from 2 to 4 April.
This year's conference title is ‘Identity and Display: artistic, national and sexual identities and aesthetic, anthropological and other notions of display’.
The convenors are Richard Humphreys of the Tate Gallery and David Bindman of University College, London.
The session titles will be as follows: ‘Art in Bourgeois Society c. 1790–1850’; ‘Authorship and Anonymity’; ‘Conservation and its Consequences’; ‘Conservation and its Discontents.
The Restoration of Historic Buildings in Europe’; ‘Displays of Identity.
Museums and the making of Histories’; ‘Documenting the Face?
The Portrait as Historical Artefact’; ‘Englishness and English Art; Genealogy of Beauty’; ‘Issues of Medieval Decorum; Metaphor of Power’; ‘Mythologies of the Artist’; ‘Representing Human Rights’; ‘Visualising Masculinities.
Interrogating the Codlings of the ‘Masculine' ‘; and ‘When is Art History?’
Coinciding with the conference is the annual Book Fair.
There will also be visits, panel discussions, gallery sessions, performance, film, video and other events on Sunday 4 April.
Meeting between 4 and 6 February will be the College Art Association of the United States, whose annual conference takes place at the Washington State Convention and Trade Centre, Pacific Northwest, Seattle.
Around 5,000 art historians, museum curators, critics and other visual arts professionals are expected to attend.
This year's keynote speaker is Robert Venturi, who designed the recently opened Seattle Art Museum.
The art history programme has taken as its theme ‘What has art history become as a cultural practice, and how?’
The studio programme will be ‘The Artist as world citizen’.
Topics will include ‘Connoisseurship and the idea of quality’; ‘Legends about art in the Middle Ages’; ‘The Renaissance as a historical concept’; ‘Classicism and Anticlassicism in Latin American art history’; ‘Recent documentary photography and photojournalism’; ‘The artist in technoculture’; ‘Homosexuality and the practice of art history’; ‘The new Soviet and East European art worlds’; ‘The artist's role in a collapsing society’; ‘Art and the environment’; ‘Artists working in the community’; ‘Native American and Pacific Island art history’; ‘Art history and publishing’; ‘Print media in the twenty-first century’; ‘Fluxus’; ‘Half a century of women in art history’.
For further information: Conference Program, College Art Association; 275 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001.
From Bacon, to Bacchus
This is one of Francis Bacon's last works, commissioned by Baroness Philippine de Rothschild, owner of Chateau Mouton Rothschild, for the labels of the 1990 vintage of this Premier Cru Classe, a very good year by all accounts.
Since 1945, a great painter has illustrated the label of Mouton Rothschild every year: Masson, Dali, Miró, Braque, Cocteau, Laurencin, Motherwell, Warhol, and Baselitz, among others.
Bacon is the second Briton, the other being Henry Moore.
Francis Bacon, well known for his capacity to drink nearly everyone under the table, left his friend John Edward, a son of a publican, £10 million in his will, which was published last month
Art Newspaper awards at the ‘Discerning Eye’
At the ‘Discerning Eye1992’ exhibition of contemporary art held in the Mall Galleries from 27 November to 6 December, The Art Newspaper was invited to single out four artists.
These were Denis Baxter for his delicate etching ‘Cannington Viaduct’, Miranda Ellis for the almost abstract and evocatively coloured watercolour ‘Blue morning kitchen window’, Sophie Rider for the solid and amusing sculpture ‘Horse with tulip’ and Bonnie Brown for the de Stael-like oil painting ‘Celia's dream on the headland’.
The selection of works for the exhibition was made by the artists John Ward and Glynn Williams; Curator of the Royal paintings Christopher Lloyd, collector Judge Stephen Tumim, and the critics Marina Vaizey and Robin Simon.
Works, which had to be small scale, were submitted by both established and unknown artists.
Bourlet manager did not start fire
In the trial last month arising from the disastrous fire at the James Bourlet antique storage warehouse at Heathrow on 7 October 1991 when items of furniture and objects valued at millions of pounds were lost, Alan Baggs, air freight manager, was acquitted of starting the fire.
After the prosecution had presented their case at Isleworth Crown Court, the Judge Bathurst Norman directed the jury to find Mr Baggs not guilty.
He said he was not satisfied that the fire had been started deliberately, let alone who might have started it and that the scientific evidence was ‘underlined by a number of assumptions which have been shown to be totally false’.
A spokesman for James Bourlet said that the police would not be undertaking any further investigations.
Cranachs stolen from Weimar recovered
The spectacular theft of eight sixteenth-century panel paintings, among them five Cranach portraits, from Weimar Castle on 12 October (see The Art Newspaper No. 22, November 1992, p.4) is virtually solved.
German police arrested five gypsies, previously known to deal with stolen works of art, on the night of 1 November in a car park near Göttingen.
To the surprise of the police all eight panels from Weimar were recovered, together with eleven paintings stolen from a private home near Stadthagen.
The curators and restorers in Weimar were immediately informed and drove over to inspect the damage and collect the paintings, which are now undergoing restoration at Weimar Castle.
Herr Katzner, head of conservation, describes the damage as considerable, but by a miracle it was not worse.
There are serious scratches, particularly on the portraits of Martin Luther and Princess Sybilla of Cleves, caused by the broken glass of the smashed show cases.
Further damage and paint loss, caused by changes in humidity and temperature during the paintings' absence, are likely to appear some time in the future, as is usual with sensitive panels.
Police are still working on the case; the Erfurt public prosecutor has evidence that the individuals arrested were not involved in the actual theft of the paintings from the museum.
Exhibitions
Berlin, Nationalgalerie
That old Picasso magic
Huge crowds flock from East and West to see the second half of the artist's career
I did not intend to do an exhibition on Picasso as a political figure’ says Heiner Bastian, ‘but the choice of ‘Guernica’, painted after the German Condor legion's bombing of the town, as our departure point has in fact turned out to have particular relevance in Germany today’.
The exhibition ‘Picasso, die Zeit nach Guernica 1937–1973’ at the Nationalgalerie until 21 February has been crowded out from day one, when 600 journalists crushed into the press conference.
Bastian, the independent scholar/dealer, who organised the show together with another independent curator, Werner Spies, says that he is most pleased with the reaction of an old couple from Dresden, who on the first day said that they had been longing to see Picasso's work for forty years.
He expanded his original idea of doing a show on the artist's late works after the Wall came down, because the people in the former East had never seen Picasso's paintings.
In fact, public collections in Germany overall are very weak in Picassos and the ninety-eight paintings, seventy drawings and thirteen sculptures have nearly all come from abroad: from the Musée Picasso, the Reina Sofia, MoMA, the Tate and so on.
A notable quantity (one hundred), particularly from the 1950s onwards, derive from private collections, which may reflect the uncanonical position the later part of Picasso's career has occupied until recently in the official estimation of his work.
In fact, Hainer Bastian see this exhibition as completing the vision of Picasso presented at the last great retrospective in New York twelve years ago, when the focus was on his Cubist, surrealist and classical phases.
The exhibition begins by gathering together all five of Picasso's ‘Weeping women’ of 1937, created around ‘Guernica’.
It shows Picasso's  response to World War II, ‘The charnel house’ of 1945, lent by MoMA to Europe for the first time.
It lingers over his paraphrases of ‘Dejeuner sur l'herbe’, ‘Women of Algiers’, ‘Las Meninas’, Poussin's and David's ‘Rape of the Sabines’ painted in the Fifties and Sixties, and culminates with his endless variations on the female nude from the years before his death in 1973.
The exhibition is sponsored by the Friends of the Nationalgalerie and Telekom, and the catalogue (Hatje, Stuttgart), by Hainer Bastian and Werner Spies, is available at the especially low price of DM39 so as to be affordable to visitors from the new Lander.
Almost the same exhibition will be at the Kunsthalle of the Hypo-Kulturstiftung in Munich from 13 March to 6 June, and at the Hamburg Kunsthalle from 18 June to 29 August.
London
Conceptual and minimal
Sculpture 1965–75 at the Hayward
A major exhibition of international contemporary sculpture opens at the Hayward Gallery this month (21 January-14 March).
Its title is ‘Grace and Gravity: the changing condition of sculpture 1965–1975’ and it has been curated by Jon Thompson of Maastricht's Jan van Eyck Academy.
With the South Bank's Barry Barker, he selected ‘Falls the Shadow’ for the Hayward Gallery in 1986 and lists ‘The 1984 British Art Show’among his other credentials.
For the present exhibition, Thompson is drawing attention to the decade which witnessed the maturity of Minimalism and the emergence of Conceptual Art.
His selection of twenty artists features a strong representation of Italian masters associated with ‘Arte Povera’(eight), with contributions from the United States (six), Britain (two), Belgium (two) and Germany (two).
In every case, their work is illustrated by important historical material among which is Bruce Nauman's ‘Neon templates of the left half of my body taken at ten inch intervals’, a large felt work by Robert Morris, the Fibonacci igloo of Mario Merz and major works by Joseph Beuys, Marcel Broodthaers, Luciano Fabro, Eva Hesse and Robert Smithson.
The two British participants are Barry Flanagan, who is showing two hessian sculptures, and Richard Long, prominently included by an early sculpture of three stone rings and a selection of photographs documenting his first walks in England and abroad.
Curiosity will be aroused by an exhibition which unites artists who would never have agreed to show together at the time when this sculpture was being made.
Architect Claudio Silvestrin is designing the exhibition's installation.
He favours large spaces neutralised by white walls and is converting the gallery's ramp into a tunnel.
Peter Ludwig's Picassos start tour in Barcelona
The German chocolate magnate Peter Ludwig, gargantuan collector, founder of museums and museum wings and lender to others (The Art Newspaper No. 23, December 1992, p. 12), wrote his thesis in the 1940s on Picasso and has collected him ever since.
His 180 paintings, drawings, collages, sculptures, ceramics, printing blocks and plates by the artist are on show at the Picasso Museum in Barcelona until 30 January and then go to the Ludwig Museum in Cologne (27 February-16 May) before joining the ‘Ludwigslust’ celebrations of all aspects of the Ludwig collection on the occasion of the reopening of the Germanisches Nationalmuseum in Nuremberg (18 June-10 October).
The collection covers all phases of Picasso's career, from a drawing executed when he was nineteen to a reclining nude completed just months before he died in 1972, with particularly interesting sculptures, including the gesso head of Dora Maar (1940) and ‘Woman with pram’(1950).
The catalogue is published by Prestel Verlag, DM98.
Washington DC
Quid pro quo 
Treasures of the Vatican Library loaned for reopening at Library of Congress
Collaboration between the Vatican Library and the Washington Library of Congress has resulted in an innovatory exhibition entitled ‘Rome reborn: the Vatican Library and Renaissance Culture’(8 January to 30 April).
Some 200 of the Vatican's finest books, manuscripts and maps, many previously unexhibited, have been selected to demonstrate the importance of the Library as a centre of learning and authority from the Renaissance onwards.
Curated by Professor Anthony Grafton of the Department of History at Princeton, the exhibition will be shown in Rome from May.
It has been sponsored by a grant from John W. Kluge.
The Vatican's decision to allow the exhibition organisers free choice of any volume in the Library is a result of a debt of gratitude towards the Library of Congress, which, in the 1920s and 1930s, helped it modernise its systems.
According to Dr Declan Murphy, project director in Washington, Rome has not forgotten this help and despite a certain weariness engendered by the numerous calls for loans of 1492 material received last year, it cooperated enthusiastically with Washington over the exhibition (which is to mark the reopening of the Great Hall of the Library of Congress after a three-year renovation).
Dr Grafton has devised a seven-part structure for the exhibition and accompanying catalogue (published by Yale): the Vatican Library, Humanism, Archaeology, the Exact Sciences, the Life Sciences, the Wider World and Music.
Sub-texts such as censorship, propaganda, patronage of book and manuscript production and the Vatican as publishers are brought to bear on the choice of objects.
To be included are: original drawings by Galileo of sunspots; the earliest surviving Greek manuscript of Euclid's Elements; the earliest illustration of a subject seen through a microscope; a ninth-century Greek manuscript of Plautus; the fifteenth-century Latin History of Peloponnesian War by Thucydides, from which all later editions derived, and love letters from Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn.
While nothing has been decided to date, an exchange exhibition of Library of Congress material remains a possibility: the evolution of the relationship between church and state in Western culture, focusing on the Library of Congress's Founding Fathers material has been mooted.
Munich
The great Prussian arrives in Bavaria from East and West
Major Frederick the Great show until 28 February
The Foundation of the Hypo-Kulturstiftung, which is owned by the Bayerische Hypotheken und Wechsel Bank, has mounted a major exhibition in its Kunsthalle titled ‘Frederick the Great, collector and patron’ which runs until 28 February.
This is the first time that such a show has been organised in Bavaria and reflects the interest of its creator, Prinz Georg von Hohenzollern, who is Generaldirektor of the Bavarian Staatliche Gemäldesammlungen and of the same family as Frederick the Great.
He began to explore the possibility of borrowing from East Berlin five years ago and had already secured an agreement from the authorities in charge of Potsdam, and from the Stiftung Preußischer Kulturbesitz in West Berlin which normally never lends.
After the opening up of the borders between East and West Germany in 1989 the project became much easier.
Loans of paintings by Watteau, Lancret and Pater and the painter-architects Knobelsdorff, von Graff and Roslin have come from the Potsdam castles, Schloss Charlottenburg in Berlin, Burg Hohenzollern (the seat of the uncle of Prinz Georg) and Schloss Doorn in the Netherlands to which the last Kaiser was exiled in 1918.
Major works by Rubens, Rembrandt and Van Dyck have come from Frederick the Great's private gallery at Sanssouci and from the Berlin and Potsdam museums, the Washington National Gallery and the Metropolitan.
Antoine Pesne, court painter to Frederick the Great and one of the most important German eighteenth-century portraitists is represented by fifteen paintings.
In addition, with loans from private collectors as well as museums in Germany and abroad, thirty-eight out of the thirty-nine surviving snuff boxes recorded as having been in the possession of Frederick the Great have been assembled.
Among them is the snuff box sold by Gloria Thurn und Taxis in the recent Sotheby's sale in Geneva on 17 November for a record £1,155,2507 (see The Art Newspaper No. 23, December 1992, p.6).
Sculpture, porcelain, furniture, sketches by Frederick the Great for the construction of his palaces and books from his library are shown.
Part of a silver table service made by Lieberkuhn for the first banquet at Sanssouci, held in 1747 to celebrate the opening of the palace has been reassembled, together with portraits of the king and his family, including nineteenth-century scenes such as Menzel's ‘Flute concert at Sanssouci’.
Even two of flutes that were owned by Frederick the Great are on display.
A catalogue with collected essays is published by Hirmer at DM49.
What's new when Bassano moves to Fort Worth
Jacopo Bassano ‘The miraculous draught of fishes’, to be shown at the Kimbell Museum in Fort Worth, Texas, from 23 January to 24 April, when the major Jacopo Bassano exhibition transfers to the States after closing at the Museo Civico of Bassano del Grappa on 6 December.
Other additions are four paintings of the Noah story from Kromeriz, Czechoslovakia; ‘The Mystic marriage of St Catherine’ from the Wadsworth Athenaeum, Hartford, CN; ‘The parable of the sower’from the Museum of Fine Arts, Springfield, MA; ‘The flight into Egypt’from the Toledo Museum of Art; and ‘The adoration of the shepherds’from the Royal Collection at Hampton Court
The art of the Solomon Islands
The Musée Barbier-Mueller is devoting an exhibition to the art of the Solomon Islands, discovered by Alvaro de Mendana in 1568 and thought to house King Solomon's Mines.
Despite colonial rule the islands' distinctive craft techniques survived, particularly a liking for work inlaid with mother-of-pearl.
The Barbier-Mueller collection contains about seventy pieces, covering the full range of works made on the islands — modelled human skulls, weapons, house posts, ancestor statues and a rare bark mask from the northernmost island of the archipelago — placing it second after the British Museum in terms of the importance of its holdings.
Until 16 February.
Howard Hodgkin's collection of Indian paintings
The exhibition ‘Indian paintings and drawings from the collection of Howard Hodgkin’, formerly at the Sackler Gallery, Washington, and the Rietberg Museum in Zurich, is now at the Ashmolean Museum until 7 February.
Fascinating because it has been brought together by one of  Britain's leading painters (although Hodgkin denies that the bright colours and strong forms employed by the Mughal period artists have influenced his art) it is also an important entity in its own right.
The main strength of the collection lies in the Rajput schools and the Akbari period of Mughal art, before the robust approach to representation had been refined into the imperial style and more formal  composition .
Mainly painted in gouache on paper, some paintings are as much as five foot across, but all are intimate in mood.
Particularly attractive are the energetic scenes of elephant hunts from Kota in Rajasthan, the detailed ‘Marriage procession in a bazaar’ from Mandi in the Punjab Hills and the surprisingly Western-looking portrait of Iltifat Khan, a powerful Mughal noble, seen in profile.
The catalogue, Indian Paintings and Drawings from the collection of Howard Hodgkin, is by Andrew Topsfield and Milo Cleveland Beach, with an introduction by Hodgkin (Thames and Hudson, £14.95).
De Bois art, expertise and trade
The heady world of the international art market at the turn of the century is the background to an interesting exhibition to be held at the Rijksmuseum from 23 January to 2 May.
‘Art, Expertise and Trade: the J.H. de Bois Gallery (1878–1936) focuses on the activities of the dealer whose gallery in Haarlem showed works by van Gogh, Redon, Bresdin, Ensor, Kollwitz, Toorop and many others, while his influence on major collectors of the time is evident in the formation of collections such as the Kroller-Muller.
Over one hundred of the works known to have passed through his hands will be shown, many now in private collections and rarely on view to the public.
One of de Bois’ greatest successes was the sale of six works by Redon at the 1913 Armory Show, after which de Bois considered himself an equal to dealers such as Vollard and Kahnweiler.
A prolific and lively writer on art, he produced an almost continuous stream of articles in daily and weekly papers covering descriptions of visits to artists' studios, collectors, auctions, dealers and museums.
The present exhibition is timed to coincide with the publication of a book of the same title by J.F. Heijbroek and E.L.
Wouthuysen published by Uitgeverij Contact (240 pp. illustrated, English summary, DFl.45).
What's on at the Barbican in 1993
The Barbican Art Gallery's exhibition programme for 1993 will be as follows: 11 March to 13 June ‘The Sixties Art Scene in London’, a survey of over 200 paintings, sculptures and other works produced by artists such as Hockney, Hodgkin, Caro, and Riley; 8 July to 5 September ‘Alan Davie’, a retrospective largely selected by the artist; 8 July to 5 September ‘The Undomestic Product: new perimeters in British Ceramic Art’, a reappraisal of the  developments and achievements of non-utilitarian British ceramics; 30 September to 12 December ‘Alphons Mucha’, the first major retrospective of the artist; and 30 September to 12 December ‘Bill Brandt’, over 250 photographs spanning his career and including his little-shown later collages.
Museums
London
A national gallery for the twentieth-century before the twentieth century's done?
Tate makes early bid for National Lottery largesse
As expected, the Trustees of the Tate Gallery have announced plans to divide the collection into two principal parts, building new premises to house the modern part of this new arrangement.
Announced on 15 December, the intention is to create a new Tate Gallery of British Art and a new Tate Gallery of Modern Art, to be ready by the year 2000.
In the November issue of The Art Newspaper (No. 22, p.6) all but one participant in a survey of leading art world figures supported this suggestion as the best way forward for the gallery.
Underlying the timing of this announcement was undoubtedly the publication of the National Lottery Bill on 16 December (see p.2).
The Lottery is now likely to be operational by 1994 and all those interested in benefiting from its considerable financial fall-out will need to tender their proposals early.
A project on the scale of the Tate's present announcement would be unlikely to succeed without State funding on a considerable scale.
Immediate steps in the realisation of this plan will be: the redevelopment of the north-west quadrant of the Gallery as the first step in the creation of the Tate Gallery of British Art; the possible establishment of a temporary Tate Gallery of Modern Art, and search for a suitable new storage facility for the collections to replace the current storage space in west London.
Ultimate intentions are to house the new Tate Gallery of British Art at Millbank and to establish a new Tate Gallery of Modern Art in a new home elsewhere in London by the end of the century.
While the British Gallery will provide a survey of the achievements of British art, it will also explore the interchanges between British, European and American art.
Conversely, the new Modern Art galleries will show international modern art of the twentieth century from Fauvism to the present, which will include outstanding examples of British art.
An anonymous American donor has pledged $10 million towards the establishment of the British collection which will go some way towards the rebuilding in the quadrant.
This will provide for over 600 square metres of new gallery space and the upgrading and air conditioning of over 1,100 further square metres.
In addition 500 square metres of flexible gallery space will be created on the lower floor of the gallery.
At present the Tate is only able to show about 1,000 works at any one time out of its 5,105 paintings and sculptures (plus 30,000 works on paper).
Since the 1950s visitor numbers have risen from 400,000 per annum to 1.8 million in 1992.
Considerable speculation exists as to the possible location of a new permanent site for the Modern Collection and suggestions so far have included the former Battersea and Bankside power stations on the south bank of the Thames and Canary Wharf in Docklands.
Money from the National Lottery and from private and public donations, will be needed to finance the building, which may cost up to £100 million.
Regarding acquisitions, the numbers of works acquired by purchase and donation (including works on paper) in each section of the collection between 1990 and 1992 are as follows: British collection, including prints and drawings, 105; modern collection, excluding prints, 170; modern prints, 313; artists' archive, 55.
Madrid
Prado launches $20.6 million expansion plan
But with only 10% more hanging space
The Ministry of Culture's latest expansion plan for the Museo del Prado has been criticised as ill-conceived and self-serving.
On 24 November, the Ministry presented designs by Prado architect Francisco Rodriquez Partearroyo which detailed three new underground floors and an entrance ramp leading in to the Prado's ground level.
Ministry officials highlighted the plan's architectural merits and lauded it as a demonstration of their firm and timely commitment to the Prado's needs.
Detractors point out that 40% of the Pta2,300 million (£13 million; $20.6 million) construction budget needs to be raised.
Moreover, the Prado will receive considerably less space than was promised by the Ministry only seven months ago.
Minister of Culture Jordi Sole Tura vowed in May that the nearby Army Museum and Ministry of Agriculture would be turned into Prado annexes.
In addition, the Palacio de Velazquez would be made available to the Prado on a temporary basis.
These projects have been put on hold indefinitely.
The new plan measures 10,554 m2 of which only 8,322 square metres will be usable space.
The grand entrance and money-making operations will receive priority treatment, such as enhanced access to the bookstore, museum shop, restaurant and cafeteria.
Only 10% of the total area, or approx. 1,500 square metres will be dedicated to displaying works of art.
Critics say the plan represents a flawed, ‘image-above-all-else’, attempt by the Ministry to beef up the Prado's revenue-generating potential, and thereby reduce State support.
The Prado's 1993 budget, Pta 2,252 million, is Pta358 million more than 1992, but Pta37 million less than 1991.
Kim Bradley
Paris, Louvre
An austere vision
Thirty-nine new rooms open, showing French painting of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
Until very recently the much heralded re-organisation of the Louvre has existed only on paper.
The opening of the Pyramid redirected the circulation of visitors, but once one had left the escalators in the Hall Napoleon behind, one was confronted with the same layout of rooms as ten years ago.
Now, with the opening last month of thirty-nine rooms on the second floor of the Cour Carree, for French paintings and works on paper from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the restructuring of the museum has entered a new phase more directly concerned with the collections themselves.
These new rooms, which the Italian architect Italo Rota, who has worked with Gae Aulenti in the past, has created in the east and west wings (formerly occupied by offices, stores and conservation labs and whose interiors therefore no longer retained their historic features), and extensively renovated along the south wing, now contain 700 paintings and around one hundred pastels, cartoons and miniatures.
Their reopening completes the reorganisation of the circuit of the Cour Carree, begun in 1989 with the sixteenth- and seventeenth-century paintings.
The new hang has for the first time brought together the figures de fantaisie by Fragonard, the Louvre's ninety-three Corots, thirty paintings by Chardin and thirteen by Watteau, as well as a rotating selection of the preparatory drawings by Le Brun for his decorative scheme for the Louvre.
The release of additional space has allowed 150 rarely seen works to be brought out of store, restored and with contemporary frames intact.
Among these are large canvases such as‘Pentecost’ by Restout, which serve to balance the received idea of eighteenth-century French art as portrayed by the Goncourt brothers which was based almost exclusively on portraits and small-scale works.
Among these new discoveries are fine paintings by Vernet, Rigaud, Desportes, Largilliere, Chasserieau and Subleyras, as well as examples of Robert-Fleury, Taraval and Suvee, the need for whose re-evaluation is more questionable.
Pierre Rosenberg, head of the department of paintings and co-ordinator of the new display, says, ‘I am convinced that the public is bored of seeing works that are widely reproduced.
If a now neglected painter was popular during his lifetime we must examine the reason why and look at the works again.
The role of the museum is to present the collection in a fresh way, both showing unfamiliar paintings and hanging them in natural light’.
Daylight was in fact one of the conditions laid down by the curators Vincent Pomarede, Marie-Catherine Sahut and Sylvain Laveissiere in the brief for the new galleries, together with the integration of views of the Seine and of the Louvre.
The skylights in the galleries admit light through angled screens which are changed twice a year, at the equinoxes, and cut out direct rays to spread a diffuse illumination through the rooms.
The installation of the thirty-nine rooms conveys, both in how it has been structured and how it has been hung, a preoccupation with the need to avoid repetition and to hold the attention of visitors.
The parquet of the floors alternates with stone and the colours of the walls were chosen after innumerable trials: mostly pale grey and tobacco brown, with pale green for the Neo-classical works and terracotta for the nineteenth century.
As to the much discussed pearwood wall panels, Italo Rota explains: ‘We were looking for a simple idea that would allow visitors who had already looked at a good many paintings to connect some of them with unfamiliar settings; the art of memory tells us that it is easier to retain images in one's head if one can link them to a specific space’.
The inclusion in the new paintings galleries of eight rooms without skylights exclusively for drawings and pastels has been hailed as a major innovation.
The segregation of departments according to media, rather than along historical periods, has always been a hallmark of the Louvre.
According to Pierre Rosenberg the museum will never succumb to showing paintings and sculpture, for example, together because that would be tantamount to sacrificing the traditional structure of scholarship at the museum.
The opening of the new galleries, has cost around FFr100 million (£11.9 million; $19 million).
More has be done in the south wing where there are still offices and a departmental library, ultimately destined to be incorporated into the future Bibliotheque des Arts.
This November should see some of the works in the new galleries, from the ‘Primitives’ to Poussin, transferred to a suite of twenty rooms on the second floor of the Richelieu wing, which will be reached by escalators and lifts bringing visitors to the galleries of French paintings directly from the Pyramid.
Art Gallery of Ontario
Jung and the art of museum marketing
C$58 million push towards financial independence
The Art Gallery of Ontario's C$58 million expansion and renovation has created one of the largest museums in North America, but the fiscal crisis that forced the provincially sponsored Gallery to close its doors last summer, and to fire more than half its 445-person staff (The Art Newspaper No.22, November 1992, p. 7), will continue to reverberate long after the enlarged institution reopens 24 January.
Owing to the cash-strapped province's crippling budget cuts, few positions can be refilled, and programmes in all areas are drastically reduced.
A recent report compiled by an independent task force for the Ministry of Culture and Communications declares the gallery's management ‘basically sound’, and requests a three-year funding package to stabilise operations, but the report also advises, rather ominously, that the Gallery reduce dependence on government funding 40% by the year 2000, giving high priority to ‘broadening its audience’.
Despite calls for ‘new incentives to encourage increased private sector support’, and a proposed recomposition of the gallery's ‘ineffective’ board, it is uncertain how the Gallery can so quickly become semi-autonomous.
Contrary to the tradition in the U.S., Canadian culture has never enjoyed significant private support.
The Gallery hopes to generate increased revenues through special activities in the original Beaux-Arts court and the new glass-enclosed sculpture atrium.
Its mammoth new retail space, which extends the entire length of the Dundas Street facade, is sure to produce significant income.
The Gallery is also bending over backwards to boost attendance, and in doing so is rather alarmingly bowing to populist pressures.
It has dedicated its Canadian historical collection to one of the art world's more radical attempts to engage the spectator: one room mimics a nineteenth-century salon, with scores of paintings crammed one above the other to the advantage of none; another gallery, devoted to the famed Group of Seven, contains a pew-like bench set directly in front of Tom Thomson's ‘West Wind’(a national icon) and two landscapes by Lauren Harris, rigged with telephones providing a soundtrack on the artists.
Here and there are ‘signposts’, elongated lecterns with albums of photos, magazine clippings, advertisements, and assorted memorabilia relating to the epoch of the nearby works of art, and notecards for visitors to record their own associations and recollections — to be periodically appended to the scrapbooks.
The didactic exercise culminates in front of a J.E.H. MacDonald landscape, a painting visible if, and only if, the visitor sits in a booth (maximum capacity of two) and listens to a voice that  tries , according to a museum official, ‘to stimulate the visitor's imaginative powers’.
These ‘groundbreaking enhancement techniques’ were devised by a museum educator with a taste for Jungian psychology, in consultation with a team comprising a cognitive scientist, someone described as ‘representing the field of environmental psychology’(the study of how our surroundings affect us), and a Jungian depth psychologist (‘someone who helps visitors draw on both conscious and unconscious experiences with the artworks’).
Fortunately, these intrusive attempts to ‘animate the imagination’ have not governed the hanging of the remainder of the Gallery's collection of Renaissance to Modern Western art.
The seven Old Master galleries have been intelligently installed, and a long corridor has been converted into an evocation of a baroque Kunstkammer, complete with pilastered cabinets for the display of paintings and objets d'art.
The Henry Moore Sculpture Centre, containing the world's largest public collection of his work, has been renewed, and there are vast tracts set aside for modern and contemporary art.
From 24 January, new acquisitions by Monet, de la Tour, Roudin , Chagall and Beuys will be on show.
For the reopening, the AGO has organised several selections of recent gifts, and a retrospective of Canadian media-based sculptor ‘Robin Collyer’(until 6 June), who will represent Canada at the 1993 Venice Biennale.
Future shows include ‘The Earthly Paradise: Arts and Crafts by William Morris and his circle from Canadian Collections’(25 June-6 September), ‘Hannah Hoch: 1889–1978 Collages’(11 August to 26 September), ‘Wyndham Lewis: The Canadian years, 1940–45’(23 September-8 November), ‘Michael Snow’(11 March-5 June, 1994), and with the Tate Gallery Liverpool, ‘Barbara Hepworth’(1995).
Adult admission is C$7.50.
New York
Mapplethorpe snub to Whitney
Guggenheim gets $s and photos
Despite the fact that the Whitney Museum was the first to show the photographs of the notorious late Robert Mapplethorpe, and only recently declared that it was creating a department of photography, the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation announced last month that it was the Guggenheim it would be patronising with gifts in money and kind.
Michael Ward Stout, President of the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation, says that the ‘permanent association’ with the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation will begin with a gift of $2 million in cash and more than 200 of Mapplethorpe's finest photographs and ‘unique objects’, to form the nucleus of an eventual collection of major modern and contemporary photography.
Thomas Krens, the director of the Guggenheim, says, ‘Photography is one of this century's most significant artistic pursuits and has been severely lacking from the museum's collection and exhibition programme.
The Mapplethorpe Foundation's great generosity marks the beginning of a long-term, mutually productive partnership’.
A gallery named after Robert Mapplethorpe and devoted entirely to photography will be created on the fourth level of the new addition to the Frank Lloyd Wright building on Fifth Avenue.
The terms of the gift stipulate at least one major photography exhibition every two years, whether from the museum's own holdings or borrowed from outside.
The Mapplethorpe Foundation, founded by the photographer in the year before his death in 1989, has donated millions of dollars to fund medical research into AIDS and HIV infection and has provided many grants in the form of cash and gifts of Mapplethorpe works to qualified art institutions for the development and expansion of their photography programmes.
Major acquisitions
The Corsini Rubens for Malibu, the Rosebery Rembrandt for Amsterdam
The Getty and Rijksmuseum add to their collections
For most established museums and picture-galleries, simple representation does not suffice: it's not enough just to have a very good Raphael in the collection; it's how many Raphaels you have.
This concept has been refined over the years into ‘How well do our Raphael holdings reflect his styles from the varying stages of his career?’, leading in a recent, and extreme case, to the Italian government spending $1.5 million at Christie's in 1991 on a St Catharine, a badly damaged sliver of a juvenile Raphael that had most of its surface paint washed away in the 1966 Florence flood.
Now the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam has just bought Rembrandt's ‘Portrait of Johannes Uyttenbogaert’ for DFl.17 million (£6 million; $9.62 million), the most money ever spent by a Dutch museum or the Dutch government for a single work of art.
The picture was sold by the Earl of Rosebery at Sotheby's London in July 1992 to New York dealer Otto Naumann and his partner Milwaukee chemical magnate Alfred Bader (himself a noted collector of Rembrandt school paintings) for £3.8 million ($6 million) and according to Naumann, ‘forty-eight hours after the purchase, a deal was being hammered out’ with the Dutch museums.
While it might seem very odd that a museum which is home to such Rembrandt masterpieces as the ‘Jewish bride’, the ‘Academy lesson of Dr Deyman’, the ‘Night watch’ and the ‘Self-portrait as the Apostle Paul’, would allocate the funds for a much less impressive work, the Rijksmuseum has long made Rembrandt purchases a priority.
In recent years mostly early paintings have been acquired: a 1629 ‘Self-portrait’(bought in 1976) the ‘Allegorical musical party’ of 1626 (bought in 1976) and the ex-Thyssen ‘Tobias and Anna’of 1626 (bought in 1979).
Curiously, the Rijksmuseum Rembrandt holdings, while unusually strong in historical subjects, is very weak in single portraits, the genre with which the artist established his reputation in Amsterdam.
This is exactly opposite to most other museum's great Rembrandt holdings: the Metropolitan's Rembrandts are nearly all portraits.
This was the reason behind their most recent Rembrandt purchase, in 1985, of the 1634 oval portrait of the rather dull ‘Haesje Jacobsdr. van Cleyburg’, bought from Herman Shickman for DFl.10 million.
The museum still lacked, as curator Jan Piet Filedt Kok said, a three-quarter length male portrait from the 1630s.
The 1633 ‘Uyttenbogaert’ fits that bill with the additional advantages of being both a representation of an important figure in Dutch religious history (although the Rijksmuseum already has a portrait of him by Rembrandt's contemporary Jacob Backer) and universally accepted as authentic by the members of the Rembrandt Research Project, some of whom are Rijksmuseum curators.
The one problem about the purchase is the picture's poor physical condition.
During the nineteenth century, the picture was brutally wax-lined, crushing Rembrandt's rich highlighting and rendering its surface dead and linoleum-like.
At present it is smothered with yellow varnish, and while conservation due to begin at the Rijksmuseum in the Spring will certainly improve it, it remains to be seen how much of the picture can be recovered, and to see if the Rijksmuseum's money was well spent.
The funds came from various sources, including the Vereniging Rembrandt, the Rijksmuseumstichtung, and Prins Bernhardfonds, although the museum still must raise some DFl.2 million it borrowed to support the purchase.
‘We know the rather negative condition reports’, says Filedt Kok, ‘but the painting's overall impact and its enhancement of the museum's Rembrandt holdings is of more importance to us.
We are optimistic that restoration will help it enormously’.
Restoration is certainly not a problem in the case of an extraordinary painting by Peter Paul Rubens recently bought by the J. Paul Getty Museum.
Depicting ‘The death of Samson’, the picture is, according to the museum's conservator Mark Leonard, in a miraculous state of preservation.
‘It is still on its original stretcher, and has never been relined’, says Leonard.
‘I've never seen any Rubens on canvas in this state.
You can even see the gesso oozing through the canvas weave in the reverse.
All the darkening of the paint surface is just natural  ageing ; no one has touched it.
The highlights and shadows are not abraded in the least.’
The picture is a very early work by the artist and painted in Italy.
It is dated by Michael Jaffe to around 1605, although Ann Marie Logan puts is at around 1601.
Sold to the museum by the New York conservator Mario Modestini, its early history is completely unknown.
It was first recorded in the nineteenth century in the inventories of the Corsini collection, Florence, where it is last noted in 1880, leaving Italy ‘well before the current laws went into effect’, as Getty paintings curator George Goldner points out.
The dramatic tour-de-force of the young Fleming is an ingenious blending of Italian influences from Giulio Romano and Tintoretto to the torso of the ‘Laocoon’, which was the model for Samson, though the dramatic and extreme composition is entirely Rubens's own, and unlike anything he attempts again.
Such early works are sparsely represented in American collections, not being what most people consider to be ‘Rubensian’.
‘With early Rubens’, says Goldner pithily, ‘you either get it or you don't’.
In his view, ‘The death of Samson’ is the first finished, authentic painting by Rubens in the museum's collection (he dismisses the other paintings, most bought by J. Paul Getty himself, as being ‘largely to entirely’studio works), though there are three fine oil sketches by the artist, notably ‘The Miracles of St Francis of Paola’(1627/8), bought by Goldner himself in 1991.
As to the price of the ‘Samson’, Goldner will not specify, only saying that it is ‘far, far less than $10 million — I could have bought that, plus another important picture for that amount’.
Dresden, Gemäldegalerie
The paintings of the Kings of Saxony displayed as architect Semper intended
Morale-booster for city as DM98 million restoration project is completed
The reopening of the Gemäldegalerie of Old Master paintings in Dresden has been the most significant thing to happen in Dresden since the fall of the Communist East German regime in 1989.
The festivities to mark the occasion on the weekend of 5 and 6 December were attended by museum directors from around the world, a valuable boost to a city which is only now emerging from the destruction of World War II and the Communist austerities which followed.
In 1988 the museum, built by Gottfried Semper in 1845–46 to house the extraordinarily rich collections of Augustus the Strong and his picture-obsessed son Friedrich August III, was closed for major renovation work.
Water was seeping through the walls and the wiring was in urgent need of replacement.
The East German State at that stage voted 90 million Ostmarks towards a programme that would also allow for the construction of underground stores and laboratories and the insertion of climate-control systems, as well as complete redecoration.
After the Berlin Wall fell the budget was cut drastically, curtailing the plans for extensive underground extension.
Since then the new political situation has allowed free consultation with museums in the West over the latest technical developments, and has brought Western financial support.
At the latest tally DM98 million have been spent on the renovation, shared by the Land of Saxony and the Bundesrepublik.
Between 1956 and 1960, when paintings removed during the war were returned from the Soviet Union, the gallery underwent a hasty reorganisation and Semper's original decorative scheme disappeared beneath overpaint and partitions.
The new restoration, masterminded by Heinrich Magirius, of the Commission for Historic Monuments for Dresden, and Harald Marx, director of the Gemäldegalerie, has returned as closely as possible to the original decorative scheme devised by Semper.
The entrance hall and staircase have their grisaille paintings and friezes in relief revealed, as do the ceilings of the top-lit painting galleries on the upper floor.
The gallery walls have been covered in fabric in various shades, of which only the orange-red of the Italian rooms is in keeping with Semper, who originally used this colour throughout.
The Netherlandish and Dutch paintings are hung on a dull green background, the Spanish and French on light grey.
The rotunda of the cupola, which crowns the Italianate building, has been painted pink, echoing the Tribuna of the Uffizi by which Semper was inspired.
The paintings are now hung in two registers on the walls, although not as thickly as a century or more ago.
The disposition of the rooms and the hang within each room have been rethought to take account of modern preoccupations: the national Schools of painting now relate to each other as do the countries on the map of Europe, with France situated between Italy and Spain and Holland.
One problem that remains to be resolved is that the high reflectivity of the glass over many of the paintings, especially in rooms that have lighting from side windows, makes it difficult to view the works.
Titian's ‘Tribute Money’, which is displayed in a free-standing case, is almost invisible behind the reflection from the windows.
In addition some criticism has been made of the new hang as focal paintings viewed down the gallery vistas — for example Raphael's ‘Sistine Madonna’— are no longer seen in isolation, but comments in the German press and from museum curators have on the whole been overwhelmingly enthusiastic.
The opportunity has not been missed to point unfavourably at the controversial plans for the Bode Museum in Berlin which, it seems, will not now be restored to its original appearance as when built for Kaiser Friedrich in 1897–1904.
At the same time as the Dresden Gallery for Old Masters reopened, so did the former Rustkammer, or weapons collection of the Princes of Saxony.
That also has been restored, with modern climatic control, lighting and rewiring, but with its original decorative features.
Part of the Semper wing of the Zwinger palace, the historic collection was known as the ‘Rustkammer’(armoury) from the sixteenth century but renamed the ‘Historisches Museum’ after World War II.
It now, significantly, has been rechristened with its royal title.
A history of the collection and building of the Dresden Gallery has been published on the occasion of the reopening by E.A. Seeman Verlag, as has a complete catalogue of the works on show (Heinrich Magirius and Harald Marx Gemäldegalerie Dresden, Die Sammlung, Das Gebäude, DM58, and Uta Neidhardt, Angelo Walther, Harald Marx Gemäldegalerie Dresden Alte Meister, Katalog der Ausgestellten Werke, DM35).
In addition the Deutscher Kunstverlag has launched a new series on masterpieces in museums with a volume on 120 of the Dresden Old Masters: Harald Marx, Gregor Weber, photos by Jurgen Karpinski Gemäldegalerie Alte Meister Dresden (DM19.80).
Velazquez did know the laws of perspective
With the aid of measured drawings and a 1:10 model of the room in the Alcazar Palace in Madrid, destroyed by fire in 1734, in which Velazquez painted ‘Las Meninas’(now in the Prado), Philip Troutman, director of the Courtauld Institute Galleries 1958–80, has been able convincingly to show that the figures seen in the mirror at the far end of the room in ‘Las Meninas’ are those of the king and queen as painted by Velazquez on the canvas propped on the easel, and not, as has been suggested, of figures peering through the doorway behind the viewer.
An exhibition was held at the Slade art school in London in December
Met opens first graphic art and photography space
On 5 January the Metropolitan Museum will be opening a newly renovated gallery to be devoted to the display of prints, drawings and photographs, to be known as the Robert Wood Johnson Jr.
Gallery.
The new space will enable the three departments to exhibit on a three- to four-month rotating basis, showing up to seventy-five works per time.
The Department of Drawings will begin with highlights from its Italian, French and Dutch Old Master holdings; Prints and Illustrated Books will focus on master printmakers such as Durer, Rembrandt, Piranesi and Goya; while the new Department of Photographs will show works added to the collection since 1928, including prints by Southworth and Hawes, Gustav Le Gray, Man Ray, Steichen, Stieglitz and others.
New Henry Moore Institute for Leeds
A new £5 million centre for sculpture will open in Leeds in mid April.
Commissioned by the Henry Moore Foundation, it is intended to provide a centre for the display, study, research and promotion of sculpture of all periods and nationalities.
The gallery will open with a major exhibition of Romanesque sculpture (22 April-19 July), a subject of passionate interest to Henry Moore, who wrote on Italian Romanesque sculpture.
The exhibition is curated by Ben Heyward, the Institute's Assistant Director and was conceived by Dr Christopher Norton of the York Centre for Medieval Studies.
It focuses on thirteen figure sculptures of apostles, prophets and kings from the original west front of York Minster before the thirteenth-century rebuilding.
They have been loaned together with objects from the treasury and crypt at York and three panels from part of a biblical narrative from Lincoln Cathedral.
Other lenders include the V&A and Jedburgh Abbey and the exhibition runs until July 1994.
The Institute will provide a new headquarters for the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust, directed by Robert Hopper, which will present a wide-ranging programme of special exhibitions, publications and educational projects.
The new building has been designed by Jeremy Dixon and Edward Jones and will occupy 20,000 square feet of space on four floors, created out of three early Victorian wool merchants' houses in Cookridge Street adjacent to Leeds City Art Gallery.
Future exhibition programmes, devised by Mr Heyward and the Institute's director Robert Hopper, will include Sol LeWitt and the work of eight young European artists.
British Museum acquires Townley archive
The great collection of classical sculpture assembled by Charles Townley (1735–1805) was purchased by the British Museum on the artist's death and is now on show in the Townley Room of the Wolfson Galleries.
With the help of the National Heritage Memorial Fund, the Society of Dilettanti, the Caryatids (a group of supporters of the museum's classical collection) and others, the museum has now purchased the Townley archive, a remarkable collection of 5,500 documents which fall into three categories: the personal papers of Townley and his immediate heirs relating to the collection; descriptions of the collection by one ‘Baron d'Hancarville’, a colourful character whose career included imprisonment for debt and banishment for pornography; and the letters to Townley from his contemporaries.
The last group contains letters from Sir William Hamilton, Richard Payne Knight, Sir Joseph Banks, John Nash, Piranesi, Reynolds, Benjamin West and Zoffany, and from Gavin Hamilton and Thomas Jenkins who acted as dealers to Townley.
Archaeology
London
Mycenaeans meet the Egyptians at last 
British Museum acquires illustrated papyrus showing Egyptians and Mycenaeans fighting side by side — the first evidence of political alliance
A remarkable illustrated papyrus has recently been acquired by the Department of Egyptian Antiquities at the British Museum from Christie's before auction.
Originally excavated by Pendlebury of the Egypt Exploration Society in 1936 at the Chapel of the King's Statue at el-Amarna in the Nile valley, the papyrus was probably connected with the official cult of King Akhenaton, the heretic  pharaoh (1352–1336 BC).
Purely illustrated papyri are extremely rare and the artistic quality of this one is very fine, comparable to the painted casket of Tutankhamun, now in the Cairo Museum.
At the time of purchase the fragments were erroneously assembled into a sea battle, but reassembly of the forty or so small pieces has revealed a land battle scene, the only one known painted on a papyrus, substantially preserved in two areas.
One of the preserved scenes depicts a Libyan, with tattooed loins and exposed genitals, wearing a long white cloak, about to cut the throat of a prostrate Egyptian.
This is highly unusual as it was almost unthinkable for the Egyptians to portray one of their number being overcome by the enemy.
The other scene shows two registers of running warriors, probably striding to rescue their fallen comrade.
It is possible that a figure of the King was once part of the scene, and that his heroic intervention in the face of disaster was part of the cult iconography.
Some of the figures are bare-headed and wear the usual short white kilt of the Egyptian soldier.
Others, clearly fighting on the same side as the Egyptians, additionally wear helmets and short-cropped ox-hide tunics, indicating that they are foreigners.
Surprisingly this does not conform to Egyptian conventions for depicting Semites or Nubians and their dress suggests that they are the first known representation in Egyptian art of the Mycenaeans, Bronze Age Greeks.
The pale yellowy-white colour and vertical lines of their helmets resemble the boar tusk helmets worn by the Mycenaeans (although the depiction is not canonical, the cut boar tusks being in one single row rather than the two or more rows known from Greece).
In support of this interpretation, men wearing similarly short spotted jerkins are occasionally depicted on Mycenaean vases, one of which is in the British Museum.
Identifiable links between the Mycenaeans and Egyptians have until now been largely confined to deposits of Mycenaean pottery in Egypt, and sporadic finds of Egyptians objects in Greece.If this papyrus does show Mycenaean warriors fighting alongside Egyptians, perhaps as mercenaries, it provides the first evidence for more direct interaction between these two major Bronze Age cultures of the Mediterranean.
Because of the delicacy of the pigments and potential damage if exposed for too long to light, the papyrus will not be on continuous show.
However, the museum plans to display it in the spring in the Egyptian galleries.
A short initial article with full colour photos will be published in Egyptian Archaeology vol III, the Bulletin of the Egypt Exploration Society, this spring.
(Available from the Society at 3 Doughty Mews, London WC1N 2PG, tel: 071–242 1880)
New York
Louvre/Met cooperation on archaeological loans
Near Eastern antiquities on display while Louvre reorganises
Beginning at the turn of the century, agreements between Iran and France created a French monopoly on excavations at Susiana, an intercultural trading centre dating from the first  millennium to the late fourth century.
By the terms of the agreement everything discovered in Susiana would go to France, with compensation for gold and silver objects.
By the 1920s, the French had lost their monopoly, but proceeded to work at Susa until the Islamic revolution of 1979.
The Louvre received an extraordinarily rich array of material from this region, most of which has never before been loaned.
Now, with the Louvre's reorganisation, a selection of 190 Iranian and Mesopotamian antiquities is on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Many of the painted ceramics, stone carvings, pieces of metalwork, and jewelry are of native Elamite manufacture, while others are foreign-made.
In the former category is a remarkable lifesize, unfortunately headless, solid-cast bronze statue of the Elamite queen Napirasu (1260 BC).
Among the foreign objects, which were either made by Mesopotamians living at Susa or seized as war booty, is the stele of Naramsin (2254–2218 BC), a stone relief showing the Akkadian king conquering a frontier tribe in a mountainous landscape, one of the greatest masterpieces of ancient Near Eastern art.
The Louvre has agreed to extend to the Metropolitan a long-term loan of two glazed-brick murals depicting archers, from a sixth-century Achaemenid palace at Susa.
Prudence O. Harper, Curator, and Joan Aruz, Assistant Curator, respectively, of Ancient Near Eastern Art at the Met, and Francoise Tallon of the Louvre's Department of Oriental Antiquities, have co-edited the catalogue, which is distributed by Harry N. Abrams.
‘The Royal City of Susa: Ancient Near Eastern Treasures from the Louvre Museum’ remains at the Metropolitan until 7 March.
Also on view at the Met are approximately 125 gold, silver, and gilt-copper figurines, plaques, pectorals, headdresses, and other personal ornaments from third-century aristocratic tombs discovered in the 1960s in the Loma Negra cemetery in northern Peru.
Drawn entirely from the Metropolitan's permanent collection, the objects came to the museum in the bequests of Nelson A. Rockefeller (1979) and Jane Costello Goldberg (from her husband Arnold's collection; 1987), acquired by these New York collectors prior to the establishment of U.S. import restrictions of Pre-Columbian objects from Peru.
Warriors abound, as do apotropaic spiders and scorpions, mythic animals, and anthropomorphic deities.
A narrative scene shows owl-headed figures using a crescent-shaped knife to eviscerate a victim.
A favoured motif is ‘the decapitator’, a scowling, lavishly adorned character typically shown with a knife in one hand, and a severed head in the other.
Such imagery belies the notion bandied about during the 1992 Columbiade of a  prelapsarian New World civilisation infected by war-mongering Europeans.
‘Loma Negra: a Peruvian Lord's Tomb’ continues until 4 July.
The largest agora in the Roman world
Recent discoveries at the site of the Graeco-Roman city of Hierapolis in ancient Phrygia, made during this summer's season of work by an Italian team, include a marble basilica situated to the north of the city, forming one corner of an extensive agora (280 x 180m), the largest of its type in the Roman world yet uncovered, and bounded on the other three sides by stoas.
Work on private houses in the city is revealing a number of elaborate structures: a sixth-century house with peristyle has been located between the theatre and the Temple of Apollo whose decorations include opus sectile paving, wall painting and a second order of Ionic columns.
Finally, pneumatic drills have been sparingly employed to uncover the surface of the main road into the town built during the expansion of the city in the time of Domitian.
Herod's luxury seaside palace at Caeserea
The last summer season of excavation at the palace site within ancient Caeserea, on the Israel coast just south of modern Haifa, uncovered pottery deposits earlier than previously known, which reinforce the theory that this was one of Herod the Great's palaces.
Terra Sigillata ware, including lamps, now date an early alteration to the palace around the year nought, placing it well within the possibility of identification as the Herodian palace described by Josephus, the Jewish historian (37–100 AD), together with the city of Caeserea, its great harbour, temple to Augustus the Emperor, and theatre.
Since 1990 excavations on the site have been sponsored by the University of Pennsylvania with a team of archaeologists from the Universities of Pennsylvania and Cincinnati and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
So far work on the promontory site has uncovered a large mosaic floor, thought to belong to a dining room, and the remains of a freshwater swimming pool 115 feet in length that was once encircled with walls and colonnades that allowed views of the sea below.
A fountain system was uncovered at one end of the dining room, which gives onto the swimming pool, together with a room with a hot bath adjoining.
The luxurious nature of the palace complex, of which this is thought to be only a wing, together with its spectacular position, led archaeologists as far back as 1976 to speculate that this was one of Herod's palaces.
More secure dating to 22–10/9 BC, between which dates the entire city was founded and built, has only recently been possible.
Dr Barbara Burrell of the University of Cincinnati commented, ‘Some experts have suggested that the palace's position between the theatre and the stadium may not be consistent with Herod's personality as a paranoid who would have wanted to distance himself from the people of the city of Caeserea.
We hope that further exploration will reveal the degree of protection that the palace had.’
Conservation
The Louvre's ‘Marriage at Cana’
It's not the Veronese we knew and loved
Artists and art historians criticise the removal of a red robe on the Master of Ceremonies to reveal a green costume beneath
Senior staff at the Louvre have been smarting after a petition launched by eighty-eight year old French abstract artist Jean Bazaine and an article in Point de Vue — a magazine specialising in coverage of European royalty — accused them of gross negligence in their ambitious restoration of one of the museum's largest pictures, ‘The Marriage at Cana’ by Paolo Cagliari, better known as Veronese.
Criticism has concentrated on the removal of the red coat worn by the Master of Ceremonies, which was shown to have a different binding agent in its pigment to the rest of the canvas and therefore considered not to be part of Veronese's composition.
Bazaine has pointed to the existence of the red robe in the first known copy of the painting, made in 1607, nineteen years after Veronese's death, and the fact that the red was a focal point in the composition.
Curators and experts are counting on the exhibition devoted to the restoration in the Salle des Fetes at the Louvre until 29 March 1993 and their highly detailed catalogue describing the technical aspects of the restoration process (Les Noces de Cana de Veronese — Une oeuvre et sa restauration, Reunion des Musées Nationaux, 1992, FFr350) to refute the historical and artistic arguments.
In the meantime, and as a direct result of the cleaning, an association has been formed in France to campaign for ‘respect of the integrity of the national heritage’ and 150 French artists and intellectuals have signed a petition demanding a moratorium on all new restorations of works of art without prior and open consultation of international opinion.
Throughout the recent restoration the Louvre consulted a commission of six experts.
It comprised Giovanna Nepi Scire (Soprintendente dei Beni Artistici e Storici in Venice), Ottorino Nonfarmale, a restorer working in Bologna, Terisio Pignatti (former director of the Museo Correr in Venice), Professor Roger Rearick (Maryland University), Francesco Valcanover (former Soprintendente dei Beni Artistici e Storici in Venice) and Professor Wolfgang Wolters, Technische Universität, Berlin.
Financed to the tune of FFr5 million by the giant British chemical firm ICI, which also paid FFr2 million towards the Salle des Fetes exhibition and a special laser-lit dinner for 1,000 under the Louvre pyramid, restoration of ‘The Marriage at Cana’ took two and a half years — almost twice the time it took the thirty-four year-old, Verona-born artist and his brother Benedetto to paint Christ's first miracle for the refectory of the Benedictine Monastery of San Giorgio Maggiore in Venice in 1562–63.
As the twenty-two by thirty-two foot painting was too large to move, restoration work was carried out on the spot behind tarpaulins fitted with transparent panels to allow visitors — most of them drawn to the Salle des Fetes by the ‘Mona Lisa’— to watch work in progress.
On 3 June last the painting was badly slashed in five places when it fell from the wall and caught on the scaffolding used by the restorers (see The Art Newspaper No.20, July-September 1992, p.1).
The largely vertical tears, ranging from 20 to 60 cm in length, were successfully repaired in time for the opening of the exhibition.
In February 1989, when the Louvre was closed for a month, museum experts under the direction of Lola Faillant-Dumas examined the ‘Marriage at Cana’ with infra-red reflectography, using a Hamatsu camera attached to a screen for immediate visualisation.
The process revealed no underdrawing although the life-size X-ray plates, now on temporary exhibition in the Salle des Fetes, show a large number of changes during the execution of the picture.
The Master of Ceremonies on the left of the picture, for example, was at first considerably slimmer, his head thrown back.
The musicians grouped in the centre of the canvas were initially composed in different positions: the central violinist originally leant to the right to read a sheet of music and now sits upright to play.
Six members of the Louvre restoration workshops worked full time on the canvas throughout.
Merely cleaning it took from December 1989 to June 1990.
While the linen canvas, comprising six horizontal strips, proved to be in good condition, the original varnish had turned brown with age, dulling colours and giving an overall yellowish hue to the work.
Ultra-violet examinations were used to determine the thickness of varnish and the restoration work executed on the top of the varnish.
Eventually, after tests on twelve separate zones on the painting, most of the original varnish was removed, leaving a thin protective layer.
Subsequent cleaning revealed both Veronese's original colours and the extent to which later overpainting had been carried out.
Critics of the restoration have concentrated on the removal of the rust red coat of the Master of Ceremonies who addresses the married couple on the left.
Duller than neighbouring colours and lacking in shading, the red coat was shown by X-ray analysis to cover a slightly shorter and far more finely draped garment in the same green as the man's sleeves.
An examination of twelve tiny samples of paint from the area of the coat revealed that the binding agent used in the red layer contained a sizeable amount of natural resins, unlike the linseed base used in pigment on the rest of the work.
Louvre experts concluded the red coat was an addition, probably executed between 1594 and 1607, for reasons which are still unknown and, after consultation with the international panel of six experts, stripped it off.
Another dramatic revelation afforded by the restoration process was the fact that the head of the tight faced, balding Benedictine seated at the right of the picture, whose black habit appears strangely severe amid so many bright fabrics, was an afterthought, painted on paper and stuck onto the canvas with animal glue when the rest was finished so as not to offend an unknown cleric.
Discoveries
A Madonna by Jacopo della Quercia emerges from the shadows
No-one knows how long it has been there, high up in the courtyard of the Palazzo Segni Masetti, which now belongs largely to the Associazione Commercianti.
Recently, this full-length terracotta Madonna 127 cm high, was sent for conservation and the discovery that it was by the great sculptor Jacopo della Quercia was made, which has caused all the more excitement because it was completely unexpected.
It is not surprising to find the figure in Bologna, because together with Siena and Lucca, that was one of della Quercia's towns, but there was not the slightest hint of its existence in the documents relating to his life.
Mediocre modern copies of it do however exist, some in and around Bologna, while others have been on the market and yet others are in museums (Amsterdam, Detroit).
Most are half-length casts made from a mould taken before 1902, which were also copied in wood and marble.
The scholar Massimo Ferretti, who will be publishing the sculpture in detail in Arte a Bologna No. 3, dates it to around 1410, shortly after the famous tomb of Ilaria del Carretto in Lucca Cathedral, the object of a recent and controversial restoration.
He says that that it shows a revival of gothicism which coincided with the development of the new classicism, and that it has clear connections with the work of Nanni di Banco and Ghiberti.
The Madonna will be on display in the Museo Civico Medievale until 8 February together with a newly discovered, early fourteenth-century, polychrome wooden Crucifixion by Sant'Agostino di Cesena and the late fifteenth-century ‘Martyrdom of St Sebastian’ from the Vaselli Chapel in San Petronio, both recently restored.
Books
Artists' biographies
Wrestling feebly with Epstein
Hagiography from a friend
Given the controversy that surrounded Epstein's sculpture and drawings, the persona presented by the contemporary media and the manner in which even mainstream criticism often alluded to the supposedly alien character of his work, explicitly stressing the otherness of artist and art, a critical biography would be extremely valuable.
Unfortunately, this deeply disappointing book is not it.
Hagiographic in tone, it fails to grapple with the real issues of racism, Jewish identity, sexuality, notions of femininity/masculinity, the social, political and artistic milieu in Britain, all of which are raided by his life, work and its public reception.
Even the notion of Establishment in the title goes unexamined.
The author's art historical understanding is extremely shaky; in addition to numerous errors of fact and spelling, several pieces of recent literature — on Epstein's earliest work, the Oscar Wilde Tomb, the W.H. Hudson Memorial ‘Rima’ and on the Liverpool commission — are overlooked.
Many lengthy evocations of individual works will be incomprehensible to readers as few of the sculptures and drawings are illustrated.
Gardiner, the Observer's architectural critic, knew Epstein, Lady Epstein and their family from the early Fifties and this biography is authorised in that he has been given unprecedented access to family papers, including letters between the artist and Kathleen Garman.
They met in 1921, became lovers, had three children, and their relationship survived the vicissitudes of his work, travels, other relationships and the understandable but violent jealousy of his long-suffering wife.
After the latter's death in 1947, Kathleen became mistress of his household and his wife in 1954.
Gardiner traces the passions, torments and tragedy (the death of two of their children) of their shared life, and sheds light on episodes which have long been the subject of rumour and anecdote.
Though his first wife remains a shadowy and rather pathetic figure about whom one longs to know more, there is plenty here on the crowded, ramshackle household and its often hand-to-mouth existence constructed entirely around the demands of the workaholic, temperamental sculptor — the hoarded treasures, the art and music which pervaded the house, the much loved but somewhat casually raised children, the constantly changing and eccentric cast of live-in models, nannies, general factotums, portrait sitters, studio visitors, plaster moulders, musicians, friends and members of the press who were usually given short shrift.
Gardiner usefully quotes or paraphrases the lively testimony of many sitters and visitors from a wide variety of sources and it is at these moments that the artist at his most affectionate, considerate, perceptive and even gently self-deprecating comes to life.
All too often, however, we see him angry, hurt, suspicious of friends as much as enemies, rarely grateful to those who stuck their necks out on his behalf, working obsessively at powerfully emotional works while seemingly ignoring the emotions generated by the domestic chaos around him.
Clearly he was working under more or less constant stress.
This was partly self-induced through the precarious complexity of his affairs and his suspicion of dealers, partly imposed by the difficulties implicit in negotiating and getting paid for commissions (which he did receive despite the title) and his public notoriety.
As a behind-the-scenes view of an artist's life it makes an interesting comparison with other recent artists' lives — Rodin, John, Modigliani and Picasso — all of whom he knew.
It is when we get away from the domestic scene that the more serious flaws become apparent.
Epstein had one of the most important collections of African and Oceanic sculpture ever assembled in this country and introduced a number of contemporaries to non-European art; most recent scholarship puts the beginning of his collecting activity in 1912 when it is documented but Gardiner places it in 1904,(i.e. before Derain and Picasso) when Epstein was a penniless student in Paris.
There is no real evidence for this.
Explanations of art movements such as the New Sculpture and Vorticism, of important works such as the 1913 ‘Rock Drill’, and the role of his philosopher friend, T.E.
Hulme, are either garbled or entirely passed over.
At the same time Gardiner takes a curiously prudish line on the emotional mainsprings of Epstein's art by denying or glossing over the disturbing sexual elements in his pre-1914 work, including ‘Rock Drill’ and in later pieces such as‘Jacob and the Angel’.
There is a frightening lack of perspective; whatever the circumstances Gardiner asserts that Epstein is justified and every work a masterpiece.
At no point is the possibility entertained that some works might be flawed, that some criticism might be valid.
Other artists and movements are consistently denigrated, presumably to inflate Epstein's stature though it does him a disservice.
The New Sculpture is written off as ‘a meaningless period in English sculpture’; Gill is ‘more like a predator than a collaborator’ and even his typography is dismissed with contempt; we hear twice that Muirhead Bone, a steadfast and astute supporter, was an unimaginative artist; Charles Holden's London Transport Headquarters at 55 Broadway (for which he received the RIBA Medal) is ‘practical but dull’; and the love-hate relationship with Moore is superficially handled.
With many more illustrations, a shorter text rigorously checked and edited, decent notes and index, the book would be greatly improved but is is sad to reflect on a great opportunity missed.
Mexicas/Aztecs and other Americans
Goodbye to 1492
Three exhibition catalogues generated by last year's quasi-celebrations
1992, the quincentenary of Columbus's discovery of the Western hemisphere, resulted in numerous exhibitions with themes relating to the Americas, and catalogues of varying range and density.
The exhibition most deliberately linked to Columbus was that at the Musée Barbier-Mueller in Geneva, the catalogue for which is a magnificent book, written by eight authors, half of whose essays were translated into French (Spanish and Catalan editions are available but not an English translation).
The introduction is an essay by Octavio Paz in which he stresses the isolation in which the civilisations of the Americas evolved (as opposed to Europe with contacts from the East) and he examines the reactions of Europeans over the years to Mexican art.
There follow accounts not only of the four voyages of Christopher Columbus but of the life of Cortez and conquest of Mexico, followed by specialised essays on the peoples and art of Mexico, Central America, Peru and Amazonia, with particular emphasis on the art of the island of Marajo at the mouth of the Amazon, in which the Barbier-Mueller Museum holdings are particularly rich.
A wide selection from the museum's collection is illustrated in beautiful photographs by Ferrazzini.
Finally there is a bibliography (which does not include John Hemming's excellent account of the conquest of Peru) and an index (the only catalogue of the three to include one).
Each essay is illustrated by photographs of sites, both in Portugal and the Americas, old engravings and maps, and photographs of exceptional objects in other museums on which authors other than the eight essayists have written observations.
Sometimes the approach is very subjective, but the result is entertaining and informative, easy to read and full of insight.
The most ambitious of the three catalogues is that from Brussels, which includes art from Pole to Pole.
Again, the catalogue is in French.
These essays are not illustrated, although they often describe sites and buildings, are set in small grey type, and do not always bear much relation to the objects illustrated — it is to be wondered if all the essayists were consulted about, or shown, the selection for the exhibition.
But readers should not be discouraged because they would miss Ted Leyenaar's essay on the ball game of Mexico, which the Geneva volume only mentions in passing and about which Marcia Castro Leal in The Art of Ancient Mexico catalogue informs us that many of the previously held ideas may now be ‘totally discredited’.
It is a pity that Michael Coe's essay on Maya hieroglyphs is not illustrated, but he makes the interesting point that vessels appear to be labelled much as they were in the classical world of the Mediterranean.
Amalia Cardos de Mendez in the Art of Ancient Mexico sets out a simple plan for the language and goes to great length to explain the Maya calendar.
Allen Wardwell gives a masterful outline of North America, and it is a delight to see an illustration of the mica hand from Hopewell.
The essays for the art of Chile and Argentina are useful.
All the captions for the numerous photographs are usually on the same page and often incorporate further observations: they are followed by a series of excellent maps with sketches of typical motifs which are repeated on plans indicating the horizons, thus simplifying the dates and locations.
There is a short bibliography but no index.
In fact this is a catalogue for the specialist who already has a knowledge of the subject, rather than someone approaching the art for the first time.
The Art of Ancient Mexico, the catalogue of the exhibition recently held at the Hayward Gallery (closed 6 December 1992) is confined to the art of Mexico and the Mayan empire.
The photographs are excellent, clustered with captions after an explanatory essay, or in some cases a series of short essays.
The introduction is lucid but many of the essays would have benefited from editing after translation.
The Spanish origin of the catalogue may also explain the absence of a bibliography and index, but does not explain why the Mexicas have replaced the well known Aztecs.
The scattering of maps is random and often difficult to read, but it is the only catalogue to illustrate a Chacmool in the supine position with head turned that impressed Henry Moore.
Publications received
architecture
David Watkin A History of Western Architecture (Laurence King, London, 1992) 591pp. 749 b/w and col. ills.
p/b £15.95 Paperback reprint of David Watkin's highly esteemed history of architecture from Knossos to Quinlan Terry.
Combines clear, elegant analysis of individual buildings and their designers with an overview of the culture and preoccupations of the age in which they were produced.
Described as ‘an intellectual triumph’ by John Summerson, Watkin's book is a delight to read and should be recommended to all students.
Donald Martin Reynolds Nineteenth-century Architecture, the Cambridge Introduction to Art (Cambridge University Press, 1992) 106pp. numerous b/w ills.
p/b £7.95 Reliable but not very inspiring trot through the architecture of the nineteenth century.
Conveys the range of the century's building styles without much of the beauty or excitement.
Probably not helped by rather dreary illustrations.
Robert Mark and Ahmet S. Cakmak Eds.
Hagia Sophia: from the Age of Justinian to the Present (Cambridge University Press, 1992) 255pp. 124 b/w ills.
£55 Many important questions remain to be answered about the building of Hagia Sophia.
The nature of the theoretical and material resources available to the early designers; the behaviour of its much-modified structure over the ages; and the capacity of the present-day structure to survive earthquakes, are all of pressing importance.
The present essays are papers arising from a colloquium held at Princeton on the fabric of Hagia Sophia and related buildings.
Subjects addressed include ‘Roman Experimental Design and the Great Church’ by William L. MacDonald; ‘Byzantine Writers on the Fabric of Hagia Sophia’by Cyril Mango; ‘The Rotunda of Thessaloniki; Seismic Behaviour of Roman and Byzantine Structures’by George Penelis and others, all accompanied by maps, charts, plans and photographs.
This is a highly technical volume, not recommended to the general reader.
Kristin Feireiss Ed.
Daniel Libeskind.
Extension to the Berlin Museum with the Jewish Museum Department (Ernst and Sohn, Berlin, 1992) 148pp. 87 ills.
text in German and English with Hebrew summary, DM48 In 1989 the American architect Daniel Libeskind won the competition to design an extension to the Berlin Museum to house a history of the collection of the Museum's Jewish Department and create a setting for an account of the history of Berlin's Jews.
Libeskind's radical design — a tortured zig-zag symbolically fractured — was embraced by the Berlin government and by all those connected with the project.
In the words of the director of the Yeshive University Museum, New York: ‘This is the most difficult project for a museum that I can imagine.
It is difficult and must remain that way because history has left us with this difficulty.
If it ever became easy it would lose its meaning’.
Initially estimated at over DM170 million, Libeskind was obliged to reduce the costs considerably.
Further political wrangling had put the project in jeopardy but the design was ratified by the Berlin Senate in late 1991 and building begins in 1993.
This useful, eloquently written book charts the project and the collection.
collecting and collections
Christina Burrus Les Collectionneurs russes d'une Revolution a l'autre (Editions du Chene, Paris, 1992) 253pp. numerous col. ills.
FFr480 Appealing post-glasnost book on Russian collectors with an emphasis on still extant collections in St Petersburg and Moscow.
Basically a picture book, it looks at the great collections of Schukin, Morozov and Costakis, reproducing the well known photos of the interiors of their homes, but is probably more interesting for the lesser-known contemporary names.
These include the Tchoudnovsky family, whose cramped St Petersburg apartment is filled with around 250 Russian Avant-garde paintings by Filonov, Chagall, Tatlin, Jawlensky, Altman, Larionov, Gontcharova and others.
Other collections include Japanese objects, Russian glass, malachite and furniture.
The quality of items is decidedly variable and the author's aim is clearly not to draw our attention to this, but this is an interesting book both for the illustrations and for the details of the private lives of the collectors featured.
Luke Hermann Die Englische Schule: Zeichnungen und Acquarelle britischer Kunstler (Albertina Press, Vienna, 1992) 225pp. 48 col. 90 b/w ills.
Volume VII of the catalogue of drawings in the Albertina, the whole project overseen by Konrad Oberhuber.
Luke Hermann, former Senior Assistant Keeper at the Ashmolean and Professor of Art History at Leicester University, has produced the present volume.
The text is divided into three parts, corresponding with the tri-partite formation of the collection: drawings assembled by Duke Albert von Sachsen-Teschen (1738–1822), founder of the Albertina; those purchased after his death; and a group of drawings by the British artist Frank Brangwyn, given to the Albertina by Brangwyn in 1914.
Duke Albert began collecting in the 1760s, the dawn of a golden age in British art.
Somewhat surprisingly he seems to have ignored the work of Gainsborough, Reynolds, Turner and Constable, none of whom entered the collection during his lifetime.
Compensations, however, include a fine Lely study of heralds, five excellent Rowlandsons, a group of shipping scenes by Dominic Serres and three attractive watercolours by Francis Wheatley.
The second part of the catalogue broadens out to encompass Beardsley, Burne-Jones, Henry Moore and a Gainsborough, purchased in 1925 while Meder was keeper of the collection.
An interesting, if not stunning, collection given a suitably scholarly catalogue.
design
Margo Rouard-Snowman Museum Graphics (Thames and Hudson, London, 1992) 191pp. fully illustrated in b/w and col. £24 h/b As museum budgets get tighter, museums' desires to project themselves through ever more self-conscious logos, typefaces and carrier bags seem to grow in proportion.
The present volume presents fifty-nine projects from ten countries with a clearly-written if rather congratulatory text by Rouard-Snowman, Professor of Graphic Design at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts, Paris and a designer herself.
This book serves to confirm a lot of prejudices: why is Dutch graphic design so dreadfully small and fiddly?
How come the V&A's lift signs are still made of black chipboard with white plastic letters that drop off at regular intervals?
Line Vautrin and Patrick Mauries Line Vautrin (Thames and Hudson, London, 1992) 112pp. 4 b/w 71 col. ills.
£20 h/b A photographic guide to the quintessentially French art of Line Vautrin, celebrated jewellery and accessory designer — parurière in her own language — whose creations include buttons made of blown glass containing tiny ships, buttons serving as scent bottles, necklaces of frosted glass and necklaces of white beads threaded on wire like wreaths of flowers.
Collected by the likes of Ingrid Bergman, Syrie Maugham, Francoise Sagan and Brigitte Bardot, her work was rediscovered in the late 1980s resulting in exhibitions and collaboration with fashion houses.
Her preface to the book captures the world of war-time Paris where women struggled to remain elegant and the young Vautrin sold her work door-to-door from a suitcase.
Tied in with the third  exhibition of her work by London dealer David Gill who was responsible for her renaissance.
furniture and decorative arts
Charlotte Gere Nineteenth-century Interiors: an album of watercolours (Thames and Hudson London, 1992) 167pp. 30 b/w 70 col. ills.
£28 Very appealing volume produced to resemble a nineteenth-century watercolour album comprising views of interiors in mainland Europe, Britain and Russia with detailed commentary by Charlotte Gere.
Produced to accompany the exhibition at the Frick, New York, earlier this year (closed 21 August), it draws on two private collections, the first a mixed group of views ranging from Carlton House to a Russian dacha; the second, the Wittgenstein family album, a rare complete survivor of this genre with watercolours by various artists produced between 1834 and 1843, depicting the Wittgenstein family homes in Rome, Naples, Potsdam, Berlin, Paris, Geneva, Poland, the Ukraine and Russia.
Two introductory chapters discuss the genre of interior views and the history of the Wittgenstein family, the latter a fascinating roll-call of princely alliances (intermarriage with the Radziwill family) European history (distinguished service in the Napoleonic campaigns) and artistic patronage (Chopin, Schinkel, Winterhalter).
The album remained with the family until this century and was first published by Praz in 1964.
design
Marilyn Hapgood Wallpaper and the Artist (Abbeville Press/John Murray, New York and London, 1992) 271pp. 251 b/w and col. ills.
£55
Lavish, decidedly non-specialist book on the development of what might be termed ‘artist's wallpaper’.
Takes its starting point from the strange notion that names are important: ‘The earliest great wallpaper artist known is Albrecht Durer…
Clearly we are in the hands of a great master with this wallpaper’.
Ignoring all earlier wallpaper and printed paper production the book leaps forward so that by page 34 we are admiring a photograph captioned ‘President Richard Nixon and his family in the foreground, the Natural Bridge of Virginia in the wallpaper background’.
The author's interest is clearly in the Arts and Crafts movement and this gets slightly more detailed attention.
There is also an appealing chapter on children's wallpaper.
drawings
Carol Clark The Robert Lehman Collection, Volume VIII, American drawings and watercolours (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York with Princeton University Press, 1992), 259pp. 392 b/w 52 col. ills.
£65/$90 The volume covering the American drawings from the 2,000-strong Lehman holding housed in the Met.
since 1975.
The catalogue has been prepared by Carol Clark, Professor of Fine Arts and American Studies at Amherst College, Massachusetts.
Only fifteen artists are actually included in the present volume, most of which is taken up by two sketchbooks by the eternally popular Maurice Prendergast, whose Paris sketchbook contains ninety pages of deftly-sketched scenes of bourgeois life, mainly park and street scenes with women and children.
The other Prendergast sketchbook in the collection, known as the Large Boston Public Gardens Sketchbook, is very much the same sort of thing but more fully worked, with numerous full-page watercolour sketches, possibly intended as presentation pieces to demonstrate his abilities to future patrons.
Other sketchbooks reproduced in this volume include those of Robert Henri who recorded a trip to Spain in 1906 following the death of his wife, and of David Levine who was commissioned to do a series of drawings of  European cities and buildings by Esquire Magazine in 1960.
Levine's depictions of the gargoyles of Notre Dame are much in the tradition of Meryon.
Christopher White, Catherine Whistler and Colin Harrison, Eds.
Old Master Drawings in the Ashmolean: a selection of one hundred from the museum's collection (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1992) 232pp. 100 col. ills.
£27.50 p/b £60 h/b The history of the Ashmolean's drawings collection is a roll-call of villains and heroes: on the death of Sir Thomas Lawrence in 1830 the British government showed supreme indifference to acquiring his outstanding collection of Old Master drawings, perhaps the finest ever assembled.
King George IV, the British Museum, Sir Robert Peel and Lawrence's patron Lord Dudley all turned down the offer of the collection.
It was only the resolute persistence of the dealer Samuel Woodburn who purchased the collection from the artist's executor in 1834, together with the support of the collector and academic the Revd Dr Henry Wellesley and the generosity of Lord Eldon that enabled part of the collection to be saved for the nation and for the new University Galleries, Oxford.
After protracted negotiations in July 1845 twenty cases of drawings were delivered to the Galleries.
The present selection includes a number of the Lawrence drawings together with later bequests of outstanding merit.
Each drawing is accompanied by a lengthy commentary and catalogue details.
Christopher White's introduction sets out the history of the collection, plus six-page bibliography.
Originally accompanied an exhibition shown at the Palazzo Ruspoli, Rome and the Ashmolean, Oxford.
nineteenth-century painting
Jean Sutherland Boggs and Anne Maheux Degas Pastels (Thames and Hudson, London, 1992) 191pp. 15 b/w 70 col. ills.
£45 Felicitous combination of distinguished art historian and conservator with background in Degas pastels and their conservation.
Draws together much of the recent scholarship on Degas, both art historical and technical, and presents it in a readable but sophisticated manner.
Comprises an elegant essay by Sutherland Boggs on Degas' development with particular reference to his use of pastel followed by a discussion by Maheux of his use of pastel including pastel paste and peinture a l'essence, his choice of papers and use of fixative, the latter crucial to the effect of his later sheets.
The main body of the book comprises full-page colour illustrations of sixty-five of the finest pastels (a number previously unpublished) with detailed commentaries.
Fine quality colour reproductions serve the extraordinary beauty of these images well.
Fully annotated, glossary of technical terms, chronology of the artist's life and the dates of the pastels, bibliography and exhibitions.
Highly recommended.
Maurice Davies Turner and Perspective: the artist and linear perspective (Tate Gallery Publications, London, 1992) 128pp. 134b/w and col. ills p/b £17.95 Result of a Volkswagen Turner Scholarship at the Tate Gallery.
The author is a rare combination of mathematician turned art historian, an ideal combination for exploring this aspect of Turner's career.
The catalogue centres on the public lectures the artist gave in his capacity of Professor of Perspective at the Royal Academy between 1807 and 1837.
These lectures have never been published and have received little critical attention since the time of their delivery (when they met with a mixed reception mainly due to Turner's chaotic approach to delivering a lecture).
The present work reproduces many of the diagrams used to illustrate the lectures and examines the impact of the artist's theories on his own work.
Dry but interesting.
William Innes Homer Thomas Eakins, his life and Art (Abbeville Press/John Murray, New York and London, 1992) 276pp. 243 b/w and col. ills.
£60  Straightforward if rather opaquely written account of the life and work of one of America's great painters, not sufficiently celebrated outside his own country.
In 1871, aged twenty-seven Eakins painted ‘Max Schmitt in a single scull (The champion single sculls)’, a work of startling intensity and lucidity whose control of light recalls Canaletto, while ‘The Gross Clinic’ of 1875 draws artistically on Rembrandt in its depiction of an operation on a leg bone, resulting in an image of startling modernity in its blood-stained detachment.
Sadly little attempt to discuss Eakins work in terms of nineteenth-century Realism or its American philosophical context — an attempt to compare him with Whitman is not fully argued — but the remarks on his Quaker background are telling.
Homer is refreshingly critical about his chosen subject and questioning about the motivation behind such works as the truly horrible ‘The Agnew Clinic’ of 1889 which depicts a mastectomy performed in an operating theatre crowded with doctors.
Perhaps the publication of this book will encourage a European institution to consider a major exhibition of this artist's work.
Rossetti, his wombat, and the humidor
From Whistler also, we first had the story of the wombat, bought at Jamrack's by Rossetti for the sake of its name.
Whistler was dining at Tudor House, and the wombat was brought on the table with coffee and cigars.
It was an amazing evening,[George]Meredith talking with, if possible, more than his usual brilliancy, and [Algernon Charles]Swinburne reading aloud passages from the Leaves of Grass.
But Meredith was witty as well as brilliant, and the special target of his wit was Rossetti, who, as he had invited two or three of his patrons, did not appreciate the jest.
The evening ended less amiably than it had begun, and no one thought of the wombat until a late hour, and then it had disappeared.
It was searched for high and low.
Days passed, weeks passed, months passed, and there was no wombat.
It was regretted, forgotten.
Long afterwards, Rossetti, who was not much of a smoke, got out the box of cigars he had not touched since that dinner.
He opened it.
Not a cigar was left, but there was the skeleton of the wombat.
For the record
An exclusive interview with Noel Alexandre, son of the collector and author of the revolutionary book on Modigliani
World premiere of the newly surfaced Modigliani drawings at the Palazzo Grassi in Venice
Noel Alexandre, historian, on the writing of his book
Monsieur Alexandre, can you explain in what way your work on Modigliani is original?
I have not tried to write an original book.
I am by training and profession an historian; my role has been to collect these documents, to present and elucidate them, to attempt to show their meaning and limitations, according to traditional historical methods.
The interest and value of the documents themselves constitute the interest and value of my work.
What are these documents?
They are documents of all sorts which were given to me by my father or which I found among his papers after his death in 1968.
There are letters, drawings, contemporary photographs, eye witness accounts.
You see Modigliani among other artists who were also friends of my father.
Some of them were to become famous, like Brancusi, Gleizes, le Fauconnier, but most are now completely forgotten, such as Drouard, Doucet, Centore, Coustillier, Guiraud-Riviere and so on because they were nearly all killed in World War I. In my book I show some of their works because they were Modigliani's everyday companions.
My father's clinic was on the rue Pigalle in Montmartre.
Not far from there, at 7 rue Delta, he had hired a pavilion due for demolition for these artists (it has long since gone and been replaced by a house).
Many of the documents are about the life of these young artists ‘au Delta’.
But other documents also are amazing.
For example, I have found an account dated 10 December1924 by Modigliani's mother: ten pages closely typed on a poor typewriter which give information of the utmost importance about Modigliani's life in Leghorn, from his birth in 1884 to his arrival in Paris in 1906.
From 1924 my father intended to write a major work about his friend and that is why he had asked Modigliani's mother to supply him with all possible information about his childhood and adolescence.
But my father never realised his plan…
Why did he not?
I can't give you a good answer.
For the whole of his life my father was preoccupied by the duty he felt in some way to bear witness to his friend and his works.
He knew that he had been the only really close friend and confidant of Modigliani from 1907 to 1914, until they were separated by the war.
He wanted to write something which would be profoundly true and he would have liked to have corrected the image of Modigliani which developed very early on in a number of dubious publications.
In 1951, he could still write to an author who wanted to publish some works in his collection: ‘I have not given you my permission because I do not know what will be in the book you are writing.
I want to reserve the publication of these works for a book which will give a view of Modigliani which is much closer to reality, and very different from that which you might get at present from what has been published so far in France and abroad’.
My father had a very busy career and was enthusiastic about other artists such as Mere Genevieve Gallois (all just as unknown as Modigliani in his day), so he continually postponed the project, counting on his excellent memory.
But at the end of his life his memory abandoned him and he died without having written the book.
Have you therefore written the book your father wanted to write?
Not exactly.
No one can know what he would have written because he was a direct witness and he had an exceptional personality — a deep artistic sensibility and great erudition.
Furthermore, he never asked me to write it in his place.
I think that at the end of his life he thought that what he knew was lost for ever.
It was to prevent that happening that I wanted to act, in homage to Modigliani and to my father, and out of a sense of duty to their memory.
My training as an historian would allow me to save what could be saved and is why I got to work many years ago.
Already when my father was still alive and under his instructions, I inventoried his complete collection of drawings, carefully noting down memories aroused in him by the sight of these works dating from his life before 1914 in the company of Modigliani.
From when I was very young, my father had nurtured a love of art in me; I shared a great deal with him (he took me nearly every Sunday to the Louvre) and was close to him until his death.
But it is about ten years ago that I really got to work.
For a long time I did not know whether the notes I was accumulating would be published one day, but that did not deter me.
Three years ago, I gave the manuscript to another historian to read, Francois Bergot, inspecteur general des Musées de France, director of the Musée des Beaux-Arts in Rouen, and a friend.
He was fired by it.
Immediately he lent me his support, his judgement and helped me find a publisher, putting me in touch with Jan Martens and the Fonds Mercator which publish admirable art books.
It was Francois Bergot and Jan Martens who both suggested taking advantage of the gathering together of all the drawings for the book to present as many of them as possible to the public in a splendid exhibition.
What did this drawings collection of your father consist of?
How was it made up?
How important was it?
The former collection of Dr Paul Alexandre consisted of about 500 drawings.
Of its kind it was unique because of its importance and because it covered the period from 1906 to 1914, from Modigliani's arrival in France until the general call-up in 1914.
It is the least known and most obscure phase of the painter's life because, despite all my father's efforts to promote Modigliani and to make the quality of his works known, he was his only real friend and protector, his only admirer and buyer at that time.
From the day of their first meeting, Paul Alexandre was struck by his prodigious artistic talents and begged him not to destroy any of his studies, offering him what little money a young doctor could spare.
And until they were separated by the war, he followed his friend's artistic production step by step with the intention of saving an exceptional body of masterpieces.
That collection by itself was more important than all the authentic Modigliani drawings published during my father's life-time.
It included academic studies, theatrical studies, caryatids, sculptural heads, nudes, portraits, studies for paintings.
It was not completely unknown because my father had let a few art lovers see it, and, later on, some researchers into Modigliani.
In addition, he occasionally lent this or that drawing to exhibitions.
But he wanted to save their publication for the book he was always going to write and which was to follow ‘line for line’ the artistic development of his friend during those decisive years.
That series of drawings shows that from 1906 the quality of authentic drawings by Modigliani is truly exceptional.
Faced with the ridiculous fakes which my father always found even in the best books, he thought that the publication of his collection would be the best defence and illustration of his friend's genius.
Have you been able to gather together the whole of your father's former collection?
No, but the greater part.
For example, I have not tried to find forty or so drawings which belonged to him — and which will, therefore, not be illustrated in my book — because they are already well known and have been published elsewhere.
Altogether I have assembled 391 drawings and fifty studies which are part of an album dating from 1906 or early1907, before Modigliani and Paul Alexandre had met.
That makes a total of 441.
They are all accurately reproduced in my book, but, of course, it will not be possible to exhibit them all.
In fact, we don't know yet how many will be exhibited, but the main thing is to give a balanced view of the whole.
In this book, which will also serve as the catalogue for the exhibitions, has it been you who has written about the unpublished drawings?
Of course.
I am the sole author of this book, although Monsieur Francois Bergot has agreed to write the introduction.
Around forty of these drawings have been known for years from books and exhibitions, but as things are, I am the only person in the world at the moment to have complete knowledge of what that collection was in its entirety.
In the circumstances it is obvious that it was up to me to present them first.
But I expect many others to work on them after me and analyse them in their turn.
I think this book and these exhibitions cannot fail to give a new direction to Modigliani studies.
More than seventy years after his death and after all the books and shows which have been dedicated to him, one might expect that nothing of any importance would appear now to improve the idea we have of his life and his work.
But nothing could be further from the truth.
All of Modigliani's formative years will become a new area of study.
We will discover that he was master of his technique and of his style very early on.
Very early on he knew exactly what he meant to do in art.
In these drawings one sees experiments and achievements that until now one thought came much later in his career.
How will your book give a different image of Modigliani from the usual one in already published works?
I cannot sum up in a few sentences what will be the substance itself of my book.
Besides, I have not wanted to play the redresser of wrongs, the polemicist who denounces the work of whoever it might be.
There is no doubt that some very serious and remarkable studies have been devoted to Modigliani.
But the scholars agree that reliable sources are missing for the period from his arrival in Paris in 1906 until the war, and that what there is is superficial and contradictory.
Very rapidly Modigliani fell victim to what you might call ‘the myth of bohemia’, from which he never emerged.
My book shows that Modigliani was not that gloomy pessimist of morbid temperament who ‘destroyed himself with as much care as he put into constructing his talent’, but that he never doubted his worth nor the imminence of success.
Despite natural hardships and TB (which he resisted remarkably for twenty years), he loved life passionately.
He looked for fulfilment in the complete dedication of his being to the vocation which pushed him irresistibly towards painting and painting with joy.
I believe that when we shall have heard the testimony of Paul Alexandre and seen Modigliani's magnificent drawings dating from this time, a truth much more beautiful than the legend will assert itself on its own.
What did your father appreciate most in the work of Modigliani?
The deep friendship between my father and Modigliani derived from the fact that both believed life to have a meaning and that the artist's duty was to say something essential to mankind.
That vision of man is particularly apparent in his drawings.
He ennobled everything he touched with his brush or his pencil.
He showed the almost divine side of human nature.
For that matter, Brancusi saw things the same way at this time.
Brancusi was almost a peasant when he arrived in Paris but he looked behind appearances at a more profound reality, which one might call the eternal reality in things.
All this profoundly attracted my father.
In their dialogues, the meaning of art and the meaning of life were almost inextricably entwined.
He talked to Modigliani, for example, of Bergson, the Jewish philosopher who nearly converted to Catholicism at the end of his life; and through Bergson, of the concept of conscience and the relationship between morality and religion.
All this deeply interested Modigliani who was a remarkably cultivated and educated man, as Paul Alexandre proves.
Have you thought what changes the publication of this book may bring to your life?
I have not really thought about it.
Like my father I love books and solitude and I flee from publicity, the brutality of the media, interviews where they try to get the interviewee to say things he doesn't really think, as though to catch him out.
Frankly, none of that interests me in the slightest.
I am also a musician and music occupies a great deal of my time.
A publisher on the trail
The person responsible for discovering the existence of these drawings and for encouraging Noel Alexandre to publish the account of his father's friendship with Modigliani is the Belgian, Jan Martens, head of the publishing house Fonds Mercator, which belongs to the financial group of Banque Paribas.
This came about because Martens had produced a guide to the Rouen Museum, in which there are two important portraits in oils of the Alexandre family.
The curator of that museum told him that a book was being written that would transform everyone's perception of Modigliani, and this led Martens to Noel Alexandre.
What began then as a project to publish Alexandre's book developed into the exhibition as well.
Martens says: ‘Of course I realised immediately the historic importance of the book and the show together.
Dr Alexandre was a privileged witness to what we now consider to have been the most important period in Modigliani's life, from 1907 to 1914; that is, from his arrival in Paris.
Paul Alexandre's archive, which has been thoroughly researched by his son Noel, is invaluable: for example, it includes group photographs which enable one to reconstruct the relationships between Modigliani and other artists of the day.
From the collection as a whole there emerges above all a Modigliani who was a most able draughtsman, a Modigliani much maligned by the critics who have unfortunately let themselves be led astray by legends rather than concentrating on the work.
The drawings are in extraordinarily good condition, although on fragile paper, with, at most, pin holes in the corners’.
On the question of ownership, Martens replies that the owners are represented by the Mercator Foundation of Paribas Bank Belgium.
He also emphasises that there is no question of the drawings going on the market, and that the agreement to publish and exhibit was given only by virtue of the moral role Noel Alexandre exercises in the name of his father and of Modigliani.
The Art Market
London Old Master sales
New records for old pictures
Christie's pre-eminent but records fall at both houses
While it is always easier to offer observations in hindsight, in many ways the results of the two Old Master pictures sales in London were predictable before they took place.
Of the two, Christie's not only offered the better quality sale, but also presented their material with more conviction.
Christie's might occasionally be blamed for ‘too many notes’ at least with regard to minor lots (see lot 18 in the present sale) but their catalogues are undoubtedly superior at the present time.
Sotheby's 9 December sale totalled £10.8 million with premium, 63% sold by lot, 73.8% by value, Christie's on 11 December £14.9 million with premium, 67.4% by lot, 83% by value.
Examples of underpresenting lots at Sotheby's included lot 9, ‘Three figures at a table’ by a follower of Caravaggio, which found its own price at £105,000 ($168,000, est. £20,000–30,000); lot 12 ‘Christ in the house of Martha and Mary’by Vasari, ‘the cheapest Vasari I've ever seen’, was one comment, which made £9,000 ($14,400); and lot 92, ‘The Annunciation’, a late work by Procaccini which made £92,000 ($147,200, est. £20,000–30,000).
Other failures must simply be ascribed to over-estimation: Lorenzo Lotto's ‘The penitent St Jerome in the wilderness’(lot 39, est. £150,000–200,000); School of Zeeland circa 1620 ‘Portrait of a family seated at a table’(lot 13, est. £120,000–180,000); Jan Breughel the Elder ‘A wooded landscape with huntsmen shooting Duck’(lot 33, est. £60,000–80,000); and Canaletto ‘The Grand Canal…’(lot 79, est. £1–1.5 million).
Lack of confidence in the ‘Portrait of Michael Wohlgemut’ attributed to Durer resulted in failure at £380,000 (est. £600,000–800,000) while Sotheby's must have considered themselves unlucky not to find a buyer for the rare Garofalo ‘Calumny of Apelles’(lot 41, est. £200,000–300,000), an important but difficult canvas.
There were of course successes.
A charming Wouwermans ‘Hawking Party in a hilly Landscape’ soared away from its £50,000–70,000 estimate to make £230,000 ($368,000), while the Mountbatten Koninck (lot 20) compared favourably with the one at Christie's (lot 101, unsold) and made £900,000, bought by Hubner.
A private buyer bidding in the room purchased two appealing lots, a large ‘Allegory of Abundance’(lot 73) by Domenico Piola (£180,000; $288,000) and a Venetian ‘Masked Ball’ by Giovanni Antonio Guardi (lot 80) for £305,000 ($488,000; est. £180,000–200,000).
Considered a bargain was the impressive Roman School early seventeenth-century ‘Still-life with basket of fruit and two Children’, one of a group of works by this yet unnamed artist, which made £215,000 ($344,000, est. £200,000–300,000).
The merited success of the Goya ‘Bullfight.
Suerte de varas’ is now well known, selling within estimate to the Getty for £4.5 million ($7.2 million).
Less assured was the fate of Christie's cover lot, de Hooch's ‘Courtyard of a House in Delft’(lot 104).
Known to have been offered privately by Christie's in the recent past, it was also thought by some to compare unfavourably with the National Gallery, London, version.
Noortman of London demonstrated their confidence in the work by paying a world record £4 million ($6.4million, est. £4.5–6.5 million).
Elsewhere Christie's seemed to have the luck that Sotheby's lacked.
Considered uninspired, highly-priced and in less than perfect condition by some, Andrea Previtali's ‘Portrait of a young Gentleman’(lot 6) still went to £150,000 ($240,000) while ‘The Piazza San Marco, Venice’ attributed to Francesco Guardi (lot 24) reached £130,000 ($208,000) against an estimate of £30,000–40,000.
The obviously poor condition of the lower half of lot 50, Hans Memling's ‘Virgin and Child enthroned’ was also forgiven, and the panel sold for £170,000 ($272,000, est. £200,000–300,000).
There was surprise among dealers in the room that the fine and large pair of Lacroix de Marseille ‘Morning’ and ‘Evening’(lot 34) failed to find buyers: ‘too big’was one verdict, which seemed to be justified by the success of a smaller pair two lots later (£120,000; $192,000).
Not dissimilar in mood, a beautiful, mint ‘River Tagus at Dawn’ by Jean Pillement (lot 38) made a record for the artist at £100,000 ($160,000, est. £30,000–50,000).
Again not unknown to the market, having been previously estimated at £500,000–700,000 by Sotheby's then offered to the Louvre, the first of the Rubens, ‘Portrait of Madame de Vicq’(lot 56), was nonetheless an outstanding work which narrowly failed to sell at £950,000 (est. £1–1.5 million), and sold after the sale.
Of the remaining Rubens, lot 57 ‘The Marriages of Constantine and Faustina and of Constantia and Licinius’ made a new record for an oil sketch at £680,000 ($1.08, est. £500,000–700,000).
For many the highlight of the sale was the last of the Rubens, ‘The Entombment’, formerly in the Demidoff collection and unseen since 1921.
Hung just above the auctioneer's head, the canvas dominated the room, selling to a private collector for £950,000 ($1.52 million, est £600,000–800,000).
Record Melendez at Bonhams
Bought in an English street market thirty years ago for a few shillings, a hitherto  unidentified still-life by Luis Melendez (1716–1780) was sold at Bonhams on 10 December for £850,000 ($1.36 million).
‘Still life of sea bream, oranges, garlic, a cloth and kitchen utensils’ is one of a group of such works dating from the early 1770s; the Prado has a second version.
The picture was bought on the telephone by a private European buyer, exceeding its unpublished pre-sale estimate of around £300,000–400,000.
Jourdan-Barry results surprising
Billed as the most important sale of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century French silver to appear at auction for twenty years, the results of Sotheby's sale of the Jourdan-Barry collection were not outstanding.
The sale total was FFr13,888,000 (£1.6 million; $2.46 million) with 73% sold by value and 72.6% by lot, against a pre-sale estimate of around FFr20 million.
Expert in charge of the sale, Kobus du Plessis, described the results as ‘surprising and illogical in the context of the current market.’
He detected a marked change in buyers' tastes towards pieces dating from the latter part of the eighteenth century and away from seventeenth-century, Louis XIV and Regence work, traditional areas for major collectors.
For these reasons a number of highly estimated lots failed to find buyers while others far exceeded their estimates.
The highest selling lots in the sale were lots 77, a pair of flambeaux by J. Besnier which made FFr1.3 million (£153,700; $232,000) and 47, a pot-a-l'oille by Joubert which sold for FFr1.2 million (£141,800; $214,100).
Christie's undergoes major restructuring
The recession-hit auction house has announced a restructuring of its world-wide operation, combining departments, while further reducing staff numbers.
According to a statement issued by the company, the major specialist departments are to form five key divisions, supported by a small policy team of senior directors from Christie's Europe, America and the Far East.
Clearly a more concerted approach is seen to be necessary in order to secure property from potential consigners.
Lower turnover in some key areas means that London and New York may be in danger of replicating their efforts, not to say chasing the same properties, which the present arrangement should avoid.
The five key decisions of major departments and the directors of Christie's plc, are: Nineteenth- and twentieth-century pictures, including nineteenth-century, Impressionist, modern and contemporary art, under Christopher Burge, president of Christie's America; Jewellery, under Francois Curiel, deputy chairman of Christie's Europe; Old Master pictures and drawings, including sculpture, under Noel Annesley, deputy chairman of Christie's International plc; Furniture, including clocks, porcelain, Islamic and carpets, under Noel Annesley and Dermot Chichester, managing director of Christie, Manson and Woods; Oriental pictures and works of art, comprising Chinese, Japanese and Korean works, under Christopher Davidge, managing director of Christie's International plc.
Paris
The difference an export ban makes
French banker buys van Gogh for $10.5 million
‘Jardin a Auvers’, a painting completed by Vincent van Gogh in July 1890, only days before he killed himself, was bought at auction in Paris on 6 December for FFr55 million (£6.5 million; $10.5 million) by French banker and businessman Jean-Marc Vernes.
The painting, which was classified an historic monument in 1988 and cannot leave the country, had an estimate of FFr50–80 million.
Auctioneer Jean-Claude Binoche handling the sale said he could have raised FFr300 million had international buyers been involved.
‘Jardin a Auvers’ was the first major van Gogh to come up for sale since ‘Portrait du Dr Gachet’, executed 3–5 June 1890, broke all auction house records by fetching $82.5 million (£43.1 million) at Christie's New York in May 1990.
Mr Vernes made a saleroom record for a piece of French furniture in November 1991 by paying FFr23 million for a jewel casket made by Martin Carlin for Marie-Antoinette from the collection of US money manager Roberto Polo.
The banker who is leaving the casket to the State for display at Versailles by means of a dation, the payment of death duties in kind, refused to comment about his intentions for the van Gogh which Paris's nineteenth-century Orsay Museum is keen on acquiring.
There are only twenty-five van Gogh paintings in public collections in France.
Guy Loudmer's much awaited sale of nineteenth- and twentieth-century paintings at Drouot on 23 November meanwhile took a dramatic turn when none of its eight Gericault oil paintings managed to sell.
Estimates ranged from FFr200–300,000 for the ‘Portrait de Felix Bonnesoeur’ to FFr4–6 million for ‘Portrait presume d'Alfred de Dreux enfant’and all the works, from the collections of Duc de Trevise, had faultless provenances.
Buyers determined to get the best bargain from a depressed market engaged in post-sale dealing and ‘Portrait en buste de Pierre-Joseph Dedreux-Dorcy’ reportedly changed hands for between FFr800,000-FFr1 million (£95,240–119,000; $152,400–190,500), its estimates at the sale.
Only thirty-seven of the seventy lots presented sold, for a total of FFr11.76 million (£1.4 million; $2.2 million), with FFr12.44 million being bought in.
The sale of fifty-four modern paintings from the collection of dealer Alain Lesieutre, held by court order on 24 November by auctioneer Francis Briest to cover debts reported to be in the order of FFr30–35 million, raised a little over FFr41 million — compared to a total estimate of between FFr43–65 million.
Most of the works, which had no reserves, were bought by private collectors for figures up to 70% below what Lesieutre — stoically present on the front row — had paid for them when the art market was booming.
Nine works were withheld from sale after hammer prices were dramatically below expectations.
Jean Dubuffet's ‘La Calipette’ of 1961, for example, bought at Sotheby's London in April 1990 for £2,530,000 ($4,427,500) went for a mere FFr6 million (£714,300; $1.12 million), its low estimate, after a long duel between two telephone bidders.
A Nicolas de Stael still life of 1954, ‘Nature morte a la bouteille bleue’ which Lesieutre bought before the art market crash for FFr11 million had difficulty reaching FFr3.8 million (£452,400; $723,800), just under its low estimate.
A Miró pastel and charcoal on paper of 1942 estimated at FFr700–900,000 sold for FFr550,000 (£59,500; $95,240) one sixth of its 1990 price, and a Degas oil sketch went for FFr1.5 million (£178,600; $285,700), its low estimate and a third of its 1989 value.
Auctioneer Jean-Louis Picard fared better with his sale of modern paintings on 25 November with FFr8 million — 80% of the total, sold.
An unusual Marquet view of Paris streets of 1904 sold for FFr1.6 million (£190,500; $304,750), just below its low estimate and a view of Rotterdam by Paul Signac of 1906 for FFr2 million (£238,000; $381,000), its low estimate.
Villa Grisebach and Sotheby's, Berlin
Quiet results for Modern sales
Sotheby's Graf Douglas has ‘complete confidence in Berlin’ Private buyers account for 80%
The fourth auction of twentieth-century German art at Sotheby's in Berlin realised sales of DM2.88 million (£1.15 million; $1.84 million), with 43% unsold by value and 36% by lot.
This is significantly less than the more substantial Spring auction which realised nearly DM6.3 million.
Nonetheless Count Christoph Douglas, head of Sotheby's in Germany, declared that he has ‘complete confidence in Berlin’ as a location and with the level and amount of bidding at the sale, some of it keenly fought and much of it this time conducted by telephone.
Dealers kept a low profile: 80% of the sales went to private bidders.
Max Pechstein's painting ‘Sunset’ of 1929 provided a surprise success, selling to the USA for more than double its estimate at DM440,000 (£176,000; $281,600).
Good prices were also reached by Otto Freundlich's geometrical composition of 1930 which made DM320,000 (£128,000; $204,800) and Otto Mueller's work on paper, ‘Standing Gipsy Girl with a Child in her Arms’, from a private collection in Israel, for which the Berlin dealer Florian Karsch paid DM280,000 (£112,000; $179,200).
The DM180,000 (£72,000; $115,200) fetched by Nolde's watercolour ‘Marsh Landscape with Ferry’ is judged by Count Douglas as the success of a work fresh on the market, unhampered by over-high expectations on the part of the vendors.
But Emil Nolde's work also registered several failures: the girl's head in oils on the title page of the catalogue, for example, and several over-valued flower watercolours.
Other paintings which failed to sell were Max Liebermann's ‘Allee im Tiergarten’(Avenue in the Tiergarten) and Ernst Wilhelm Nay's ‘Dark Rhythms on Ochre’.
However Nay's radiant picture ‘Woman and Ram’ of 1948 was purchased after the sale for DM130,000 net (£52,000; $83,200).
At Villa Grisebach's evening auction (number 27) held on 27 November 1992, eighty items were presented, of which fifty-five were sold, realising DM7.5 million (£3 million; $4.8 million).
While none of the lots was sold to a museum, purchases were made by private bidders from all over Germany.
A fair number of final bids which came in under the reserve price were later accepted.
The auction opened with Daniel Chodowiecki's watercolour ‘Frederick II on horseback’ of 1777, which went under the hammer at DM78,000 (£31,200; $49,920), more than double its estimate; it reached its first highpoint with Max Liebermann's ‘Garden on the Wannsee’of 1916, for which a north German collector paid DM480,000 (£192,000; $307,200).
The watercolour ‘Section of a town’ by Paul Klee was sold for DM250,000 (£100,000; $160,000) and the delicate mixed media work ‘Nude girl on riverbank’by Otto Mueller went to Hamburg for DM260,000 (£104,000; $166,400).
The hammer fell at the lower estimate of DM250,000 (£625,000; $1 million) for El Lissitzky's mixed media work from the ‘Proun’ series; it fell at DM110,000 (£44,000; $70,400), exceeding the reserve, for Sandor Bortnyik's Cubist watercolour of a newspaper reader.
Hopes that Ljubov Popova's painting ‘The clock’ would reach up to DM800,000 (£320,000; $512,000) remained unrealised.
This was among the failures, along with Renoir's red-chalk studies, Jawlensky's ‘Variation’, and two dark Mueller lithographs.
At the end of the session prices between DM240,000 (£96,000; $153,600) and DM380,000 (£152,000; $243,200) were also realised for abstract oil paintings from the 1950s by Willi Baumeister and Ernst Wilhelm Nay.
Maybe yes, maybe no
Phillips auctioneers have responded to Sotheby's rise in buyer's premium with the following statement, issued on 3 December: ‘Whilst Phillips do not wish to increase their buyer's premium, they reserve the right to alter their standard terms and conditions or sale at any time in the future if necessary in order to maintain their competitive position’.
Tribal art at Christie's New York
Christie's have announced that they will be offering tribal art in their New York rooms.
Heading the tribal art department will be Stacy Marcus Chidekel, previously research and curatorial assistant at the American Museum of Natural History.
Allen Wardell, previously head of the Primitive Art department and assistant director for museum services at the Art Institute of Chicago, will be the department's consultant.
Mr Wardell was also head of the Asia Society Gallery in New York for ten years.
The first tribal art sale will be held in May.
Sale of the Riviera Pasha
Paris auctioneer Jacques Tajan hopes to raise FFr60 million in March from the sale of the art collection of French Riviera socialite and former associate of Egyptian King Farouk, Turkish-born Ilhamy Hussein Pasha.
The collection of Pasha, who died last October in his villa at St Jean Cap Ferrat, and who Tajan says was a personal friend, goes on show in his former home 6–9 March.
Tajan will then auction a choice of the best works at the Sporting d'hiver in Monaco on 13 and14 March before returning to the villa to sell the remainder in situ over the following four days.
Said to be the most important such Riviera sale since that of the collection of American socialite Florence Gould, the Pasha auction reflects a similar sort of taste.
Expected to comprise some 3,000 lots, the art, accumulated in the late 1950s and 1960s, will include a significant amount of good quality if not exactly highly refined eighteenth-century French furniture.
It includes a pair of Cressent commodes, console tables attributed to Riesener, a Louis XVI Stumpff secretaire.
Pasha also owned Beauvais, Gobelins and Flanders tapestries, Louis XVI Sevres porcelain and a substantial amount of silverware.
He collected works by Utrillo, Vlaminck and Van Dongen and a painting by Boucher, ‘Venus trouvant le corps d'Adonis’, hung in his bedroom.
Born in Istanbul, Pasha became director of the Deutset-Orient Bank there.
He married Princess Shivekiar, a relative of Egyptian Viceroy Mehemet Ali but was exiled from Egypt after the fall of King Farouk.
He made his home in the Hotel de Paris in Monte Carlo before marrying Mrs Harkness, an American.
American paintings, New York
The $1.1 million O'Keeffe skyscraper
A bright point in unremarkable sales
There are no sweeping statements about resurgence in the American Paintings market that can be made from the major New York sales at Sotheby's and Christie's, on 3 and 4 December, though some areas, like early modern paintings, remain stable, if not strong.
But, while buying still remains erratic, willingness to consign good, and fresh works has increased.
The auctions were better than those of last season, and their strength was buttressed by separate catalogue, single owner sales, in addition to the mixed property catalogues; Sotheby's with the Transco Energy Company's collection of watercolours, and Christie's with the John J. McDonough collection.
Christie's two sales made $11.09 million with premium, 68% sold by lot; Sotheby's two made $12.9 million in total with 74% sold by lot.
Again, with the greatest strength in twentieth-century works, the Sotheby's sale was better overall.
The most notable early landscape was the Thomas Moran Wyoming scene featured in the Transco catalogue cover (lot 14 est. $150–200,000) that brought $240,000 (£150,000) after a keen telephone battle (a price $90,000 higher than it brought at Christie's in 1984).
Two Winslow Homers, an oil and a watercolour, were both somewhat problematic: ‘The unruly calf’, from the Pauline Woolworth Trust, showing a boy trying to coax a tethered calf to move (lot 36 est. $1–1.5 million) was very flat but still found a private buyer at $1.1 million (£687,500).
While early Modernist works were selling, their buyers (particularly dealers) showed caution in spending serious money.
The strongly estimated Charles Demuth on the cover (lot 153 est. $750,000-$1 million), a rare and good Precisionist work, brought an artist's record, while selling to New York's Berry-Hill Gallery for its low estimate.
The 1913 Marsden Hartley (lot 158 est. $1–1.5 million) was the only million dollar plus twentieth-century work, going to Citibank for $1.05 million (£656,250).
The softness of the Georgia O'Keeffe market was evident: the small and not very exciting ‘Cannas’(lot 160 est. $125–175,000) went to Santa Fe dealer, Gerald Peters for $130,000 (£81,250).
Peters also bid on the larger, and far more dazzling ‘Red-Canna’(lot 169 est. $500–700,000), but while he went to $450,000, the painting was bought in at $475,000.
This result would have been different during the O'Keeffe frenzy of the mid-Eighties, when the painting would have sold, and probably for more.
Some of the lesser priced Modernist works were of greater interest, Edward Hopper's 1926–28 watercolour, ‘Gloucester houses’(lot 143 est. $300–400,000), bought cheaply by the Jordan-Volpe Gallery, for $300,000 (£187,500) was a brilliant example of what was to be one of his most popular subjects.
Vance Jordan also bought the early and very strong Max Weber Cubist ‘Interior With Men’(lot 132 est. $75–100,000) for $90,000 (£56,250).
The cachet of single owner sales, regardless of quality was apparent in the packed salesroom, and aggressive prices of the John J. McDonough collection at Christie's.
The sale was also proof of the dwindling supply of great American pictures, when compared to the sale of the Ohio doctor's first collection at Sotheby's, in 1978.
However, the Willard Leroy Metcalf ‘East Boothbay, Harbour’(lot 3 est. $300–500,000) though rather flat, was a good Impressionist picture and sold to a private buyer for $300,000 (£187,500).
While Robert Henri's ‘Skipper Mick’ was a radiant, tightly painted and very appealing late portrait (lot 56 est. $80–120,000), none expected the $315,000 (£196,875) Henri portrait record paid by dealer John Surovek.
The ‘bright and pretty’ pictures that soared in value with Sunbelt new money in the Eighties somehow still held up.
The Frederick Carl Frieseke nude on the McDonough cover (lot 24 est. $300–500,000) spurned a tough economy with a $360,000 (£225,000) final bid, as did the somewhat more sophisticated Richard Edward Miller (lot 44 est. $150–250,000) going to a private buyer for $200,000 (£125,000).
The main sale also had some superb pictures: Hassam's ‘Horse drawn cabs at evening, New York’, previously sold for $900,000 in the 1989 Dorrance sale at Sotheby's, was one of the finest early Hassams ever offered.
But the consignor, had to settle for the $750,000 (£468,750) Berry-Hill Galleries paid this time.
Certainly the most talked about picture in the sale was Georgia O'Keeffe's ‘Ritz Towers’, the early skyscraper painting on the cover (lot 123 est. $1.4–1.8 million).
Its significance and the justification of its $1.1 million price (£687,500) is understood by the fact that there may only be two more skyscraper paintings still privately held.
Above: Edward Hopper ‘Gloucester houses’, 1926–28.
Watercolour.
Sold at the low estimate, $300,000, to the Jordan-Volpe Gallery.
Right: Georgia O'Keeffe ‘Ritz Towers’.
Sold below its estimate of $1.4–1.8 million at a nonetheless creditable $1.1 million
Dulwich pictures at Christie's, mosaics at Sotheby's
This year's winter exhibition at Christie's draws on the rich holdings of Dulwich Picture Gallery to show forty works from that collection at 8 King Street (7 to 24 January).
All the paintings were purchased through Christie's at some point in their early history.
They include a group of works bought in the 1790s for Stanislas Augustus, the last King of Poland by the London-based French picture dealer Noel Desenfans.
The abdication of the King meant that the works never reached their destination: they were bequeathed by Desenfans's business partner Sir Francis Bourgeois to Dulwich with the intention of forming Britain's first national gallery.
Other collectors to have enriched the collection include Charles Fairfax Murray who donated forty eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century paintings to Dulwich in 1911, a number of which will be lent to Christie's.
Dulwich Picture Gallery receives no public funding other than for its educational activities, and despite the £1.5 million raised by its own efforts over the last seven years, it is currently hard pressed to cover its running costs.
It is to be hoped that the Christie's show will help draw further attention to the collection and its plight.
Sotheby's will be devoting their winter exhibition to ‘Mosaics from Jordan’ between 5 and 22 January.
Thirty-six mosaics have been lent by the Jordanian government and will be seen for the first time in Britain.
They include late Roman, Byzantine and early Islamic examples, used to decorate both religious and secular buildings.
The first mosaic in Jordan was only excavated in 1880, since when numerous examples have been uncovered.
Subject matter includes animals, portraits, townscapes and cityplans.
After their Sotheby's showing they will move on to Manchester City Art Gallery for a three-month showing.
Three lectures will be organised in conjunction with the exhibition, to be held on 5, 12 and 19 January at 5.30pm in Sotheby's Colonnade Gallery.
New York
Cartier clocks: method or madness?
Prices have wildly exceeded estimates for second rate pieces.
Why?
Madness would seem to be reigning in the rather exclusive world of old Cartier ‘objets d'art’.
At Sotheby's New York on 21 October last, five clocks of second-rate quality (the property of a collector who had already dispersed the best part of his collection) sent auction prices rocketing.
The first lot was a poorly conceived jade and silver mantle clock estimated at $5,000–7,000 which fetched $85,000 (£53,125).
The following lot was even more surprising: a simple agate ‘strut’ clock of a type produced in considerable number by Cartier.
Since the mid-1970s these clocks appeared regularly at auction and been valued consistently at around $4,000–6,000.
Sotheby's version, with a blue dial, was catalogued and estimated at $5,000–7,000, but, to gasps in the saleroom, reached $80,000 (£50,000).
Excitement mounted: the third lot, estimated at $6,000–8,000 realised $110,000 (£68,750), and the fourth made $140,000 (£87,500) against an estimated of $7,000–9,000.
With the same estimate, the fifth — heavily and poorly repaired — made $160,000.
Speculation among dealers and experts was rife: ‘It's money laundering’; ‘drug money’; ‘Sotheby's will never get paid’, were typical comments.
The only clues to the identity of the telephone bidders was that German was spoken to one of them by the saleroom staff.
At Christie's the next day the situation continued.
A massive pink quartz mantle clock, whose low estimate of $35,000–45,000 reflected doubts about its authenticity, shot to $180,000 (£112,500), while a pretty crystal and ruby table clock with a kingfisher feather dial estimated at $10,000–12,000 made $120,000 (£75,000).
Asked about the results David Warren of Christie's jewellery department said, ‘I don't actually know the answer.
It does strike us as unusual and while I'm obviously aware of some of the individuals who are bidding, I don't know their motives…
The prices these clocks fetched do not reflect the mood of the market’.
The Cartier market has previously been relatively stable at auction.
Serious interest began in the late 1970s when Christie's Geneva sold the superb fifty-piece collection of the late Robert Greene.
Interest generated by this sale drove prices high in the early 1980s.
After a dip caused by the 1981–83 recession, the publication of a definitive catalogue by Hans Nadelhofer helped push up prices, and by 1985 a the third ‘Portico’ mystery clock (from an edition of six) achieved a new world record of $400,000 for a Cartier piece.
The key year for the explosion in prices was 1990 when Christie's New York offered three important pieces including the ‘Elephant’ mystery clock which had previously made $185,000 in Geneva in 1985, now realising $680,000.
The stage was set for the following year when Christie's New York offered the now famous ‘Egyptian’ clock, estimated at $200,000–300,000.
To rapturous applause it made $1.6 million, a world record for any clock at auction.
Emboldened by such success, Christie's felt able to organise an all-Cartier sale, held in Geneva in 1992, the results of which justified their confidence.
The high prices paid, were, however, for pieces of fine quality, markedly different to those sold in New York in October.
A prodigal Rembrandt
Rembrandt ‘Joseph explaining the Dreams of the Butler and the Baker’, sold Christie's Amsterdam 25 November for DFl.414,000 (£151,650; $242,640).
The drawing was identified as a Rembrandt by Christie's Old Master drawings expert, Hugo Chapman, when it was brought in by the owner for valuation.
Bourdichon manuscript at Sotheby's
On 7 December Sotheby's made £150,000 ($240,000) for an extremely rare sixteenth-century secular French  manuscript of the Lives of the Twelve Caesars with illuminations attributed to Jean Bourdichon.
Illuminated in Tours around 1520, it contains twelve full-page miniatures of the emperors and was possibly made for the library of Francois I. The manuscript has a distinguished provenance: it belonged at the Jesuit College de Clermont Library in Paris and later to the celebrated English collector Sir Thomas Phillips who considered it among the finest of his 60,000 manuscripts.
It was sold at Sotheby's in 1946 in the first and greatest post-war Phillips sale for £900.
Print sales
Green shoots of recovery?
Cheering results in the London print auctions including a $1 million lot at Christie's
The Christie's and Sotheby's London print sales which took place from 2 to 4 December produced some notable results, as well as encouraging overall signs in what has been a fairly subdued market.
In total Christie's sale realised £1.95 million ($3 million) with premium, 78.4% sold by value, 62% sold by lot, while Sotheby's made £2.05 million ($3.1 million) with premium, 77.6% sold by value, 72.3% by lot.
Of the two sales Christie's had the stronger Old Master section, with two outstanding lots.
A fine early impression of ‘The Resurrection’ after Pieter Brueghel the Elder (lot 3, est. £24,000–30,000) was keenly contested by Ray Lewis, David Tunick and Helmut Rumbler before selling to the latter for £60,000 ($90,600).
In the light of the recent debates over the attribution of the prints of Mantegna and his school which arose during the recent exhibition, it was particularly apposite of Christie's to produce a beautiful impression of ‘The Flagellation with the Pavement’(B.XIII)(lot 30, est. £120,000–160,000), here attributed to Mantegna with a correspondingly strong estimate.
It was secured on a telephone bid for £120,000 ($181,200), apparently to the Swiss-based collector Sam Josefowitz.
Elsewhere in the Old Master section a group of rare School of Fontainebleau prints by Davent, Fantuzzi and others had only mixed success due to strong estimates.
Similarly, a group of eighteenth-century French decorative prints by Janinet, Bonnet and others (the second part of the collection partly sold last summer) struggled to find buyers in the main, although Stanley Johnson bought the charming ‘Les Hazards heureux de l'Escarpolette’(lot 243, est. £2,500–3,500) by de Launay after Fragonard for £4,200 ($6,342) and David Tunick  outbid Andre Candillier for ‘The Mariage [sic]Presents’ by Bonnet, part printed in gold (lot 257, est. £1,500–2,500) which made £4,000 ($6,040).
Christie's pulled off the biggest coup of the week, selling a complete, signed Vollard suite for £600,000 ($906,000) to David Tunick bidding in the room, the first Vollard suite to sell at auction since 1982 (although another set was unsold at Sotheby's last year).
In many ways, however, it was Sotheby's slightly larger, more standard sale that indicated the state of the market.
Competitively priced estimates ensured a high level of sales: Chagall, forty-four lots out of fifty-one sold in the room; Miró, thirty-one lots out of fifty-one sold; Picasso, seventy-five out of ninety-two lots sold; Hockney, thirty-one lots out of thirty-three sold; Tapies, nineteen out of twenty-four lots sold; Warhol, thirteen lots out of twenty-one sold, including an astutely estimated set of Marilyns (lot 842), bought by a London dealer for £115,000 ($173,650, est. £100,000–120,000).
Freud, Hundertwasser and Bacon were also in demand at both houses as were Hamaguchi and Hasegawa at Sotheby's.
Away from this routine fare, a fine, hand-coloured ‘Auf der Brucke’ by Munch (lot 463) was taken to £98,000 by David Tunick ($147,940, est. £45,000–55,000).
Impressionist and Modern sales
Kandinsky and best Cezanne fetch good prices
Lesser Impressionist works as usual did not attract buyers
Launching a week of sales of modern and contemporary art on the evening of 30 November, auctioneer Charles Allsopp swayed back and forth in his rostrum like the captain of a ship in a storm, conjuring bids from collectors and chandeliers in equal measure.
In Christie's sale of Impressionist and Modern Paintings, he managed to find genuine buyers for thirty-one lots and raised £17.16 million ($25.74 million), with a further twenty lots failing to sell, although sales of two of those lots, Monet's riverscape of Vetheuil (lot 8, est. £1.5–2 million), and Cezanne's sketch of two companions departing for a painting expedition (lot 10, est. £250,000–350,000) were subsequently negotiated at £1million ($1.5 million) and £175,000 ($262,500) respectively.
This sketch belonged to a group of seven oil paintings by Cezanne formerly in the collection of Auguste Pellerin and offered by an unidentified European foundation.
Not, in truth, the very best of the artist's work, they performed unpredictably, with only ‘L'Homme a la Pipe’(lot 16, est. £1.6–2.4 million), an enchanting study for the spectator in the Metropolitan Museum's ‘Cardplayers’, arousing proper competition between a successful telephone bidder, who acquired the lot for £3.2 million ($4.8 million), and underbidder Desmond Corcoran of Lefevre.
Another telephone bidder secured Cezanne's fine late watercolour of Mt Sainte-Victoire (lot 17, est. £900,000–1.2 million) for £1.3 million ($1.95 million).
In a sale otherwise notably short of good material, Zurich dealer Ernst Beyeler paid £1.4 million ($2.1 million) for Vuillard's fine and richly decorated interior scene (lot 20, est. £1.5–2 million) and £560,000 ($840,000) for a superb gouache by Paul Klee (lot 26, est. £300,000–400,000).
The following evening, Simon de Pury, in excitable, almost hysterical mood, sold thirty-five lots for £11.33 million ($17 million) at Sotheby's, but a further twenty-two works, mostly less important material, were left on his books.
A great rarity, and with an impeccable provenance from the collection of Paul Klee and consigned by his grandson, Kandinsky's first sketch for ‘Composition VII’ of 1913 (lot 13, unpublished est. £5 million) achieved the session's highest price, and became, as expected, the most expensive work of art to be sold in London that week, when it was acquired by a telephone bidder for £5 million ($7.5 million).
Citibank's Art Advisory Services had been bidding at £4.4 million.
Another abstract canvas by Kandinsky dating from 1930 (lot 21, est. £450,000–550,000) sold for £460,000 ($690,000).
Bernheimer purchased two watercolours by Egon Schiele, including a portrait of the artist's nephew, Paul, in a sailor suit (lot 9, est. £250,000–350,000) for £390,000 ($585,000).
Christie's and Sotheby's
Triumph of Gothic knight and Renaissance casket
Lively bidding for major lots at works of art sales
The two London works of art sales produced healthy totals in terms of both value and number of lots sold: Christie's sold £564,800 with 66% sold by lot and 86.6% by value; Sotheby's, with the much larger sale, £1.83 million with 61% sold by lot and 84.7% by value.
Both sales saw keen competition for the more interesting lots.
Christie's (8 December) produced a small catalogue, largely free of inferior items with a good range of types of objects.
Notable Gothic polychrome pieces included a substantial Hispano-Flemish polychrome and giltwood enthroned Madonna (lot 21), the colouring on the body later, which made £19,000 ($30,400 est. £5,000–8,000).
Considerable interest was shown in a fine marble relief (lot 77) of cavorting putti playing with a boldly carved sea creature in front of a net, possibly emblematic of water and functioning as an overdoor.
Christie's had pointed up the stylistic similarity of the putti to those found in some of Rysbrack's, tomb sculpture.
Estimated at £5,000–8,000 it sold to Danny Katz for £34,000 ($54,400).
Katz also pushed up the bidding on a finely carved and drilled colossal marble bust of Lucius Verus (lot 84), attributed during the viewing to Carlo Albacini, which sold for £45,000 ($72,000, est. £8,000–10,000).
Christie's were pleased to sell their cover lot, a substantial bronze group of ‘Venus and Adonis’ by Soldani-Benzi of around 1700, difficult to estimate through its rarity (one of only two models known, the other in the Walters Art Gallery).
It was bought by Cyril Humphris for £120,000 ($192,000).
Star of the sale was undoubtedly the Venetian late sixteenth/early seventeenth-century rock crystal and silver gilt casket (lot 15), one of only ten of this type known and thought to have been used to contain christening linen blessed by the Pope.
Estimated at £30,000–40,000 it sold on the  telephone for £165,000 ($264,000).
Sotheby's (10 December) greatest coup was the sale of a north German bronze aquamanile in the form of a knight on horseback, datable to around 1200 (lot 26).
The only intact example of this type of helmeted figure, bidding from German museums pushed the final figure to £600,000 ($960,000, est. £50,000–80,000), sold to a private collector.
A successful museum bid was the £38,000 ($60,800) paid by the British Museum for the Bowleaze jewel (lot 19), a late ninth-century Anglo-Saxon gold jewel of the same type as the Minster Lovell and Alfred Jewels in the Ashmolean Museum.
Possibly made as the terminal of a staff, the jewel was found on a Dorset beach by a local man.
Selling deservedly well above estimate was a group of three south Netherlandish oak reliefs of scenes from the Passion, dated around 1490 (lot 46).
Highly pictorial in conception — with particular figures reminiscent of van der Weyden — they sold for £82,000 ($131,200, est. £30,000–40,000) to a private collector.
Among the Renaissance bronzes, Danny Katz paid £85,000 ($136,000) for a bronze stallion of around 1600 from the Susini workshops after Giambologna, comparable to an example now in the V&A.
The strength of the market across the board was evident in the strong prices achieved for a Limoges enamel plaque of a scene from the Aeneid from the workshop of the Aeneid Master (lot 228), which realised £40,000 ($64,000, est. £6,000–8,000), and in the success of a group of Flemish and German seventeenth-century ivory pieces.
Among these lot 247, a large ivory tankard with silver gilt mounts depicting scenes from the life of John Sobiesky, King of Poland, made £50,000 ($80,000, est. £40,000–60,000).
London drawings sales
Christie's Carmontelles charm
French colour portraits attract trade bids
The Old Master drawings sales, closing the season, posted solid results.
Sotheby's sale totalled £270,816 ($423,827); unsold by value: 21.6%, by lot: 39.6%, while Christie's made £551,680 ($859,517); unsold by value: 12.5%, by lot: 31.8%.
At Sotheby's on 14 December the most energetic competition greeted Giulio Romano's deftly drawn head of an eagle with several British dealers as well as a telephone bidder competing for the prize; it sold for £16,000 ($25,040) to Colnaghi (with London dealer Thomas Williams providing the underbidding) against an estimate of £5–7,000.
Colnaghi, with Aldega providing the underbidding, carried off ‘The Adoration of the Shepherds,’ by Ludovico Cardi (called Cigoli) at £5,000 ($7,825) against an estimate of £800–1,000.
‘Studies of the head of a dead Roebuck,’ attributed to Jan Breughel the Elder held no attraction, buying-in at £1,800 ($2,817) against estimate of £4–6,000.
At Christie's, with Lord Carrington watching for much of the sale, bidding from three British and American dealers in the room competed with a telephone bidder for Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione's ‘Drovers by a pool’.
Estimated at £5–8,000, it went to Colnaghi at £42,000 ($65,436).
Trade bidding edged out the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine in the conquest for the beautifully drawn ‘Saint  Liborious before the Virgin and Child’ listed initially in the catalogue as Neapolitan school, later attributed in a saleroom notice to Giovanni Odazzi; estimated at £1–2,000, an American dealer won it for £4,500 ($7,011).
Undoubtedly the most interesting works to surface in the two sales were a group of drawings by Louis Carrogis (called Carmontelle), an artist who pursued a brilliant career at the Court of Orleans.
These portraits of court worthies, apparently executed for himself, originally came from albums containing 750 portraits in black lead, red chalk and watercolour.
The charming profile, full figure portraits were  healthily estimated and bidding met with pre-sale expectation.
Telephone or client bidding secured the majority: ‘The Princess of Salm with her son’ sold for £29,000 ($45,820), est. £30–45,000; ‘Monsieur de Cormainville sold for £42,000 ($65,436), est. £25–35,000; ‘The Prince of Saxe-Gotha with his Tutor’sold for £20,000 ($31,600), est. £25–35,000); ‘Baron de Talleyrand’sold for the same amount against the estimate of £20–30,000; ‘Baron de Bombelles’sold for £18,000 ($28,044), est. £20–25,000; ‘The Duke of York on a quay’sold for £17,000 ($26,486), estimated £20–30,000; and ‘Colonel Morrison’sold for £13,000 ($20,254), est. £15–25,000.
In the room, ‘The Duchess of Chaulmes as a gardener in an allee’ sold to Hazlitt, Gooden & Fox for £32,000 ($49,856), est. of £30–40,000 and ‘The two Youthful de Neville Brothers’sold to New York dealers John & Paul Herring for £23,000 ($35,834) against an estimate of £25–40,000.
A rare book dealer underbid the pencil, watercolour and bodycolour ‘Three peaches on a branch’ by Pancrace Bessa secured by Kate de Rothschild for £8,500 ($13,243) against an estimate of £3–5,000 and a telephone buyer competed against the room for ‘A wooded river landscape’by an associate of Pietro Perugino raising the estimate of £5–8,000 to £42,000 ($65,436).
Contemporary art sales, London
Saatchi sells again
Auction record for important Kossoff with decent prices for Warhol, Yves Klein and Auerbach
After his frenzied performance on the rostrum for the Impressionist sale, Simon de Pury returned for the Sotheby's sale of Contemporary Art on Thursday 3 December.
He found buyers for seventy-four lots which raised £3.24 million ($4.86 million), but nineteen lots failed to sell.
The most important casualty appeared to be Francis Bacon's ‘Study of a Nude with a Figure in a Mirror’(lot 34, unpublished est. £1 million), which attracted no bids and was bought-in at £680,000 ($1.02 million), but was sold to an unidentified Continental dealer or collector after the sale for £735,000 ($1.1 million).
The session's highest price was paid for Andy Warhol's ‘Four Marilyns’(lot 32, est. £400,000–500,000), which sold to a telephone bidder for £555,000 ($832,500).
Warhol's ‘Most Wanted Man No. 4’(lot 30, est. £60,000–80,000), which had been consigned by Charles Saatchi, was bought by a Californian collector for £125,000 ($187,500).
Saatchi was the vendor of two important London scenes, Frank Auerbach's dramatic nightscape of Mornington Crescent station (lot 53, est. £150,000–200,000) which was bought by an Israeli collector bidding in the room for £135,000 ($202,500), and Leon Kossoff's swimming pool in Willesden (lot 59, est. £150,000–200,000) which sold to a private collector for £190,000 ($285,000).
An important nude portrait of his wife, Elke, by Georg Baselitz (lot 52, est. £300,000–350,000) was picked up inexpensively by Jim Cohan of Anthony d'Offay for £150,000 ($225,000).
Disappointments included Lucian Freud's beautiful head of East End entrepreneur, Charlie Thomas (lot 33, est. £100,000–150,000), one of half-a-dozen works consigned by private dealer, Richard Salmon, Sean Scully's ‘Double’(lot 75, est. £50,000–60,000) and Gerhard Richter's ‘Vogel’(lot 58, est. £120,000–150,000), a marvellous abstract canvas of 1982 from the collection of Lewis Manilow, which failed to reach its reserve although there was a bid of £100,000 ($150,000) from Dusseldorf dealer, Helge Achenbach.
In the afternoon, Guy Jennings presided over a tediously slow but rather successful sale of Contemporary Art at Christie's.
Eighty lots sold for a respectable total of £4.19 million ($6.29 million), with only nine lots failing to find buyers.
New York dealer Joseph Mugrabi paid the session's top price of £300,000 ($450,000) for Yves Klein's impressive sponge painting ‘RE 26 Rosa’(lot 28, est. £250,000–300,000).
Other strong prices included Dubuffet's ‘Petite Musique pour Edith’(lot 11, est. £180,000–240,000) which sold to a telephone bidder identified as an American dealer for £270,000 ($405,000), and a beautiful stabile by Calder (lot 41, est. £70,000–90,000) which was purchased for £173,000 ($259,500) by Davlyn's Joe Nehmad who, with his brother David, were conspicuous bidders at all the sales of the week.
Two recent abstract compositions by Gerhard Richter attracted keen competition, ‘Untitled 649–1’(lot 75, est. £40,000–60,000) being purchased by a Californian collector for £72,000 (1108,000) and ‘Untitled 666–4’(lot 77, est. £30,000–40,000) selling to a telephone bidder for £58,000 ($87,000).
There were, however, no bidders for Richter's grand and  elegiac seascape (lot 52, est. £200,000–250,000) where a cracking paint surface caused concern.
The afternoon's surprise was the determined competition for Lucian Freud's small and rather unattractive nude portrait (lot 55, est. £50,000–70,000) which sold to a telephone bidder for £115,000 ($172,500).
Dealers and Galleries
European Community
Exporting a picture and puzzled about procedures?
No answers yet
The European Community art export arrangements agreed by the Council of Ministers last November (The Art Newspaper No. 23, December 1992, pp. 1, 33) are still in mid-air.
The Directive on the return of cultural goods unlawfully removed from a member state is not ready for implementation yet, and, although the Regulation on the export of cultural goods to non-EC countries is, it will not enter into force until the Directive has been debated by the European Parliament and has returned to the Council of Ministers for final approval.
If everything goes smoothly, this may be by the end of March.
It is, however, possible that the European Parliament will amend it, and, if the Commission in Brussels accepts any changes, discussions will be reopened in the Council.
In that case, it is difficult to predict how long it would take to be finally approved.
Three days after the publication of the Directive, the Regulation enters into force (ie, becomes national law) and the art trade will have to comply with its requirements.
The Directive itself will still have to be enacted in national law.
Nine member states have to accomplish this within nine months, but Belgium, Germany and The Netherlands have negotiated twelve months for themselves.
According to the best scenario, therefore, the Directive will be implemented in two stages, in January and April 1994.
Both measures are retrospective to 1 January 1993; that is, export licences may be issued for objects ‘lawfully and definitively located’ in a member state on that date, and the restitution procedure may be started for an object unlawfully removed from a member state on or after that date.
At the moment it is difficult to describe how the system will work in practice.
Even so far as the Regulation is concerned, which may be operational in less than three months, several questions remain open.
In the UK, licences will be issued by the Department of National Heritage and EC experts are working on the common export document but it is not finalised yet.
However, it has still to be spelt out, for instance, whether and how an applicant has to prove that an object was legally and lawfully located in or dispatched from a country.
If it is the applicant, then the trade is likely to be put in an awkward position vis-a-vis some of their potential vendors.
Probing questions may either encourage vendors to follow the correct procedures or to take their goods to easier markets, notably Switzerland and the US.
According to an auction house representative the latter is the more likely outcome, because he doubts whether some countries, for example Italy, will be able to clamp down on smuggling.
Another important question is whether the UK government will bring the existing financial  thresholds above which an item requires a licence in line with the EC  thresholds , which are slightly more liberal for a wide range of items, although stricter for few significant categories, such as prints and drawings.
It is widely thought that it will, but that special protection will be given to historical portraits, textiles, arms and armour, and architectural and scientific drawings.
It is unclear, however, whether objects which have been imported into the UK less then fifty years ago, which under existing law are exempt from export control, will fall within the EC Regulation.
New York and Chicago
Old hands show
Old Masters
London-based Old Master drawings dealer Annamaria Edelstein is holding an exhibition in New York at the Beadleston Gallery, 60 East 91st Street, from 11 to 15 January and in Chicago at the Roger Ramsay Gallery, 325 West Huron, Suite 207 from 18 to 21 January.
Works on show include a ‘Virgin and Child’ by Badile; a ‘Road to Calvary’by the Bolognese Aureliano Milani; an ‘Apollo and Marsyas’of circa 1805 by Cammerino; a ‘Bacchus and Ariadne’by Pelagi, probably from an album of around 1802 made for the Accademia della Pace; and a red chalk study of a hand by Lorenzo Tiepolo.
French drawings will include a red chalk male nude in profile by Bouchardon and a preparatory study by Simon Julien for the painting given in 1762 to the church of St Hippolytus in the Faubourg St Michel, Paris.
Until the end of April Margot Gordon and Marcello Aldega will be showing a number of pictures from their 1992 catalogue, including: Fra Bartolommeo's ‘Holy Family with the infant St John the Baptist’ dated by Chris Fisher to around 1515–16; a ‘Nativity with Saints’by Penni, attributed by Nicholas Turner; a late ‘Male Profile’by Parmigianino, possibly a self-portrait; a ‘Putto’by Annibale Carracci, attributed by Oberhuber and relating to the upper part of the S. Gregorio altarpiece, Bologna; two sheets by Simone Cantarini, ‘Jove and Ganymede’and a ‘Male figure’.
Art brut in New York
Ecstatic experiences at outsider art
Following on the heels of the important Los Angeles County Museum exhibition ‘Parallel Visions: modern artists and outsider art’(opens Madrid 11 February), a fair devoted to ‘outsider art’ will be held at the Puck Building, New York from 30 to 31 January.
Thirty-three galleries specialising in ‘naive, self-taught, visionary and intuitive’ art from England, France, Australia and America will be participating, including Judith Alexander, New York; Henry Boxer, London; Marcel Fleiss, Paris; and Carl Hamer, Chicago.
Naturally the nature of the work on show means that many of the artists have or had unusual, not to say colourful, backgrounds.
Bill Traylor was born in 1854.
Aged eighty-four, he left the plantation where he was born and moved into nearby Montgomery, Alabama.
Using pencil and paint on cardboard shirt boxes and other scrap material he painted scenes from his world.
The Henry Boxer Gallery will be representing the British artist Von Stropp, who had ‘ecstatic experiences’ aged eleven.
Raised in extreme poverty he taught himself to paint in the style of Durer, Bosch, Leonardo and other Old Masters.
A symposium entitled ‘Uncommon Artists: a series of cameo talks’ will be presented by the Museum of Folk Art in conjunction with the fair: speakers will include Russell Bowman, director of the Milwaukee Art Museum; Phyllis Kind, gallery director; John Maizels, editor of the British Journal Raw Vision; Dana Mensi, director of La Tinaia, Florence; and collectors Herbert Waide Hemphill Jr., Glenn Smith and Didi Barrett.
The symposium will be held at the Phyllis Kind Gallery on 30 January.
The term ‘outsider art’ was first used in 1972 by Roger Cardinal in his book of that name.
Cardinal used the term to refer to Jean Dubuffet's collection of art acquired from mental hospitals, visionaries, eccentrics and other social outcasts.
In 1976 Dubuffet's collection became the core of the Musée de l'art brut in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Bernard Jacobson's twenty-five years
Gallery-owner Bernard Jacobson will be celebrating his twenty-five years in the art world with a year of exhibitions devoted to the theme of landscape.
The year's calendar will be: 12 January to 20 February, ‘The Lake Isle of Innisfree’, a body of work produced by William Tillyer, Maggi Hambling, Maurice Cockrell and Wendy Connelly who all spent a week painting in County Sligo; 23 February to 1 April, ‘Ivon Hitchens centenary exhibition’, commemorating the centenary year of the artist's birth; April 5 to 1 May, ‘Wendy Connelly’, the artist's first one-person show since graduating from St Martin's in 1991; 5 May to 5 June, ‘William Tillyer’, oils and watercolours from the Yorkshire-based artist; 8 June to 4 September ‘British Landscape painting 1750–1993’, from Richard Wilson and Gainsborough to Constable, Palmer, Spencer and Lanyon; 7 September to 2 October, ‘John Virtue’, in collaboration with the Lisson Gallery; 5 October to 6 November, ‘Ben Nicholson centenary exhibition’, timed to coincide with the Tate exhibition; 9 November to 4 December ‘Graham Sutherland’, the gallery's first showing of work by the artist; 7 December to 30 January, ‘Maurice Cockrill’.
Tessiers sticks to a girl's best friend
The London jewellers Tessiers reopened on 5 November, having been taken over by new owners.
The firm is now in the hands of managing director Tim Watkins and ‘a private family concern’.
While the new owners have purchased the firm's name, goodwill and Bond Street premises, all the previous stock has been disposed of.
New stock — both antique and contemporary — has been purchased at auction and privately in recent months.
The new firm intends to specialise in diamond pieces including signed works from the nineteenth century onwards, and a selection of early Tessiers pieces formerly made for the firm.
An exhibition programme will be developed over the coming months.
The interior of the Bond Street shop has been remodelled to incorporate a new showroom on the first floor.
Agnew's list of sales
London picture dealers Agnew's issued a useful press release on 11 December detailing the pictures and works of art sold by the gallery in 1992.
These include sales to American museums: ‘Pope Clement VII’ by Sebastiano del Piombo, bought by the Getty; ‘St Francis and a Bishop Saint’and ‘St Dominic’by Fra Angelico, bought by the Getty; ‘The Adoration of the Magi’by Corrado Giaquinto, bought by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston; ‘Mercury and Argus’by Pierre-Etienne Monnot, marble sculpture, bought by the Toledo Museum of Fine Art; ‘Salome’, Picasso drypoint, bought by the Los Angeles Museum of Art; ‘Alice Gray’by Sir William Everett Millais, bought by a Japanese museum.
Private UK and overseas collectors  purchased : ‘The Descent from the Cross’ by Tintoretto; ‘Don Pedro, IX Duke of Osuna’by Goya; ‘Vesuvius’by Joseph Wright of Derby; ‘The Sleeping Shepherd’by Samuel Palmer; ‘The Giudecca from the Canale di Fusina’by Turner; ‘La Terrasse de la Villa Madama’by Hubert Robert.
In addition a number of works by the living artists represented by the company were sold.
Bob Haboldt shows Old Masters in New York
Ever since Bob Haboldt opened his Paris gallery on the faubourg Saint Honoré a few years back, things have been relatively quiet at his New York offices.
He now seeks to rectify the situation with a new Old Masters exhibition in his remodelled and expanded gallery on East 76th Street.
Among the more notable pictures are floral still-lifes by Ambrosius Bosschaert I, Carstian Luycks, and Louis-Leopold Boilly, a monumental Hobbema (on a surprisingly modest 14 x 19 panel), a superbly preserved cassone panel depicting scenes from the life of David by Bernardo Roselli, and a wonderful portrait of a pampered little boy with his pet pug by the underappreciated eccentric, Jan van Noort. (8 January-20 February).
Art 93 London's only contemporary art fair
Art 93, which is, with the collapse of the rival attraction formerly held at Olympia, now London's only fair for contemporary art, will be taking place for the fifth consecutive year at Islington's Business Design Centre (21–24 January).
Primarily attended by British galleries including Waddington, Flowers East, Francis Graham-Dixon, Anne Berthoud, Connaught Brown and Annely Juda (who will be showing sculptures by Antony Caro on the grass outside the entrance) it features two attractions: an exhibition of paintings and sculpture by younger British and foreign artists from Unilever's corporate collection, and a series of eleven works of art commissioned from Andy Goldsworthy, Rebecca Horn, Zadok Ben David and other artists by Peter Gabriel as interpretations of the tracks of his recent pop album.
Art LA: the results
The number of visitors attending the Los Angeles Art Fair from 3 to 6 December this year was 20,114.
No figures were available for the number of works sold and the total turnover, but according to the organisers, the majority of participants were  satisfied with the results: Connaught Brown sold all their Lucian Freud etchings; the Salzburg gallery from Weihergut, Austria sold their entire stock.
Angela Flowers of London, Beaux Arts of Bath, and Harcourts of San Francisco expressed particular satisfaction.
Grosvenor House, names and dates
The Grosvenor House Antiques Fair will take place this year from 9 to 19 June.
Around one hundred dealers will participate, and newcomers this year will include: A la Vieille Russie, jewellery and objets d'art; Ariane Dandois, continental furniture; Barry Davies Oriental Art; Dover Street Gallery; Nicholas Grindley, Chinese furniture; John Mitchell and Son, European painting, seventeenth to nineteenth centuries; The Oriental Gallery; Richard Philp, Old Master paintings, drawings and works of art; Whitfield Fine Art Ltd, Italian paintings.
This year's theme will be European Influence on Art in Britain.
For the first time this year, advance booking will be available from 1 January.
Kent dealer wins Leonardo Prize
The Crowley Colosso Leonardo Prize is awarded annually at the Orangerie Italiana fine art fair to the dealer who has made the most important new find, discovery, or reattribution of an Italian work of art.
This year's prize was awarded to Clive Gill of Sarice Antiques, Tunbridge Wells, Kent.
Mr Gill's wife nominated him for the prize for his purchase of the ‘Astronomicon’, a poem in Latin verse on astronomy and astrology of around 1455–60 by Basinio da Parma, dedicated to Malatesta Novello, lord of Cesena, and probably made in Rimini.
Mr Gill spotted the manuscript at a local auction and purchased it for £1,500, realising its quality but not its rarity or importance; Sotheby's Christopher de Hamel found it ‘extraordinarily interesting’.
The ‘Astronomicon’ sold to the Cassa di Risparmio in Rimini for the Rimini Museum at Sotheby's on 23 July 1992 for £105,000 against an estimate of £60,000–80,000.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this January
LONDON
Gilbert and George and Cragg star shows
Hamish Fulton at Annely Juda
Traditionally a quiet time in the market place and with the majority of London's contemporary art dealers involved in one or all of the art fairs taking place in Miami (14–18 January), London (21–24 January) and Madrid (12–17 February), there are few new exhibitions planned for the weeks ahead, although several impressive gallery shows which opened before Christmas are continuing until the end of the month.
For example, Waddington, which enjoyed a successful autumn season with its beautiful exhibition of new paintings by Sean Scully and a string of sales during Cork Street's open weekend at the end of November, is drawing upon its vast resources of stock, while mounting an exhibition of Barry Flanagan's large bronze sculptures at Art Miami 93.
In other galleries in Cork Street, Victoria Miro's architect, Claudio Silvestrin, who has created the design for the Hayward Gallery's current conceptual sculpture exhibition, is making an architectural installation (20 January-12 February) and RAAB is organising a print retrospective of Rainer Fetting's graphic work (19 January-27 February), with a second print exhibition of Ken Currie's recent etchings being held consecutively at its Millbank branch.
Mayor's exhibition of new graphic works by Roy Lichtenstein, inspired by Monet's waterlily compositions, has been extended (to 16 January).
A small survey of Lichtenstein's art opens at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, next month, with a really comprehensive exhibition of his work following at the Guggenheim Museum, New York, in May.
In and around Bond Street, there is Marlborough's exhibition of new watercolours by Paula Rego, who has created a portfolio of fifteen coloured etchings for a new publication of J.M. Barrie's Peter Pan (to 30 January) and is prominently featured in the Tate Gallery's new arrangement with an important autobiographical painting of ‘The Dance’; twenty coloured drawings, captioned with humorous texts, by Glenn Baxter at Thomas Gibson (to 22 January); and a series of new sand pictures by Michael Young at Turske-Hue-Williams (18 January-27 February).
Created in Lucca over the summer months of last year, they are titled ‘The Sedimentary Paintings’ and employ the sands of Tuscany and Umbria in looser compositions than those carefully crafted geometric designs which the artist showed at the gallery in 1991.
In addition, Young has made six sand drawings on mylar sheets.
Identified as ‘The House of Sand’, they have been loosely inspired by the domestic architectural designs of Frank Lloyd Wright.
With Michael Hue-Williams attempting the tricky task of renegotiating the terms of the lease on his first-floor gallery, there are fears that these works may comprise the last exhibition in his elegant space in Old Bond Street.
Bernard Jacobson, who is celebrating twenty-five years of activity, is devoting his programme for an entire calendar year to exhibitions of historic and modern British landscape painting.
He launches this project with ‘The Lake Isle of Innisfree’(12 January-20 February) which is the title of a poem by W.B. Yeats.
Four artists, William Tillyer, Maggi Hambling, Maurice Cockrill and Wendy Connolly, travelled to this island in County Sligo and painted their responses.
In Dering Street, Annely Juda makes a strong start to the new year with her first exhibition of new works by Hamish Fulton who has been walking in recent months in Norway, France and Spain (28 January-6 March).
Currently the subject of a survey at IVAM, Valencia (to 22 February), which is the most impressive accumulation of his material since the retrospective exhibition held at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in 1990, Fulton is making three wall texts, a new dot painting created with his fingers on a board, and a new series of photographs documenting the landscape of his journeys.
Anthony d'Offay is showing ‘The New Democratic Pictures’ of Gilbert & George, the most important group of new images which the artists have created since 1984 (to 30 January).
For the first time in their careers, they are featured entirely naked in ecclesiastical, urban and pastoral contexts.
The exhibition of ‘The Cosmological Pictures’ which has been touring Eastern and Western European cities since autumn 1991, opens at the Tate Gallery's Liverpool branch towards the end of this month (23 January-14 March).
Tony Cragg completes a spectacular and busy year with an exhibition of five new sculptures at Lisson (to 30 January).
They include an important new limestone composition, work in bronze and glass, a fascinating accumulation of domestic furniture and other wooden objects coated in hooks, and ‘Terris Novalis’, a mighty two-part steel sculpture which was suggested by Cragg's fascination for scientific measuring instruments.
A second exhibition of his work is taking place concurrently at Tucci-Rosso in Turin.
MAAK is showing large works by William Tucker, Philip King, Basil Beattie and other British artists in its impressive Blackburn Road space in North London (to 9 February).
Tucker's contribution is a major new bronze sculpture and the first opportunity to see his work in this country since his installation at the Tate Gallery in 1988.
Maureen Paley has relaunched Interim Art in Beck Road with an exhibition of work by Henry Bond, Angela Bulloch, Liam Gillick, Graham Gussin and Marcus Hansen (10 January-8 February).
New York
Dealer-artist partnerships celebrated
Vicente at Berry-Hill and Jasper Johns at Castelli
For Esteban Vicente, still busy at work in his Bridgehampton studio as he enters his ninth decade, the sweet blarings of Fame's trumpet have always had more than a little in common with the songs of the sirens.
Being famous was never the point.
Art is, and always was, the only point — a notion so old fashioned in today's hyperventilated art world that it just might, if we are lucky, be due for a comeback.
Art is all: being known as an artist is nothing.
The notion took hold in Vicente at an early age and got serious reinforcement when he arrived in America from his native Spain (by way of Paris) and began to form lasting relationships with many other, then unknown, artists of the New York avant-garde.
Back in the 1950s, when the New York School was going into full session and paint was seriously flying in Village studios, it was always the work that was important, not the persona of the artist.
When his friend Jackson Pollock's cocky figure appeared in a Life magazine spread on him, Pollock's confreres at the White Horse Tavern looked askance.
In those days Vicente became a kind of de facto mayor of 10th Street.
When de Kooning was looking for a bigger space, Vicente suggested he take a studio next to his.
He also arranged for the Tanager Gallery, a co-op that enlivened the 10th Street scene for many years, to move there.
And it was there that he and other members of ‘The Club’, Rothko, Newman, Kline, Reinhardt, David Hare, Hedda Sterne, et al, met to discuss ‘the issues’.
The Berry-Hill Gallery, in recent years Vicente's New York dealer, has arranged a ninetieth birthday celebration for Vicente this month in the form of a retrospective spanning five decades of his work and coming right up to and into the Nineties.
On 20 January, the artist's actual birthday, the gallery will host a gala party in Vicente's honour and the following day the show will be open to the public.
Until 13 February.
An anniversary of a different sort is also being celebrated this month in Manhattan: the thirty-fifth year of Jasper Johns's association with Leo Castelli, his first and longtime dealer.
For the occasion the gallery has been stocked with loans of Johns's work in a full range of media from various museums as well as from two important private collections: those of Mr Castelli and Mr Johns.
A catalogue with a celebratory essay by Judith Goldman has been prepared and the show is on view from 9 January until 6 February.
Nancy Hoffman is celebrating twenty years in business at her gallery this month.
From 9 January to 10 February she has invited many of the artists with which she has been closely associated during those years to show.
Among them are Joseph Raffael, Don Eddy, John Okulick, Juan Gonzalez, Peter Plagens — the list is long.
Thirty years, more or less, have gone by the boards since a ragtag group of artists converged on a spot in lower Manhattan called Coenties Slip.
The Slip was in reality two short streets on the waterfront just north and east of the Battery bordering a V-shaped park which, in Herman Melville's day, was a working boat slip.
The area had been going to seed for many years after the ship chandlers who once thrived there went one by one out of business.
They left behind them a mouldering group of small loft buildings whose interior columns might once have been ships' masts.
In the late Fifties and early Sixties these proved  irresistible to a group of penniless artists looking for space for free.
Among those who moved in, covering his windows at night with blankets so that the police would not know anyone was living there, was Robert Indiana — who quoted Melville's rousing exhortation CIRCUMAMBULATE THE CITY in one of the works he painted there.
Others on the Slip in those days were Ellsworth Kelly, James Rosenquist, Agnes Martin and Jack
Youngerman.
Pace, in SoHo, is remembering the artists of Coenties Slip this month in a show that opens 10 January and continues through 13 February.
The Slip, incidentally , no longer exists.
It was bulldozed into oblivion in the 1970s to make way for a couple of undistinguished skyscrapers and a brick-pathed wasteland called by the city, a park.
Robert Indiana was in many ways a pioneer in the use of words as the chief subject matter for art, making what you read just as important as what you ‘see’.
More recently — in our era of politicised art — artists more often than not include texts in their works just in case you don't get the point.
You are well advised, when the Whitney Biennial comes along, to be sure to remember your reading glasses.
One of the grandfathers of the text-on-the-wall-as-art is conceptualist Lawrence Weiner who shows new work this month at Marion Goodman (9 January to 13 February).
Hans Peter Feldmann, Rodney Graham and Allen Ruppersberg have also included words in their works in the past.
To see if any new ones have cropped up, go to 303 where their works are cohabiting from 5 to 23 January.
And David Diao, lately mixing the textural with the painterly, concentrates his attention at Postmasters from 16 January to 10 February on Barnett Newman.
In one large painting and a suite of related prints he pays homage to the great minimalist by superimposing texts relating to Newman's career over images of his work.
(Also at the gallery are recent indictments by Mary Kelly that she calls ‘Gloria Patri’.
Inspired by the Gulf War, they explore masculine and feminine attitudes towards the military).
Edward Ruscha, another artist whose non-visual vocabulary is often on view in his paintings, did a series of works in the Sixties and Seventies he called ‘Liquid Words’.
A group of them have been rounded up at Gagosian from 14 January to 20 February.
Further words are provided, in the form of a catalogue essay, by Yves-Alain Bois.
‘A Private View: Artists’ Photographs’, is on this month at Blum Helman (6 January — 6 February).
In it you can see photographs by, among others, Dennis Oppenheim, Ellsworth Kelly, Joe Andoe, Jose Maria Sicilia and Christo.
Elsewhere, historical shows — such as those of the sensational photojournalism of Weegee from the Forties and Fifties (at Janet Borden through 16 January) or of vintage prints from the Twenties and Thirties by Joseph Breitenbach (at Hirschl & Adler from 16 January — 13 February)— are common, and present day work abounds.
At Paula Cooper from 7 January to 4 February there is new work by Andreas Serrano while Gladstone shows large black and white prints by the British artist Craigie Horsfield.
Andrea Rosen shows new prints by Ken Lum (through 16 January) and Robert Miller the work of David Seidner.
Bernd and Hilla Becher are back at Sonnabend with another accounting of related industrial architectures (9 January — 6 February) while Edition Julie Sylvester is showing what is probably the biggest photograph you've ever seen.
Based on an image taken from a polaroid of flowers, it is as free-standing object, able to be walked around, and its dimensions are six by sixteen feet.
The photographer is an Austrian, Rudi Molacek, and his megaphoto is on view until 16 January.
David Hockney has been known to do photo-works, too — huge collages of tessera-like snaps which, taken all together, make one big picture.
But he has forsaken them for the moment, at least in his current Emmerich show, ‘Some Very Recent Paintings’(opening 14 January).
Upstairs at Emmerich is a show called ‘Hofmann's Hofmanns’, presumably the works the abstract expressionist kept for himself (opening 7 January with both shows continuing until 13 February).
Lee Krasner's ‘Umber Paintings’, made between 1959 and 1962, are at Robert Miller from 5 January until the end of the month and recent oil paintings by John Walker are at Knoedler from 16 January to 11 February.
Neil Welliver has always had a special fondness for trees.
He is second to none, for instance, at suggesting the shimmer and glint of birches in a winter landscape.
Landscape, of course, is his forte and a show of recent works in this department (oil paintings and graphics) are on at Marlborough starting 6 January and continuing until the end of the month.
Trees are also the speciality of Robert Lobe — though his are stately and sober by comparison.
For one thing Mr Lobe is a sculptor and his trees, seemingly hammered in sheet metal directly from nature (often along with alarmingly big chunks of the surrounding landscape) have hovered abidingly in New York galleries over the years.
His newest arboreal manifestations continue at the Blum-Helman Warehouse until the 16th of this month.
Landscapes from pretty much around the world figure in Michael Zwack's new paintings, on view at Curt Marcus from 7 January to the end of the month.
A few of his rare essays in landscape are included in a small show of oils, aquatints and pencil drawings by Giorgio Morandi at Baldacci-Daverio also on until the 30th.
One of the joys of riding the subways in New York is noticing the many ornamental tile decorations which enliven stops throughout Manhattan.
At Columbus Circle, for instance, a ship with billowing sails is repeated (the ‘Santa Maria’?) while beavers march along the walls at Astor Place (John Jacob Astor made his fortune trading in beaver pelts).
These are accompanied by handsome systems of mouldings and mosaics spelling out the station names.
Few people, though, realise that these images and graphics were planned — just after the turn of the century — by a man named Squire Vickers (1872–1947).
He was the chief architect in charge of the then-burgeoning rapid transit system — and it turns out he was also a painter.
Leave it to the Shepherd Gallery — long known for daring to go where on one has gone before — to unearth Vickers's work, which clearly influenced his subway designs.
On the occasion of this first retrospective of his work — which runs until the end of the month — Shepherd is making available a book with forty-three colour plates, Subway Ceramics by Lee Stookey, as well as a fully-illustrated catalogue for the show.
Galerie St Etienne starts off the new year on a somewhat lugubrious note with a show called ‘The Dance of Death: Images of Mortality in German Art’.
In it are included graphic re-workings of that Medieval theme by twentieth-century masters such as George Grosz, Otto Dix, Max Beckmann, Kathe Kollwitz and Alfred Kubin.
Also included are earlier versions in prints by Durer, Holbein and others, 19 January until 13 March.
The notion of death is also pervasive this month at Amy Lipton where Karen Finley continues her participatory installation, ‘Written in Sand’, until the 9th.
Viewers are encouraged to write the name of someone they know who died of AIDS in the sand and then, with a brush of the hand, erase it.
PARIS
Snow at Claire Burrus
Mouffe at Franka Berndt
Francois Morellet is showing ‘Relache’, a series of recent works whose title pays homage to Picabia, at Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert (16 January to 20 February) while Vera Rohm's ‘Foto-tele’, monumental sculptures, are on at Nikki Diana Marquadt until the middle of January, together with large panels by Horst Haack, taken from pages of one of his albums, covered with sketches, quotations, poems and newspaper cuttings.
From 23 January to 6 March the same gallery will be showing Belgian artist Eric Weiss's installation entitled ‘A poet with a machine gun’.
At Galerie de France the Pierre Soulages exhibition will be extended until 14 January.
From then until the end of February the gallery will be showing drawings, gouaches, photographs and photomontages by Domela, together with recent work by Jaume Plensa.
Max Neumann is at Vidal-Saint Phalle until 11 February.
Laage-Salomon has Claudia Hart and then the urban photographs of Axel Hutte.
Maeght (rue St-Merri) is continuing with Gasiorowski until the middle of January.
Three young Germans — Cosima von Bonin, Michael Krebber and Ingeborg Gabriel — are showing at Samia Saouma until 23 January.
Lithographs by Kounellis are to be found at Lelong until 28 February: a series of ten large portraits drawn on the stone with the finger, entitled ‘Stone Smoke’.
Also at Lelong, but only until 31 January, are the preparatory designs for Jan Dibbets's stained glass windows at Blois cathedral.
A group exhibition at Yvon Lambert examines the notions of fragmentation and diffraction, with work by Robert Barry, Peter Downsbrough, Dan Graham, On Kawara, Giulio Paolini, Niele Toroni, Felice Varini, Michel Verjux, Agnes Martin and Lawrence Weiner.
Thaddaeus Ropac extends an invitation to the opera with drawings by Bob Wilson for a recent production of ‘The Magic Flute’(until 14 January).
Mitsukoshi Etoile is showing contemporary Japanese art in their gallery space, with the work of Yoshiteru Nomura until 6 February.
Gilles Peyroulet is opening a new space on 16 January at 7 rue Debelleyme and kicks off with sculpture by Jurgen Albrecht, simple geometric forms of paper and card which reflect and absorb light.
The nineteen town gates of Rome painted by Francois Rouan between 1971 and 1977 (exhibited in part at the Musée National d'Art Moderne in 1975) are on show at Templon this month.
From 16 January to 13 February the work of Willie Doherty is at Jennifer Flay.
A series of self-portraits by Muscovite Vladimir Yankilevski — now achieving recognition in Europe and the States after years of neglect — is at Dina Vierney until 20 February.
The Franco-Turkish artist Albert Bitran is showing around thirty drawings at Louis Carre.
Daniel Spoerri, meanwhile, remains at Galerie Beaubourg throughout the month with his ready-made picture-tables.
Drawings and models by Robert Mangurian and Mary-Ann Ray are at Sadock & Uzzan; they convey the artificial scenery and manipulation of light used by these two American architects (who work with James Turrel and Mary Miss) to remodel the theatre district of St Louis, Missouri.
Birds are the protagonists of Jean-Luc Mylayne's photographed imaginary story at Meteo until the end of the month.
Giulio Paolini continues at Di-Meo until the same date.
Michael Snow continues at Claire Burrus until 16 January, as does Druesnes at Franka Berndt, to be followed by a confrontation between the work of Carmelo Arden Quin, founder of the ‘Madi’ movement, and Roger Desserprit, a European disciple.
Superimposed colours, transparency and opacity, signs of rust where moisture has seeped into the cloth stretched over the frame: for the last ten years Michel Mouffe's work has created its own history through the layered transformations taking place within the canvas.
The Belgian artist is showing a series of recent work at Christine and Isy Brachot until 23 January.
At Aline Vidal a group show until the middle of February shows Arni Sigurdsson, Bernadette Gence, Edmunt Kuppel, Helene Mugot, Etienne Pressager, Eric Fonenau, Andy Goldsworthy and Bertrand Gadenne.
Lastly, about ten monochrome acrylics on canvas by Milan Grygar can be seen at Gilbert Brownstone until 15 February.
Buy your triple-combed burgonet here
New York, Sotheby's, January 11–12.
This sale of European works of art and arms and armour includes an Italian triple-combed burgonet (visored helmet) from the Guard of Pier Luigi Farnese, Duke of Parma and Piacenza, dating from around 1545–47 (est. $25,000–35,000; £15,600–21,800).
On offer too is a German, late sixteenth-century powder-flask, the outer surface chased in relief with hunting scenes (est. $15,000–20,000; £9,375–12,500).
Hippolyte by Houdon
New York, Christie's, January 13.
A marble portrait bust of Jacques-Antoine Hippolyte, comte de Guibert will be offered in this sale of European works of art.
The sitter was a celebrated military theorist of whom George Washington wrote, ‘the works of Colonel Guibert are the companions of my glory’.
At the time, he was equally renowned for his billets doux to Julie de Lespinasse.
The portrait was commissioned by his widow in 1791 from Jean-Antoine Houdon, the preeminent portrait sculptor of the period (est. $1–1.5 million; £625,000–937,500).
The sale will also include fine maiolica and a number of tapestries.
A Brussels late gothic tapestry depicting a young king, circa 1510 to 1520 is estimated at $150,000 to 200,000 (£93,750–125,000) and a Louis XIV Gobelins tapestry depicting Aquarius (January) after Lucas van Leyden should sell for $100,000–150,000 (£62,500–93,750).
Marching as to…
New York, Christie's, January 13.
Highlighting this sale of Old Master drawings is a pen and brown ink rendition of Mars with his sword drawn by Guercino (est. $60,000–80,000; £37,500–50,000).
A fragrant scene
New York, Sotheby's, January 13.
A sale of Old Master drawings will feature a previously unpublished drawing by Jean-Honoré Fragonard, ‘The garden of an Italian villa with a gardener and two children playing’.
Executed in brush and brown ink over a charcoal underdrawing, the drawing may well date from the artist's second trip to Italy in 1773–74.
It is estimated at $150,000–200,000 (£93,750–125,000).
Major maiolica
New York, Christie's, January 13.
Arthur M. Sackler's collection of Italian maiolica will be dispersed in two sales, the first of which comprises sixty-five lots.
The collection contains works by the major artists of this form and from the leading centres: Florence, Faenza and Urbino amongst others.
Highlights will include an istoriato plate depicting the ‘Sack of Rome’, made in Urbino between 1527 and 1530 by Francesco Xanto Avelli da Rovigo (est. $100,000–125,000; £62,500–78,125), an armorial istoriato charger illustrating ‘Orpheus charming the animals’ of around 1520 (est. $80,000–100,000; £50,000–62,500) and a tondino made for the Vitelli family of Città di Castello around 1530 (est. $50,000–60,000; £31,250–37,500).
The first session will include the sale of a number of eighteenth-century istoriato plaques and a number of albarelli.
Old fruit
New York, Christie's, January 14.
Christie's sale of Old Master paintings includes a fine still-life of fruit and flowers on a ledge by the early seventeenth-century German artist, Isaac Soreau (est. $100,000–150,000; £62,500–93,750).
An exceptional ‘breakfast’ piece by Pieter Claesz. is expected to fetch $400,000–600,000 (£250,000–375,000).
The Dr Carlo Croce collection of over sixty Italian paintings from the fifteenth to the eighteenth centuries concentrates on the Baroque.
Star lots include Jusepe de Ribera's ‘Saint Jerome’(est. $150,000–250,000; £93,750–156,250) and a Jacopo Tintoretto entitled ‘The concert of the muses’(est. $250,000–350,000; £156,250–218,750).
Portrait of the artist, or not
New York, Sotheby's, January 15.
Sotheby's New York winter sale of Old Master paintings includes a pair of ‘Imaginary views of Mediterranean harbours’ by Lacroix de Marseille (est. $140,000–180,000; £87,500–112,500).
‘Portrait of an artist, possibly a self-portrait’ by Michael-Martin Drolling is one of his finest works.
The winner of the 1810 Prix de Rome depicts the subject as a self-assured young rake.
The suggestion that it is a self-portrait is strengthened by evidence from David's letter on the Salon of 1819.
The picture is estimated at $250,000–280,000 (£156,250–175,000).
Fine boating weather
London, Sotheby's, January 20.
Auctions of marine paintings have become a regular feature of the season, but this is the first to take place in January.
Sotheby's will be hoping that their clients' wallets have not been laid up for the winter together with their yachts.
The racing scene will be represented by ‘View of Long Island Sound’ by Admiral Sir Richard Brydges Beechey depicting two yachts participating in the first race of the 1886 Americas cup (est. £30,000–50,000; $48,000–80,000).
A view of the ‘Port of Liverpool’ in 1825 by Robert Salmon is estimated at £30,000–40,000 ($48,000–64,000).
Pax Americana New York, Christie's, January 23.
This auction will feature the dispersal of American furniture, silver, prints, folk art and decorative art.
One of the highlights should be ‘The peaceable kingdom’ by Edward Hicks (1780–1849) which is still in its original cherry frame made by the artist (est. $600,000–900,000; £375,000–562,500).
The sale also includes a painting depicting ‘Penn's treaty with the Indians’ of about 1830 by the same artist (est. $500,000–700,000; £312,500–437,500).