

News
Morality and Venice
When one is engaged in seeing through a major public project, when that project concerns the international inheritance that is Venice, and when the whole is being financed with State money, the first guideline that should be brought into play is the moral yardstick.
Looked at this way, the question of how best to safeguard Venice's heritage is in fact an ethical question.
But in reality what does it mean to place morality and ethics at the centre of plans for Venice?
It means, I believe, both something very important and very complex.
I am not attempting to lay down the law, but simply wish to voice my opinion that ethics should be the first guideline of those dealing with public resources.
This is not a new principle but, sadly, in Italy today it has become all too relevant.
In the case of Venice and her heritage however, the ‘ethic question’ is of wider import and presupposes other kinds of honesty than merely those connected with money.
Honesty in economic affairs is essential but not enough.
In order to save Venice more is required: intellectual honesty, hard work, a high level of scientific research and well conceived projects.
Prejudice, conflict and squabbling serve no purpose at all.
Let me illustrate this point with a concrete example.
Despite the grave financial situation that Italy is in today, and despite the total suspension of spending on public works, parliament has indicated that Venice should have absolute priority on account of the grave risk of permanent damage if nothing is done.
For this reason additional funds were voted last year for the city.
Only a limited number of national public projects have remained fully funded: those in the fields of health, justice, the fight against Aids and Venice.
The considerable public and social implications of this piece of casuistry require no comment.
Except, perhaps, to underline that Venice has now become a problem of national priority, not only in actuality but in the collective consciousness.
This is why I maintain that both when and how these funds will be spent is closely bound up with the question of morality.
Any delay or obstruction of measures to safeguard Venice's heritage would not only be a bureaucratic or administrative problem or even a political game: the delay and second rate solutions have now clearly become a moral issue.
The New York Impressionist and Modern sales
Paintings top $10 million for first time since 1990
Dealers return to buy for stock as confidence creeps back again
Sotheby's and Christie's sales of Impressionist and Modern art of 10–11 November took the art world on a psychological roller-coaster ride beginning with a frightening drop and ending on a reassuring plateau.
On 10 November Sotheby's generally weak, over-estimated sale posted a dismal 53% sold rate and brought only $35.6 million (£23.7 million) against expectations of at least $59 million.
Panicky observers murmured that the market was even worse off than they had feared.
But the next evening, Christie's better quality sale was 78% sold and brought $70.6 million (£47 million), far above its projected low estimate.
Perspective was regained and relieved dealers pronounced the market selective but healthy.
For good pictures, enthused London dealer Heinz Berggruen, ‘The market isn't just inching up — it's jumping up!’
He was referring to three extraordinary prices.
At Sotheby's, ‘L'Asie’, a late Matisse from the estate of dress designer Mollie Parnis Livingston (est. $8–10 million) sold to the Kimbell Museum in Fort Worth, Texas, for $10 million (£6.6 million).
Then at Christie's, Swedish collector Dr Philip Sandbloom looked on as his 1927–28 Matisse, ‘Harmony in yellow’ sold for a record $13.2 million (£8.8 million).
The buyer was not identified.
Keeping the momentum going, an American collector paid an unexpectedly high $11 million (£7.2 million) for ‘Waterlily basin’ by Claude Monet.
These are the first Impressionist works to sell at auction for over $10 million since the fall of 1990.
The Monet is one of only four small-scale waterlily pictures.
Two are already in museums and another is badly damaged.
There were a number of serious bidders including some Japanese.
‘Harmony in yellow’ epitomises Matisse of this period.
It depicts a favourite model, Zita, and was purchased by Sandbloom in 1933 directly from the Matisse family.
‘Aisie’, from the artist's Moroccan period, was part of the Parnis collection since the 1950's.
According to Sotheby's, at least six bidders vied for this work to the $8 million level.
Twelve other works by Matisse were offered — all trying to cash in on the much-hyped exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art — but only ‘La plage rouge’, an estate picture at Sotheby's soared, selling to a European collector at $1.25 million.
Also at Sotheby's was ‘Young lady in a loge’ a pastel by Mary Cassatt (est. $1–1.5 million) that was, as underbidder dealer James Hill puts it ‘sublime — and fresh to the market’.
It went to an American collector at a hefty $2.3 million (£1.53 million).
Another American collector paid $1.1 million (£733,333) for a Max Ernst bronze ‘The king playing with the queen’.
Many other re-cycled or over estimated works shared the same fate.
Neither sale was a true test of the Picasso market.
Both were loaded with works which, as Heinz Berggruen says, ‘Didn't do well because they weren't any good’.
But Christie's had generally fresher, more interesting material.
A European collector paid $6.5 million (£4.3 million) for Degas' ‘Two dancers in green dresses’, a large, late work.
‘Homme qui tombe’ a rare bronze by Giacometti from the collection of Richard and Dorothy Rodgers, which passed through London dealer Thomas Gibson's hands in 1987 at $750,000, sold far above estimate for $1.35 million (£900,000).
At least seven bidders tried for it.
Another late Degas, a pastel entitled ‘Girl braiding her hair’ also went to an American collector, within estimates at $2.97 million.
Renoir seems to be back, even without heavy Japanese support.
A European dealer paid $1.525 million (£1.01 million) for ‘Seated bather in profile’ and several others sold well.
Although collectors bought most of the big lots, for the first time since 1990 some dealers are buying for stock.
A number of British and American dealers were doing so, and the Italian trade is known to have bought and underbid a good amount in the Christie's sale, including ‘Natura morta’ by Morandi at $270,000 (£180,000).
Given the uncertain state of many world economies this optimism may seem surprising, but as Swiss dealer Ernst Beyeler says, ‘There is still enormous personal wealth in the world.
Buyers learned from the crash that mediocre art doesn't hold it's value.
This is now a smart market.’
Henri Matisse, ‘L'Asie’(detail), sold at Sotheby's New York, 10 November, for $10 million to the Kimbell Museum, Fort Worth
1993: the circulation of works of art
Agreement reached on exports and restitution
The Regulation to enter into force by the end of March, the Directive in October
On 10 November the Council of Ministers for the Internal Market of the EEC reached agreement on two measures regarding the circulation of cultural goods as from 1993.
The disappearance of customs' posts in that date between the member States had caused concern that there would be a  haemorrhage of national treasures from country to country and out of the EEC itself.
The Regulation (for details see p. 33) concerns the export of cultural goods from the EEC.
The Directive concerns the return of cultural goods which have been unlawfully removed from another member State.
The Regulation enters into force after the European Parliament has debated it, which should be no later than 31 March 1993, but the Directive is delayed until October in response to a request by the Netherlands, which says that is not ready yet with its internal laws.
The Directive defines cultural goods as those classified as a national treasure under national legislation and also falling within the limits of a defined set of categories with age and value limits, which are the same as for the Regulation (see p.33).
These were highly controversial so far as the implementation of the Regulation is concerned, with the British Department of National Heritage fearing an increase by 250,000 in export documents required by the antiquities trade, as all archaeological goods, even of no value, are required to have export papers.
At the last moment the U.K. managed to push through an optional exemption of archaeological goods such as coins.
Now the question is whether the U.K. government will bring the age and value limits in force under the current British export procedures into line with the EEC limits.
London
Easy money?
Edinburgh University joins Royal Holloway in proposed sales of works of art
The case of the proposed sale by London University's Royal Holloway College of a good Turner, Constable and Gainsborough (in that order) from the collection given to it by its founder Thomas Holloway has been rumbling on since 1988, arousing increasing indignation in some academic and most heritage circles.
These seem to have had their fears that the flood gates holding back university collections are now opening confirmed, as Edinburgh University announced last month that it was proposing to sell a sculpture by Adrian de Vries or a Ruisdael landscape, bequeathed by Sir James Torrie, to help put right a deficit permitted over the last few years by a Treasurer who has since resigned.
This had already necessitated the disposal of books from its library, including a complete set of Audubon's Birds of America.
The Chairman of the Museums and Galleries Commission, Graham C. Greene, has asked the Attorney General Nicholas Lyell to look into the matter of the permission, finally granted this year by the Charity Commissioners, but applied for in 1988, to break the Trust of Thomas Holloway.
In August, Lyell had refused to do so, but Mr Greene says that there is new evidence to suggest that the Commission did not exercise its duties correctly; The Commissioners seem not to have taken expert advice, as they were bound to do, on the importance of the paintings to the collection, but relied merely on the statements supplied by the College itself.
These did not come from either the Tate Gallery or the Victoria and Albert Museum, the institutions with the relevant collections, but almost certainly from, among others, Agnews, the firm which, ironically, helped build up the collection in the nineteenth century.
The Principal of the college, Norman Gowar, is refusing to say whom they consulted.
The financial circumstances of the college also appear to have improved since 1988 when it was forced into an underfunded merger with Bedford College, and the state of the building does not seem to require the sum of £10.5 million  originally put to the Commissioners.
Indeed, the College told the Court of the University of London in June 1991 that it would not be adding significantly to its accumulated deficit of £1.2 million in 1991–92, that student numbers were increasing ‘comfortably’ and that surpluses should follow in 1993–94 and 1994–95 and that the main building needed only £5 million until the year 2000 to keep it in good repair.
In fact the1880s main building, a Grade I listed extravaganza modelled on Chambord, is in a structurally sound condition, having had money from the Pilgrim Trust, the Wolfson Foundation and the University Funding Council spent on it over the last ten years.
The college has not yet applied for an English Heritage grant, for which it would certainly be eligible.
Its spokesman, David White, told The Art Newspaper, that it had ear-marked the notional £20 million to be raised from the sale of the pictures for modernising students' rooms, putting in lifts and so on, but that a large proportion would be invested to provide funds for future use.
‘We're not time-sensitive’, he said.
‘We're not trying to get out of a short-term financial  embarrassment , which gives us flexibility.
We're not rushing to sell the pictures’.
The Museums and Galleries Commission is hoping that these considerations will lead the Charity Commissioners to reconsider their decision under the cy-pres (i.e. next best thing) provision of the 1960 Charities Act, which allows a charitable bequest or trust to be altered where the original stipulation is no longer relevant.
Holloway's stipulation was that the picture collection was ‘to decorate the walls of the college’ which is arguably still relevant unless the college risks bankruptcy or physical collapse, neither of which is the case today.
In the meanwhile, the Constable bought in at Sotheby's last month at £850,000 may have given the Principal pause for thought.
It was in 1988 that the college was led to believe that the three picture would fetch £15–20 million, but while the college's financial situation has improved since then, the state of the art market has done the exact opposite.
Paris
France looks to the Courtauld Institute for its own art centre
From 1993 an International Centre for the arts and patrimony in the Bibliotheque Nationale
On 5 November France's culture minister, Jack Lang, announced the setting up of a new multi-disciplinary institute devoted to the teaching of art history, archaeology, cinema, theatre and dance.
It will be housed in the former Bibliotheque Nationale, now Bibliotheque des Arts.
Pierre Encreve, a professor of linguistics, has been charged with setting up the new foundation, which will serve to fulfill Andre Chastel's 1983 commitment to found an institute for the history of art and culture, on the lines of London's Courtauld Institute.
A budget of around FFr50 million has been allocated to the Centre international d'histoire des arts et du patrimoine which has been allocated 17,000 square metres of space next to the rue Vivienne.
In contrast to an institute such as the Courtauld which offers its own degrees, the courses at the new centre will be run independently by the various departments of the Parisian and provincial universities which have, in the past, offered courses in the relevant subjects.
Working alongside the students will be  practising musicians, architects, painters and dancers.
The idea is that close proximity will result in greater inter-disciplinary contacts.
The new institute's other roles will be those of research, documentation and international exchanges.
Facilities such as an iconographic databank are expected to encourage researchers to use the building as their base and help establish the institute as a rival to the Courtauld and the Getty from the point of view of new research.
The centre will be enormously enriched by the presence of the Bibliotheque des Arts, created from specialist sections of the Bibliotheque Nationale such as prints, coins, and photographs, and the addition of special book collections such as the Jacques Doucet library, the Bibliotheque du Louvre and the architecture library of the Bibliotheque des Beaux-Arts, around 1.5 million books in all.
Lang has also pledged himself to an increased emphasis on the teaching of art history at secondary school and college level.
A new option will be introduced into the curriculum of the same type as the cinema and theatre courses already on offer.
On a practical level, however, this may prove difficult as France does not have sufficient numbers of teachers qualified to teach this subject.
Rome
The art historian as politician
Carlo Argan died 11 November aged eighty-three.
He was Italy's most influential art historian, also an art critic, campaigner for the country's patrimony and a politician.
He was communist mayor of Rome 1976–79, and his History of Italian Art (1968) is a set text which has influenced countless Italian school children
At the 1993 Venice Biennale, the Council had unanimously intended to award Giulio Argan a Leon d' Oro prize; as Curator of this next Biennale, I would like to put this fact on record.
When, as is happening today, history is fragmenting politically and socially to the point of tribal conflict, culture must propose ideas with an international vision; the moral worth of art lies in its internationalism, its capacity to weave differences together.
Hence the theme of next year's Biennale, ‘The cardinal points of art’.
Hence our debt to Giulio Argan, who in his writings always favoured movements and artists who were not only independently creative but also in step with historical change.
Argan derived his belief in the autonomy of criticism, understood as being learning productive of an understanding of the poetic, of the artist and a world vision, from the autonomy of art itself.
For Argan, art was also ‘a thing of the the mind’, a conceptual vehicle formalised in the image.
That is why he loved Botticelli, Michelangelo the architect, David, Hogarth, Canova, Mondrian, Gropius and the theories of programme art in the early Sixties.
Argan was a great writer and a coherent ideologue of art, an historicist who believed in progress and in the functionalism of art right up to its transmutation into design.
Hence the bias of his history of art, that interwoven analysis of artistic production and the world of technique.
It was when he became aware of the dominance of some technique which emptied the art of meaning that he began to express scepticism over the art of the last decades.
He did indeed believe in the autonomy of art, but as the exultation of the conflicts of history and not as pure commentary.
Essentially, he expected art, even that of the Avant-garde, not merely to override the present but to ride it.
He thought the piling up and saving of images for future use pointless if corrupted by a consumeristic present.
As a Marxist, he had no faith in the superstructure of art, convinced that it depended on the structure of production.
It is not by chance that, in his History of Art, movements such as Mannerism are undervalued and considered periods of artistic involution.
He gave art an openly political meaning and did not appreciate the artist as an individual dissenting voice.
Argan believed that art belonged to all men, which is why he battled  in defence of the cultural heritage from the dark days of Fascism — to the last days of his life, proof of his commitment to criticism as an instrument of conscience.
I have always asked myself how much Argan actually loved art, and how much derived instead from the respect he certainly had for his own intelligence.
I think he knew when he truly found himself in front of a work of art.
Then a conceptual emotion was released in him which transmuted what he saw into theory, a recognition of the cerebral nature of an art which transported him beyond the mere explanation of the visible.
Argan's writings are the testimony of a great conceptual writer, the founder of a  metaphysics of criticism which fights art and celebrates it with the force of theory.
London
English Heritage passes the conservation buck
England's chief custodian of historic monuments and sites tries to shed functions to cope with £50 million funding shortfall
The letters pages of the newspapers, the House of Lords and the radio all resounded last month with shocked criticism of the new strategy of English Heritage, the country's leading conservation body, published in the report Managing England's Heritage.
This involves a radical restructuring of the organisation, with devolution into local authority or private management of up to 203 of the 350 or so historic sites now in English Heritage's care; the eventual redundancy of nearly 500 staff (more than one quarter of the total); and the handover of powers to influence decisions on Grade II listed buildings in London, powers inherited in 1986 from the now defunct Greater London Council.
Additional proposals include setting up an emergency fund to save buildings or sites for the nation and another for historic gardens (two proposals which have met with approval), and cutting back on conservation grants, principally repair grants made to local authorities, amounting to £9.5 million annually, half of which has been on a pound-for-pound basis.
In a letter to Peter Brooke, Secretary of State at the Department of National Heritage, the Council for the protection of Rural England and the Council for British Archaeology have joined their voices to that of the National Trust in calling for a public review of the new strategy.
The contentious proposals have been under consideration for a number of years, says English Heritage, and are not principally attributable to its new director, the controversial Jocelyn Stevens, widely seen as a hardline, Thatcherite free marketeer.
A spokesman told The Art Newspaper, ‘The Executive Board and Commissioners all took part in its preparation and discussion, and devoted many meetings to the process’.
Despite this, however, the organisation seems to have failed to consult a number of leading individuals and bodies in the heritage world who, not surprisingly have reacted with scepticism and hostility.
The distinguished archaeologist Professor Lord Renfrew, member of English Heritage's own Ancient Monuments Advisory committee, revealed that its opinion had not been sought until the third week of November when it finally was called for a formal meeting with Jocelyn Stevens.
English Heritage says that it will now be talking to its advisory committees.
Objections to the proposals essentially turn on the terms under which any devolution would take place, and the question of the competence and reliability of the organisations which would be taking on responsibility for the sites.
While Fountains Abbey, the great Gothic ruin set in beautiful parkland, could naturally be transferred to the National Trust given a suitable endowment (who would provide the millions needed for that?), and Westminster Abbey's Chapter House could be entrusted to the Church of England, it is uncertain whether some of the less glamourous archaeological sites could be hived off to local councils without risk to their future.
Both Peter Addyman, President of the Council for British  Archaeology (The Times, 2 November) and Laurence Keen, President of the British Archaeological Association, fear that local councils lack the necessary specialist knowledge.
At a time when local authorities are cutting back on services, many may reject this additional financial responsibility.
English Heritage says, however, that since the publication of the strategy, they have had seventeen expressions of interest from local authorities and that they will only hand over in cases where they are sure that maintenance will be adequate and public access guaranteed: ‘We will do everything we can to assist those authorities that need help by giving guidance and support — which could include pump-priming of posts…
There is no question of selling the properties or of forcing involvement of local people’.
It denies that it is sliding out of its responsibility towards  archaeological sites: ‘Our archaeological activities will still continue and remain a vital part of our work’.
The withdrawal of English Heritage from looking after the Grade II listed buildings in the capital — those which make up much of its historic fabric — is viewed as alarming because it involves dismantling the highly professional architectural conservation division, with its unifying role, which English Heritage inherited in 1986 when the Greater London Council was abolished.
English Heritage chooses now to stress the  responsibility of the many boroughs of which London is made up: ‘Our policy is, in consultation with the boroughs, and over an agreed programme, to withdraw from the exercise of our powers where we are duplicating their functions’.
‘What functions?’ has been the response; a spokesman for Camden, the borough with the largest number of Grade II listed buildings after Westminster, says, ‘We've never even had a conservation policy?’
Underlying these changes is the by now all too usual crisis in public funding.
Jocelyn Stevens says that he needs £156 million to carry out properly English Heritage's traditional role, while its grant in aid for the next three years is £100 million, £104 million and £106 million.
Like so many others in the art world, he is pinning his hopes on the proposed National Lottery, and his organisation has already submitted a list of historic monuments and sites which need £500 million before the year 2000.
In the meanwhile, he is said to be hurt and shocked by the hostility of the reaction to the strategy proposals.
Grade A monuments from the list of sites which may be handed over
Prehistoric: Avebury stone circles near Devizes
Roman: Birdoswald Fort, on Hadrian's Wall; Vindolanda Fort, on Hadrian's Wall; Silchester City Amphitheatre, near Basingstoke
Medieval: Fountains Abbey (including Studely Royal Church, near Ripon); Gainsthorpe deserted village, near Brigg, Humberside; Waverly Abbey, near Farnham, Surrey; Westminster Abbey Chapter House
Post-Medieval: Fort Cumberland; Hampton Court Conduits; Plymouth Royal Citadel
In categories B and C the division by types of sites is as follows:
Grade B
Prehistoric: Twenty sites
Roman: Four sites
Medieval: Twenty-one sites
Post Medieval: Six Sites
Grade C
Prehistoric: Twenty-four sites
Roman: Nine sites
Medieval: Eighty-one sites
Post Medieval: Nineteen sites
Coutts bank pays for prizes
The Coutts Contemporary Art Foundation awards for 1992 have been awarded to Edward Dwurnik of Poland for paintings, Helga Fanderl of Germany for film and Dan Graham of the USA for sculpture.
The Foundation was set up in September this year by Coutts and Co, Zurich.
It aims to support contemporary artists with financial awards totalling over $100,000 per annum.
The awards will be made periodically to one or more artists at the discretion of the Foundation's Art Advisory Committee.
Members of the 1992 Committee include Professor Kaspar König, head of the Stadelschule at the State University for Visual Arts, Frankfurt am Main; Gary Garrels, senior curator, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; and Hans-Ulrich Bodenmann, president of the Joseph Beuys Foundation, Basel.
Van Gogh drawings or a hoax?
Two French collectors have announced what they consider to be a major find of six previously unknown Van Gogh drawings.
The sheets are reported to have turned up inside a frame offered for sale in a provincial Sunday flea market outside Paris.
They show a view of a city park, two female figures, a country scene with a bridge, a village scene with figures, a small doorway, and a castle, all recognisable places in Provence.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper, Louis van Tilburg, research curator at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam commented: ‘On the basis of the photos we have been able to inspect we are confident that the six drawings do not fit within the oeuvre of Van Gogh and do not correspond in any way with the graphic style he developed at the time.
In fact I do not understand what all the fuss is about.’
There are plans to display the drawings at the Espace Cardin next March or April.
Washington DC
Full tax benefits for gifts to non-profit bodies thrown out with the General Revenue Act
Museums in the U.S. have fallen victim indirectly to President Bush's famous pledge never to raise taxes.
Provisions in the General Revenue Act of 1992 to make deductible against tax the current value of both tangible and intangible property donated to a non-profit organisation (for example, a painting to a museum or shares to a hospital) rather than their value at acquisition failed along with the whole bill when it was vetoed by President Bush last month because it contained forty tax increases.
The earliest the matter can be raised again is in January when the new Congress returns, and although if the benefit is reintroduced it may well be retroactive to1 January, potential donors are biding their time for the moment.
Gifts to museums have therefore fallen dramatically since the one-year tax window allowing full deductibility closed on 30 June.
The Metropolitan Museum in New York received items worth $8 million from one hundred donors in June, but worth $500,000 and from only fifteen donors in July.
A key player so far as the passage of the bill is concerned will be the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, Congressman Rostenkowski, and then in the upper house, Senator Benson.
Lobbyists, which include the American Museum Association and the Arts Alliance will be in touch with Senator Moynihan who helped get the tax window opened in 1991.
Moscow
Principle of private ownership of art enshrined in new Russian law
With rare unanimity and hardly any debate, a joint session of the chambers of the Russian Supreme Soviet has passed Principles for Russian Federation Legislation on Culture.
The issue of private ownership holds a prominent place within the Principles for Legislation.
All forms of ownership of cultural treasures, buildings, equipment and other cultural items are permitted.
However, the right of use, disposal or ownership of especially valuable items of cultural heritage can only be changed by Supreme Soviet resolutions.
It is also stipulates that cultural goods in the holdings of State museums, archives, libraries and art galleries are exempt from privatisation.
No less than 2% of the Russian budget and no less than 6% of local budgets is to be allocated to culture (although in reality it is unlikely that the State budget, with its huge deficit, will manage more than 0.5%).
In addition, tax breaks are promised for enterprises owned by artists' unions and associations as long as they are operating for their prescribed purpose.
Tax exemptions for the property of literary and artistic figures is also proposed.
The Russian government has been instructed to submit a federal State programme for the conservation and development of culture.
Preliminary estimates from the Ministry of Culture suggest that 180 billion roubles will be required to enact the programme.
Died
Richard Pousette Dart, the American Abstract artist, died in New York on 25 October.
His first one-man show was at The Artists Gallery 1941 and he showed with Peggy Guggenheim's Art of this Century in 1944 which led on to a one man-show at the Guggenheim in 1947.
He exhibited at Betty Parson's gallery and wo Whitney retrospectives of his work were held in 1963 and 1974.
Alexander Camaro, the Berlin artist, has died at the age of ninety-one.
He will chiefly be remembered as creator of the cycle of paintings called ‘wooden theatres’ in which Camaro recalled his earlier career as a dancer in some of the oldest of Germany's theatres, such as the Ekhof-Buhner in Schloss Friedenstein.
Appropriately, this castle was the setting for his last exhibition, early this year, of the fabulous ‘Winter images’ that he had recently devoted his energies to — tableaus of men and animals created out of ice and snow.
Joan Mitchell, painter, born Chicago 21 February 1926, died Paris 30 October 1992.
An Abstract Expressionist artist she was influenced by de Kooning.
Mitchell won numerous prizes including the Grand Prix des Arts of the city of Paris in 1991, and her work hangs in all the main American collections.
A ten-year retrospective of her work was held at the Whitney in 1974 and at major retrospective at the Johnson Museum of Art, Cornell University, New York in 1988 which toured the US.
She was the long-time partner of Jean-Paul Riopelle.
Froelich Gladstone Rainey, archaeologist and anthropologist, died at St Austell, Cornwall, 11 October, aged eighty-five.
Director of the Philadelphia Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology of the University of Pennsylvania from 1947–77, his colourful life, including time spent with the Eskimo, is recorded in his autobiography Reflections of a Digger.
David Baxendall, former director of the National Galleries of Scotland, died Hereford 17 October aged eighty-seven.
He became director of the Manchester City Art Galleries 1945–52, and remained there until he succeeded Ellis Waterhouse as director of the National Gallery of Scotland 1952–70.
He was an authority on twentieth-century English Abstract art.
David Harris Cohen, associate curator of decorative arts at the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, died 18 October, aged 43.
He joined the Getty in 1982, having previously worked in the department of Western European sculpture and decorative arts at the Metropolitan Museum, New York.
FBI seeks missing Egyptian antiquities
According to a recent report in the New York Times, the Federal Bureau of Investigation is currently looking into the disappearance of three Egyptian antiquities, shipped to the Merrin Gallery in Manhattan from the Cleveland Museum of art on 1 October, but which failed to arrive.
The missing works, valued at over $1 million in total, are: a five-inch high rose granite portrait head, probably of a king, dated around 1300BC; a seven-inch high black diorite head of a priest, fourth century BC; and a thirteen-inch bronze mirror from the fifteenth century BC.
Lloyd's of London is offering a reward of up to $50,000 for the safe return of the objects or information leading to their recovery.
Vasarely at odds with his own foundation
Victor Vasarely, age eighty-six, leading optical artist of the 1960s and 1970s, author of very numerous brightly coloured geometrical trompe l'oeil works and large scale State commissions, has declared legal war on the president of his own arts foundation at Aix-en-Provence, Charles Debbasch.
The artist accuses Mr Debbasch, who is also Rector of the University of Aix-Marseille III, of selling off works from the Fondation Vasarely, created in 1976, without the permission of either himself or his family.
Last July a court in Aix refused Vasarely's request to nominate a temporary administration to the Foundation but did appoint two experts to evaluate the assets of the Foundation and take stock of which works have been sold.
Mr Debbasch has counterattacked by bringing charges for forgery and defamation.
A court in Aix should make a first ruling this month whether Vasarely or Debbasch is legally in control of the Vasarely Foundation.
When art is 20,000 loaves of soggy bread
A group of Dutch artists under the collective name of ‘Cargo’ recently came up with the idea of dropping 20,000 loaves of bread into the sea as an act of  sacrifice ‘from the nation’.
Holland, the only country lying mainly below sea level, is understandably obsessed by the sea, but this went too far even for even the greatest patriots.
In preparation for the ceremony of toppling, a huge power pylon containing the loaves to allow them to fall out into the water, the group made an application to be granted an exemption from the law prohibiting the dumping of waste at sea.
They were turned down by the Minister of Traffic and Waterways, Mrs Maij-Weggen, and it seemed that the idea, which was abandoned.
Nothing more was heard of Cargo, who were rumoured to be considering dropping the loaves outside Dutch territorial waters, until a month ago a number of loaves of bread were found washed up on the Dutch coast.
Cargo have since become impossible to trace.
Digital visual library expands
Interactive Home Systems (IHS) was set up in 1989 in Redmond, Washington, with the aim of selling high quality visual information to homes, schools, public institutions and businesses, drawing on a constantly expanding visual information library which includes not only art but also history, science, travel, current affairs and popular culture.
As part of their art library they have entered into agreement with the National Gallery, London and the Seattle Art Museum by which the museums have granted the company non-exclusive rights to the digital reproduction and distribution of major works from both collections.
The company have now announced a similar deal with the Hulton Deutsch Collection, London, the largest commercial photo-archive in Europe and the Dorling Kindersely Collection, London which has a collection of more than 500,000 images.
It has also purchased the Francis G. Mayer Collection of colour slides, New York, and part of the photography collection of the British photographer Roger Wood.
London
The new Department of National Heritage ten months on
This April saw the creation of a Department of State uniting the arts, heritage, sport, tourism and broadcasting.
David Mellor, its first chief was forced to resign early this autumn.
What does it consist of now?
WHERE?
The Headquarters of the Department are still in Horse Guard Road where the old Office of Arts and Library was.
Some officials have moved to Grove House, just next to the National Gallery.
Some of the new elements, such as broadcasting, are still housed in their old buildings pending the imminent conclusion of the negotiations for taking over a headquarters for everyone, probably in Trafalgar Square.
Who's Who?
(See Table) Peter Brooke, educated at Marlborough, Balliol College, Oxford and Harvard, is an old-school Tory known to have a keen interest in pictures and in conservation, especially of churches.
He is considered a good listener and a effective operator.
His years as Minister at the Treasury should help him in negotiating effective deals.
As Northern Ireland Secretary from 1989 to the last elections he proved to be a skilful diplomat and he is widely acceptable to all factions of the Conservative Party.
Robert Key, a teacher by profession, entered Parliament in 1983 and sat on the Select Committee on Education, Science and the Arts.
A jovial personality and a member of the Chorus of the Academy of Saint Martin's in the Fields.
Viscount Astor, a hardworking and professional hereditary Peer.
He is said to be particularly strong on heritage.
Anthony Steen, a barrister, entered the House in 1983, has a longstanding interest in urban renewal and in music.
Hayden Phillips, smooth, urbane, the kind of establishment figure that the Thatcherites liked to take on, he has had a brilliant career which started in the Home Office, took him to Brussels as chef de cabinet to Roy Jenkins and then to the Treasury as Deputy Secretary.
Nigel Pittman, trained as an actor, joined the Civil Service in Scotland.
In1984 he became secretary to the Museum Advisory Board for Scotland, then worked with Robert Anderson, now director of the British Museum, at the National Museums of Scotland before before being put in charge of Museums and Finance at the Office of Arts and Libraries.
Highly regarded, he was promoted by Brooke's predecessor David Mellor to his current position.
Margaret O'Mara, a classicist and economist who has spent almost twenty years in the Treasury where she has been involved in monetary policy and the control of public expenditure.
A true  high-flyer , she remains approachable and friendly.
Philip Gregory is in charge of museums under O'Mara.
A measured man, his knowledge of museums is primarily from the tourism and management angles.
John Gunn was previously responsible for heritage in the Department of the Environment.
Dominic Loehnis, educated at Eton and Oxford, where he attended Steven Sondheim's master classes.
He started his carrier as a lyrics writer and then went on to the Daily Telegraph.
How many?
How much?
With 250 staff the DNH has an total budget of £968m for 1993–94.
In last month's very tough spending round, the main programmes have held up and the British Library has received extra funds.
The Museums and Galleries will receive £213.5 million, that is a cut of 3.9% in respect of the previous year, taking into account inflation; English Heritage gets £100.1 million, a cut of 5.7%, while the Arts Council will receive £225.6 million, a cut in real terms of 1.8%.
The allocations for the British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum are increasing by 1.75% and 1.85% in real terms respectively.
The settlement is for next year only and the three-year planning system is discontinued; from now on figures for future years will only be indicative.
This decision will cause greater uncertainty.
The radical change is that the grant-in-aid to individual museums is no longer earmarked, so that their trustees will be able to decide how to distribute funds, in particular between maintenance costs and purchases.
This may mean that purchase votes will decline from their already low levels, frozen by government since 1985.
If the government sticks to its decision to limit public sector pay rises to 1.5%, museums may have some extra flexibility as the DNH has budgeted for a greater increase.
Peter Brooke on Brooke
At the end of October, the Arts Council organised a conference ‘The Odd Couple: Broadcasting and the Arts’, where Alan Yentob, Controller of BBC2, interviewed Peter Brooke, Secretary of State for National Heritage.
Our reporter Laura Suffield took notes
On culture: I don't flinch at using the word
On himself: I am a very, very pragmatic Englishman.I have a powerful sense of history, which informs where we are now.
On radio: I'm a Radio Four [news, talks and drama programmes]man.
On tv: Don't watch it much.
On reading: I have very wide tastes.
I think all politicians should read more novels.
On art: I'm fairly conservative but not totally baffled by contemporary art.
On funding: I detect a swing back of the pendulum from the excesses of market forces of the early 80s, but I predict that the recession will squeeze funding further.
I think that the 80s were beneficial in that they produced plural arts funding.
On the National Lottery: We must decide what are the proper things to spend the money on and make sure that the Treasury does not cut out other funding.
It will probably be used for capital funding rather than running costs.
On English Heritage: I must be confident that Jocelyn Stevens [its director]is handing over the sites to the right custodians; I feel that local management could be better.
It's a perfectly  honourable exercise in which he is engaged.
French centralism v.
English decentralism: This is a cultural thing.
It probably explains why we beat them at war in the past.
But we have much to learn from Jack Lang's elan and generous funding.
On collecting contemporary art: More people in Germany buy it than they do here.
I would like to see some research done into this.
On active participation by the population in arts and sport: I' m in favour of experimentation but not compulsion.
Letters to the Editor
A regrettable reading
I have never accused Joseph Kosuth of plagiarism.
Others have done so, in writing, but not I. I spoke of the ‘regrettable similarity’ between a 1989 work by Parmiggiani and Kosuth's installation at the 1992 Documenta (Il Giornale dell' Arte No. 103, September 1992, pp. 1,8).
A ‘regrettable similarity’ is not plagiarism.
And yet it is an awkward situation for it is certain the reception of Claudio Parmiggiani's work will for a long time be affected by the great deal of media attention given to Joseph Kosuth's work.
There are all sorts of coincidences which are in no way plagiarism.
For example, there are ‘interesting’ coincidences.
And I find, for example, that there is an ‘interesting’ similarity between Alice Aycock's 1985 project entitled ‘The Rosetta Stone City’and Joseph Kosuth's work ‘Ex libris , J.F. Champollion’(Figeac 1990).
Joseph Kosuth is a great reader.
He tells us that he ‘spent months researching’(citations from his letter, The Art Newspaper No. 22, October 1992, p.3) the texts which he uses in his work at the Neue Galerie at Kassel and he criticises me for ‘forgetting’ these texts which took him so long to research, even though they are clearly mentioned in the second, fourth and fifth paragraphs of my article which comprises only seven paragraphs.
Has our great reader read my article?
Or rather was he unable to read it?
A propos, one is tempted to suggest that he reflect further on the Walther Benjamin question of the aura which perhaps no longer needs to be ‘blocked’ since it is historically lost.
Curiously, Joseph Kosuth uses a language which is redolent of relentless Christian morality.
He is being accused of a ‘sin’.
He insidiously suggests that my ‘motivation’ was not altogether ‘untainted’, which is really rather sordid.
He cites ‘the interest of scholarship and fair-mindedness’, which are as it happens rather grand terms, but is it not rather a matter of free speech than of insinuation or imprecation?
Since when should one be ‘ashamed’ of defending an artist whom one feels has objectively been wronged?
Besides, the cavalier way in which Joseph Kosuth mentions Claudio Parmiggiani's name says a great deal about his indifference to the problem raised and to the wrong in question.
I have never dreamed of denying Joseph Kosuth's ‘own contribution’.
It even seems to me that my article constitutes a commentary which despite its broad irony nevertheless contains arguments Joseph Kosuth avoids.
He defends himself saying that ‘for nearly thirty years’ he has been using black and white and that, what is more, the Documenta logo was also black and white.
I suppose that his reply is also written in black on white.
I wonder how many millions of logos are black and white and how many thousands of artists limit their use of colour purely to black and white, which is not in fact true of Joseph Kosuth.
I am entirely convinced that Joseph Kosuth has never seen work by Claudio Parmiggiani either actually or in reproduction.
That is a pity.
But I think that it is even more of a pity, as I said in my article, that none of the four Documenta organisers brought the above problem of Claudio Parmiggiani's work to Joseph Kosuth's attention.
For I have no doubt that, had this been the case, the great American artist, given the purity of his motivation, would have had the courtesy to apprise the Italian artist of his project.
No Christie's sales in Germany
I am writing with regard to the small article ‘Christie's to hold sales in Germany’ that appears in the November edition of The Art Newspaper.
Christie's will not be holding sales in Germany next year as it is our policy to centralise ‘European’ sales in London where the international range of buyers and sellers can benefit from the best marketing and auctioneering available.
Other auction houses have chosen to hold periodic sales around Europe outside main selling centres; however, after studying their results, we have found that, at this time, vendors are best served when their property is included in high-quality specialised sales held in familiar salerooms.
In light of the success of the Spanish sale held in London last spring and in recognition of the importance of German art in the international marketplace, Christie's are organising a sale devoted entirely to German art from the sixteenth to the twentieth century, which will be held at King Street in May of 1993.
I felt that your readers would appreciate having this small point clarified; furthermore, I would like to take this opportunity to say I receive your publication regularly and I always find it interesting, informative and a pleasure to read.
How to teach civilisation
Perhaps you will allow me a brief reply to the anonymous review of my book Art and Civilisation in your November issue: The reviewer wonders why the book was written, or, rather, why the publisher was ‘keen on the project’.
The answer is the American academic market, specifically Western Civilisation courses in American universities.
The two American editions — Pretence-Hall and Abrams — are more than ten times the size of the British one.
The ‘messy’ layout your reviewer objects to — i.e. the presence of topic spreads interrupting the narrative — reflects the needs of this market.
Your reviewer recommends Gombrich's Story of Art as a viable alternative.
Not for the main purpose, I'm afraid.
Gombrich's book (1950, last revised in 1989) has unrivalled charm and sophistication, but nevertheless makes no mention of any of the following: Pontormo, Georges de La Tour, Boucher, Greuze, Stubbs, Mengs, Canova, Schinkel, Malevich, Brancusi, Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, Duchamp, Bacon, Dubuffet and Balthus.
In a ‘Civilisation’ course students would probably expect to hear about most of these.
As a universal history of art Gombrich is less complete than the Honour/Fleming World History of Art, since, while including Africa, the Pre-Columbian cultures, Oceana, Islam (mostly Iran) and China, he omits India, South East Asia and Japan.
Kissinger never called
In your October edition there appears an article entitled ‘The Tibetan art show Kissinger wished would go away’.
May I respond to this, for included within is a reference which is misleading.
The quote is: ‘At the inaugural dinner for its first showing at the San Francisco Asian Art Museum in April 1991, Rand Castile, the director, admitted to a personal call from Henry Kissinger suggesting that he drop the show, diplomatic relations with China being at stake’.
If former Secretary Kissinger ever sought the cancellation of the Tibet exhibition he did not call me.
The rumour gained credence, I suspect, through a call made to the Museum by a reporter from National Public Radio who said she had heard Mr Kissinger had called me to request we not present the exhibition.
I informed the reporter that no such call had come to my office.
In organising the exhibition we made every effort to ensure that the exhibition would not become ‘political’— we borrowed neither from Tibet nor from the People's Republic of China.
Piers Rodgers is absolutely correct, ‘this is a show about art, not politics’.
Geneva
Louvre buys back another Crown jewel
First Thurn und Taxis sale fetches £9.015 million as Bavarian State still negotiates over the greater treasures
New German money flocked to buy jewels, silver and objets de vertu touched with the lustre of German history when the treasures superfluous to requirements of the Fürsts von Thurn und Taxis came under the hammer in Geneva on 17 November.
Simon de Pury, president of Sotheby's Switzerland, proclaimed himself delighted with the total, SFr19,743,130 (£9,015 million) which exceeded the pre-sale estimate of SFr16,509,700 (94% sold).
The dowager  Fürstin Gloria said, ‘With this sale another big step  towards the efforts to secure the inheritance of my son has been achieved.
I am now looking forward to the sale in Regensburg next year’.
As in many English country house sales, the bidding was dominated by private buyers prepared to bid uncommercially high prices for silver which, although good quality and of eighteenth-century date, had been well used (up to his death in 1990, the late Fürst lived like a fairy tale prince), for lavish nineteenth-century jewellery and bibelots like snuff boxes and jewelled ostrich feather fans.
The  Société des Amis du Louvre carried out the Louvre's ongoing policy of buying back French crown jewels by bidding SFr935,000 for the tiara made of State gems and pearls for Napoleon III, to give to his bride, Eugenie de Montijo.
A consortium of English and European dealers, led by S.J.Phillips of Bond St, bid a world record price for a snuff box when they gave SF2,530,000 (£1,155,2507) for one of the twenty-six surviving hardstone and jewelled boxes made for Frederick the Great.
Although one of the most interesting objects in the sale, it was not considered sufficiently rare — or Bavarian — to be among the items withdrawn from the sale at the instigation of the Bavarian State, which at the time of writing was still negotiating with Fürstin Gloria over what exactly will still come up in the future Regensburg sale.
The problem for the State is, that while the family sent a letter in 1942 declaring its intention to reach an agreement over what should be considered inalienable heirlooms and therefore assured a permanence in the family's headquarters of Schloss St Emmeram in Regensburg, this agreement was never actually realised.
Theoretically, therefore, the family is in the exceptional position of being able to put even the most historic items on the market.
Both the State and the family would like to avoid this  happening , and a fiscal package is being put together that would enable the huge death duties owing to be paid off partly in kind.
Despite all the public hoo-hah over the recent sale of jewels, the items which are really important to the history of the family — and to Europe itself — are the archives of Europe's first postal service, founded in the Middle Ages by the Thurn und Taxis, and the two incredibly fine libraries; compared with these, even the furnishings in the castle pale into insignificance.
Tiara by Lemonnier made for Napoleon III in 1853 on the occasion of his marriage to Eugenie.
It incorporates State jewels and pearls.
Sold in 1887 by the republican government.
Bought at the Thurn und Taxis sale on 17 November for the Louvre
The Empress Eugenie depicted by Winterhalter wearing the tiara
Venice
The private societies: £750,000, the Italian State: 0
This year not one Lira of government funds has been spent on restoration
The chief State official responsible for works of art in Venice, Soprintendente Nepi Scire and the architect in charge of the Doge's Palace, Mario Piana, have declared that no State funding has been made available this year for restoring Europe's loveliest and most fragile city.
Money was allocated, but due to delays in passage of the Bill through Parliament, as has so often been the case before, no money has actually flowed from the coffers in Rome.
The occasion of this denunciation was the annual meeting in Venice this October of the twenty international private societies for the safeguarding of the city, at which it was announced that they, on the other hand, had spent £750,000 of privately raised money.
Projects include, for example, ongoing work on Santa Maria dei Miracoli; restoration of the frescoes in Santa Maria Assunta on Torcello, and cataloguing of the furnishings, textiles and goldsmiths' work in the twelve churches participating in the so-called ‘Museum’ scheme.
Unesco was able to assure the societies of its continuing important service as coordinator between them and the Soprintendenze, also saving them 4% VAT, and making available an employee and its office in St Mark's Square.
This is significant, because there has been a period during which it looked as though, because of the societies' successful opposition in 1990 to the then Italian Foreign Secretary Gianni De Michelis's plan to site Expo2000 in the Veneto, the Italian government would no longer pay for the Unesco office.
At the meeting, Luigi Zanda, a leading Italian campaigner for Venice and President of the Consorzio Venezia Nuova, made a plea, published here in place of the usual editorial (see p.1), for the future of Venice to be treated by the Italian government with a new sense of responsibility and morality free from the political factionism which stalemates so much of the country's public life.
His speech alludes also to the scandals over corruption in political life, particularly where building contracts are concerned, which have been rocking Italy this year.
London
John Summerson has died
Sir John Summerson, the most distinguished British architectural historian of his generation, died in London 10 November, aged eighty-seven.
Unlike most scholars in the field, he was actually a trained architect, studying under the late Neo-classicist Albert Richardson, but he practised only briefly before turning to writing.
His first book, John Nash, Architect to King George IV,(1935), was widely acclaimed.
Although the popular view of Summerson is as the historian of Georgian building (his Georgian London, first published in 1945 is still in print), and although he was a founder member of the Georgian Society, conservation groups failed to enlist his automatic support.
He was nonetheless a key figure in setting up Britain's statutory system of buildings conservation, when he helped to create that invaluable archive the National Buildings Record (now shortly to be banished to Swindon from its present sensible location next to English Heritage), which he joined as deputy director in 1941.
This work resulted in a list of buildings which formed the basis for the first systematic protection established by the 1944 Town and Country Planning Act.
Almost a whole generation knew him as Curator of Sir John Soane's Museum in London (1945–84), where he maintained its distinctive, old-fashioned atmosphere throughout his tenure and on Saturday afternoons himself guided visitors around.
He answered his letters in long-hand, and when he retired there was not even a typewriter in the building.
Among his most important books — read by specialists and layman alike, for such is their clarity and elegance of style — are Architecture in Britain: 1530–1830 in the Pelican History of Art series; The Classical Language of Architecture (1963); Inigo Jones (1966), and The London Building World in the 1860s (1973).
The lengthy obituaries which he earned in the British press deserve to completed now by the publication as soon as possible of his memoirs, on which he was working to the last.
Windsor, Berkshire
Fire ravages Windsor Castle
Heavy structural damage, but limited losses to works of art
Initial fears that the major fire which raged at Windsor Castle over 20 and 21 November would lead to catastrophic losses of works of art were not realised.
Five thousand square metres of the castle, which is regularly lived in by the royal family, was affected by a blaze which began near the family's private chapel in the Chester tower on the north-east side of the vast complex.
The police say that there is no suggestion that it was the result of terrorism; the belief rather is that it was caused by building works being carried out as part of the routine modernisation of the royal residences.
That is why seven of the rooms most affected by the fire were in fact already empty.
A human chain of soldiers, castle employees and members of the royal family carried out paintings, carpets, furniture, Sevres vases, books and drawings and laid them on the lawns before being transported by convoys of lorries.
At the time of writing there was still no official tally of the art losses, but there were fears for a a massive equestrian portrait of George III by William Beechey, which hung in the private dining room.
The structural damage is estimated at £50 million: Chester Tower and St George's Hall with its valuable organ, used for State banquets, are burned out, while the Waterloo Chamber created by Jeffry Wyatville for George IV to hang all the Thomas Lawrence's portraits of rulers and statesmen involved in defeating Napoleon, is badly  damaged by smoke.
The Library, which contains also the world famous Old Master drawings collection, was untouched.
Offers of help have been pouring in from all quarters, with the director of the Victoria and Albert Museum, Elizabeth Esteve-Coll putting her conservation department at the ready to assist, and the Secretary of State for National Heritage, Peter Brooke, conceded that his department would be responsible for financing the repair bill.
Museum director murdered
Fyodor Sergeyev, executive director of the State Russian Museum, was shot dead on 19 November outside an underground station in St Petersburg by a man he had arranged to meet.
New York
The European-style Kunsthalle has suddenly arrived on the scene — in triplicate
Artists abandoned by their impoverished dealers are welcoming the new exhibition spaces with enthusiasm
Dealers in Manhattan may be crying poverty, but plans are underway to open three exhibition spaces patterned after the European Kunsthalle model by the spring.
Each project interprets that model in its own way.
The Kunsthalle, a space (usually municipally funded) in which artists can exhibit their works outside academic and museum constraints, is largely unknown in the United States, even though every small city in the country seems to have built a ‘contemporary art space’ over the last ten years.
The current New York project that most closely resembles the European model is called the New York Kunsthalle.
Not surprisingly, it is a Germanic effort.
Half a dozen German and Swiss investors, originally interested in simply buying New York real estate, became the backers of a $10-million exhibition space in the East Village, North of SoHo.
The building plans a year-round schedule of exhibitions, and will also include studios for visiting artists.
Martin Kunz, the project's Swiss director, intends to show the work of artists — particularly Europeans — whom Kunz says the commercial galleries have ignored.
Kunz also expects to show American artists.
Kunz was director of the Kunstmuseum in Lucerne, Switzerland, from 1977 to 1989, where he exhibited a wide range of American artists before their names were known among collectors and dealers.
Kunz's Kunsthalle represents a novel art business foray in New York.
The space will charge an admission fee, unlike the galleries in the surrounding neighbourhood, and it will attempt to assemble a membership entitling guests to special privileges in the four-story, 30,000-square-foot site.
Kunz admits that 1993 is an unlikely time to be opening such a venue in a depressed New York.
The project was initiated in 1990, when conditions looked far more promising.
What Kunz didn't figure on were two competitors with their own plans for Kunsthalle-style exhibition spaces.
One of those is the independent curator Christian Leigh, who opened a SoHo gallery called Kunsthall last spring.
Like the Swiss-German project Leigh's space receives its money from European backers, around nineteen and mostly Italian, whom Leigh advises on art purchases.
Leigh's retainer as a consultant has supported the space, which held five exhibitions until it closed this fall.
Leigh is now looking for a larger space.
This Kunsthalle will show at least thirty per cent European work.
Leigh agrees with Martin Kunz that much European work has not found its way into New York galleries.
In a SoHo where only months ago ‘art glut’ was a favoured term, Leigh insists that there is more art being made than there is space to show it.
The Kunsthalle model, he maintains, fills a need that the ‘alternative’ contemporary art spaces haven't met.
Their agendas, he charges, are political, ‘anti-object and anti-aesthetic’.
Another Kunsthalle project takes that idea one step further.
Martha Beck, founder of The Drawing Center in New York, is in the process of creating a contemporary art exhibition network with homes in Paris, New York London, and Berlin.
The Center for International Exhibitions would have non-profit Kunsthalles without permanent collections in those cities.
Each would offer five exhibitions a year, which would then travel among the four museums.
Every four years, according to the plan, a leading critic in each city would mount a show with seventy-five works by fifteen artists.
The plan's logic suggests that curators in the four cities would compete to be independent and daring, that the four venues would give exhibitions more attention than individual biennial shows and that the public would benefit from a greater exposure to work judged to be the finest of contemporary art.
Each city would also host monthly exhibitions called ‘new art’.
Beck already has sites in Paris at the hotel des Arts on rue Berryer and in London in the south block mezzanine and lower ground floors of Somerset House overlooking the Thames embankment.
Buildings in New York and Berlin are still being sought.
The Center for International Exhibitions already has an eminent board of directors, including Louise Bourgeois, Jasper Johns, John Richardson, and Pierre Rosenberg.
Given the Drawing Center's success in attracting first-rate exhibitions — and in attracting corporate money — Beck seems to have the best chance for success of the three.
As those projects struggle to take form, competition seems to be rubbing rivals uncomfortably.
Christian Leigh, still in search of a new space for his Kunsthall, says the most important financial backer of Martin Kunz's project has abandoned it.
Leigh himself is reported to have his own financial difficulties but Leigh insists that New York could support at least twenty such exhibition spaces if the work in those exhibitions were well chosen.
All three potential Kunsthalle directors say they are being welcomed by the lower Manhattan art community.
Artists whose cash-pressed dealers have ended their stipends are said to be climbing on board.
Dealers express mixed feelings about the projects.
Some welcome a chance to see more work by lesser known European artists.
Others suspect that exhibition spaces might simply be veils for new real-estate deals.
Even before opening, the New York Kunsthalle has suffered a setback.
In September a fire swept through the huge space, delaying the opening of the entire space until sometime next summer.
Martin Kunz assures potential visitors that small-scale exhibitions will start in the spring.
Exhibitions
New York
Lam — flavour of the month
The current enthusiasm for Cuban-born Wifredo Lam, with exhibitions in New York, Rome and Madrid, contrasts with the plight of artists in Cuba today
It would be hard to find an artist more suited to the political needs of museum exhibitions in the early 1990s than Wifredo Lam, who would have been ninety years old this year.
Lam's biography seems tailor-made for todays' infatuation with multiculturalism: he was born in Cuba to a Chinese father and a Creole mother, he was a Roman Catholic fascinated by Santeria (Cuban animism), his studies and work took him to France, Spain, the United States and the Caribbean, and each of his three wives came from a different European country.
Lam's stylistic passage through Primitivism, Cubism, and Surrealism show him to be a man of his times.
Lam exhibitions have been mounted this month at The Museo Nacional Reina Sofia in Madrid (until 14 December and then travelling to the Fundació Miró in Barcelona, 21 January–28 March, 1993), the Villa Medici in Rome, the home of the French Academy (until 24 January 1993 and the first show of the artist's work in Italy) and in New York.
After the shows' organisers have their say, this neglected artist could turn out to be anything from a prophet of black consciousness to a dissenter in the midst of 1492 anniversary tributes.
The centrepiece of the New York Lam celebrations is ‘Wifredo Lam and His Contemporaries’, a show of about one hundred works at the Studio Museum in Harlem, from 6 December to 11 April 1993, organised by Lowery Stokes Sims, associate curator at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Described as a ‘revisionist enterprise at several levels’, the exhibition aims to examine Lam's work in the context of ‘Cuban cultural nationalism’, concentrating on Lam's place in an Afro-Cuban tradition.
This emphasis seems intended to correct earlier approaches to Lam that found him influenced by Matisse, Picasso, Breton, and Miró, an exotic Third World modernist satellite rather than a major creative force.
Alongside Lam's work, the show will display works by his Cuban contemporaries, plus those of Arshile Gorky, Robert Motherwell, and Asger Jorn, whom he knew in Paris and New York.
In New York, visitors to the Studio Museum have been prepared for this recasting of Lam by a retrospective of his works on paper at the Americas Society, which travels to Barcelona's Fundacio ‘La Caixa’ on 21 January.
In spite of the visual evidence, Lam is presented less as a modernist than as a rebel against modernism, as the outsider who challenges Europe on its own terms and wins.
‘Lam turned his art into a performed act of disruption’, writes curator Charles Merewether.
‘He mimed and exceeded this modernism through assimilation, acquiring its power.
In a sense he subjected European culture to the ancestral spirits of the Afro-Cuban world and disempowered it’.
A similar creolisation of Western painting, however, is also being attributed to Jean-Michel Basquiat, the late graffiti writer turned painter now celebrated in a Whitney Museum retrospective,(see The Art Newspaper No. 22, November 1992, p.10).
Given the Lam exhibition's focus on the artist's Cuban sources — a twenty-one-year-old Lam left the island in 1923 and returned in 1942 to spend a decade there — it is curious that Cuba does not figure among Lam's celebrants.
Part of that is due no doubt to ongoing poor relations with the United States, but part may also be the result of a collapse of cultural life in Cuba today, particularly in the visual arts.
The extreme scarcity of artists' materials and a relaxation of restrictions on travel have led to a new exodus of painters, sculptors, and other artists.
Many of those artists have settled in Mexico where a Cuban dealer has begun selling their work.
Few of those artists are expected to return to the island soon.
Their ‘temporary stays’ may be extended even longer, now that a recent trial has sentenced two of their peers in Cuba to prison terms for screening a videotape of everyday life in Havana at a conference in Costa Rica.
Pierpont Morgan Library
‘Cut missal up in evening — hard work’ Ruskin
Bernard Breslauer has the finest collection of illuminated leaves in the U.S., on display this month for the first time
Though modern readers might wish to repay Mr Ruskin's ‘hard work’ recorded in a 1854 entry, with hard labour, the practice of dismembering books went on for many centuries.
New York-based rare book dealer Bernard Breslauer has spent twenty-five years collecting these single illuminated leaves, amassing the finest private collection of its kind in America.
His 104 items constitute a survey of European painting from the Romanesque period to the Renaissance, including fifty Italian miniatures, twenty-four German, ten Netherlandish, fifteen French, three English, and two Spanish.
Among the highlights are works by Lorenzo Monaco, Nicolo da Bologna, Bicci di Lorenzo, Giovanni Pietro Birago, Simon Bening, and Jean Bourdichon, as well as leaves from an eleventh-century Lectionary from Jumièges, a thirteenth-century Beatus from Castile, and a double-sided miniature from the thirteenth-century German Arenberg Psalter.
The trove will be exhibited together for the first time at the Pierpont Morgan Library (9 December-4 April1993), accompanied by an illustrated catalogue by William Voelkle and Roger Wieck, curator and associate curator, respectively, of the Morgan's Department of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts.
A fellow of the library since 1974, Mr Breslauer's bibliophilic activities are a family legacy.
His father, Martin, was a leading rare book dealer in pre-War Berlin who assembled the most important private collection of books on bibliography.
Forced to flee the Nazis in 1937 — leaving behind the 20,000 bibliography volumes — the older Breslauer resettled his family in London but was killed shortly after in an air-raid.
Bernard served in the British Army until 1945, then, with the support of collectors, scholars, and librarians in Europe and the United States, he reestablished the business, which continues to thrive to this day.
He has just published a profusely illustrated catalogue of fine books in fine bindings which has been described as an important reference work on its subject.
His own collection of miniatures was begun, he has said, because he could not afford to purchase entire illuminated manuscripts.
He buys miniatures exclusively for their artistic (rather than historical) interest, buying at auction, from dealers and privately.
A large proportion of the miniatures are attributable to known artists such as Jean Bourdichon: four sheets by this artist were originally in a Book of Hours belonging to Henry VII of England and are among the great finds of the collection.
Mr Breslauer paid no more than $12,000 per sheet for them.
The highest priced work is the leaf from the Arenberg Psalter with illuminations on both sides, for which he paid about $520,000 in 1990, admitting that he has been one factor in the rise in prices in single sheet miniatures at auction: ‘Prices have climbed enormously because museum directors realise more and more that the history of painting before 1450, and even into the sixteenth-century is to a very large extent found in illuminated manuscripts’.
Poignantly, Mr Breslauer's father's collection of bibliographical books was split up and sold by the Nazis.
His son has been able to buy back some of these volumes and his own collection on this subject now numbers around 8,000 volumes.
On this aspect of his collection he has said: ‘Within this field, I try to obtain beautifully bound copies that belonged to a royal library, to a prince, or to a famous bibliophile.
That for me is the ideal copy’.
Los Angeles
The infancy of Pop Art
The early works of Johns, Rauschenberg, Warhol and the young masters of Pop
As the Royal Academy's Pop Art exhibition approaches the end of its international circuit, closing at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts on 24 January 1993, an important new study, more tightly focused and including only work created in the United States, opens at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, at the beginning of this month (6 December-7 March 1993).
‘Hand-Painted Pop: American Art in Transition 1955–1962’ has been organised by the museum's chief curator, Paul Schimmel, and Donna De Salvo, formerly curator at the DIA Art Foundation and responsible for ‘Success is a Job in New York: the early art and business of Andy Warhol’.
It will be shown at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago (3 April-20 June 1993) and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (16 July-3 October 1993).
The exhibition concentrates upon a critical seven-year period in the evolution of Pop Art and is part of Schimmel's interest in the transitional stages of modern American art.
It was preceded by ‘The Interpretive Link: Abstract Surrealism into Abstract Expressionism 1938–1948’, which he presented at the Newport Harbor Art Museum, where he was formerly chief curator, in 1986.
The present exhibition features 165 works of art created in New York and California by twenty-one artists of a generation which had been schooled in the bold brushwork of Abstract Expressionism but was interested in exploring a new range of subjects drawn from daily experience and popular or commercial sources.
The famous names of this generation include Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, Jim Dine, Roy Lichtenstein, Andy Warhol, Claes Oldenberg, James Rosenquist and Ed Ruscha, all of whom are prominently featured in Schimmel's selection by works of art created at the beginning of their careers.
Artists who may only be familiar to a West Coast audience but whose rehabilitation was launched by Norman Rosenthal at the Royal Academy are Billy Al Bengston, Mel Ramos and Wayne Thiebaud.
The exhibition's terminus is 1962.
Rauschenberg, Lichtenstein and Warhol's contribution, limited to those rare and beautiful canvases carefully painted by hand, is expected to form the most moving section of the exhibition.
This scholarly scrutiny of these crucial years, encouraged by the exhibition and its catalogue (Rizzoli, 255pp. 200 ills.
p/b $39.50), provides a useful balance to the sweeping survey of the Royal Academy.
Roger Bevan
Angelica Kauffman at Brighton
The reputation of Angelica Kauffman (1741–1807) has risen steadily in recent years, since she ceased to be regarded as a minor decorative artist and began to reassume the esteem accorded her by her contemporaries.
Feminism has also made her one of its heroines.
She was a founding member of the Royal Academy in 1768, and in Britain is generally associated in the popular mind with Robert Adam's decorative schemes.
The Brighton Museum is offering a selection of her paintings from her English period, 1766–81, although paintings for British clients dating from her Italian period are included, as is her self portrait (a copy of that in the Uffizi gallery).
Loans have come from a variety of country houses such as Nostell Priory, Goodwood, Saltram, Ickworth and Burghley House and are fairly evenly divided between portraits and classical mythology; frequently both are combined.
Wendy Wassyng Roworth, Professor of Art History at the University of Rhode Island, Kingston, is the guest curator.
The exhibition continues until 3 January in Brighton and then transfers to York City Art Gallery from 23 January until 7 March.
The accompanying book, Angelica Kauffman: a continental artist in Georgian England, edited by Wendy Wassyng Roworth, is published by Reaktion Books with the Brighton Pavilion at a cost of £9.95.
Ben Nicholson's Swiss period featured in new exhibition in Switzerland
In spite of concern that budgetary restrictions might have forced its cancellation, the Fondation Pierre Gianadda is proceeding with its exhibition of works by Ben Nicholson (until 31 January).
Jeremy Lewison, Deputy Keeper of the Tate Gallery's Modern Collection and author of a new monograph (Phaidon Press, 1992, £17.95), is guest curator and has selected some forty-five paintings and reliefs as well as twenty-five etchings from the series published by Francois Lafranca in 1965–68.
The most comprehensive survey of Nicholson's art since the exhibition held at the Gulbenkian Foundation, Lisbon, and the Fondacion Juan March, Madrid, in 1987, it is Lewison's dress rehearsal for the major retrospective of more than one hundred works which he is organising for the Tate Gallery in the autumn of1994.
Although the exhibition covers all periods of Nicholson's career and includes such historic material as ‘Crowned head: the Queen’(1932, Abbot Hall Art Gallery), ‘Coin and Musical Instruments’(1933, Richard Zeisler collection), and ‘April 1950: Still-life Abelard and Eloise’(Musee des Beaux-Arts, Ottawa), it is particularly  strong in the larger, later works which the artist created during his second and longer residency in Switzerland (1958–71).
The hidden legacy of Germany's rural Jews
An important and unprecedented exhibition is showing at the Goethe Institute until 19 December.
‘Genizah: the hidden legacy of the German Jews’ brings together books, broadsheets, textiles, metalwork and other objects of everyday and ritual use which record the now vanished world of Germany's rural Jewry.
Essentially a poor and itinerant community — cattle traders, pedlars, travelling salesmen — some of the objects demonstrate  surprising contact with the mainstream of European history, such as the broadsheet report of the trial and execution of Marie Antoinette, translated into Yiddish in 1792.
Much of the material has been found in recent years in synagogues, many themselves in poor states of repair or inaccessible to scholars as they are now in private hands.
The guiding hand behind the work of collecting and saving these objects is that of Evelyn Friedlander, executive director of the Hidden Legacy Foundation, set up around four years ago.
The present exhibition will travel to the Sainsbury Centre, Norwich (19 January to 18 April 1993) before going to the Jewish Museum, New York.
Windsor drawings celebrate new gallery
The Gallery at Windsor Castle has marked its reopening with an exhibition of twenty-eight outstanding drawings from the Royal collection (until 3 January).
New lighting, hangings and furniture designed by Alec Cobbe have been installed.
The present drawings represent a selection from a larger exhibition ‘Italian Master Drawings from the British Royal Collection’, organised by Jane Roberts of the Royal Collection in 1987 and also exhibited at that time in America.
For this showing the drawings include: Giovanni Bellini ‘Head of a bearded old man’; Fra Angelico ‘Head of a cleric’; Raphael ‘The Three Graces’; Michelangelo ‘Head of a young woman’; Bernini ‘Self Portrait’ and works by G-B.
Castiglione, Guido Reni, Canaletto and others.
Robert Adam bicentenary
The ruins of Split in happier times
An exhibition on one of Neo-classicism's rediscoveries at Kenwood until 28 February
Despite valiant attempts to mount a large multi-media show to mark Robert Adam's bicentenary in London and Edinburgh this year, it eventually fell to the latter city to honour the great designer with a group of exhibitions during its recent Festival.
The most substantial of these shows in all respects —‘Monumental Reputation’— which is devoted to the intriguing story behind the making of Adam's lavish publication The Ruins of the Emperor Diocletian's Palace at Spalatro (sic), has now been transferred from the National Library of Scotland to London and continues at the Iveagh Bequest, Kenwood, until 28 February 1993.
It is particularly appropriate that the eighteenth-century house at Kenwood, situated on the northern fringe of Central London at Highgate, should show this exhibition devoted to Adam, who remodelled an earlier building on the site between 1764 and 1769 to create a handsome suite of state rooms culminating in a magnificent library for a fellow Scot, Lord Chief Justice Mansfield.
Julius Bryant, Kenwood's curator and Head of Museums Division of English Heritage, who administer the house, is responsible for the exhibition's transfer to London.
(He is also the author of the booklet on Robert Adam that was published to accompany the exhibition in Edinburgh, Robert Adam, Architect of Genius (National Library of Scotland and English Heritage, London, 1992, £2.95.)
The late eighteenth century saw a radical reappraisal of classical antiquity as a key inspiration for contemporary architects, vividly demonstrated by Adam's refashioning of Kenwood itself.
‘Monumental Reputation’, arranged and researched by Iain Brown of the National Library (following a suggestion by Alastair Rowan who has contributed a tape-slide presentation on Adam), is among the first attempts to explore in detail the making of an archaeological folio which changed the face of contemporary design.
Books as subjects of exhibitions present considerable problems, but the National Library's unique set of proof plates for Adam's folio, accompanied by a considerable number of original sketches on site by Clerisseau (mainly from the Hermitage, Leningrad), and letters between Robert and his brother James, reveal an arresting story of intrigue and manoeuvring.
In short, the exhibition traces the inevitable tensions between the need for factual accuracy depicting the ruins embedded in a medieval Adriatic sea town, the artistic licence determined by the taste for picturesque views, and the ruthless self-promotion behind Adam's driving ambition to be a leading innovator.
(As he characteristically put it, the book would be a great puff, conducive to raising all at once one's name and character.)
A generous loan from the Soane Museum of visionary designs, part inspired by Piranesi, plots Adam's artistic progress in Italy before the rapid five-week survey at Spalato (the modern Split) in 1757.
Despite Adam's devious attempts to play down the collaboration behind this superb work (several resplendently bound copies are on display), credit is now given to James's role as project manager, co-ordinating teams of engravers in Venice, Rome and London over the seven years before publication in 1764.
By and large the original exhibition at Edinburgh has been well adapted to the diverse spaces at Kenwood, even if it has not been possible to make the large plaster reconstruction model, lent by the Museo della Civiltà Romana, Rome, still the focal centre of the show.
It is a shame that Iain Brown's outstanding scholarship, evident in the extensive captions, was not allowed to take the form of a numbered catalogue but he has nevertheless produced an attractive companion publication for the show (Monumental Reputation.
Robert Adam and the Emperor's Palace, National Library of Scotland, £3.50).
View of the Peristylium of the Palace, Split
London
Munch joins the Christmas tree in Trafalgar Square
The National Gallery continues its new interest in Northern Europe
For the first time since it was shown at the Berlin Secession in 1902, the National Gallery has reconstructed Edvard Munch's ‘The Frieze of Life’(until 7 February 1993), a loose association of forty or fifty pictures illustrating the important and highly autobiographical themes of love, anxiety and death, to which the artist makes a first reference in his correspondence in 1893.
Not painted for a specific location and comprising canvases of different dimensions, the frieze was a pool of images from which Munch made withdrawals for sale, replacing the pictures which he had plundered with new versions of the same composition.
Such constant cannibalism and modification prevented the frieze from ever assuming a permanent shape, although it generated the most important work of the greatest decade of the artist's career.
The earliest picture belonging to the frieze is ‘The Sick Child’(1885), the premier version of which is owned by Oslo's Nasjonalgalleriet.
Its omission from the exhibition is compensated for by the inclusion of two later versions (1896, Goteborgs Kunstmuseum and 1907, Tate Gallery, the only painting by the artist in a British public collection).
Other major subjects painted for the frieze and included in this exhibition are ‘The Scream’, ‘Death in the Sickroom’, ‘Vampire’, ‘Madonna’, ‘Jealousy’ and ‘The Dance of Life’, each illustrated by one or several oil paintings and the related lithographs or woodcuts.
The museum has treated this material in thematic fashion, reserving a concluding gallery for ‘The Green Room’ series of paintings (1907), that bitter cycle of love and jealousy which was intended to evoke the mood of a brothel in Berlin.
In mounting this exhibition, the National Gallery is correcting a bias which it perceives in the content and popularity of the British collections and continuing its reassessment of Northern European art, already apparent from its recent acquisitions policy.
Mara-Helen Wood, Director of the University of Northumbria Art Gallery and organiser of ‘Munch and the Workers’(1984) and ‘Munch and Photography’(1989) is the exhibition's guest curator.
With Michael Wilson, the gallery's Head of Exhibitions, she has made the selection of more than forty paintings and thirty-four graphic works, and written the catalogue (£25 h/b, £12.95 p/b) which contains additional essays by other leading Munch scholars.
What it costs to appreciate Munch this month
Highly-strung connoisseurs on the verge of a nervous breakdown should consider the following acquisitions and activities which may provide relief:
Catalogue of the Munch exhibition ‘Edvard Munch, the Frieze of Life’ at the National Gallery, London, £25
Hamper of Norwegian delicacies from Selfridges, £17.50
One night in The Priory, a London psychiatric clinic, £264 (with bathroom)
‘Auf der Brücke’(Girls on the Bridge), lithograph printed in black with extensive handcolouring, 1912, to be offered at Sotheby's London 4 December, estimate £45,000–55,000
Dallas
Pissarro's cityscapes
Sixty-five serial studies
The study of Later Impressionism, which has preoccupied scholarship in recent years, continues with a new exhibition focusing upon the urban pictures which were painted by Camille Pissarro in the last decade of his career.
‘The Impressionist and the City: Pissarro's Series’ opened at the Dallas Museum of Art last month (until 31 January 1993) and will be shown at the Philadelphia Museum of Art (7 March-6 June 1993) and at London's Royal Academy of Arts (2 July-10 October 1993), which has already contributed to this debate with its recent exhibitions of ‘Monet in the Nineties’(1990) and ‘Alfred Sisley’(1992) in which the later works were strongly featured.
The exhibition's curators are Richard Brettell, Director of the Dallas Museum of Art and responsible for an impressive list of other projects including ‘A Day in the Country: Impressionism and the French Landscape’(1984–85) and ‘The Art of Paul Gauguin’(1988–89), and Joachim Pissarro, the artist's great-grandson and author of Monet's Cathedrals (Pavilion Press, 1990).
They have selected some sixty-five oil paintings covering the period of 1893–1903 and restricted to those urban subjects which Pissarro treated in a serial procedure, making subtle adjustments to his position in front of the motif and noting changes in weather, lighting conditions and season, and in street or port traffic.
How far this development in Pissarro's art depended upon the example of Monet is uncertain but it can be remembered that, after initial scepticism, he commented favourably upon the ‘Haystacks’ series and found himself in Rouen in the spring of 1896, several months after Monet's canvases of the Cathedral had been exhibited at Durand-Ruel's gallery.
Pissarro's interest lay, however, in the industrial bustle of the city's south bank which made such a striking contrast to the medieval architecture of the old centre.
In addition to Rouen, which the artist revisited in 1898, the series includes Parisian street subjects of the boulevard Montmartre (1897) and the avenue de l'Opera (1897–98); the Tuileries Gardens (1898) and the Square du Vert-Galant (1900–1901); the tip of the Ile de la Cite from which Pissarro was able to sweep across both left and right banks to the Seine in front of him; the markets, church and port of Dieppe (1901–1902); and the harbour of Le Havre (1903), the last series upon which he worked before his death.
Brettell's essay in the catalogue (Yale, £ 30, $50) places Pissarro's urban landscapes in the historical context of Vermeer, Canaletto and other masters whom he would have studied in the Louvre.
Museum of Modern Art, New York
The Italian artist's livre d'artiste
A show and a book
The glories of French book production in the twentieth century are well known, as are the names of the great artists, dealers, publishers and printers behind the books.
Italy has received comparatively little attention, although many of its foremost artists also turned to book illustration at least once in their working lives.
Now, however, an important exhibition including more than 175 books and periodicals by twentieth-century Italian artists, is on show at the Museum of Modern Art until 16 February.
The exhibition draws on a private Italian collection whose owner previously collected Old Master drawings, renouncing them on the discovery that the collecting of livres d'artiste yielded so much more for comparatively little financial outlay.
Highlights of the collection include a group of Futurist books including Depero's Depero Futurista (1927); a collection of Futurist manifestos; five books by Lucio Fontana with typical cut-outs of perforated aluminium sheets and coloured boards; a sizeable group by De Chirico including Le Mystere laic of 1928; and a group of innovatory books, variously illustrated with photographs and objects by Arte Povera artists such as Merz, Pistoletto and Kounellis (the latter's La via del sangue consists of seven burnt matches each mounted on a page annotated with the day of the week).
The collection is still growing and the current strength of limited edition book production in Italy is reflected in very recent works by Cucchi and Paladino.
The MoMA show will be the first sizeable examination of this subject in North America and has been curated by Riva Castleman who has written an accompanying brochure.
The exhibition coincides with the publication of a book by Ralph Jentsch The artist and the book in twentieth-century Italy, published by Umberto Allemandi, Turin (341pp. 480 b/w and 120 col. ills.
L100,000).
Jentsch's book consists of detailed catalogue entries of 549 artist's books and brief biographical details of more than 400 artists with an illustration of one or more pages from each book.
Also included are three bibliographies, catalogues raisonnes of individual artists, exhibitions held in Italy and books on Italian publishers and printers.
Unfortunately, the introduction to the book is extremely brief — a three-page dash through the history of the book in general and a chronological check-list of key events in twentieth-century book production.
This is a sad opportunity missed not to discuss the background to the production of the books listed in Mr Jentsch's catalogue: the tradition of printing in Italy from the earliest printed books through to Bodoni and on to Mardersteig in the present century, and the vital role played by the publisher in the production of any limited edition artist's book.
This is a handsome catalogue which cries out to have an accompanying text volume.
Vatican manuscripts in the Archbishop of Cologne's museum to say thank-you
After closing for a year to refurbish its exhibition rooms the Diozesanmuseum has reopened with an exceptional exhibition of rare manuscripts from the Biblioteca Apostolica in the Vatican, ‘Vaticana — liturgy and devotion in Medieval times’.
Eighty-eight codices of extraordinary quality are on show until 10 January, ranging from a sixth-century codex purpureus to an Antiphonal belonging to the Medici pope Clement VII.
Among over forty pre-thirteenth century manuscripts on show are the famous Carolingian Lorsch Gospel, the Byzantine bible of Pope Leo and the Menologion of Basileos II.
The section of fourteenth- to sixteenth-century manuscripts features the Breviary of Blanche de France, executed around 1310 in the workshop of Jean Pucelle — the starting point of the Franco-Flemish and Italian Schools of illumination.
This generous loan from the Vatican is in exchange for payment by the German episcopal conference for a new air conditioning system in the Vatican Library's book stacks, a deal arranged by the Stuttgart Belser-Verlag which also paid for the exhibition's catalogue (by Jonathan Alexander, Eberhard König, Jean Michel Massing and others; DM98).
Belser have previously published facsimile editions of books and manuscripts in the Vatican.The Archbishop of Cologne has shown a keen interest in the refurbished ‘Archbishop's’ museum and is supporting the new director, Joachim M. Plotzek, in his efforts to gain international recognition for the museum.
The Vatican is also lending an exhibition of manuscripts to the Library of Congress in Washington 8 January-30 April 1993.
Apart from one manuscript, this will be a completely different selection.
Light and shade: Goltzius's woodcuts
Nancy Bialler, print scholar and head of Old Master Prints at Sotheby's New York, has organised an exhibition on the topic of Hendrick Goltzius's chiaroscuro woodcuts, to be shown at the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam until 10 January 1993.
It will then move on to the Cleveland Museum of Art.
The choice of exhibition grew out of Dr Bialler's Yale dissertation on Goltzius and was timed to coincide with the publication of her book Hendrick Goltzius and his Time, a complete catalogue raisonne of all the woodcuts together with a discussion of the genesis and development of the technique in Germany and Italy, published by Snoeck-Ducaju & Zoon, Gent (price BFr3800/DFl.200).
Museums
Prague
East meets West — but the gulf tells
Conference in Prague on public galleries and private collectors hears of thefts and restitution claims in Eastern museums
Private loans to public galleries and museums were the subject of a conference (26–28 October, 1992) organised by the Goethe Institute, the German government agency charged with promoting cultural links between Germany and other countries.
‘Galleries and Private Collectors’ brought together Czech, German and American gallery directors and art experts for three days of frank, and at times heated, debate.
The German airline Lufthansa, as a long-standing sponsor of joint-projects with the Goethe  Institute , was brought in to talk about sponsorship.
Lufthansa is additionally involved in the museum world in former East-block Europe through the new U.S. fund for Arts and Culture in Central and Eastern Europe, for which the airline is providing free trans-Atlantic flights.
They are also sponsors of ‘The Great Utopia — the Russian and Soviet Avant-Garde 1915–1932, at the Guggenheim Museum, New York until 15 December.
Thomas Messer, emeritus director of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, expatiated at the conference on the ‘acrobatics’ required to finance and negotiate major international shows successfully.
Although the Czech delegation, consisting of the directors and head curators from virtually every major gallery in Bohemia and Moravia, expressed a real desire for a quicker and fuller integration with the wider art world, it soon became apparent that the Czechs are not yet ready to engage fully with their Western counterparts.
‘It will take a very long time before we can fully cooperate’, said Czech-born Thomas Messer.
‘I wouldn't like to put a time on it, but we could be talking years.
They are so far away from the market, even though Prague is geographically further west than Vienna’.
These are tough times for the Czech art world.
In line with the government's strict policy of reducing public expenditure, the Czech ministry of culture has had its budget cut every year since the 1989 collapse of communism, so, therefore, have public galleries and museums.
Lubomir Slavicek, director of the National Gallery in Prague, said, ‘Our funding was cut by 10% in our April budget.
It will be cut by another 10% every quarter over the coming year’.
With a budget of 70 million Crowns, including a tiny 3 million Crowns (£71,000, $106,500) for acquisitions, Mr Slavicek has had to sack one hundred people from a staff of 550 to reduce overheads.
In order to turn the National Gallery into a viable concern, he will need to find private sponsorship and patronage, but although a Friends society has been launched, attracting sponsorship will prove extremely difficult until a new tax law designed to encourage personal and corporate donations to culture and sport is introduced.
Owing to national budgetry complications arising from Czechoslovakia's split into two nations on 1 January, 1993, this long awaited tax law could be delayed by up to six months.
The urgency of the Czech art establishment's task is not helped by cloying, centralising bureaucracy: when an English-language Prague newspaper requested a photograph of a Schiele drawing from the National Gallery's collection, it was told to send a formal request to the director, Mr Slavicek.
Mr Slavicek was out of Prague that week, and there was no one out of the remaining 449 employees who had the authority to give one black-and-white photograph to a local newspaper.
The recent announcement that the National Gallery intend to establish a public relations department may improve the situation.
Art thefts are soaring.
Between 1985 and 1988 some seventy works were reported as stolen; in 1991, 695 went missing.
When four Picassos stolen last year from the National Gallery were recovered (see The Art Newspaper No. 9, June 1991, p. 2; No. 11, October 1991, p. 2), one had already crossed the German border to Bayreuth.
Restitution questions over property nationalised by the State following the communist putsch of 1948 are also damaging relations between galleries and the public.
‘Our biggest problem is a question of trust between the State institutions and the public’, said Mr Slavicek.
The Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague has returned about 700 works over the past six months.
The National Gallery has received 150 restitution claims to date, half of which have been satisfied, the rest deferred following negotiations, by keeping the item on long-term loan.
Earlier this year the National Gallery received a restitution claim from the children and grand-children of Vincenc Kramar, a Czech art collector and historian who, according to the National Gallery, as a committed Communist donated a thirty-piece collection to the State shortly before his death in 1960.
Kramar's descendants argue that he was pressurised by the government to hand his collection over, and therefore that the State acquired the work illegally and the paintings should be given back.
The collection contains sixteen Picassos, two Braques, two Derains, and ten works by various Czech artists including Emil Filla.
Mr Slavicek suggests a conservative value of $10 million per Picasso.
The case went to court in September and resumes on 2 December.
The outcome will set a precedent with far-reaching implications for the whole restitution process.
If judgment goes in favour of the National Gallery, the entire network of Czech and Slovak galleries and museums will breath a massive sigh of relief and receive a much needed morale-booster.
If Kramar's family win the day, it will shatter the confidence of an already  beleaguered art world and herald a fresh wave of restitution claims.
The chances are that the paintings will go straight onto the market.
All things considered, it's hardly surprising that the Czech delegation to ‘Galleries and Private Collectors’, expressed fears about an impending mass sell-off and export of art, and made calls for legislation regarding art and commerce.
New York
Changing waistlines at the Met
Curators Richard Martin and Harold Koda of the Met's new Costume Institute reveal their plans
Everyone has some way of coming into a cognitive and very deeply associational relationship with clothing — perhaps we should bring that to painting and sculpture’, says Richard Martin, the newly appointed curator of the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (that's the way he tends to talk).
In fact, costume does rejoin painting and sculpture at the Metropolitan Museum this month, when the newly renovated Costume Institute galleries reopen.
The inaugural exhibition, ‘Fashion and History: a Dialogue’, is curated and installed by Katell le Bourhis, the former Met curator who has since become the director of Musee des Arts de la Mode et du Textil in Paris.
The 200 objects in its show will explore themes that reflect the breadth of the museum's vast collection: floral imagery, symbolism of black and white, geometrics and abstract imagery, and tweeds.
The rococo mantua dress is the featured garment in a special section called ‘Dossier 1708’.
The real story of the Costume Institute, however, is the arrival of Richard Martin and his associate Harold Koda.
Martin, formerly editor of Arts magazine, is a trained art historian.
Koda describes himself as semi-trained.
For the past decade, the two have been exploring the boundaries of costume exhibitions at New York's Fashion Institute of Technology, from which they come with a dazzling reputation.
One art critic described their installation of a ‘Fashion and Surrealism’ exhibition there as ‘near perfect’.
A survey of twentieth-century men's fashion, ‘Jocks and Nerds’, showed the duo's capacity for humour, an asset they may find less welcome uptown at the Met.
Martin and Koda plan just as ambitious a schedule of costume exhibitions at their new home — three per year — and they say they've been given a mandate to do that.
The museum has two objectives now: to display costumes from its collection of 50,000 objects throughout the year; and to reclaim its role as the preeminent institution of costume scholarship.
(Almost all of Martin and Koda's exhibitions have been accompanied by extensive scholarly catalogues, most of which are available from Rizzoli.)
At the Met they also plan to publish the first catalogue of the museum's costume collection, to take shape gradually as the collection is displayed.
Since clothing, like prints and drawings, is sensitive to light, exhibitions will have to be rotated every four to six months.
That leaves the Costume Institute without familiar icons in familiar places.
That apparent drawback means that each rotating show is as much about curatorial overview as it is about the objects themselves.
By virtue of that, exhibitions will vary greatly in size.
Martin says, ‘The matrix of every show we've done has been the argument’.
Some arguments may need twenty mannequins, some 120.
The curators' muse here is Diana Vreeland, whose ‘editorial verve’, the curators say, took the Costume Institute (made part of the Met in 1946) from an assemblage of theatre costumes to one of the world's largest collections.
‘Certain scholars have reservations about the kind of exhibitions she did because they lack factual perspective’, says Harold Koda, ‘but in terms of a larger concept of truth, she captured the truth of fashion’.
Since Vreeland's death in the mid-1980s, the Costume Institute lost some of its high profile, but if the new curators' proposed shows are any indication, visitors will be given done focus rather than broad overviews.
First on their list for the spring is a show called ‘Deconstruction’, in which the subject is the externalising of support garments to  outerwear .
Other proposed exhibitions will be words, numbers and letters in clothing (‘wordrobe’) and the significance of the changing waistline in women's fashion.
These shows may prove to be a new test of the Met's own flexibility.
Along the way, Martin hopes, costume studies may cease to be the poor relation among museum departments and begin to be taken more seriously.
Fashion's commercial dimension, which it shares with all art, and its identification with things female (an inaccurate generalisation, Martin charges) have marginalised the field.
‘There's also, particularly in the United States, this sense that if something is on the body, it is less important than something that is on the wall’, says Martin.
V&A and Harrods
An American were-wolf in London
Here we go again: Mapplethorpe photographs banned
From Cincinnati to Madrid, from Venice to London, Robert Mapplethorpe is universally obscene.
In Harrods book department the penis of a Manhattan black photographed by raking light seems to be more offensive to the general public than are close-ups of Madonna's private parts.
The amorous  contortions of Sex, the rock star's naughty book, were not only stocked by the department store, but sold out instantly, while the volume on the great American photographer published by Jonathan Cape was withdrawn after protests by dozens of shocked customers.
The director of the Victoria and Albert Museum, Elizabeth Esteve-Coll immediately followed suit, unaffected by the fact that the proceeds were for research into Aids, the condition which killed Mapplethorpe in 1989.
The episode raises the question of whether she actually knew who Mapplethorpe was when she agreed to the V&A being used for an Aids fund-raising event, at which there was to be a slide show of the photographs in the book.
Or if she was aware of him, was she aware of the political turmoil the previous cancellation of a Mapplethorpe show has engendered in the U.S. over the last two years, with the director of the Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati indicted for obscenity (but acquitted) and the very principle of government funding of contemporary art called into question?
As bidders vied for five nineteenth-century condoms (used) at Christie's (sold for £8000), the V&A's Press Officer Robin Cole-Hamilton said,’ Many pictures in the book would not only shock thousands of people, but are profoundly repugnant’.
, Michael Stout, president of the Mapplethorpe Foundation of New York, an Aids fund-raising body, rebutted,’ It is clear by now that Mapplethorpe's photographs are art, and art should not be censored.
The Victoria and Albert Museum's decision is ridiculous and obscurantist’.
The august newspaper The Independent also intervened in the episode, which at times has had overtones of the film ‘An American were-wolf in London’.
In an unsigned editorial it tried to explain it by saying that there were too many explicit photographs of homosexual acts in the book (Mapplethorpe takes pictures of oral sex, of a man pissing in the mouth of his partner and of men buggering each other in various ways, including with a fist), and that the authors had therefore not left enough space for his more restful images, such as his ‘superb studies of people and flowers’, which the author of the editorial obviously sees as representing Mapplethorpe's angelic side.
The editorial goes on to say that Harrods had a perfect right to remove from its windows a product which alienated the customers, just as the V&A had not really committed an act of censorship.
The article's underlying thesis is of Mapplethorpe as a split personality: on the one hand, the talented artist; on the other, the near-degenerate.
It continues, ‘Had Mapplethorpe devoted part of his life to a celebration, not of sado-masochism but, say, Nazism — as did the talented German  film-maker Leni Riefenstahl in the Thirties — it is hard to believe he would have found many advocates in the art establishment’.
The were-wolf pornographer is  thereby given the coup-de-grace, and with great subtlety at that in times of regurgitated Nazism and anti-Semitism.
The Independent allusively brings the subject full circle, because of the swastikas, studs and chains that appear in some of Mapplethorpe's portraits.
The V&A's act can be seen, therefore, not as an act of censorship, but as a healthy reaction to artistic production flawed by error.
The Ludwig Collection
Adding a new outpost to the empire
Chocolate magnate endows yet another museum in Teutonic Knights' stronghold on the Rhein
The new Ludwig museum in Koblenz adds yet another to the many showcases for the Ludwig Collection that dot the map of Europe.
Irene and Peter Ludwig, who made his fortune in chocolate manufacturing, have collected art since the 1960s, at the rate of one work per day.
To display their collection of everything from Islamic ceramics to the Russian Avant-garde they have made substantial long-term loans as well as opening their own museums.
Their last project, the Ludwig Forum für internationale Kunst, opened in July 1991 in a large converted umbrella factory in Aachen to show contemporary art from all five continents.
Now the Deutschherrenhaus in Koblenz, a former monastery of the Benedictine order built in 1306, and house of the Teutonic Order of Knights, has been adapted to house a changing selection of post-war art, with special emphasis on French artists.
Seventeen works belong permanently to the museum by artists including Stella, Jasper Johns, Rauschenberg and Vostell.
The inaugural exhibition, which runs until 15 March, shows French art post 1950 under the title ‘Atelier de France’.
A deliberate counterpoint has been introduced to each of the installations on the four floors by juxtaposing the Nouveaux Realistes with Cristo's Support/Surface works, Picasso with Figuration Libre.
Daniele Perrier, curator of the museum, is keen to emphasise the possibilities of the Deutschherrenhaus as explorer of interaction in European art through dialogues between individual works.
Plans for the future include hanging Abstract Expressionism alongside the School of Nice and using Vostell's art as the springboard for a Fluxus exhibition.
Where the Irene and Peter Ludwig Foundations and Collections are to be found
Foundations
vienna Österreichische Ludwig-Stiftung für Kunst und Wissenschaft, founded 1981
aachen Ludwig-Stiftung für Kunst und internationale Verstandigung GmbH, founded 1983
oberhausen Ludwig-Institut für Kunst der DDR, founded 1983
Collections and permanent loans
Faience, tiles, porcelain, Islamic ceramics, furniture, decorative arts
aachen Couven-Museum
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
mainz Mittelrheinisches Landesmuseum
dusseldorf Hetjens-Museum
kassel Staatliche Kunstsammlung
munich, Bayerisches Nationalmuseum
plassenburg bei kulmbach
kassel Landesmuseum
Art from the Middle Ages to Baroque
cologne Wallraf-Richartz-Museum
cologne Schnutgen-Museum
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
koblenz Mittelrhein-Museum
aachen Couven-Museum
Antiquities
basel Antikenmuseum and Sammlung Ludwig
wurzburg Martin-von-Wagner Museum
kassel Staatliche Kunstsammlung
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
Precolumbian and non-European art
cologne Rautenstrauch-Joest-Museum
dusseldorf Hetjens-Museum
aachen Ludwig Forum für Internationale Kunst
Pop Art and Sixties art
cologne Museum Ludwig
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
aachen Neue-Galerie — Sammlung Ludwig
vienna Museum Moderner Kunst, Palais Liechtenstein
basel Kunstmuseum
paris Centre Georges Pompidou
berlin (west) Neue Nationalgalerie
berlin (east) Nationalgalerie
saarbrucken Saarland-Museum
mainz Mittelrheinisches Landesmuseum
aachen Ludwig Forum für Internationale Kunst
Contemporary art
cologne Museum Ludwig
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
aachen Neue Galerie — Sammlung Ludwig
vienna Museum Moderner Kunst, Palais Liechtenstein
basel Kunstmuseum
Koblenz Ludwig Museum im Deutschherrenhaus
paris Centre Georges Pompidou
berlin(west) Neue Nationalgalerie
berlin (east) Nationalgalerie
 saarbrucken Saarland Museum
mainz Mittelrheinisches Landesmuseum
oberhausen Ludwig-Institut für Kunst der DDR
munich Bayerische Staatsgemaldesammlungen
leipzig Museum für Bildende Kunste
aalborg, denmark Nordjyllands Kunstmuseum
cologne Kölnisches Stadtmuseum
wolfsburg Schloss Wolfsburg
budapest Ludwig Museum
aachen Ludwig Forum für Internationale Kunst
Russian Avant-garde and classic modern art
cologne Museum Ludwig
berlin (west) Neue Nationalgalerie
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
leipzig Museum für Bildende Kunste
vienna Museum Moderner Kunst, Palais Liechtenstein
Koblenz Ludwig Museum im Deutschherrenhaus
East European art from the former GDR, USSR and Bulgaria
cologne Museum Ludwig
aachen Neue Galerie — Sammlung Ludwig Aachen
oberhausen Ludwig-Institut für Kunst der DDR
cologne Kölnisches Stadtmuseum
saarbrucken Saarland-Museum
wolfsburg Schloss Wolfsburg
vienna Museum Moderner Kunst Palais Liechtenstein
Picasso
cologne Museum Ludwig
aachen Suermondt-Ludwig-Museum
berlin (east) Nationalgalerie
vienna Museum Moderner Kunst, Palais Liechtenstein
Koblenz Ludwig Museum im Deutschherrenhaus
Korean art at the V&A
On 1 December the Victoria and Albert Museum opened its new Samsung Gallery to house the most comprehensive collection of Korean Art in this country.
It will display over 600 objects dating from the fifth century to the present and is funded to the tune of £430,000 by the Korean Samsung corporation with a further £25,000 from the government-funded Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme.
The new space has been designed by Tim Molloy of Malone Design who has separated the gallery from the surrounding Chinese, Japanese and Chinese Export displays by manipulation of gallery lighting rather than obtrusive design elements.
Following a trip to Korea Mr Molloy selected cherry wood for the raised plinths in the gallery and a reference to a Korean temple in the curved ceiling space.
Hidden behind a shrine-like structure are two touch-screen video programmes, designed to introduce visitors to Korean daily life as well as to provide background information on the more important exhibits.
At the end of the gallery Mr Molloy has designed a tall wooden column inspired by the vertical nature of hangul, the Korean script, which has been inscribed with part of a Korean poem cycle.
A number of events have been organised in connection with the new gallery, including a study weekend on the ‘Lacquer arts of Asia: focus on Japan’, a seminar entitled ‘What is Korean Shamanism today?’ and study days on Korean material culture and Korean textile arts.
Beth McKillop of the museum's Far Eastern department has written Korean Art and Design (£16.95) which will be published to coincide with the opening.
Rudi Fuchs named new director of Stedelijk
Rudi Fuchs has been named Wim Beeren's successor as director of the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam.
He will begin work on 1 February, taking charge of Holland's most prestigious museum of modern art, which is on the verge of a radical programme of expansion that will double the available exhibition space.
Eight years ago Fuchs had been Beeren's only serious rival for the appointment.
The public battle between their respective supporters generated a great deal of heat.
This time everything went very smoothly, which is the more remarkable as Fuchs is a controversial figure in the Dutch art world.
He will leave the Gemeentemuseum in the The Hague still reverberating from the public debate which he initiated over the de-accessioning of two Picassos from the museum's collection.
Fuchs was one of the few public figures who supported Beeren publicly at the time of the debacle over the restoration of the Barnett Newman painting ‘Who's afraid of Red, Yellow and Blue III’.
Blame it on the EEC — Spain's museums to charge
The twenty-one museums, including the Prado, under the Spanish Ministry of Culture will be introducing entrance charges as from early next year.
In1982 the Consejo de Ministros made a symbolic gesture to express their socialist principles and declared that all Spanish citizens would have free access to museums (foreigners paid).
Now the director general of Bellas Artes, Jose Maria Luzón cites the EEC as the reason why they are retracting this gesture, although in fact Brussels has never legislated on the matter.
The government hopes to cover 15% of running costs, which this year amounted to Pta11.29 billion, of which 3.6 billion went to Madrid's museum of modern art, the Centro de Arte Reina Sofia, and 2.1 billion to the Prado.
Quebec to convert museum into a gambling hall
City officials will order the Palais de la Civilisation to vacate its home of seven years to make room for Quebec's first gambling casino.
Since 1985, when the Palais moved into the cylindrical Expo ‘67 French Pavilion on the Ile Notre-Dame, the showcase has attracted hundreds of thousands of spectators to large thematic exhibitions such as‘Rameses’(1985), ‘Gold of the Thracian Horsemen’(1987), ‘The Aztecs’(1988), and ‘Rome: 1,000 Years of Civilization’(1992).
Despite the often flagrant commercialism of its rather lightweight extravaganzas, the Palais has been running a deficit well beyond its more than C$2 million annual subsidy from the city.
Montreal and the province of Quebec are concluding an agreement whereby the province will lease the capacious riverside building — an ideal setting for a casino.
LOTO-Quebec, the provincial agency licensed to conduct gambling, will administer the gaming hall, with revenues going to the province.
Although the deal is not yet final, a spokesperson for the Palais told The Art Newspaper she expects the Kunsthalle to relocate to Bonsecours Market in the Old City where it will reopen next May, perhaps with a new name, and probably with a show about Alexander the Great and Macedonia.
Commentary
New York
Thomas Hoving tells all — and exposes himself
The enfant terrible, energiser — and arguably the originator of today's Metropolitan Museum — publishes his memoirs this month
During his eleven-year tenure (1966–77) as director of New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art, Thomas P.F. Hoving irrevocably changed the way art museums are run.
From the start, Hoving was obsessed with popularising an institution that had become physically neglected and bogged down with ennui.
‘A sort of unforgivable silence can surround a painting pinioned in a frame or a sculpture plunked on a pedestal or a beautiful small bronze isolated in a glass case’, he once said.
‘The task of the Metropolitan Museum is to break through that silence and communicate — simply and conveniently — the full life of a work of art’.
His achievements are considerable: under his directorship, the museum underwent a major overhaul and improvements of its existing exhibition spaces, while adding new galleries devoted to Musical Instruments and Islamic, Egyptian, African and American Art.
It made such stellar acquisitions as the Packard collection of Japanese art, twenty-five Chinese paintings from the Sung and Yuan Dynasties, a Bacchic group by Bernini, Monet's ‘Terrace at Sainte-Adresse’, the Robert Lehman collection, David's ‘Portrait of Lavoisier and his wife’, the Temple of Dendur, Canova's ‘Perseus’ and Velasquez's ‘Juan de Pareja’(still the most important single paintings acquisition since its purchase in 1970) and made the museum more accessible and inviting to the public.
For better or worse, he also was instrumental in promoting the blockbuster exhibition, notably the infamous ‘Treasures of Tutankhamun’ extravaganza of 1978 that attracted the public in droves but made tranquil enjoyment of a work of art an impossibility (those who believe that the age of the rib-crushing blockbusters has ended, thanks in part to increased insurance costs, are herewith directed to the Museum of Modern Art's current Matisse show — provided you have a ticket).
Had Hoving's reign been marked by only these highlights, he would have richly earned his self-appointed title as the ‘crusading force’ in American museums in the twentieth century.
Unfortunately, Hoving became rapidly intoxicated with his own power and was incapable of maintaining the balance between forcefulness and arrogance, between populism and vulgarity; between protecting and caring for the art under the Met's roof and blithely selling it heedless of scholars or donors.
Hoving proved his own worst enemy, and eventually his taste for the tinsel and show of the art world overtook whatever feeling he had for the art itself, and he left the museum after his cherished Arts Communication Center (to be funded by Walter Annenberg, with Hoving as its head), a nebulous film-studio-cum-information centre to be built in gallery space reserved for the European decorative arts department, was dissolved after much local criticism.
He has never ceased to use his career at the Met as a touchstone for such later projects as editor-in-chief of Connoisseur Magazine and several ‘inside scoop’ books on the art world ranging from Tutankhamen: The Untold Story to his early years as a curator of the Met's medieval department and his purchase of the ‘Bury St Edmunds Cross’(King of the Confessors).
Like an unusually resourceful starlet, it has long been rumoured that he would write another tell-all tome, this time about his years as the Met's director.
While Hoving's career at the Met could make for a juicy and fascinating story, Making the Mummies Dance proves that he is not the man to tell it.
He can be deft and funny describing such varied personalities as Cecil Beaton, J. Carter Brown, and Joan Whitney Payson, an unusually sharp, no-nonsense trustee (informed of Wildenstein's role as the Met's auction representation in buying the Velasquez, she remarked, ‘What if they cheat?’).
The gloating accounts of his triumphs, particularly against the New York City Landmarks Commission and members of the City Council, and fiascos (the misconceived ‘Harlem on My Mind’ exhibition), are also gripping.
Unfortunately, however, Hoving's overweening ego becomes distressingly evident: he presents a soon tiring scenario of the young, hip, rebellious David against the stuffy old WASP Goliaths, symbolised by most of the board of trustees and members of the curatorial staff.
The litany of fights, exhibitions, fights, acquisitions and fights soon becomes uninteresting and one is left not having a clue how a museum works and operates.
All is filtered through Hoving's glass, which magnifies himself at the expense of his colleagues.
It quickly becomes evident that Hoving has more on his agenda than just reportage, and like Nancy Reagan in My Turn, his primary concern is with settling old scores.
Hoving's wide-eyed devotion to Ted Rousseau, the curator of European paintings whose playboy antics and debonair charm masked his mediocre acquisition record, contrasts with his dismissive and sour remarks concerning his successor as director, Philippe de Montebello (‘No one on the museum was more self-assured’, notes Hoving, ‘But Ted Rousseau was convinced he had no eye’).
Everett Fahy is fine while on the trail of the Velasquez, but is eventually discredited due to his second thoughts about the deaccessioning of an important Henri Rousseau.
Henry Geltzahler earns special derision (probably because he was the hip jet-setter Hoving yearned to be).
Trustee Arthur Houghton is called ‘a loose cannon’ due to his idea that the Cloisters ‘could be made more appealing to the average visitor by weeding out the ‘welter of objects’.
[Houghton]himself would pick a dozen objects and put them in a ‘masterpiece’ gallery so the average Joe could taste the cream and leave’, yet Hoving espouses precisely such ideas throughout the book.
He is inexplicably nasty about the Met's greatest patroness, Jayne Wrightsman, characterising her as an ‘American geisha’ and ‘cardboard thin — moving through life by rote’, unkind considering that she funded many of his major triumphs.
Given Hoving's long-standing jealousy of John Walsh, a former curator in the European paintings department who is now the director of the J. Paul Getty Museum, it is surprising that Walsh does not come in for more snide brickbats than a conversation Hoving cites with Getty, where the eccentric billionaire asks him if he would become the director of his museum.
Hoving's gushings are just as tiresome as his nastiness: his description of warming up the cantankerous Robert Lehman (estranged from the museum over what the collector believed to be an anti-Semitic slight) recalls similar scenes in Shirley Temple films, the main difference being that presumably Hoving didn't sit on Lehman's lap.
After winning the collection, Hoving overpraises its considerable merits, adding in nonexistent Raphaels and Dirck Bouts to the litany of masterpieces.
He disparages the critics of Robert and Ethel Scull as nouveau-riche social climbers, yet, ironically, his anecdotes support those opinions.
In a previous book, King of the Confessors, Hoving admits to being able to ‘lie convincingly without any hesitation’.
So the reader is entitled to some scepticism over some of his more outrageous statements.
There are several elisions and errors sprinkled throughout Mummies: Hoving's appearance before the search committee prior to his appointment as director was clinched, according to Hoving, by his disclosure of legal charges being brought against the Museum by the N.Y.
State Commissioner for Human Rights alleging abuses in the hiring practice and promotions of women within the museum, something none of the trustees had known about.
In fact, the suit was filed by the Attorney General's office in 1973 — seven years after Hoving became director.
Similarly, the account of a huge ‘fire sale’ of unwanted Impressionists in the Medieval sculpture court of the Met, conducted by Sotheby's Peter Wilson, is, according to one well-placed source at the Metropolitan, an outright fabrication.
So far as the deaccessioning issue is concerned, Mummies reveals that, for all his fervent declaration about searching for works of surpassing quality, his attitude towards art and the museum's permanent collection is dismissive and ignorant.
He disparages as ‘fruity’ a superb marble fountain of a nymph drying her hair by Louis-Claude Vasee (‘hardly a household word and unknown to me’) and justifies his (thankfully aborted) deaccessioning of Ingres' grisaille ‘Odalisque’by stating that the museum ‘owned a significant number’of works by the artist, and therefore could part with one and no harm done.
It never crosses Hoving's mind that Ingres is an artist by whom it is impossible to own too many works — nor, for that matter, that the ‘uninspired portrait of the Marechal Count Gerard, which to me summed up the pomposity of Bonaparte's court’(one of the Ingres mentioned in Hoving's list) is in fact a fine, signed and dated, late work by Jacques-Louis David!
In the end, Hoving's tell-all tome is less scandalous than deeply sad.
He accomplished much while director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, but today is apparently content to sit out the art world harbouring bitter memories of what might have been.
Most of the surviving cast of characters in his book have not only survived in the tumultuous ebb and flow of the art world that took place since Hoving's retirement, they have flourished.
All it seems, except Thomas Hoving.
Sacred and profane in art
The polytheism that dare not speak its name
Sister Wendy Beckett, contemplative nun and art critic, guides Britain's TV viewers through the sacred in art this month
The Catholic Church has been severely criticised for the ever increasing number and speed of canonisations in modern times.
The issue surfaced recently in connection with the moves to canonise the founder of the hard-line Catholic organisation, Opus Dei, only seventeen years after his death.
According to the Congregation for the Cause of Saints in Rome, a total of 1,359 beatifications and canonisations took place during this century alone, more than one a month.
Art, being the alter-ego of Religion, reflects this trend, albeit at an intensified rate.
Canonisation of artists has exploded: whereas in the last century you worshipped either Rubens or Botticelli, depending on your aesthetic credo, now it is legitimate to worship Gerome as well as Manet, while putting them on the same altar as living legends like Schnabel, Kiefer and Koons.
Don't be surprised if the Catholic Church follows suit and canonises the not-yet-dead.
The contemplative nun-cum-critic-cum-TV-star Sister Wendy Beckett is a product of our time.
Her writing first appeared in Modern Painters, a magazine founded by the evangelical English critic Peter Fuller in the late Eighties.
Her mission was to seek and market the ineffable — the Sacred in Art.
The blurb for her latest book describes her as ‘one of Britain's best-loved art critics’, but — sadly and symptomatically — she gives the impression that the Sacred grows on trees.
In an exquisitely penned introduction, Sister Wendy distinguishes between religious, spiritual and sacred art.
Religious art provides ‘poster-like’ illustration of religious stories, but does not ‘deepen the faith’of those who contemplate it.
Spiritual art is ‘only known by its personal power’(Chardin, Velasquez), while Sacred Art is ‘the most intense form of the spiritual’ in which ‘our humanity responds to something greater than itself yet intimately part of us’(Goya).
Brief homilies follow on work by sixty-five twentieth-century artists.
They range from modern classics (Picasso, Johns, Serra) to Sunday painters (Nerdrum, Sipp-Green, Purdum: are these names real?).
All sixty-five, despite wildly divergent styles (Minimalism to Neo-Romanticism), and mostly diabolical qualities, are claimed to have a hot-line to the Sacred.
If only the first Artificer, rather than a modern architect, had pointed out that Less is More.
Robert Rosenblum is a more-is-more man.
There can be no art movement of the last 200 years that he has failed to sanction.
From his exegeses of Joseph-Marie Vien's ‘Selling of Cupids’(in Transformations in Late Eighteenth Century Art), through to his anatomies of Cubism, Northern Romanticism, Picabia, Warhol and The Dog in Art, Rosenblum has seen and said it all.
That is why his canonisation of the equally versatile Jeff Koons —‘a person who is trying to lead art into the twenty-first century’— carries such conviction.
The Jeff Koons Handbook is cheap and well worth having.
The intellectually capacious introduction to Jeff Koons by Rosenblum is followed by a voyage of discovery through the life and art of Jeff Koons, with lib-theological gloss by Jeff Koons.
We know the Devil has all the best tunes, and few tunes sound better than the one played by ‘Puppy’, the forty foot-high lap-dog, fashioned from flowers, which spent the summer squatting outside a Schloss near Kassel.
Jeff Koons sermonises: ‘Puppy communicates love, warmth and happiness to everyone.
I created a contemporary Sacred Heart of Jesus’.
It seems that the lovable Sister Wendy has a canine competitor.
Books
About to be published
America
Homage to Political Correctness
Books on non-Western art, women artists, and from the new art history
American publishers are noticeably cutting back on expensive art books with numerous colour illustrations.
Those that are now appearing have been in the pipeline for at least two years, having been commissioned before the recession hit the publishing industry.
A leader in the erstwhile field of large and beautifully produced publications is Abbeville, which plans to publish Classical Taste in America 1800–1840 by Wendy Cope in June, at the relatively modest price of $55.
Also promised from Abbeville are two books on Californian art movements, Art of Light and Space by Jan Butterfield ($65) and Arts and Crafts Movement in California, the latter to accompany a travelling exhibition originating at the Oakland Museum ($55).
There also appears to have been a decline in the output of feminist writings on art, but Abrams will be releasing American Beauties: women in Art and Literature edited by Charles Sullivan (£25, $29.95), which includes paintings, sculptures, drawings and other works of art from the National Museum of American Art, part of the Smithsonian Institution.
American history, from pre-Columbian times to the present, is told through more than eighty works of art with accompanying texts in English and Spanish by Edith Pavese in United States History in Notable Works of Art,(£25, $29.95).
Art of Africa by Jacques Kerchache, Jean-Louis Paudrat and Lucien Stephan (£120) embraces the creative work of the entire continent south of the Sahara.
With an astonishing 1069 illustrations, this will be a fundamental reference work.
Daumier Drawings by Colta Ives, Margret Stuffmann and Martin Sonnabend (£50, $65) includes the rarer and less known drawings and watercolours, and accompanies an exhibition projected for the Metropolitan Museum of Art from February to May 1993.
Freer: a Legacy of Art by Thomas Lawton and Linda Merrill (£40, $49.50) tells Freer's story as a collector and celebrates the reopening of the Smithsonian's Freer Gallery of Art in Washington DC on Sunday, 9 May, its seventieth anniversary, after a four and a half year renovation project.
Penelope Mason's The History of Japanese Art (£45, $60) offers a comprehensive survey of the painting, sculpture, architecture and ceramics of Japan from prehistoric times to 1939.
Also planned for the spring are Asian Art in the Art  Institute of Chicago by the curators of the collection (£25, $35), George Caleb Bingham by Michael Edward Shapiro on the increasingly popular Missouri artist (£30, $39.95), and Helen Frankenthaler, Prints by Ruth Fine on the contemporary American printmaker (£35, $25).
Just confirmed for publication in May is John Ruskin and the Victorian Eye with essays by Susan Casteras, Susan Phelps Gordon, Anthony Lacy Gully, Robert Hewison, George Landow and Christopher Newall.
Possibly as a direct result of the recession, there appears to be an increase in the reissue of major classics.
Alan Wofsy Fine Arts in San Francisco is known for such reprints and is offering an impressive range in 1993.
These include the catalogue raisonnes Canaletto's Etchings by Ruth Bomberg (£90); Honoré Daumier's Paintings, Watercolours and Drawings by K.E. Maison (£210); Daumier's lithographs by Loys Delteil (£90) and Daumier: the Complete Engravings by Eugene Bouvy (£105).
From Braziller come two Richard Long volumes.
Richard Long: Mountains and Waters which comprises photographs, text works and maps as a record of his ‘walks’ and siteworks from 1974 to 1992 ($35).
This follows the success of Richard Long:Walking in Circles, which will be reissued in 1993.
A hard-to-define British artist, Long has attracted much attention in America with his use of stones and landscape.
Also planned is Asmat Art: Woodcarvings of Southwest New Guinea, edited by Dirk Smidt ($65).
This assembles the finest examples of woodcarving by the Asmat, selected from the collections in Leiden's National Museum of Ethnography and other museums, and emphasising the striking modernity of much of this art.
The Mark J. Millard Architectural Collection: The French Books by Dora Wiebenson and Claire Baines ($90) provides a comprehensive history of French architecture from the Renaissance to the present, charted through this highly important collection of illustrated books on Western European architectural design and theory.
Reprinted in paperback will be Mayer Schapiro's Late Antique, Early Christian and Medieval Art: selected papers and Romanesque art: selected papers, both at $19.95.
The J. Paul Getty Museum publishes its own books on the museum's collections and has four titles coming out next season.
Continuing the series of the Catalogue of the Collection in the J. Paul Getty Museum is Hellenistic Metalwork by Michael Pfrommer ($60).
The museum's collection of silver and gold from the Hellenised Near East is one of the largest yet assembled.
Pfrommer dates the groups of objects and places them in their cultural and archaeological context.
Decorative Arts: an illustrated summary catalogue of the J. Paul Getty Museum by Charissa Bremer-David and Catherine Hess is a new edition of a previous publication with new sections devoted to maiolica and glass and an added index of accession numbers and updated bibliographies ($45).
Also by Catherine Hess (Assistant Curator of Sculpture and Works of Art), this time with David Harris Cohen, is Looking at European Ceramics: a guide to technical terms ($10.95).
The book offers definitions of terms related to the techniques, processes and materials used in the making of ceramics in Europe from the Middle Ages until the early twentieth century.
This is the fourth in a series of Looking at books co-published with the British Museum Press.
In a challenge to the perceived order of things MIT Press is bringing out a book that turns the accepted view of Modernism on its head.
In The Optical Unconscious Rosalind Krauss explores the interactions between the world of the art critic and that of the artist through imaginary encounters between such figures as Clement Greenberg, Marcel Duchamp, John Ruskin and Jacques Lacan (£22.50).
Eighteen essays by contemporary artist Dan Graham have been collected together by Brian Wallis and are published under the title Rock My Religion: Writings and Projects 1965–1990 (£26.95).
Together with descriptions of Graham's own works and installations are his thoughts on Minimalism, architecture and urban space, punk rock and popular culture.
The Vienna art historian Alois Riegl had a profound influence on, among others, Walter Benjamin, who in turn influenced the contemporary textual artists.
Margaret Iversen's Alois Riegl: Art History and Theory promises to be the first general introduction to Riegl's approach to art history, the context of his work and its relevance to contemporary critical thinking (£22.50).
On a more practical level Structure in Sculpture by Daniel Schodek covers the technical aspects of structure in sculpture, illustrating balance and geometry and the structural characteristics of different materials with works by Rodin, Calder, Serra and Christo.
How the materials of buildings change is examined in On Weathering: The Life of Buildings in Time by Mohsen Mostafavi and David Leatherbarrow with examples drawn from Alberti to Le Corbusier (£26.95).
Princeton University Press is offering Fields of Vision: Landscape Imagery and National Identity in England and the United States by Stephen Daniels (£32.25, $45), in which the author explores the ways in which artists from the later eighteenth century to the present day have used landscape as a way of embodying their national feelings, and how painters like Turner and Constable contributed to a ‘myth’ of national identity.
Also from Princeton comes Inventing Bergson: Cultural Politics and the Parisian Avant-Garde by Mark Antliff (£27.50, $50) which explores the highly influential philosophies of Henri Bergson in early twentieth-century France, and his influence on Futurism, Cubism and Fauvism.
Morgantina Studies, Volume IV: The Protohistoric Settlement on the Cittadella by Robert Leighton (£50, $90) is the fullest study to date of this protohistoric settlement in Sicily, prior to the creation of the Greek town above it.
It includes an illustrated catalogue of more than 700 mainly unpublished artifacts from the site.
The emphasis of Rizzoli's spring list is definitely on contemporary art.
Louise Bourgeois, now in her eighties and one of America's most important women artists, was interviewed by Paul Gardner for his book Louise Bourgeois (£9.95).
Kate Linker's Vito Acconci is the first full-scale study of this contemporary artist (£45), while in association with the Gagosian Gallery in New York come Richard Diebenkorn: The Ocean Park Paintings by Jack Flam (£16.95), Ed Ruscha: The Word Paintings by Yves-Alain Bois (£18.95) and Francesco Clemente: Evening Raga and Paradiso (£19.95) with an introduction by Francesco Clemente, Allen Ginsberg and Peter Orlovsky.
A catalogue raisonne of 300 prints by James Rosenquist, one of Pop Art's major artists, has been compiled by Constance Glenn and will appear as James Rosenquist — Time Dust: Complete Graphics 1962–1992 (£35).
In what promises to be a fascinating collection of thirty-four essays, American and German scholars chart the emergence of New York and Berlin as parallel centres of artistic and technological innovation at the end of the nineteenth century in Berlin — New York: Unlike and Unlike: Essays on Art and Architecture from 1870 to the Present edited by Josef Paul Kelihues (£60).
In sharp contrast, Art of the Persian Courts: Selections from the Art and History Trust Collection by Abodala Soudavar gives a survey of Iranian and Persian manuscript painting, calligraphy and drawing from the sixteenth to nineteenth centuries (£55).
The University of Chicago Press has a long list of titles for the coming spring season, in contrast with last year's more restricted offering.
Albert Boime's The Art of the Macchia and the Risorgimento: Representing Culture and Nationalism in Nineteenth-Century Italy is the first extended study of the Macchiaioli in English (£43.95, $55).
Boime investigates the group's writings, sources and patronage in relation to the Risorgimento — a useful accompaniment to the exhibition ‘Ottocento: Romanticism and Revolution in nineteenth-century Italian paintings’ currently at the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore.
The role of colour and form in visual perception is explored by the painter August Gareau in another work translated from French, titled Color Harmonies (£35.95, $45).
Two volumes of collected essays by Clement Greenberg document the critic's emergence as the most influential champion of modernism during its American  ascendance after World War II: volume 3 of The Collected Essays and Criticism is titled Affirmations and Refusals, 1950–56, volume 4 Modernism with a Vengeance, 1957–1969 (each £23.95, $29.95).
Also from Chicago is promised High Renaissance Art in St Peter's and the Vatican: an interpretive guide by George Hersey in which the papal commissions from such artists as Michelangelo, Raphael and Bramante are placed in their historical context (£45.50, $57).
A new book from Joseph Leo Koerner, winner of this year's Mitchell Prize, is The Moment of Self-Portraiture in German Renaissance Art (£49.50, $59.95).
Koerner examines how artists such as Durer and Baldung Grien registered in their paintings changing attitudes to self in sixteenth-century Germany.
For next season's publications from Yale University Press see the section on the U.K. (pp.17–18), where the vast majority of their books on art are commissioned.
Paper prisons
Testament to the power of the Russian spirit during the years of repression, Vladimir Sulyagin's collages depict ‘non-people’ under Stalinism: Mayakovsky, Eisenstein, Akhmatova, Sakharov, Mandelstam.
Drawing on the style of Russian avant-garde work the collages attempt to convey the struggle of the sitters' lives, using grey and blue wrapping paper with scraps of black and red card and silver foil.
Thus Mandelstam's head is a silhouette, surrounded by a void around which is a box-like form representing his years of exile in the Urals and the last five years of his life in a labour camp followed by death in a concentration camp.
The book's preface is by Hilary Spurling who has showed Sulyagin's work at the East West Gallery, London.
His work will be there again next February.
Vladimir Sulyagin Paper Spirits: Collage Portraits (Chatto and Windus, London, 1992) 94pp. 46 col. ills.
£25 
France
Monographs prevail
Paintings and philosophy
According to the monthly magazine Livres hebdo, the beaux-livres sector — which includes lavishly illustrated books as well as true livres d'artiste — is the least dynamic area of French publishing.
At the same time, the best sales figures are being achieved by shops which sell new books at reduced prices or hold continuous sales, rather than by conventional bookshops.
Another interesting fact is that, although since 1989 the number of books published has not diminished, the average print run has.
Be that as it may, plenty of new titles are due out in the next six months.
Editions Aldines have just published Jacopo da Pontormo (FFr680 until 31 January and FFr750 thereafter).
As well as a facsimile of the Mannerist painter's diary, it contains three texts by Jean-Claude Lebensztejn: a commentary, an analysis of his life as seen by Vasari, and a long essay on the Santa Felicitá ‘Deposition’.
Another book by the same publisher/author team, though covering a completely different period, is due to appear in June 1993.
Ecrits sur l'art récent: Marden, Morley, Sharits is a 140-page work on three artists representative of American art in the 1970s.
In the Spring, Adam Biro is due to publish a work on the art of Vermeer by Daniel Arasse, Le métier de Vermeer, ou la foi d'un peintre.
Already in print is L'embarquement pour Byzance by Tanya Velmans, an essay on Byzantine art and civilisation written in the form of a travel diary.
Linking up with the revival of interest in Byzantine civilisation occasioned by the current exhibition at the Louvre Macula, too, have taken Byzantium as their theme, publishing Les Origines de l'ésthetique  méediévale , three texts written in 1945 by André Grabar on the links between Neo-Platonism and Byzantine art.
Macula are also publishing an essay by Georges Didi Huberman, Le cube et le visage, devoted to a sculpture by Giacometti.
Huberman believes the cube was connected in the Swiss artist's mind with the tomb of his father.
In the spring, the same publisher will be bringing out the Mémoires of Charles Perrault, unobtainable since first published in 1906, with an introduction by Antoine Picon.
A celebrated writer of fairy stories, Perrault was also a collaborator of Colbert's, and the man who prevented Bernini from realising his projected façade for the Louvre.
Also concerned with the reign of the Sun King is a monograph by Michel Gareau, Charles Le Brun, premier peintre de Louis XIV, published by Hazan (FFr490).
Hazan are also preparing to publish a guide to medieval Paris by Laure Beaumont-Maille and a series of monographs: on Matisse by V. Lebaume; Bonnard by Guy Cogeval; and Schwitters by J.C.
Bailly.
Due out in April is La peinture de Pompeii, a two-volume translation of research published in Italy and Japan in 1991.
It includes studies by Giuseppina Cerulli Irelli, Masanori Aoyagi, Stefano De Caro and Umberto Pappalardo (FFr1490 until 31 July 1993, then FFr1850).
The latest volume in Citadelles et Mazenod's ‘Arts et civilisations’ series is devoted to the United States.
Written by both French and American authors and introduced by Michel Butor, L'Art des Etats Unis covers over 300 years of U.S. architecture, painting, photography and decorative art (FFr990).
The same publisher is also offering L'art décoratif en Europe — Classique et Baroque, the first of three volumes, edited by Alain Gruber, on the development of the decorative arts through the circulation of printed designs from one European country to another (FFr990).
A limited luxury edition of 300 cloth-bound copies featuring a seventeenth-century acanthus-leaf motif is on sale at FFr2500.
Due out at the end of next year, in the ‘Grandes civilisations’ series, is a volume devoted to the art of Oceania.
The authors are Christian Kaufman of the Basel Museum, currently working at the Musée des Arts Africains et Océaniens in Paris; Adrienne Kaeppler of the Smithsonian; and Douglas Newton, former head of the Department of Primitive Art at the Metropolitan.
Michel Ledoux investigates the function and motivating forces of art in Corps et Création, published by Les Belles Lettres in their ‘Confluents psychanalytiques’ series.
In Matisse, Picasso, Miró, Plume present the fascinating memoires of the American Rosamond Bornier, founder of the review L'Oeil (FFr385).
Plume will also be publishing, next April, Picasso, mon ami, with photographs by Lucien Clergue and text by Jean-Marie Drot and Jean-Marie Magnan.
Gallimard, meanwhile, are bringing out the correspondence between Picasso and Apollinaire, a monograph on Masson by Bernard Noël, and a study of Leonardo and Titian by David Rosand, provisionally entitled La trace de l'artiste.
Due out in April is an essay on Loplop, the fantastic character created by Max Ernst.
The author is Werner Spies, who organised the recent retrospective of the German artist.
In conjunction with the magazine Beaux-Arts, Gallimard are also publishing a book on paintings kept in provincial museums, Mille plus belles peintures des musées de province.
Jannink have opted for limited editions (300 numbered copies, with a lithograph, at FFr480) of previously unpublished writings by artists: Erro, Monory, Soulages, Martial Raysse.
In February, the Bibliothèque des Arts will publish L'âge d'or espagnol by David Boone and, in April, a Dictionnaire des peintres de l'Ecole de Paris, having recently brought out the fifth volume of the catalogue raisonné of Theodore Gericault, complete with a critical study and documentary material and edited by Germain Bazin.
Flohic have paired up writers and artists, commissioning essays dedicated to particular works which are illustrated alongside.
Pairings include Zurbaran and Cees Nooteboom (already on sale), Titian and Pascal Bonafoux (due out in February), and Bram Van Velde and Philippe Djian (March/April).
Flammarion are publishing a monograph on Christian Boltanski by Lynn Gumpert, beginning with his very earliest oil paintings and ending with his celebrations of memory of recent years.
They have also produced a new edition of Pierre Schneider's Matisse, which now includes details of recent discoveries and up-to-date information on the location of his works, and coincides with the transfer of the large New York show to the Pompidou Centre from 25 February until 21 June, although in a reduced version (FFr995 until 31 January, then FFr 1200).
La Différence pays tribute to the American painter Joan Mitchell, who died recently, in the form of a lavishly illustrated monograph by Michel Waldberg (FFr600).
From Lachenal et Ritter comes L'Arrière-Montparnasse by Oser Warsjawski, five short stories exploring daily life in the Parisian art world between the wars.
Catalogues include one published by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux to mark the major Martial Raysse retrospective being held at the Jeu de Paume, Figures du moderne.
L'Expressionisme en Allemagne (1905–1914), published by the Ville de Paris and Paris-Musée for the current exhibition at the Musée d'Art Moderne; and another published by the city authorities, this time in collaboration with Gallimard, to support the exhibition ‘Apollinaire critique d'art’, which goes on show at the Pavillon des Arts in February.
Luciana Mottola Colban
Italy
The glorious past
Applied arts arise
In a difficult economic climate, Italy's top publishers are playing safe, concentrating almost exclusively on artists, themes and historical studies from the glorious past.
From Bologna, Franco Cosimo Panini's end-of-year contribution will be a two-volume work devoted to Juvarra, the great Sicilian architect, who worked mainly in Turin, Messina and Rome.
Gianfranco Gritella presents Filippo Juvarra's work in the historical and cultural context of Europe in the early eighteenth century.
From the same publishing house comes a monograph on Antonio Begarelli, the greatest terracotta sculptor of the Italian Renaissance, by Giorgio Bonsanti.
The sixteenth century is also featured in a work by Giordano Viroli, published by Nuova Alfa Editoriale titled La Pittura del Cinquecento a Forlì.
This is the first full study of the greatest period in the city's history, which produced such painters as Melozzo and Palmezzano.
Florence publishers have turned their attention almost exclusively to their home territory.
Cantini & C. are offering I Della Robbia.
La scultura invetriata del Rinascimento (2 vols., L 280,000) by Giancarlo Gentilini.
The author examines the work of the three generations of the family and that of their competitors, Benedetto and Santi Buglioni, and also looks at glazed sculpture by Benedetto da Maiano, Rustici and Sansovino.
The same publisher is also bringing out — after a gap of seven years — a second volume devoted to The Martello Collection: Further paintings, drawings and miniatures, 13th-18th Century (L120,000), again edited by Miklòs Boskovits, and — in collaboration with Umberto Allemandi & C. as part of the series edited by Kirsten A. Piacenti — a volume entitled I mobili di Palazzo Pitti.
Il primo periodo lorenese, 1737–1799 by E. Colle.
In preparation, Cantini have a Corpus of Italian Paintings from the Sixteenth Century in Dutch Public Collections, with contributions by various authors on behalf of Florence's Istituto Universitario Olandese di Storia dell'Arte (L60,000).
Working for the Giunti publishing house, Boskovits again has edited the first volume of The Origins of Florentine Painting by R. Offner (L230,000).
Meanwhile, after years of preparation, S.P.E.S., is publishing a monumental work on the art of the Florentine silversmiths, Argenti fiorentini dal XV al XIX secolo, the first ever full-scale study of the subject, by D. Liscia Bemporad in three volumes.
In Lorenzo the Magnificent's anniversary year, this publisher is also bringing out an edition of the inventory of the entire Medici residence taken on the great ruler's death, L'inventario in morte di Lorenzo il Magnifico, edited by M. Spallanzani and G. Gaeta Bertelà.
This document is central to Florentine cultural history in the fifteenth century.
Piero della Francesca has not been forgotten by Milanese publishers in the year of the five hundredth anniversary of his death.
Electa have produced a new edition of Eugenio Battisti's Piero della Francesca.
Opera completa, updated by M. Dalai Emiliani.
Other offerings from this publisher include the seventh volume in the series ‘La Pittura in Italia’, entitled Il Novecento. 1900–1945 (2 vols.), and the second part of painting in the Veneto region, La pittura nel Veneto.
Il Trecento, by Mauro Lucco.
Electa Napoli, meanwhile, have published L'Italia del Grand Tour.
Da Montaigne a Goethe, in which Cesare de Seta fleshes out the classic eighteenth-century journey with material from literary sources, travel diaries, and guide books, as well as paintings, drawings and engravings by the major artists of the period.
Luca Giordano.
L'opera completa by Oreste Ferrari and Giuseppe Scavizzi is an updated edition of a study first published in 1966.
The artist emerges far more clearly as a result of corrections and additions, and of further research on the many drawings that have come to light in recent decades.
Planned for 1993 is a monograph reviewing the complete works of Jusepe de Ribera by Nicola Spinosa.
Electa again, this time in Venice, is offering a new edition of Cennino Cennini's Il libro dell'arte, which marks the transition from fourteenth-century workshop culture to Renaissance production methods.
To return to Milan, an important new publication is the first volume of the ‘Corpus bizantino slavo’, entitled I Serbi nel Medioevo (L125,000), edited by Sima Cirkovic for Jaca Book The major monograph Gentile da Fabriano.
Il viaggio di un pittore nell'Italia del Rinascimento by Andrea De Marchi, is published by Federico Motta.
The bank Cassa di Risparmio di Parma, has sponsored the publication, by Franco Maria Ricci, of the two-volume Il battistero di Parma.
The first volume, which went on sale this year, is devoted sculpture, while the second, due out in 1993, covers the Baptistry's paintings.
The authors are George Duby, Gianni Romano, Chiara Frugoni, Bruno Zanardi and Peter Rockwell.
Next year, the new publishing firm of Charta will be issuing a complete catalogue of the works of Burri.
The research is being done by the Museo del Castello di Rivoli and its director Ida Gianelli.
The Venetians, too, are focusing on their local heritage with Il Vetro veneziano 1890–1990 (L140,000), written by Rosa Barovier Mentasti for L'Arsenale — the first full history of Venetian glass-making from Art Nouveau to the present day — and a second edition of Giardini segreti a Venezia (L80,000), by Gianni Berengo Gardin, Cristina Moldi Ravenna and Tudy Sammartini, evoking the intimate atmosphere of the little-known and well hidden gardens of Venice.
Still in the north-east of Italy, Campanotto Editore of Udine have chosen a Roman theme in the person of Antoniazzo Romano e gli Antoniazzeschi.
Anna Cavallaro is the author of the first exhaustive study of this late fifteenth-century artist, the chief exponent of devotional painting of the period.
The inflated catalogue of works ascribed to him as a result of late nineteenth-century adulation has now been stripped down to basics.
In Rome, Jandi Sapi has focused on lesser-known artists.
Out next spring is David Ryley Marshall's study of Viviano e Nicolo Codazzi, a father-and-son team of landscape painters active in Rome and Naples in the seventeenth century.
Viviano was a precursor of the realistic style that reached its greatest heights in the century following.
For 1994 Jandi Sapi has announced J. P. Hackert, a study of a German landscape painter active in eighteenth-century Italy.
The last work of the late Andrea Busiri Vinci, edited by F. Cosmelli and published by Ugo Bozzi Editore, is devoted to Giovanni Ghisolfi 1623–1683, one of the initiators of 17th-century vogue for romantic ruins.
Finally, we move to Turin, where Einaudi have published the third volume of their ‘Storia dell'Arte Moderna in Italia’, Neoclassicismo, by Paola Barocchi.
Utet's series on art history, Storia dell'Arte in Italia, directed by Ferdinando Bologna, gains a volume by Mario de Michele on nineteenth-century sculpture, La scultura dell'Ottocento (L110,000).
Il nuovo assetto dell'Europa (VI-XI sec.),
Piotr Skubiszewski's forthcoming contribution to the series ‘Storia Universale dell'Arte’, the volumes on Western civilisation edited by Enrico Castelnuovo, will not be on the shelves until 1993.
Umberto Allemandi & C's end-of-year catalogue includes the third and penultimate book in the series Giorno per giorno nella pittura (L200,000), this volume by Federico Zeri on central Italian painting (it excludes Tuscany, covered in the previous volume).
Also promised are a new edition by Raniero Gnoli and Attilia Sironi of the monk Agostino dal Riccio's Istoria delle pietre, a sixteenth-century treatise on the classification and working of the stones used in Renaissance Florence, and an exhaustive monograph by Giancarlo Ferraris — edited by Alvar Gonzalez-Palacios — on Pietro Piffetti, a highly-skilled eighteenth-century cabinet maker in the service of the House of Savoy (L250,000).
Gonzalez-Palacios also introduces the latest issue of the Antologia delle Belle Arti, which he edits, concentrating for a third time on the decorative arts during the Neo-classical period.
Other Allemandi titles include a Catalogo della Manifattura Lenci by Alfonso Panzetta, who by studying documentary and photographic material kept at the Turin factory has been able to classify and illustrate the Lenci ceramics workshop's entire output (L200,000); and Ralph Jentsch's The Artist and the Book in Twentieth-Century Italy, published for the current exhibition devoted to the Italian livre d'artiste at New York's MoMA.
The 1993 will also see the publication of Repertorio della scultura fiorentina del Seicento e Settecento, edited by Giovanni Pratesi with research by Ursula Schlegel.
United Kingdom
Eclectic and scholarly
Contemporary art retreats
According to a recent survey, Britain's recession-hit publishers are still producing more books than any other European country.
About 70,000 titles a year are published in the UK, compared to about 56,000 in Germany, Britain's nearest competitor, and 36,000 in France.
Germans, however, spend more per head, around £60, compared to £44 in Britain while Italy is bottom of the league at £28 per head.
In the field of art publishing gardening and the Italian Renaissance — a happy combination — would seem to be next year's most popular themes for Britain's publishers, whether scholarly or popular.
The Victorians also come in for considerable attention, some of it with a feminist slant, while, not surprisingly perhaps, Latin America still seems to be chic.
Not much on contemporary art but a sprinkling of the new art history proves that publishers are aware of current trends.
Real heavyweights are promised on Romanesque, Gothic and British manuscripts and papal sculpture in Rome and Avignon, plus two more volumes from the magisterial Rubens corpus of the artist's works.
The eagerly awaited titles from Harvey Miller are Marjon van der Meulen's Rubens' Copies after the Antique and Elizabeth McGrath's Rubens' Subjects from History.
These present much new information on these themes crucial to an understanding of the painter's mind and work.
A useful companion to Rubens's antique studies will be Diana Kleiner's Roman Sculpture,(£35).
Walter Cahn's important Romanesque Manuscripts in 1993 discusses masterpieces of illumination, such as the great Bibles and focuses mainly on paintings with an iconographical interest, while its catalogue details information about format, style, contents and provenance and literature for each manuscript.
From the same publishers comes another manuscript study, Kathleen Scott's Later Gothic Manuscripts 1390–1490, which is the sixth and final volume of the Survey of Manuscripts illuminated in the British Isles.
It selects 140 illuminated books such as the Sherborne Missal and the Bedford Hours.
Lund Humphries are offering three important books on Victorian art: The Last Romantics, the Romantic Tradition in British Art: Burne-Jones to Stanley Spencer, a lavishly illustrated coverage of this now fashionable area of British art (£18.95); Georgiana Burne-Jones's Memorials of Edward Burne-Jones (2 vols. £50), and Ruskin and Tuscany by Jeanne Clegg and Paul Tucker (£17.50).
The last accompanies an exhibition at the Accademia Italiana in London (8 January to 7 February 1993) and completely documents Ruskin's seven Tuscan visits made  between 1840 and 1882.
One of this publisher's 1993 highlights will be the appearance of volumes V and VI of Henry Moore Complete Drawings 1916–1983, edited by Ann Garrould, produced in association with the Henry Moore Foundation (around £50 per volume).
Phaidon's main offerings will be Masaccio and Masolino by Paul Joannides (£95) and Fra Filippo Lippi by Jeffrey Ruda (£95), both catalogues raisonne with extensive commentaries.
Modern art is catered for with The Sixties Scene in London by David Mellor (no relation to Britain's erstwhile Heritage Minister of that name)(£29.95) and, most topically, Understanding Hypermedia by Bob Cotton and Richard Oliver (£25.95) which looks at the impact of computer-generated imagery on contemporary art and design.
Jumping on the Columbus bandwaggon is The Art of the American Indian edited by David W. Penney (£39.95), mainly a pictorial reference book.
John Murray's Patronage in Renaissance Italy from 1400 to the early Sixteenth Century by Mary Hollingsworth is the first comprehensive study of patrons in the Italian Quattrocento (April, £19.99).
Also from Murray comes the controversial James Beck's Art Restoration, The Culture, the Business and the Scandal (April, £16.99) in which he reworks the debate the debate over restorations at London's National Gallery, the Metropolitan, the Louvre, Prado and the Uffizi, as well as the Sistine Chapel.
From Thames and Hudson comes Griselda Pollock's 1992 Walter Neurath Memorial Lecture, Avant-Garde Gambits 1888–1893, Gender and the Colour of Art History (£6.95) offering re-readings of the art of Gauguin, van Gogh and Bernard.
Edited by Mary Ann Caws, Joseph Cornell's Theatre of the Mind (£18.95) is the first extended selection of Cornell's diaries and writings to be published.
Artist Robert Motherwell provides an appreciation of Cornell.
The weighty question ‘What is a designer?’ is raised in Design since 1945 by Peter Dormer (£6.95), which examines the contexts in which post-war designers have worked and surveys the range of post-war products including graphics, furniture, textiles, kitchen utensils and tableware.
Thames and Hudson are also publishing two new books on Mexican and Aboriginal art, The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya by Mary Miller (£16.95) and Karl Taube and Wally Caruana's Aboriginal Art (£6.95).
The first is the only English-language dictionary of Mesoamerican mythology and religion, while Caruana's book will be the first concise survey of Australia's indigenous painters.
Its author is Curator of Aboriginal Art at the Australian National Gallery in Canberra.
The entire span of Irish Art and Architecture is examined in a book of that name by Peter Harbison, chairman of the National Monuments Advisory Council, Homan Potterton, former director of the National Gallery of Ireland, and Jeanne Sheehy who has written on Irish art (£14.95).
Julian Treuherz, Keeper of Art Galleries for Merseyside has written Victorian Painting, a highly informative survey which examines key issues such the rise of genre painting, the Aesthetic movement and taste and patronage.
A major new book is Jelena Hahl-Koch's Kandinsky (£75) with 420 illustrations and incorporating many works only known after the opening up of the old USSR in 1989 and the first Kandinsky retrospective in his homeland.
Montague Massengale's Fragonard (£14), Henri Loyrette's Degas: Passion and Intellect (£6.95) and Sylvie Patin's Monet: the Ultimate Impressionist (£6.95) seem to offer general accounts of the artists' lives and work.
The extraordinarily prolific Edward Lucie-Smith is now offering Latin-American Art of the Twentieth Century (£6.95).
Of great interest will be journalist Didier Eribon's record of Conversations with Ernst Gombrich, discussing recurring issues in his writings such as the relationship between art and perception and the way in which our responses are conditioned by conventions, history, social pressures and changes of taste.
Publishers Philip Wilson have rationalised the books published under each of their three imprints — Zwemmer, Scala and Sotheby's Publications — for their spring list.
From now on Scala will publish books on museums or classic artists, the Sotheby's imprint will be reserved only for books that have a direct input from Sotheby's auctioneers, and Zwemmer will take on the rest.
One exception is that the Menil Foundation specifically asked for the Philip Wilson Publications imprint for the eagerly-awaited Volumes II and III of David Sylvester's Rene Magritte, catalogue raisonne, Vols.
IV and V of which will appear next autumn (each volume £95).
On the Zwemmer list are Regency Design1790–1840 by John Morley (£85) which traces design as manifested in gardens, architecture, interiors and furniture; Filippo Brunelleschi: the buildings by Howard Saalman (£85); Parmigianino: life and work, with a catalogue of the paintings and prints by Cecil Gould (£45); and Spencer House: chronicle of a great London mansion by Joe Friedman (£35).
The catalogues of the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection have now been transferred to the Zwemmer imprint which will bring out Twentieth-century Russian and East European painting in the autumn (£85).
Scala books are continuing their series on the contents of major museums with volumes The Boymans van Beuningen by Hanneke de Man (£14.95); The Uffizi by Luciano Berti, Anna Maria Petrioli Tofani and Caterina Caneva (£19.95); and The Wallraf Richartz Museum, Cologne by Rainer Budde (£14.95).
In conjunction with English Heritage Julius Bryant has written London's Country House Collections (£14.95) which discusses the rich holdings of Kenwood, Chiswick House, the Ranger's House and Marble Hill, Twickenham.
They will also publish the monograph Bosch by Paul Vandenbroeck (£19.95).
Sotheby's Publications continue to bring out the volumes on Alexej von Jawlensky with the Catalogue raisonne of the oil paintings, Vol. 3, 1934–37 (£175).
Also promised are Kandinsky Watercolours, a catalogue raisonne by Vivian Endicott Barnett (£145) and Maritime Decorative Arts by Jon Baddely (£35).
The British Museum Press will be publishing a new series on Eastern art beginning with Sheila Canby's Persian Painting, Rachael Ward's Islamic Metalwork and J.M. Rogers's Mughal Miniatures which set the major stylistic and technical developments against the historical events which influenced them.
On a more contemporary note, from Reaktion comes Contradiction: Artistic Life, the Socialist State and the Chinese Painter Li Huasheng by Jerome Silbergeld with Gong Jisui (£30), dealing with art under the political changes in China from the 1950s to 1970s.
Reaktion are producing a paperback of their Mitchell Prize-winning Caspar David Friedrich and the Subject of Landscape by Joseph Leo Koerner (£17.95) while Frances Colpitt's Minimal Art: the Critical Perspective (£8.95) provides an overview of the most influential movement of the 1960s.
Yale is bringing out The Planters of the English Landscape Garden by Douglas D.C. Chambers, dealing with the philosophy of gardening and landscaping in England in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
Also forthcoming is Francis Haskell's eagerly awaited History and its Images: Art and the Interpretation of the Past, the next chapter in his history of culture, this time through the examination of the historians' use of visual images from the sixteenth century onwards.
David Hill's Turner and the Thames traces Turner's journeys along the Thames during 1805 and charts the artist's relationship with the river through topographical and social history relating to the paintings.
Also dealing with the early nineteenth century, British Journey: Karl Friedrich Schinkel edited by David Bindman and Gottfried Riemann, studies the great German architect/designer's visit to England and Scotland in 1826 as recorded in his important journal.
The Altarpiece in Renaissance Venice by Peter Humpfrey is the first detailed study in English of the Renaissance altarpiece and focuses on Venice from 1450–1530.
It concentrates on the relationship between altarpiece and its original physical and liturgical context, and the patrons' motivation in such lavish spending.
Also from Yale will be another new contribution to Renaissance studies, William Hood's Fra Angelico at San Marco, discussing the ideals, daily rituals and pictorial traditions of the Dominican monastery in Florence based on an itinerary through San Marco sheds new light on the frescoes and panels.
Routledge are offering a number of promising books including Stained Glass in England during the Middle Ages by Richard Marks of York University (about £80).
Marks's book will be the first modern study of the medium and discusses issues such as donors, technique, the workshops and stylistic developments.
Should be good.
Deborah Cherry of the University of Manchester has written Painting Women on the subject of Victorian women artists (£35), drawing on letters, diaries, autobiographies and contemporary papers, while The Female Nude by Lynda Nead (£35) promises to be a counterblast to Kenneth Clarke's classic.
Nead's text takes in the conventional notions of feminine beauty, pornography and the tabloid press, the fine line between sexuality and the obscene and the recent reclamation of the nude by female artists.
The first comprehensive  guidebook to The Roman Remains of Southern France by James Bromwich (£25) is organised in a simple alphabetical format with maps, plans and photographs.
Bromwich, of London University, also incorporates new research on major sites.
Hodder and Stoughton's National Trust Handbook 1993, which covers all the Trust's many gardens and houses (£3.95) is invaluable.
Further books from the same publisher also concentrate on gardens: Richard Bisgrove's The Gardens of Gertrude Jekyll (£20) and Derek Fell's The Impressionist Garden — a judicious mingling of two  perennially popular  subjects (£20.)
Routledge's Heritage Gardens by Sheena Goulty is aimed at the professionals tending gardens such as the above (£45).
Also profiting from the New Europe, with a  sprinkling of gardening thrown in for good measure, is Weidenfeld and Nicolson with J.M. Dent's Germany: Architecture, Interiors, Landscape, Gardens by Christa von Richthofen with photographs by Oliver Benn (£30).
The only important offering from National Gallery Publications is timed to coincide with a major loan exhibition to open at the National Gallery next spring: Tradition and Revolution in French Art, 1700–1880: paintings and drawings from Lille will appear in March (£27.50).
Bloomsbury's Essential Art History from Abstract Expressionism to Zeitgeist by Paul Duro and Michael Greenhalgh (autumn 1992) is part of a series offering a guide to the history of Western art.
Duro and Greenhalgh's book will undoubtedly be compared with Cambridge's Abstract Expressionism and the Modern Experience by Stephen Polcari (£10.95).
Also from Cambridge will be Donald Kuspit's The Cult of the Avant-garde Artist, which argues that modernist art is essentially therapeutic in intention (£24.95).
Added to these may be Splendours of Flanders, Late Medieval Art in Cambridge Collections.
Early English court patronage is covered by Art and Patronage in the Caroline Courts edited by David Howarth (£40) while Patricia Mainardi's The End of the Salon, Art and the State in the Early Third Republic (£25) documents the closing of an important era in French official art.
One of the publishing house's more politically correct offerings will no doubt be Paragons of Virtue: Women and Domesticity in Seventeenth-century Dutch Art by Wayne E. Franits of Syracuse University (£50).
Joining the torrent of books on Renaissance cardinals are Pamela M. Jones's Federico Borromeo: Art Patronage and reform in Seventeenth Century Milan (£55) along with Christopher M.S. Johns's Papal Art and Cultural Politics, Rome in the Age of Clement XI (£45).
Travelling east, Learning from Mt.
Hua by Kathlyn Maurean Liscomb deals with a Chinese fourteenth-century amateur painter's writings and travels (£50).
The close links between French and English art at the turn of the century are a reference point in The Letters of Lucien to Camille Pissarro 1883–1903, edited by Anne Thorold (£75), containing a wealth of previously unpublished material.
About the town of Cambridge itself, possibly the most interesting title in 1993 will be a useful reissue of Tim Rawle's classic work first published in 1985, Cambridge Architecture (£25) from Andre Deutsch
Among the plethora of books on the Italian Renaissance, Oxford University Press offers the British Academy Lectures on Art and Politics in Renaissance Italy edited by George Holmes (£25).
Britain's rich holdings in painted glass roundels, around 2,500 in all, receive detailed attention in corpus vitrearum medii aevi: Great Britain, Summary: a catalogue of Netherlandish and North European Roundels in  Britain by William Cole (£60).
About 1,400 of the entries are illustrated.
In the field of architecture, what the publishers describe as ‘a monumental new series’, Buildings of the United States, is intended to be a sort of Pevsner to that country.
First off the presses will be Buildings of Michigan, of Iowa, of the District of Columbia and of Alaska (priced between £19.95 and £27.50 each).
A hefty tome listing 3,000 artists is the Dictionary of Australian Artists, Sketchers, Photographers and Engravers to 1870, edited by Joan Kerr (£95).
Moving into more recent times, The Collected Writings of Robert Motherwell, edited by Stephanie Terenzio offers an insight into the recently deceased artist's work and theories of art (£25).
OUP's Clarendon Studies in the History of Art series, devoted to the publication of recent research are releasing a number of important new titles.
These include The Tomb and the Tiara: curial tomb sculpture in Rome and Avignon in the later Middle Ages by Julian Gardner of the University of Warwick (£75); Cloister Design and Monastic Reform in Toulouse; the Romanesque sculpture of La Daurade by Kathryn Horste (£80); An Architectural History of Norwich Cathedral by Eric Fernie (£60); Giambattista Piazzetta by George Knox (£70); and Alfred Waterhouse 1830–1905: biography of a practice by Colin Cunningham and Prudence Waterhouse (£80).
From Scolar Press in Hampshire comes The Graphic Work of Laura Knight by G. Frederic Rolling and Valerie E. Withington (approx. £55).
Dealing with her finest prints and drawings with appropriate quotations from her own writings, this reveals many of her sources.
Part II discusses her woodcuts and lithographs, many little known.
There is also a comprehensive catalogue of her eighty published prints.
Also from Scolar are two other titles on prints:The Heath Family Engravers 1779–1878 in two volumes (£85), a study of the growth and eclipse of the line engraver's art in Britain in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century, together with exhaustive catalogues and background information.
Architecture in the Encyclopédie of Diderot and d'Alembert (£50) covers the letterpress articles and selected engravings from the twenty-eight-volume Encyclopédie and its seven-volume supplement.
Scolar's British Printmakers 1855–1955 edited by Robin Garton (£75) starts with the Etching Revival of the mid-nineteenth century, and includes the experimental work carried out at Corsham and St Ives in the 1950s.
An A-Z of artists includes biographies and reference material on over 400 principal artists, with extensive additional information, should make this the authoritative study of the subject.
A number of interesting new titles are promised by the Antique Collector's Club based in Suffolk whose books are generally aimed at the collector/dealer market.
Diana Edward's Black Basalts examines this evocative material which was taken up by Josiah  Wedgwood to produce some of his most distinctive and popular ware (£45).
John Sandon, director of ceramics at Phillips auctioneers, London, is the author of The Dictionary of Worcester Porcelain volume I, 1751–1851 which takes the form of a historical survey and 600-entry dictionary.
It includes an illustrated section on marks and extracts from contemporary accounts of visits to factories (£35).
Clock enthusiasts will welcome The Georgian Bracket clock 1714–1830 by Richard C.R. Barder (£45).
The buildings of the Garden of England are extensively surveyed in Anthony Quiney's English Domestic Architecture: Kent Houses (£35), a fully illustrated survey of the county's buildings from the thirteenth century to the present.
The pursuit of Liberty
Full length account of the production of the famous firm founded by Arthur Lasenby Liberty in 1875, whose distinctive products gave their name to Art Nouveau in Italy — Stile Liberty.
A readable combination of informed texts by known experts in the field — Calloway, Eric Turner, Malcolm Haslam etc. — the book is most useful for the attention it devotes to the later years of the shop's production which have received much less attention in the literature than the celebrated Art Nouveau epoch.
The trouble with writing about a still-extant commercial enterprise is that the text does tend to the rather uncritical and the whole thing can end up like an extended press release.
A bit more of a critical eye would be welcome: why are many of Liberty's current fabrics really rather frumpy, hence their popularity in the shire towns of England?
Germany
More books in English
Picasso, Expressionism and medieval art
There is little exciting news from German publishers on the whole; no experiments or adventures are in sight.
Prestigious scholarly and popular series are being continued, German Expressionists, Picasso and the art of the Middle Ages remain safe favourites.
The good news for English and American readers is that some German publishers are taking more note of the English-speaking market.
They are teaming up with British and American publishers for simultaneous English and German editions of the same book, or themselves issuing an increasing number of bilingual (usually German/English) books.
Some of the new German publications even come out in English only.
This bid for greater accessibility only extends so far to mainstream and international subjects — many of the most interesting studies on medieval art are by German authors, and these are published in German only.
Prestel in Munich, Germany's biggest publisher of weighty and glossy art books, which even issues separate catalogues of its English-only new books, is a case in point.
Somewhat surprisingly, Land Art USA by Patrick Werner (DM48, p/b), the first art historical analysis of this quintessentially American form of monumental conceptualism, is only published in German.
But the first comprehensive monograph on Keith Haring, edited by Germano Celant (DM78), as well as Andreas Franzke's big up-to-date monograph on Antoni Tapies (DM168), and the complete catalogue of the nearly 200 works by Picasso in Picasso in the Ludwig collection (Picasso — Die Sammlung Ludwig, DM108) all come out simultaneously in both a German and an English edition.
The last, edited by Evelyn Weiss and with contributions by a number of other authors, is published to coincide with an exhibition travelling from Barcelona (until end January 1993), to Cologne (from February) and Nuremberg (from June).
The painter Emil Schumacher (born 1920) on the other hand, one of the grand masters of German Informel, stays linguistically at home; Hans-Gerhard Guse's publication of Schumacher's gouaches of the years 1980 to 1991 is only available in German (DM98).
The same is true for Das kostbare Evangeliar des Heiligen Bernward, the important illuminated 1000-year old manuscript preserved at the cathedral of Hildesheim (DM78).
It has been taken apart for restoration and can be seen next year at Hildesheim during the celebration of the thousandth anniversary of the enthronement of St Bernward as bishop.
The book, edited by Michael Brandt and including contributions by Rainer Kahsnitz and Hans Jakob Schuffels, will come out in January to coincide with the exhibition of the Gospel itself in Hildesheim (15 January until 28 February 1993).
Thirty pages are reproduced in facsimile with gold leaf.
New books which Prestel only issues in English include Picasso and Braque, the collected contributions to the symposium held in 1990 during the exhibition of the same title at the Museum of Modern Art in New York (DM68), and Josef Hoffmann-Designs, a monograph on the great Viennese designer (1870 to 1956), published to coincide with the exhibition at the IBM Gallery, New York (DM68; exhibition until 23 January).
Hirmer chiefly offers translations (nothing bilingual) and re-issues this year.
New publications include the second volume of Joachim Poeschke's opulently illustrated Die Skulptur der Renaissance in Italien, on Michelangelo and his time (DM248), and Die Hofkunst Kaiser Ludwig des Bayern (1314–1347) by Robert Suckale (DM98), the first art historical appraisal of the art at the court of this important medieval ruler.
While Schimer/Mosel continues to concentrate on its good list of German editions of international books on photography, one German original is Museumsbilder, the first complete publication of a series of fifteen large colour photographs taken by Thomas Struth in leading museums of the world (DM58).
Also in Munich, C.H. Beck publishers offer Denis Vialou's Frühzeit des Menschen, a survey on prehistoric art, as part of the enormous, and still growing series (twenty-one volumes so far) Universum der Kunst, and Judische Kunst, a weighty one-volume introduction into Jewish art from biblical times until today, by the art historian Hannelore Kunzel.
The Verlagsgemeinschaft Hatje/cantz at Stuttgart continues its successful collaboration with complementary lists of classical modern (Hatje) and contemporary (cantz) art and architecture.
Hatje's main  strongpoint this year are monographs on painters, the oldest of whom is Meister Francke (born around 1380)(DM28).
Most of his few surviving altarpieces and other religious paintings are preserved in the Hamburger Kunsthalle, which is also the centre for the study of the master.
The new monograph has been written by Helmut Leppien, curator at the museum and is published in conjunction with the Hamburger Kunsthalle, as is a new book on Max Beckmann by Uwe M. Schneede, the Kunsthalle's director (DM28).
The Kunsthalle possesses an important group of Beckmann's otherwise widely dispersed paintings, and the author centres his introduction to the expressionist's complex imagery on this particular body of work.
For the start of 1993, Hatje promises Walter Ophey 1880–1930, Leben und Werk by Stefan Krause (DM98), the first comprehensive critical monograph of this expressionist from Dusseldorf, including a full catalogue of Ophey's paintings and prints, and Wassilij Kandinsky by the German-Russian author, Jelena Hahl-Koch (DM198).
Hahl-Koch's book is, surprisingly, the first full monograph on Kandinsky since 1958.
It covers much new material, including letters which have never before been published, a number of long lost works which in the past few years have resurfaced from museum storerooms in the former Soviet Union, and works newly discovered in international private collections.
Among the many exhibition catalogues on Hatje's list are Pablo Picasso — Die Werke nach Guernica 1937–1973 by Werner Spies (DM120), accompanying a travelling show (11 December to 21 February 1993 at the Nationalgalerie Berlin) of a selection of Picasso's later works, and, probably fuller of surprises and discoveries, Honoré Daumier — Zeichnungen (DM98).
Daumier is famous for his satirical lithographs; his equally good drawings and watercolours are less known as so many of them are in private collections.
They are introduced by experts on French nineteenth-century art, including Klaus Herding, Martin Sonnabend and Margaret Stuffmann.
(Frankfurt, Stadel, until 17 January, then New York, Metropolitan Museum.)
More drawings by August Macke (1887 to 1914) are presented by Ursula Heiderich who has already published his seventy-eight sketchbooks.
Her new book, Die Handzeichnungen, is the first fully illustrated publication of all his loose drawings and completes the picture of this extremely prolific draughtsman (DM580).
Hatje's partner edition cantz issues a number of appraisals and retrospective catalogues of works shown at last summer's Documenta IX.
They include Documenta Portrats, an impressive 170 portraits of participating artists taken during the installation of their works, by the German photographer, Dirk Bleicker, with an accompanying text in German and English (DM28), and a documentation of Joseph Kossuth's conceptual installation ‘Das Passagenwerk’ with a text by Denys Zacharapoulos (DM24).
Dumont publishers at Cologne offer unusually few new monographs this year.
Exceptions are the paperback Otto Mueller by Mario-Andreas von Luttichau (DM24.80), on the romantic among the German Expressionists, and Cezanne — Die Gemalde by Gotz Adriani (DM86).
Both are promised for January 1993; the latter is the catalogue of the important Cezanne retrospective about to open in Tübingen (only showing: 16 January to 2 May 1993).
Karl Ruhrberg's Die Malerei in Europa und Amerika 1945–1960, subtitled the second modern movement, has a surprisingly traditional format for a book on the painters who aimed to break with all traditions (DM94).
A concise introduction into international postwar painting, the text takes its starting point with Jackson Pollock in New York and Wols in Paris and ends with Mark Rothko and Barnett Newman, and is followed by colour reproductions and commentaries on a series of individual works.
Dumont's traditionally strong interest in non-European cultures (it is also one of Germany's major publishers of good travel guides) is represented by Die Wanderungen des Monchs Ippen, the first publication of an important thirteenth-century Japanese set of scrolls in a European language (DM86), translated and edited by Franziska Ehmcke.
The monk Ippen (1239 to 1289) travelled all over Japan in the sixteen years before his death, and his journeys, his life and ideas (he was also the founder of an Amida-Buddhist school) were documented by one of his brothers in the twelve illustrated scrolls completed in 1299.
They rank among Japan's national treasures.
For those who prefer to stay on more familiar ground, back to Germany with Baukunst in Brandenburg, scheduled to come out just before Christmas (DM128).
The lavishly illustrated volume is an introduction into the architectural history of Berlin's wider surroundings, published in association with the federal government of the Land Brandenburg and with texts by various authors on not only architectural aspects of this part of former Prussia.
Apart from famous chateaux like Sanssouci and Rheinsberg, the book covers lesser known country houses, medieval monasteries, historic villages and small towns, as well as twentieth-century villas, estates and utilitarian buildings, most of which have yet to be (re) discovered by a wider public in the West.
Gebrüder Mann in Berlin also offer a local topic, Der große Tiergarten in Berlin (DM198).
Peter Joseph Lenne was only one of the landscape planners and artists who left their mark in this biggest and best known park of Berlin.
The book by Folkwin Wendland, a trained garden- and landscape architect, traces its history since 1450.
Most of Gebrüder Mann's new publications are on medieval art however.
The eminent art historian Otto von Simson has turned eighty in July this year, and Von der Macht des Bildes im Mittelalter, edited by Reiner Haussherr, is a collection of his studies in Christian art of the Middle Ages (DM68).
They range from the role of liturgy in art over studies of the mosaics in Ravenna to interpretations of early Netherlandish art.
As befits an anniversary volume, an up-to-date bibliography of von Simson's complete writings is included.
Volume VII, 2, of the series corpus vitrearum medii aevi Deutschland, Die mittelalterlichen Glasmalereien in Luneburg und den Heideklostern by Rudiger Becksmann and Ulf-Dietrich Korn is the first issue in this scholarly series to cover medieval stained glass in Northern Germany (DM395).
Apart from a comprehensive catalogue, it includes newly published documents on stained glass production in Luneburg and establishes this town as a major centre for the art.
The ground plan of the great monastery of St Gallen, drawn on parchment in about 830, has been a famous puzzle for medieval scholars since 1604.
The discussion has intensified again in the past few years.
With Der Klosterplan von St Gallen und seine Stellung in der karolingischen Architektur, the art historian, Werner Jacobsen  attempts a  definitive study (DM298).
His book is the first to be based on close technical scrutiny of the parchment, which revealed several erased preparatory drawings that point to some controversy among the medieval planners.
Jacobsen aims to reconstruct this debate in the wider context of the development of Carolingian church architecture and of the political debates in the turbulent age between 814 and 840.
Also in Berlin, the traditionally strong design and architecture list of Ernst und Sohn announces that Karl Friedrich Schinkel: Spate Projekte/Late Projects, two volumes with a bilingual (German/English) commentary by Kurt W. Forster, will be out by January 1993.
It is quite pricey (approx.
DM 360) but the beautiful designs, including those for a Royal Palace on the Acropolis, are all reproduced in colour.
At Tübingen, Wasmuth also continues to concentrate on international architecture and design, past and present.
The past is represented most interestingly with an illustrated study of Koca Mimar Sinan (ca. 1490 to 1588), the architect of Suleyman the Magnificent, by Ulya Vogt-Goknil (DM98).
Sinan was responsible for the transformation of the Hagia Sophia, the former church of the Emperor Justinian, into  Istanbul's great mosque, but created many other sacred and profane buildings throughout his long life.
The book includes a chronology of Sinan's life and work, and short biographies of Sinan's patrons, as well as a chapter comparing Sinan with European Renaissance architects.
Among the design books issued by Wasmuth is Deutsche Keramik von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart, a richly illustrated handbook on the 8000-year old history of pottery in Germany by Adalbert Klein, a former director of Dusseldorf's Hetjens Museum for ceramics (DM128).
As all examples of objects in the book are at the Hetjens Museum, it works also as a sort of catalogue.
It includes a chronology, glossary and bibliography.
Seemann in Leipzig still has a rather small list of new issues, but fills an important gap at last with the completely revised catalogue of the displayed works in the Gemäldegalerie Dresden alter Meister to celebrate the re-opening of the Zwinger in December after extensive restoration.
Small black-and-white reproductions of all about 700 paintings and seventy pastels are accompanied by brief entries written by curators of the museum (DM35).
For readers more interested in the Gemaldegalerie's building (1856, by Gottfried Semper) and in the history of the collection, there is in a separate volume Gemäldegalerie Dresden: Die Sammlung, Das Gebäude by Heinrich Magirius (architecture) and Harald Marx (the collection).
Marx, the museum's director, has also contributed an introduction to the catalogue.
Rescheduled for this year is Der Krakauer Marienaltar von Veit Stoss by Michael Stuhr (DM168).
Visitors to Cracow can see this monumental altarpiece only from afar.
The many colour reproductions in this book show its innumerable details, while the text explains their iconographical meaning and gives the latest on the complicated state of research on Veit Stoss.
For the coffee table, Seemann offers Georg Brühl's Art Déco, a presentation of highlights of German art deco porcelain from 1910 to 1930 in new colour photographs (DM29.80).
An important contribution to the growing corpus of books about the newly accessible surroundings of Berlin is Preußische Königsschlosser in Berlin und Potsdam by Jurgen Julier and Hans-Joachim Giersberg (DM128).
Julier is in charge of Berlin's palaces and gardens, while Giersberg has the same role in Potsdam-Sanssouci.
The art that Berlin lost to the Nazis
Rudolph Belling's ‘Head in Brass (Toni Freeden)’ of 1925 was seized on 7 July 1937 from Berlin's museum of German art and taken to Munich for the ‘Entartete Kunst’exhibition.
It entered a private collection but was ordered to be returned to the Nationalgalerie by the Soviet military administration in 1949.
The publication of Kunst in Deutschland 1905–1937, Die verlorene Sammlung der Nationalgalerie (Art in Germany 1905–1937, the lost collection of the Nationalgalerie) marks the reunification of Berlin's hitherto divided collections of twentieth-century German art.
The authors have compiled a catalogue of a total of 505 works of art the majority of which were sold abroad by the Nazis and are now in foreign museums or private collections.
Photographs of the collection hanging in the former Kronprinzen-Palais (destroyed in the war) show paintings by Franz Marc, Kirchner, Schlemmer, Beckmann, Feininger, Nolde, Klee, Kandinsky, Corinth and Grosz among others, and sculpture by Kolbe, Belling, Lehmbruck, and Barlach.
For the record
Richard Serra in London and Dusseldorf
My sculpture shares the logic of towers, dams, silos, bridges, skyscrapers and tunnels
Richard Serra completes about ten huge steel pieces a year.
Currently he has two museum shows running in Europe devoted to his famously demanding — in terms of sheer weight and mass — sculptures.
Here he talks about he sets about creating these site-specific works
I do not begin the process of working with a clear and obvious intention.
If a work is no more than an illustration of what I projected, it's useless.
I hope to extend my language through each work.
The reason to work is to find out what I don't know; I do not want to recycle what I know.
There are no definite, specific, methodological prescriptions.
There is, however, a predilection for materials and principles of gravity, weight, mass, density and balance.
These principles are often applied to a given context; however, the works are not rooted in a priori ideas or theoretical propositions.
In this respect my work differentiates itself from the work of the Minimalists.
One of the biggest limitations of Minimalism is its relation to context.
Minimalist works were originally made in the Sixties for loft spaces.
The loft space was then imitated by the galleries of the Seventies and Eighties, to be reproduced again by the new museums of the Nineties where they were perfected and neutralised into a well-lit, white shoebox.
At the same  time as the context was  rarefied , the Minimalist object was turned into a high-tech, mass-produced commodity — now the container and the contained can both go into circulation.
The Minimalist's notion of site specificity was always limited to the room, the perfect white cube.
That explains why any attempt to place Minimalist sculptures in the landscape or in urban sites reduces them invariably to homeless objects.
My work is not an illustration or depiction of formal didacticism.
That would be a constraint on me and an imposition on the viewer.
However, it is difficult to think without obsession, and it is impossible to create something without a foundation that is rigorous, incontrovertible and in fact, to some degree repetitive.
The ordeal of repetition is a way to jumpstart the indecision of beginning again: not to repeat what has been done but to retrace the same path.
Work comes out of work.
In order to work you must already be working.
The significance of the work for me is in its effort, not its intentions.
The effort is a state of mind and an interaction with the world.
For the most part, the site determines how I think about what I am going to build, whether it be an urban or landscape site, a room or any other architectural enclosure.
Some works are realised from their inception to their completion at the site, like the installation at the Tate.
Other structures are worked through in the studio.
Having a comprehensive understanding of the actual site, I experiment with models.
The models range from architectural and topographical contour constructions to precise, measured and scaled experiments with steel in a large sandbox.
The sand functions as a ground plane or as a surrogate elevation and enables me to shift building elements so as to understand their sculptural capacity.
The compressed sand, which functions as a fluid fulcrum, allows for a continuous shifting, tilting and rotating of planes and volumes on their axis.
Experimentation is based on trial and error.
A hands-on procedure is followed, not only in the studio but at the site, where I build full-scale mock-ups as often as I can.
This approach allows me to conceive and perceive structures I could not imagine.
It also allows me to determine the location and scale of a work in context.
The process or the how-to-do is, in the final analysis, no substitute for what-to-do; simple minded glorification of method or technique is usually a cover-up for an academic procedure.
The understanding of the pragmatic limitations and constraints of each given context — accessibility, surface- and sub-surface conditions, load-bearing capacities, etc. — is part of my work.
I face the same problems as a structural engineer.
I have always been interested in testing the limits and assumptions of structural rules or engineering codes.
I have attempted to take the possibilities and practice of engineering to absurd lengths.
The problems engineers resolve cut across mathematics, science and art, offering solutions to problems that arise in the specifics of building.
The exactitude and measure of structural engineering has been indispensable for the development of my work.
My decision early on to build site-specific works in steel took me out of the traditional studio.
The studio has been replaced by urbanism and industry.
I rely upon the industrial sector to build my work, upon structural and civil engineers, upon surveyors, labourers, transporters, riggers, construction workers, etc.
Steel mills, shipyards and fabricating plants have become my on-the-road extended studios.
I began to work in steel mills when I was seventeen to support my education.
These mills have since provided a source for material, inspiration, fabrication and construction.
Usually I analyse the capacity of a mill, a plant, a fabricator; study their equipment, look to their processing of materials, their manufacturing of products, study their tools, whether they are a forge, a roller, a brake, whether they are making ingots, nosecones, turbines, shells or pistons.
Whatever is made and how it is formed becomes a handbook of my concern.
I consider their most advanced processes and how I can interact with them.
I try to extend their tool potential in relation to what I need to accomplish.
To be able to enter into a steel mill, a shipyard, a thermal plant and extend both their work and my needs is a way of becoming an active producer within a given technology, not a manipulator or consumer of a found industrial product.
The history of welded sculpture in this century has had little influence on my work.
Most traditional sculpture until the mid-century was based on a relationship of part to whole: that is, the steel elements were collaged pictorially and compositionally together.
Most of the welding was a way of gluing and adjusting parts which through their internal structure were not self-supporting.
This is clearly evident in most modernist sculpture, whether by Gonzalez, Picasso, Smith or Calder.
Working with steel, not as a picture-making element, but as a building material in terms of mass, weight, counterbalance, loadbearing capacity, point load, compression, friction and statics, has been totally divorced from the history of sculpture.
It has, however, found a direct application in the histories of architecture, technology and industrial building.
It is the logic of towers, dams, silos, bridges, skyscrapers, tunnels, etc.
Sculptors for the most part have ignored the results of the industrial revolution and failed to investigate these fundamental processes of steel-making, engineering and construction.
The builders I have looked to have, therefore, been those who explored the potential of steel as one of the most advanced materials for construction: Roebling, Mies van der Rohe.
Site-specific works deal with the environmental components of given places.
The scale, size and location of site-specific works are determined by the topography of the site, whether it be urban or landscape or architectural enclosure.
The works become part of the site and restructure the organisation of the site both conceptually and perceptually.
My works never decorate, illustrate or depict a site.
Site-specific works invariably manifest a value judgment about the larger context of which they are a part.
Based on the interdependence of work and site, site-specific works address the content and context of their site specifically.
A new behavioural and perceptual orientation to a site demands a new critical adjustment to one's experience of the place.
One factor for a changed experience of a site is a basic change in the experience of time.
The inclusion of sculptural elements into a given context makes one more conscious of time, not by slowing it down to a state of meditation, but rather by particularising time through the experience of the work in context.
This sense of time or sensation of time, which is always a private and individual experience, can only be achieved through the language of art: nature doesn't do it; furniture doesn't do it; design doesn't do it; architecture rarely does it.
It seems to be one of the basic functions of art to enable us to acknowledge thought and perception in a way that other things do not.
To engage thought does not mean that the thought is contained within the work itself; it means that the thought is contained in the dialogue the work engenders in relation to its place.
Site-specific works emphasise the comparison between two separate languages — their own language and the language of their surroundings.
Unlike modernist works that give the illusion of being autonomous in their surroundings, and which function critically only in relation to the language of their own tradition, site-specific works emphasise the comparison between two separate languages.
To quote Bertrand Russell, every language has a structure about which one can say nothing in that language.
There must be another language, dealing with the structure of the first and possessing a new structure about which one cannot say anything except in a third language — and so forth.
In order to substantiate my remarks on site-specificity, I will retrace some of the thoughts that led to the conception of ‘Weight and Measure’ at the Tate.
Initially, I had to decide how to use the space: whether to place a separate work in each room or to accept the perceptual boundaries of the Duveen Galleries as a given and conceive a work which would deal with the space in its entirety.
I visited the Tate several times over a two-year period.
Although I had precise engineering plans I nevertheless measured and remeasured the space.
Measuring for me is not directed toward geometric conclusions.
It is a process that allows me to locate myself in a space, to understand a space in terms of my physical movement.
I measured everything: the diameter of the columns, the distance between the columns, doorways, the plane of the wall between the niches in the north gallery, as well as the niches themselves.
These niches or recesses in the north gallery posed a big problem in that they dissolve the directionality of the main axis and compartmentalise the space, which accounts for the difference between the north and the south gallery.
I was very concerned that the space of the north gallery would dissipate out into these side pockets, these large shadow boxes, which are too small to be rooms and too large to function as niches for sculpture.
I also realised immediately that the columns were a big problem in that they have an enormous sculptural presence.
I started with the idea of using forged rounds taking the scale of the rounds from the scale of the columns.
I dropped the idea.
Conceptually it falls right into the post-modernist trap of contextualisation.
The linkage between the columns and the rounds would have been too evident.
I did not want a post-modernist confusion.
I did not want to enter into an affirmative dialogue with the building.
I did not want to mirror the face-value language, the physiognomy of the architecture.
The rounds would have extended the stage-set character of the architecture.
Another problem posed by the Duveen Galleries is the vastness of the horizontal field.
The Duveen Galleries are basically a large hallway formed by three separate but continuous rooms strung out in a line, which empty into the side galleries to the right and left.
In the middle, between north and south Duveen, is the highly defined space of the Sackler Octagon.
I decided to use the directionality and linearity of the central axis.
At first I thought about setting up a series of divisions throughout the length of the hall which would demarcate it rhythmically.
We stood people at various locations over the distance to establish a scale reference.
I started out considering five elements.
I dismissed this concept because the seriality of placement would have imposed a formal composition on the hall isolating the installation from the conditions and functions of the architecture.
The big trap in dealing with the Duveen Galleries is the centre octagon.
It reads as a separate vertical volume and without being an actual pedestal, it takes on the function of a pedestal.
You cannot get away from its vertical rise.
I needed to come up with a solution which avoided this overly defined focal point and used it at the same time.
I worked with full scale mock-ups.
With five and even three elements I always had one element in the centre.
After we reduced the parts to three, it became clear that we had to remove the work from the centre and reduce it to two elements, which would hold the volumes of the north and the south galleries and make a linkage across the Octagon activating the entire space.
The architecture of the Duveen Galleries is overblown, authoritarian and a bit heavyhanded.
I did not want to reinforce these characteristics.
I wanted to concentrate the space to the sculptural potential it aspires to but does not fulfil, which meant that the two elements I decided to use needed to have a weight and mass comparable to that of the architecture.
I wanted a physical scale and mass which would act as counterweight to the columns and the weight of the stone.
The two forged blocks are nine feet wide, scaled to the distance between the central columns in the Sackler Octagon.
I wanted the blocks to be read as mass, not as a slice, line or plane.
I started out with a depth of thirty-six inches.
It was too standardised, too familiar, a furniture scale.
The mock-ups confirmed that the depth of forty-one inches would make the blocks massive enough to be understood as volumes in relation to the volume of the space.
Scale and measure can only be understood in context.
One has little retention for scale and scale relationships.
The problem of scale cannot be resolved through design solutions.
It has to be worked out with mock-ups.
Width, depth and height were crucial decisions.
The element in the south gallery is sixty inches high, the element in the north gallery is sixty-eight inches high.
The tension of the piece is based on its difference in elevation; on the fact that one element reads as a horizontal volume, its top plane clearly below eye level, whereas the other rises vertically above your eye level as you walk towards it.
It reverses the expectation of its height as you approach it.
When you enter the Tate, the blocks appear almost level due to perspective.
You begin to realise their difference in elevation only after you enter the centre Octagon.
The two forged blocks set up a visual field where the entire space becomes a manifestation of sculpture.
I want to make the volume of the space tangible, so that it is understood immediately, physically, by your body; not that the sculpture is a body in relation to your body, but that the volume, through the placement of the two sculptural elements, becomes manifest in a way that allows you to experience it as a whole.
It is the explicit intention of site-specific works to alter their context.
Le Corbusier understood this as early as 1932.
He wrote in a letter to Victor Nekrasov: ‘You have in Moscow, in the churches of the Kremlin, many magnificent Byzantine frescoes.
In certain cases, these paintings do not undermine the architecture.
But I am not sure that they add to it, either; this is the whole problem of the fresco.
I accept the fresco, not as something which gives emphasis to the wall, but, on the contrary, as a means to destroy the wall violently, to remove any notion of its stability, weight, etc.
I accept Michelangelo's Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel, which destroys the wall; and I accept the Sistine Chapel's ceiling as well, which completely distorts the very notion of ceiling.
The dilemma is simple: if the Sistine Chapel's wall and ceiling were intended to be preserved as form, they should not have been painted with frescoes, it means that someone wanted to remove forever their original architectural character and create something else, which is acceptable’.
However, the contextual issue of site-specific works remains problematic.
Site specificity is not a value in itself.
Works which are built within the contextual frame of governmental, corporate, educational and religious institutions run the risk of being read as tokens of those institutions.
One way of avoiding ideological cooptation is to choose left-over sites which cannot be the object of ideological misinterpretation.
However, there is no neutral site.
Every context has its frame and ideological overtones.
It is a matter of degree.
But there are sites where it is obvious that art work is being subordinated to/accommodated to/adapted to/subservient to/required to/useful to…
In such cases it is necessary to work in opposition to the constraints of the context, so that the work cannot be read as an affirmation of questionable ideologies and political power.
I am not interested in art as affirmation or in art as manifestation of complicity.
Large scale, site-specific projects which do not allow for secondary sale are hardly ever considered to be a worthwhile investment.
For that reason the concept of site specificity and corporate sponsorship are antithetical.
Corporate sponsorship for the arts breeds economic opportunism and reinforces palatable artistic conventions.
To accept corporate support often means to submit to corporate control: supply upon demand; accommodation with consent.
Corporate funded artworks are often advertised as public service.
Slogans such as‘art for the people’ mask the cynicism of commercial and political manipulation, which would like to make believe that we all live in a homogeneous society of consumers.
Cultural and educational inequalities based on economic inequality are a reality which needs to be revealed and not glossed over by a populist notion of art for the people.
The aspiration of art cannot be to serve and thereby reaffirm the status quo by delivering products which give people what they want and supposedly need.
Art-marketing is based on this premise.
The more one betrays one's language to commercial interests, the greater the possibility that those in authority will reward one's efforts.
If artefacts do not accord with the consumerist needs of people, if they don't submit to exploitation and marketing strategies, they can be voted into oblivion.
Tolerance exists only for officially sanctioned ideas.
Submission is at the core of the problem.
We all submit to a degree, but how much of our autonomy do we cede to a government, for example, that pursues policies which we find contradictory to our basic beliefs?
If one remains silent and does not speak out, it is tantamount to abdicating responsibility.
Conservation
Cairo
Over 150 ancient and medieval Egyptian sites hit by October earthquake
UNESCO coordinating a restoration programme for buildings from the Pyramid of Cheops to the Blue Mosque
The earthquake of 12 October caused a range of damage to over150 Pharaonic, Coptic and Islamic monuments in and around Cairo, weakening a number of structures that were already unstable and details of whose condition before the quake do not exist.
The original list of damage compiled by the Egyptian Antiquities Organisation has now been verified by the The Conservation Practice in West Sussex, England, and Gifford Consulting Engineers, who were invited to inspect the damage by UNESCO in preparation for a coordinated relief effort.
The monuments in the Islamic centre of Cairo have been a cause of concern for many years — sewage and water systems in the old city are in a constant state of collapse and the resultant rising damp and sulphate action has considerably weakened foundations.
Medieval Cairo, included on the World Heritage list, contains the greatest concentration of major monuments in the Islamic world.
UNESCO however is unlikely to able to pay for the full cost of the restoration programme and intends to enlist aid from other international agencies.
President Mubarak, appealing for outside aid, said that ‘above all we need experts and specialists in saving damaged buildings’.
The Pharaonic monuments, solidly constructed from massive blocks, withstood the seismic shocks far better than later buildings.
At Giza some stones fell from the Pyramid of Cheops and stones were displaced from the side of the Pyramid of Khephren that faces the Sphinx, leaving fissures.
At Saqqara seven small stones fell from the step pyramid and the Serapeum, the underground burial chamber of the bulls of Apis, suffered cracks in the roof, side chambers and corridors.
Cracks have also appeared in the underground passageways of the Tuna el-Gebel at Minia 300 km. south of Cairo and the granite columns of the Roman basilica at the neighbouring el-Ashmunein now incline several degrees away from the vertical.
In the Valley of the Kings at Thebes sixty-five tombs now need internal support; the tombs of Ramasses I and III have cracks in the walls.
While the Luxor temples escaped with only cracks and fractures in some of the columns, two blocks of stone each weighing ten tons fell from the roof of the hypostyle of the temple at Kom Ombo 140 km. down the Nile.
Cracks in the temple of Hibis in the el-Kharga oasis in the Libyan desert have widened, giving urgency to the plan to move the temple which was already suffering from underground water seepage.
Altogether twenty-three Pharaonic monuments (grade one classification) suffered damage as opposed to a total of 132 Islamic and Coptic monuments in Cairo itself.
Among the latter the Qualawan Mosque has suffered cracks in all the arches of the  mausoleum , and detachment of plaster decoration in the madrasa (school building).
At the As-Salih Negm Ad-din madrasa and mausoleum urgent action is needed to save the minaret, which has cracked and is sloping one way, while the supporting timber lintel slopes the other.
The mosque of the sixteenth-century Al-Ghouri, the last of the great Mameluk sultans, is in very poor condition: the minaret has moved and many areas of marble facing are loose.
The decorative marble floor has subsided into the basement while the poor condition of the building has been further aggravated by the actions of the shopkeepers at the base of the mosque.
The minarets of Al-Hakkim of Bi-biralahi are both in poor condition and in need of repair.
The fourteenth-century Blue Mosque now has cracks in the walls and a dangerously leaning minaret.
The side wall of the seventh-century Coptic Church of Mi-allaqa (the Hanging Church) is leaning, pulling the internal colonnade with it.
In addition the Roman masonry below is suffering from sulphate attack aggravated by the recent use of cement mortar and render.
Daryl Fowler of The Conservation Practice commented ‘The cultural spine of the Fatimid and Ayyubid city has been badly damaged and repair and conservation programmes, long needed in Cairo, are now increasingly urgent’.
‘Las Meninas’ cleaning awarded prize after eight years
The 1991 International Prize for Restoration, given by the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy, was awarded on 16 October to John Brealey (right), former head of restoration at the Prado, and his team, for the restoration of Velazquez's ‘Las Meninas’.
The preliminary cleaning of the painting in 1984 aroused a good deal of adverse criticism but, as Felipe Garin, the Prado's director, recently commented: ‘In the end the passage of time and the approval of the general public have brought us to our senses’
Naples churches to be reopened for restoration
As part of a wider plan to restore Naples' historic centre and bring back into public use an artistic and historical heritage that has been shut up and neglected for too long, the Soprintendenza per i Beni Artistici e Storici in Naples has announced a programme of restoration of twenty-six churches to start on 5 December.
The initial phase will concentrate on the monuments housed in the churches and subject them to dusting, washing and cleaning.
In addition, and as a direct result of the restoration programme, it will be possible to visit these churches every Saturday until the end of June.
Visitors will get a rare chance to see inside the Pietrasanta and SS.
Severino e Sossio, the Pio Monte della Misericordia, Santa Maria la Nova, S. Giovanni a Carbonara and S. Maria dell'Incoronata, among others.
Each Saturday there will be guided tours for two of the churches on the list, while on the first and third Saturday of every month a concert of classical music will be held in one of the churches, the takings from which will go towards restoring a work of art.
Cleaning up sacred and profane love
The temporary but lengthy closure of most of the Galleria Borghese in Rome has allowed the restoration department of the Palazzo Barberini to undertake some much needed cleaning of some of the paintings.
Two Titians are receiving attention: the late ‘Venus and Cupid’ and the famous ‘Sacred and Profane Love’.
Detached pigment and small but generalised lowering of colours are two problems which the restoration team headed by Maria Grazia Bernardini and Sara Staccioli have identified in the ‘Sacred and Profane Love’, which was probably last relined at the beginning of the eighteenth century.
The canvas has already undergone a light cleaning to remove the accumulations of old varnish which have contributed to its yellowed appearance.
Eventually a more thorough cleaning will remove any dirt and later retouching.
Work on the painting has revealed important new data about the work including a number of pentimenti to the composition.
These include a different position for the face of the nude woman; a different colour for the drapery of the clothed woman (originally red, now white) and less of it; and more figures — now difficult to read precisely — at the left hand side of the composition.
Most surprising, perhaps, is the discovery of a drawing on the verso of the original canvas showing a standing figure, some tree trunks and a grid of lines corresponding to the shape of the sarcophagus in the painting.
Whether this represents a preparatory drawing for the finished painting or a different version of it, remains to be established.
The restored canvas will go on show in the early part of next year.
Archaeology and Conservation
Roman Britain
Huge cache of Roman treasure discovered
Gold bracelets, silver spoons and thousands of coins dug up in Suffolk field
One of the most important finds of late Roman gold and silver coins and objects has been located by a local man, retired gardener Eric Lawes, with a metal detector in a field in Suffolk.
Buried in a box in the ground, the find was kept secret so that it could be properly excavated by Suffolk County's archaeological department, headed by Judith Plouviez, the County Archaeology Officer.
Ms Plouviez commented: ‘The hoard must have been hidden by a wealthy family around 1,600 years ago.
It is one of the finest known from Roman Britain.
It is priceless in terms of the knowledge it will give us’.
This is the first occasion on which a Roman horde in Britain has been correctly excavated and much new information about the burial of such treasures is expected as a result.
Now reposing in the British Museum where it was taken after its removal to Halesworth police station, the horde consists of several thousand silver and gold coins, minted in various imperial centres such as Rome, Milan and Trier.
Those examined so far are gold solidi and silver siliquae, produced under a range of emperors of the late 4th to early 5th century including Julian, Honorius and Arcadius.
Dr Andrew Burnett of the Museum's coin department estimated their equivalent modern value to be in the region of £250,000 ($375,000).
This is by far the largest cache of Roman coins to be uncovered in Britain since the eighteenth century.
With the coins are a remarkable group of silver spoons in a variety of forms, some marked with the Christian Chi-ro symbol.
Outstanding among them is a previously unknown type, a silver, parcel-gilt strainer with the handle in the form of a dolphin with garnet eyes.
Catherine Johns of the Museum's Prehistoric and Romano-British department could not speculate as to the possible country of origin of the spoon.
Gold objects so far partly cleaned of earth include an extremely large gold bracelet ornamented with a pierced frieze of a well-known Roman type.
This example is, however, the first to be found in Britain and Ms Johns estimates that around fifteen will probably emerge when all the treasure has been liberated from its surrounding earth.
Another important gold item is a body chain of a type worn by wealthy women: the double chain passed around the neck then under the breasts and round the back, secured by decorative medallions at the centre front and back.
Gold rings, finely wrought chains and bracelets with head terminals were also displayed at the press conference held at the Museum on 19 November, together with a beautiful silver, niello-inlaid tiger, probably a mount for a chariot.
The find will be the subject of an inquest, probably next year after all research and conservation on it has been completed at the British Museum.
If proven that it constitutes Treasure Trove (i.e. it was buried with the intention of later removal, rather than as part of a funerary burial), it is most likely to be retained by the Crown for the British Museum and the finder paid a sum equal to the market value of what is retained.
What's up at the Conservation Unit
Now funded by the Department of National Heritage, the Conservation Unit was set up in 1987 as part of the Museums and Galleries Commission to act as a national focus for raising conservation standards.
In 1989 it set up its Conservation Register, an extensive computerized database listing conservators working in over one hundred different fields whose working practices, studio security, fees and other professional requirements have been carefully vetted by the Unit before inclusion on their files.
The Register is available to the public; for a fee of £5 details of up to five conservators in any one area of expertise are supplied.
This year the Unit has launched a new annual awards scheme with the aim of recognising what they consider to be the outstanding achievements of British conservators.
There will be three awards: a major prize for the best completed project in a museum, gallery or historic building including churches and  cathedrals ; a young conservator of the year award to the most promising intern or trainee; and a prize for innovation in restoration or conservation in developing materials or processes.
Among the Unit's useful publications are The Conservation Source Book which lists bodies and societies involved in conservation (ranging from the National Trust to the British Sundial Society), price £11.95, and Training in Conservation — a Guide to full-time courses in the UK price £2.
Among the Unit's many educational activities an international conference on sculpture conservation is currently being organised for 16–18 June1993 hosted by The National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, Liverpool.
The Unit and the Register are housed at 16 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1.
Tel: 071 233 3683.
Coming unstuck: removing architectural fittings
The Victorian Society, London, has commissioned a new report entitled ‘Coming Unstuck: the removal of fixtures from listed buildings’.
Compiled by Teresa Sladen, the Society's Secretary, it sets out the legislation relating to the removal of fixtures — including fireplaces, staircases, panelling, balustrading, window and door surrounds, chimneys, floors, stained glass, tiling and more — from listed buildings.
It then sets out six case studies where owners of significant buildings have failed to observe regulations, and allowed fixtures to be removed for sale or destruction.
The report continues with a list of cases in which disputes over fixtures in listed building led to a public enquiry, a court case, or both and concludes with a section entitled ‘How to make the legislation more effective’, which provides advice to owners, information on Stop Notices and calls for control over the sale of fixtures.
This is a highly informative text, available from the Society at 1 Priory Gardens, London W4 1TT.
Tel: 081 994 1019.
Getty to conserve ‘Last Judgement’ in Prague
The Getty Conservation Institute has announced a joint project with the Office of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic on the conservation of the fourteenth-century mosaic ‘Last Judgement’ in St Vitus's Cathedral, Prague.
Considered one of the country's major artistic treasures, the mosaic covers 904 square feet of the south facade of the cathedral, above the main entrance.
It depicts Christ in a mandorla surrounded by angels, above the kneeling saints of Bohemia.
Below this are the emperor and his fourth wife, Elizabeth of Pomerania.
The only other gothic cathedral to be covered in mosaic in this way is Orvieto cathedral in Italy.
The similarity in technique of the two works has suggested that the Italian craftsmen came to Prague to execute the work, commissioned by Charles IV, King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor.
Major restoration campaigns were undertaken on the mosaic in 1619, 1889, 1956 and on a number of occasions with varying degrees of success since that date.
The latest campaign will take about four years.
The present initiative is one of a number of Getty projects currently underway in Eastern Europe.
Adopt a pane of Rijper glass
According to the society for the preservation of ‘Rijper’ windows, vandalism, neglect, war and fire have caused the loss of some 8000 square metres of painted glass in The Netherlands over the last two centuries — there are barely 4,400 square metres left.
Now twenty-four important windows dated 1655–57 from the parish church in De Rijp, an affluent village of whalers and ship builders near the north Holland coast dating from the seventeenth century, are suffering from the effects of humidity and air pollution.
A plan to restore the windows at a cost of DFl.1.2 million has been approved by the State Office for Monuments who are putting up the greater part of the necessary funds.
The remaining DFl.215,000 is being raised by a scheme whereby individuals, businesses and societies are encouraged to ‘adopt’ one or more panes of glass.
One pane will cost the sponsor just DFl.50 (£18.50; $27.70), while the cost of a whole window lies between DFl.15,000 and 18,000 (£5,500–6,600; $8,300–10,000).
Readers wished to adopt should contact Mr Booy, Heikeshof 21, 1483 XE De Rijp, Netherlands, tel: 2997–1826
Royal wall painting rediscovered
One of the finest wall paintings yet to be uncovered in Britain has been found in the chapel at Chester Castle.
Possibly commissioned by King Henry III who transformed the fortress into a royal palace in 1237, the seven scenes appear to depict miracles apocryphally attributed to the Virgin Mary and other scenes from her life.
The scenes are in no way complete but many of the heads are remarkably well preserved and executed in a highly sophisticated style reminiscent of Italian art of the same date.
The paintings originally covered about one hundred square metres.
The removal of the whitewash which has covered the paintings since the Civil War is being undertaken by English Heritage and the Courtauld Institute's Conservation Department.
David Park, head of the Courtauld's Conservation Department, described the works as of‘amazingly high quality’.
Rome
$29 million to weed the Colosseum
Banco di Roma funding revives old feuds over how to treat ancient Rome
From early October the Colosseum has been surrounded by scaffolding.
Like most of Rome's classical monuments the fabric of the 1,900 year-old structure is crumbling from the combined effect of acid rain and vibrations from heavy traffic.
To make good the depredations that years of neglect have wrought on the Flavian amphitheatre, L40 billion (£19.3 million; $29 million) funding has come from the Banco di Roma, newly created from the merger of three of Italy's banks in preparation for the single European market.
They were persuaded to act as sponsors by Francesco Sisinni, Direttore Generale del Ministero dei Beni Culturali, in return for exclusive rights to use the Colosseum and the restoration project in their advertising.
The restoration follows work two years ago to stabilise the external circuit of the walls.
The first phase of the current project, now underway, is to clean and consolidate the outside walls.
Once that has been completed the scaffolding will be removed and the Banco di Roma will provide indefinitely for a team of gardeners and maintenance officers to keep the upper walls free of weeds that grow in the crevices, loosening small bits of masonry and concrete that are then dislodged by birds or lizards.
Plans have also been discussed to relay the surface of the amphitheatre, which would prevent the bottom of the arena from filling with water that seeps into the masonry.
Rebuilding of the upper levels is also a possibility.
Apart from the cosmetic effect, this would make them easier to maintain.
Although the area between the Colosseum and the Arch of Constantine is now for pedestrians only, one-third of the Colosseum is still exposed to heavy traffic, including large tourist buses.
Rome's traffic planners are constantly exploring new ways of rerouting traffic that will free the amphitheatre from fumes and vibrations while allowing the tourists to gain access.
Rome's underground railway, which runs close to the surface between the Colosseum and the Arch of Constantine, has agreed to fit the trains with rubber wheels which will virtually eliminate the shaking that the building currently receives.
The renewed debate over whether to close the entire ancient centre of Rome to traffic, and in particular the Via dei Fori Imperiali which runs from Piazza Venezia to the Colosseum, slicing in half one of the largest and most important archaeological sites in the world, is charged with  political meaning.
The road, which is an important link in Rome's traffic system, was constructed on orders of Mussolini in 1931–32 in the hope that this highway through the remains of classical Rome would enhance his fascist regime with echoes of Imperial grandeur.
Opponents of the project to remove the road have been quick to point out that to reunite the expanse of archaeological remains carries a political subtext of cancelling out of one of the most potent symbols of Mussolini's fascist State.
The proposal has therefore been labelled as just as propagandistic as Mussolini's act.
Arguing against the project, the independent scholar Cesare d'Onofrio has pointed out that ‘the proposed creation of an archaeological park would involve excavating down five to six metres below the present level and the creation of an immense basin stretching from the edge of Piazza Venezia and engulfing whole areas of the city up to the Porta Appia and beyond, embracing in its metal fences and walls not only the Forums, the Colosseum, the Domus Aurea, the Oppian and Coelian hills, the Circus Maximus etc. but, of necessity, a whole series of churches and medieval, Renaissance and baroque basilicas which would stand wrenched both from their historical context and from their place in the daily life of modern Rome’.
Speaking in favour of the scheme Adriano La Regina, Soprintendente Archeologico for Rome, has sharply attacked the ‘nostalgists’ who interpret every exploratory move made in this area as an ‘attack on their idea of antiquity’.
What is apparent to everyone, however, is the deteriorating state of the city itself, not only from an archaeological viewpoint but from an urban one, and specifically where traffic circulation is concerned.
The dismantling of the Via dei Fori Imperiali and the creation of an archaeological park is an idea that was floated back in the days of Napoleonic occupation.
It remains to be seen whether the archaeologists will win out over the urban planners.
Paris
State reforms of French archaeology imminent
Mass resignations spur Minister to action
The mass resignation earlier this year of the Conseil Supérieur de la Recherche Scientifique (CSRS), the official body at the head of French archaeology, has led to the commissioning of a report by the Minister of Culture, Jack Lang, which is now being considered by the CSRS.
The report proposes reforms of the CSRS itself; a drastic decentralisation and the setting up of an interministerial committee (the relevant ministries are Research, Foreign Affairs, and the recently merged Culture and Education).
The report emphasises the need to establish solid links between research, the archaeological heritage and society; to make sites accessible to the public and to publish them equally accessibly.
It also recommends that excavations be coordinated at a national level, albeit at the same time as more powers are devolved to the regions, this decentralisation freeing the CSRS of its administrative and financial role and giving it the freedom to concentrate on scholarly matters, with — and this is a novelty — systematic recourse to the advice of outside experts.
Besides planning excavations throughout the nation, then, the Conseil will now conduct any emergency works which arise, such as the preliminary excavations when a rail road or motorway is being built, or in any exceptionally difficult local cases.
The problems of French archaeology are deep-rooted, although the discipline is recently established: the law which supports its activities dates only from 1941, and has hardly been modified since then.
The first State archaeological services were created by Andre Malraux only in 1964.
Emergency archaeology was born at the end of the Sixties in response to increased building.
Its activities have grown with every year, but public financing has not, so it is more and more dependent on what it can extract through planning regulations from the developers and industrialists themselves.
It has also come to rely on the part-time staff made available by the Association pour le Fouilles d'Archeologie Nationale, which in turn depends largely on private money, although it is in the charge of the Ministry.
It began with a budget of Ffr10 million p.a. and now disposes of 300 million; it has over a thousand members, many of them professionals but forced to wander from excavation to excavation, without the opportunity to specialise.
Although recently the Association has been enabled to take on some 250 full-time archaeologists, there is still an acute shortage.
Alain Schnapp, lecturer in Greek archaeology at Paris University, says that the profession is short of at least 400 practical archaeologists.
‘In France we probably have between two and three million archaeological sites, but the ministerial archaeological service lists just 50,000’.
Dead dogs puzzle archaeologists
‘The largest dog cemetery of any kind known in the ancient world’, according to Harvard archaeologist Lawrence Stager, has been  discovered in the Israeli coastal city of Ashkelon.
Rows of neatly arranged dog corpses have been discovered, about 1,200 in all, each animal placed on its side, legs flexed, tails tucked around the hindlegs.
Stager  believes the burials were the work of the Phoenicians, whose culture dominated fifth-century Ashkelon.
Only they would have possessed the necessary authority and material wealth at the time to take prime land — the site of a major trading warehouse — and transform it into a dog cemetery.
The dogs might then been associated with a Phoenician temple, although Stager admits he does not know the name of the deity or the location of the temple.
He is open to better suggestions.
The Art Market
Contemporary art sales, New York
‘How can you stop now?’ pleaded the auctioneer
Bidders generally responded unenthusiastically to John Marion's call as Bruce Nauman sets record but Pop Art performs poorly
No generalisations can be made about the results of the two prestigious sales of contemporary art held at Sotheby's and Christie's on successive evenings last month.
Good works sold both above and below estimate or did not sell at all, and the determining factor may have been a lone telephone bidder working against the reserve.
Leading auctioneer, John Marion, appeared to be in confident mood as he took the rostrum at Sotheby's on Tuesday 17 November.
His polished blend of humour, encouragement and persuasion resulted in the sale of fifty-one lots for $19.4 million (£12.9 million), but a further twenty-six lots failed to find buyers.
If the firm was disappointed by this total, its chairman, Alfred Taubman, received a second blow.
He had consigned abstract paintings by Clyfford Still (lot 30A), Franz Kline (lot 31A) and Morris Louis (lot 37A) and none attracted a single bid.
The auction was launched by eleven works of recent art consigned by Raymond Learsy, eight of which found buyers.
Keenest interest was directed towards a string abstract canvas by Gerhard Richter (lot 3, est. $200,000–250,000), which was purchased by art advisor, Jeffrey Deitch, for $220,000 (£146,667), and Chuck Close's portrait of Cindy Sherman (lot 6, est. $200,000–250,000) which sold to a telephone bidder for $210,000 (£140,000).
Eli Broad paid $150,000 (£100,000) for Mark Tansey's ‘Four Forbidden Senses’(lot 11, est. $180,000–220,000).
David Hockney's celebrated double portrait of Henry Geldzahler, who was seated in the audience, and Christopher Scott (lot 17, est. $1–1.5 million) was acquired at the low estimate by Larry Gagosian, acting on behalf of record producer, David Geffen, while an European telephone bidder purchased both Roy Lichtenstein's ‘Girl with Piano’(lot 23, est. $3–3.5 million) for $1.65 million (£1.1 million), and an important coloured silkscreen painting by Robert Rauschenberg (lot 43, est. $1.75–2 million) for $1 million (£666,700).
In both cases, there ware no other bidders in the room.
Another telephone bidder paid $3.4 million (£2.27 million), the highest price of the week, for Andy Warhol's ‘Marilyn x 100’(lot 25, unpublished estimate of $4 million).
This vast canvas had been consigned by Charles Saatchi.
Failures included two sculptures by Richard Artschwager from Saatchi's collection (lots 21 and 66), Anselm Kiefer's ‘Des Malers Atelier’(lot 51), and Richard Long's beautiful and important ‘Whitechapel Slate Circle’(lot 60), which had been bought by a British collector for his New Jersey estate at Sotheby's in May 1989 for $190,000 (£126,667).
On this occasion, Anthony d'Offay made one bid of $100,000 but the reserve had been set at a higher level.
At Christie's on Wednesday 18 November, the results were more successful but only because consignors had been squeezed to lower their reserves.
Fifty-eight lots were sold for $16.1 million (£10.73 million), with fourteen other lots left without buyers.
Jasper Johns's  monochromatic canvas, ‘O through 9’(lot 38, est. $2.8–3.5 million), sold to a telephone bidder against a Swedish dealer for $2.1 million (£1.4 million).
A smaller version of the same composition, and on paper, had fetched $2.7 million exactly three years ago.
An apocalyptic landscape by Enzo Cucchi (lot 66, est. $100,000–150,000), the most important Italian picture offered during the week, fetched the low estimate.
Asher Edelman was a disappointed vendor, with no bids for the two lots which he had consigned, an abstract composition in dubious condition by Willem de Kooning (lot 20), and ‘Studio Painting’(lot 56), a fine combine painting by Robert Rauschenberg.
Moscow
Russia to liberalise art exports
Parliament may allow exit of works made up to a century ago
On 2 November, two Chambers of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation passed the first reading of a draft law on export and import of works of art.
According to official sources, over the last twenty years the country has already lost nearly 80% of its icons or about 24 million pieces, some of great importance to the national heritage.
Forty well organised criminal groups are said to be smuggling works of art out of Russia.
Sometimes they are better equipped than the police itself and have good connections with the West.
The Russian Ministry of the Interior reports that, in the first six months of this year, 2,211 crimes in that field have been registered and about 10,000 works of art stolen from State museums and private collectors.
No trace has yet been found of the French gallery owner Basmadjian who disappeared or was kidnapped two years ago in the former Soviet Union.
There is, of course, a legal way to get works of art out of Russia, but it is tied up in red tape.
It involves bringing the piece itself before a Committee of State experts; they declare its value and charge 100% Custom fees.
Good contacts among State experts are advisable.
In any case, no piece made before 1945 may be legally exported, nor can any work of art by a deceased artist.
The new draft law both adds teeth and liberalises, Customs officers will have the right to check all luggage including diplomatic bags, the latter in accordance with the Vienna Diplomatic Convention of 1961 signed by the former Soviet Union and recognised by Russia.
On the other hand, only works of art made more than one hundred years ago will carry an export ban.
This means, for example, that some of the Russian Avant-garde might soon be on the international art market.
It goes without saying, however, that not all works of art made since the beginning of this century will be available for export; a list of unexportable items will be drawn up.
Exceptions will be made, of course, for exhibitions abroad, but in such cases sound security conditions will be required.
The existing 100% Custom fees will be abolished, but all those wanting to sell Russian art abroad will have to pay a varying sum to the Federal National Heritage Service for such a permission.
This sum will depend on the quality of the work of art in question.
There is some hopeful news for private collectors.
If they will give the State the part of their collections considered by experts to be an important part of Russia's national heritage, they may get permission to export the remainder.
A precedent for this was years ago when the famous collector of Greek origin, George Kostakis, was allowed to leave the Soviet Union with a considerable part of his collection of Russian Avant-garde after he had given the most interesting pieces to the Tretyakov Gallery (for part of his memoirs, see The Art Newspaper, No. 21, October 1992, pp. 20–22).
At the time a decision was made at the highest political level, with help from the mighty KGB chief Yury Andropov.
The State will also have a kind of right of pre-emption.
The authorities may acquire any work of art that someone wants to export.
In such a case, the State will pay the owner the value he has established himself and presented to the Federal National Heritage Service or Custom Officers.
As an owner will have been interested in keeping the value low so as not to pay a high export premium, the State will be ideally placed to acquire valuable works of art on the cheap.
Nor will the State be forced to pay at once.
Payment can be postponed for a year and it is not clear yet how inflation will be taken into account and whether the price will be paid in roubles or in hard currency.
But if somebody leaves Russia for good, no such delay is foreseen.
It seems inevitable that there will be a lot more red tape in the art market after the final adoption of the draft law.
You will need a document for any kind of transaction because you will have to prove to the authorities legal ownership of each and every work of art.
If, for example, a Russian artist is giving you one of his canvases, you would be wise to ask him to write you a certifying document first.
As to the artists themselves, they will be able to take out of the country an unlimited number of their works unless, of course, they are considered to be an integral part of the national heritage.
At present they can only export five pieces tax-free when they go abroad.
What about a work of art whose origin is uncertain but which you have bought in good faith from a private person or in a State owned shop?
The draft law proposes that such work of art will be considered legally yours after twenty years.
It is clear that it will not be easy to put the new law into effect when it is adopted.
It is not clear either how the authorities will prevent the illicit export of art.
Interestingly, the deputies in parliament showed no particular interest over this law and it was passed in a lukewarm atmosphere with very few votes against it and virtually no abstentions.
Lloyd's loss yields Ming brushwasher for Bonhams
Bonhams are offering a rare Ming brushwasher on 9 December.
Consigned on the instructions of certain Lloyd's underwriters, the object was last at auction at Sotheby's as part of the Edward T. Chow collection in 1981.
Made around 1435, this example is particularly rare due to the unusual motif of two phoenix (emblematic of the Chinese empress) around the sides and in the central base combined with the six mark character of the Emperor on the base and its almost perfect condition.
The present estimate is a fairly confident £300,000–500,000 ($450,000–750,000).
Sotheby's
Panic or planning?
$13.2 million loss raises buyer's premium to 15% to indignation of dealers
In the week that Alfred Taubman, chairman of Sotheby's Holdings Inc., struggled to persuade British fund managers to invest in his chain of American shopping malls, the auction house released its third quarter results.
The dismal figures of a net loss of $7.7 million for the nine months ended September 1992, compared to $5.4 million for the same period last year, and a net loss of $13.2 million for the third quarter with a loss per share of $0.25 (compared to $0.22 per share last third quarter) were almost obscured by the announcement that the company will be raising its buyer's premium from 10% to 15% as from January 1993.
The new rate will be charged on lots realising $50,000 (£30,000) or less and will result in a maximum increase of £1,500 on any one item.
Lots selling for above that figure will be charged at 15% on the first $50,000 and 10% for the remaining amount.
While there is at present no firm indication that Christie's will be following suit, the auction house will have to act quickly if it does decide to raise the rate in order to get the new terms out for the renewed contracts for American consigners which will be issued in the New Year.
Christie's have indicated that they are currently reviewing both seller's commissions and buyer's premium.
Sotheby's fear must be that potential purchasers will turn to Christie's at the lower price level should their competitors decide not to raise their rate for the time being.
Its recent innovation of the so-called Colonnade Sales, aimed at the lower price bracket of £2,500 per lot or less, will inevitably be hit hard.
However, if sales are maintained at the present level the higher rate will generate an extra $18 million of gross earnings.
Among their justifications for the present move, Sotheby's have stated that the average price of a lot sold at Sotheby's is £1,000 which will result in an extra £50 on the bill; that this is the first rise in the buyer's premium since 1975; and that the alternative would have been to close down a number of the company's European offices.
The root causes of the present move —‘an accountant's reaction’— was one comment, are clearly manifold.
Continuing foreign exchange pressure on costs and the shifting of some lower-margin paintings into the third quarter are two factors as well as a low contribution on share value from principal activities.
Current levels of consignment are running below budget with analysts lowering fourth quarter aggregate estimates to $460 down from previous estimates of $500 million and down on last year's figure of $493 million.
Despite the above, the market's view of the company remains positive: ‘the high 5.5% dividend yield, continued commitment by top management to global leadership and…a solid backlog of consignments for 1993’ are all cited as reasons for inspiring confidence on the New York stock market.
In the opinion of Paul Whitfield, Deputy Chairman of Bonham's, the cost structures of a company such as Sotheby's are inappropriate to the present recessionary climate, but dismantling them is impossible without breaking up the company — one possible solution in his opinion.
Theoretically it costs Christie's from around £200 to pass a lot through the sale room, from its arrival at the front desk to its departure at the delivery room (assuming it sold).
Such a figure is based to some extent on notional accounting — an expert's time per hour is, for example, assessed at a much higher rate than he or she is actually paid — but it indicates the profit margins which both houses need to maintain.
Too much competition between the two main houses has resulted in the whittling away of the seller's commission in many transactions and buyers will now be hit in order to restore profit margins.
While Sotheby's has been ‘a cash positive business’ in the boom years, Taubman's financial activities are clearly ‘cash negative’and the possibility that he will pull out of the company altogether cannot be ruled out.
Taubman still owns about $185 million of Sotheby's stock, but this year he sold eight million shares worth about $106 million.
He also consigned three paintings to Sotheby's 17 November New York contemporary sale all of which failed to sell.
The reaction to the raised premium has been comparable to the furore which broke out over the original introduction of buyer's charges in London in 1975.
Much of the reaction has, however, been misinformed or ill-targeted.
Critics range from Charles Lee, a former president of the British Antique Dealers Association who described the move as a ‘smack in the eye’ and castigated Sotheby's for charging 25% to their customers (i.e. 10% from vendors and 15% from buyers).
A statement issued by the London Society for Antique Dealers also criticised the move and quoted the figure of 25%, missing or ignoring the fact that seller's commission is extremely flexible, to the point of being cut out altogether in some cases, hence the reason for imposing the new rate on the buyer's premium, which is non-negotiable.
Privately, however, reaction at the higher end of the trade is positive, with the feeling that potential purchasers will turn back to the dealers for better service at more or less comparable prices.
Paris
Japanese debt dogs leading French auctioneer
Tajan's rue Favart building reported for sale while staff cuts loom
Paris auctioneer Jacques Tajan, partner in France's largest auction company Ader Tajan, is facing further staff redundancies after being forced to take out a mortgage on his FFr40 million premises on rue Favart as security on bank loans.
Tajan and his two associates, brothers Remi and Antoine Ader, have a staff of forty after laying off thirty-two since 1990.
The firm's building, owned jointly by Tajan and his two associates and estimated at FFr80–100 million before the recent slump in Paris property prices, is also reported to be for sale.
Tajan predicted in November that Ader Tajan would make a total of FFr310–330 million in 1992, less than the FFr350 million he had hoped for but enough to cover annual wage costs of FFr13 million.
But Ader Tajan is dogged by a debt of FFr30 million owed them by Japanese real estate investor Narita.
The Osaka-based businessman has never paid for Daum and Galle glassware, nearly 75% of the total of a sale which Tajan held at the Hotel Okura on 20 November 1990.
The sale, complete with satellite link to the Eiffel Tower, made a total of just over FFr42 million.
Mr Narita's acquisitions were seized and are still in storage in Geneva where, thanks to the art market slump, they have lost anything up to 75% of their value.
Their sellers meanwhile still await payment from Tajan.
Tajan hoped to recuperate at least part of the FFr30 million by holding another auction in Tokyo last June (see The Art Newspaper No.16, March 1992, p.18).
The sale was to have comprised both the unpaid for items and pieces from Mr Narita's collection, acquired at a Tajan auction in April 1990 — the Japanese businessman having proved sensitive to Tajan's repeated pleas to make good the difference.
Tajan's bankers, however, vetoed the project.
Last October when Drouot salerooms carried out their regular annual inspection of Ader Tajan's accounts, rumours — quickly denied by Drouot Chairman Joel Millon — began circulating that the company was on the brink of bankruptcy.
Tajan, who at first denied anything was wring at all, said in November he had been obliged to raise FFr15 million to pay the sellers of the Daum and Galle.
But Tajan is contesting the obligation to pay his sellers on the grounds that the objects have not actually changed hands and that the auction took place in Japan and is thus not subject to French legislation.
‘The problem is there is a legal vacuum in Japan.
But the auctioneer is not obliged to pay the sums and the sellers can always sue Mr Narita’, said Tajan.
The auctioneer also suggested the latter might accept reimbursement lower than the bids recorded in 1990 and closer to recent market prices.
In November Tajan told the Daily Telegraph of London he also had FFr15 million owed to him in France — a figure he rectified a week later to ‘between FFr6–8 million’.
Modern British sales
Fine works, uneven bidding
Good prices are paid for Sutherland and Gill; Spencer sells below estimate
The sale of Modern British art at Sotheby's on 4 November included a surprising number of notable works and attracted a large audience.
But it was an occasion for spectators rather than bidders and only two lots exceeded expectations, Eric Gill's fine, if slightly sweet, stone carving, ‘Mother and Child’(lot 20, est. £25,000–35,000), described by the auction house as his most important sculpture to come to the market for ten years and bought by a telephone bidder against the Fine Art Society for £56,000 ($85,680), and Graham Sutherland's boldly coloured ‘Palm Palisade’(lot 88, est. £40,000–60,000) which was acquired by Agnews for £68,000 ($104,040) after competition with private dealers Ivor Braka and underbidder Jamie Maclean.
Two figure compositions by Stanley Spencer made satisfactory money although the results will have disappointed those dealers who were pushing Spencer's market a couple of seasons ago.
An important figure composition, ‘The Temptation of St Anthony’,(lot 79, est. £300,000–500,000) sold to a telephone bidder for £270,000 ($413,100) and Lefevre bought ‘Going to Bed’(lot 80, est. £180–260,000), one of the nine small canvases comprising the ‘Domestic Scenes’ of 1935–36, for £130,000 ($198,900).
The vendor of these two pictures had previously consigned them to Thomas Gibson who had been offering them at considerably higher prices.
A pretty view of St Mark's Cathedral by Sickert (lot 16, est. £30,000–40,000), one of several versions dating from 1901, was bought by Browse and Darby at the low estimate ($45,900), and Marlborough bought Stephen Conroy's ‘Kerngrove’(lot 122, est. £18,000–25,000), a large figure painting shown in his first exhibition in 1989, on behalf of a client.
Proceeds for the sale were £1.36 million ($2.8 million), with sixty-nine of 123 lots finding buyers.
Christie's held its rather less interesting sale of Modern British art on 6 November and earned £585,250 from ninety-six lots.
A further seventy lots failed to sell.
The highest price of £38,000 ($58,140) was paid for ‘On the Road’(lot 16, est. £25,000–35,000), a depiction of horses led through a landscape by Sir Alfred Munnings.
A large watercolour by Edward Burra, ‘The Opening of the Hunting Season’(lot 58, est. £25,000–35,000) sold for £28,000 ($42,840) and John Piper's handsome portrait of Skelton Church (lot 93, est. £25,000–35,000) fetched £23,000 ($35,190).
Rodchenko photo breaks all records
A new world record for a twentieth-century photograph at auction was achieved at Christie's London on 29 October when Alexander Rodchenko's quintessential Constructivist photograph, ‘Girl with Leica’(lot 118) made £105,000 ($163,305) against an estimate of £12,000–16,000.
The price surpassed the previous record of $165,000 for Tina Modotti's ‘Roses’, sold at Sotheby's New York in April 1991.
The photo was one of a group of twenty-eight Rodchenko photographs which were given to the consigner in 1960 by Varvara Rodchenko, the artist's daughter, and which raised £445,648 in total.
They were previously in the collection of the artist and his wife and many have the archive stamp of that collection on the reverse.
A number are signed and titled on the original mounts while the majority are signed and titled on the backs of the prints.
Fine condition and outstanding quality of impression contributed to the desirability of the group which contained a number of seminal images other than the ‘Leica’, such as‘Pioneer, 1931’ and ‘Morning wash, 1935’(lot 120) which made £70,000 (est. £5,000–7,000).
Elsewhere in the sale four ‘vortographs’— formal studies of fractured light produced by an assemblage of mirrors placed between the subject and the lens — by Alvin Langdon Coburn made £268,400 in total, nearly four times their estimate.
In total the Christie's sale sold 92.4% by value, realising £803,088 ($1,261,650), the highest total for a photography sale in London to date.
Christie's and Sotheby's
Fresh flesh in demand from choosy trade
Recycled lots rejected at the London Victorian picture sales
At the Victorian picture sales at Sotheby's on 12 November and Christie's on 13 November, buyers tended to stay away from works which had been on the market in recent years.
This seems to have affected the fate of Frederic, Lord Leighton's ‘Sibyl’, bought-in at £145,000 against an estimate of £180–250,000 at Sotheby's and previously sold at Christie's in 1987 for £250,000; Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema's ‘A Sculptor's Model (Venus Esquilina)’ bought-in at £150,000 against an estimate of £200–300,000 at Christie's, consigned by a Japanese corporation but familiar from the front window of a London gallery within very close proximity of Christie's; and John Roddam Spencer Stanhope's lovely ‘Our Lady of the Water Gate,’bought-in at £55,000 against an estimate of £80–120,000 at Christie's, having previously been offered privately for around £180,000.
The totals for the two sales were: Sotheby's, £1,569,130 ($2,391,354); unsold by value: 30.4%, by lot: 34.8%.
Christie's, £1,138,000 ($1,735,531); unsold by value: 53.6%, by lot: 42%.
In contrast, bidders competed for uncleaned and fresher works such as Lord Leighton's ‘The Antique Juggling Girl’ at Sotheby's bought by a telephone bidder at £400,000 ($600,000)(estimate £400–600,000), and Valentine Cameron Prinsep's evocative ‘Home from Gleaning,’also at Sotheby's which sold to another telephone bidder for £50,000 ($75,000; also healthily estimated at £50–70,000).
Telephone bids (presumably from Italian buyers) rocketed Keeley Halswelle's ‘The Quack Doctor of the Piazza Rotonda, Rome’ from its revised estimate £8–12,000 (originally £5–7,000) to £27,000 ($40,500) to a surprised room at Sotheby's.
The Sotheby's cover lot, Anthony Frederick Augustus Sandys's ‘Portrait of Julia Smith Caldwell’, was apparently judged a pretty, but nonetheless ordinary portrait; it was bought-in at £62,000 (estimate £70–100,000).
Christie's cover lot also failed to sell: Lord Leighton's ‘Moorish Garden: a Dream of Granada’ was left unsold at £340,000 (estimate £400–600,000); questions concerning its condition (what would happen were the wax lining to be removed?) and opinion that it was a work not from his most marketable period seem to have dampened enthusiasm.
Christie's Martin Beisly bid successfully on behalf of a client for Lord Leighton's ‘The Bracelet’, which sold for £380,000 ($570,000) against underbidding by David Mason of MacConnal-Mason on behalf of Andrew Lloyd Webber who gave the final shake of the head at his side.
The pretty but comparatively minor portrait, ‘Mabel, daughter of Charles Galloway, J.P.
in red dress…in an aesthetic interior’ by Edward John Gregory sold at Christie's for an astonishing £30,000 ($45,000; estimated quite rightly at £10–15,000) to David Mason.
New York nineteenth-century sales
Masterpiece by Giuseppe de Nittis fetches $715,000
Overall results flat, with better success rate at Christie's due to realistic estimating
The rather flat results of the autumn sales of nineteenth-century paintings in New York indicated that the market remains somewhat thin, although, as usual, good pictures, attractively priced, nearly always sell, if not for the frequently high estimates given them by the auction houses.
Sotheby's on 29 October featured a brace of Bouguereaus, of which the best was ‘Le Coquillage’, of a mother placing a shell to the ear of her winsome blonde daughter.
Estimated high at $500–600,000 it sold at the desk for $480,000 (£320,000), still a very strong price today for this artist.
Conversely, the artist's large ‘Allegory of Honesty’, of a laurel-crowned female nude clutching a staff and two serpents and holding a hand-mirror aloft (est. $250–350,000) had not the same appeal, and failed at $200,000 (£133,333).
German genre subjects have been flat for the past few seasons, so it was a pleasant surprise that Franz von Defregger's ‘Tyrolean zither player’(est. $70–90,00) sold for $105,000 (£70,000).
In a similar vein was Isidor Kaufmann's ‘Discussing the Talmud’(est. $150–200,000), sold to an Hasidic bidder for $160,000 (£106,666).
Biggest disappointment was ‘The end of the story’, a fine Albert Moore which, while amply demonstrating his brilliance as a colourist, was done in by its overcleaned state and high reserve (est. $500-$700,000): all bidding, such as it was, stopped at $375,000 (£250,000).
Christie's sale had a higher number of successes as well as the most expensive lot, Giuseppe de Nittis excellent ‘At the races’, a work much influenced by the artist's friend Degas.
Estimated at $500–700,000, it sold to a Citibank client for $715,000 (£476,666).
Another work by a friend of Degas, Leon Bonnat's ‘Arab plucking a thorn from his foot’, was one of the day's most astute purchases.
These works are seldom seen on the market, and Christie's canvas, not blistered by bitumen as are a number of Bonnat's works in this vein, was particularly fine.
For all that it sold for $46,200 (£30,800)(est. $30–50,000).
Furniture sales
Carpets star in New York: Monaco promises better
Continental furniture holding up with big names offered this month
Following the outstanding results for continental furniture achieved in London and New York last season, Christie's produced a confident catalogue for their 4 November New York sale with a few outstanding lots, most of which sold, although only just.
Overall, 71% of the sale sold by lot and 77% by value, totalling $3,944,476.
A pair of Louis XIV pedestals attributed to André-Charles Boulle of small size and probably designed to display vases or busts, sold for $200,000 (£127,759) against an estimate of $300,000–500,000.
A pair of ‘Boulle’ marquetry meubles à hauteur d'appui of around 1780 attributed to Etienne Levasseur of  Phillip-Claude Montigny made the same amount against an estimate of $250,000–350,000.
The cabinets are closely related to a pair in the Getty Museum and were in the collection of Baron Alphonse de Rothschild at the Schloss Schilldersdorf, Silesia, earlier this century.
Most successful in the sale were two fine early nineteenth-century Savonnerie carpets (lots 227 and 228) which sold well above estimates for $200,000 and $230,000 respectively (£127,759; £146,902).
Among the more significant failures were a Louis XIV ormolu-mounted ivory-inlaid fruitwood and marquetry bureau plat of around 1690, unsold against an estimate of $250,000–350,000.
On 4 December Sotheby's is offering French furniture from one of the last old style tenues on the Cote d'Azur.
Villa Eilenroc was the property of Helene Beaumont (1895–1988).
Six years before she died she presented it to the Municipality of Antibes; now pieces she and her husband acquired in the Twenties, particularly from the 1923 sale of the Anthony de Rothschild collection at Aston Clinton, are coming up.
They include a bureau full of automated parts by Riesner, a painted secretaire a abattant by Rene Dubois (est.
FFr3.5 to 4 million); a Weisweiler bureau decorated with gouaches under glass and a small Louis XVI marquetry table stamped RVLC (est.
FFr1.5–2 million).
From the 1925 Rothschild London sale came a porcelain-mounted table again stamped RVLC (est.
FFr 3–4 million) and a Weisweiler bureau plat (est.
FFr3.5 to 4 million).
On 5 December Christie's Monaco will be offering an important private collection of French furniture estimated to realise about £3.5 million in total.
The sale includes an ebony console desserte attributed to Weisweiler (est.
FFr 1.5–2.5 million), a boulle marquetry longcase clock by Bernard I Vanrisamburgh (est.
FFr 2–3 million) and a Louis XIV eight-light chandelier from a design by Boulle, sold in the Hamilton Place sale at Christie's in 1882 (est.
FFr3–5 million).
A Leleu kingwood secretaire a abattant is estimated at FFr 2.5–3.5 million (£290,000–400,000), while a Louis XV clock with a rhinoceros by the celebrated bronzier Jean-Joseph de Saint Germain is estimated at FFr600,000–800,000 (£70,000–90,000).
Matisse: man of the match?
You've seen the show — now buy a picture.
The enormous success of the Matisse show currently at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, has coincided if not resulted in a large number of works appearing this season.
In New York alone Christie's and Sotheby's between them have mustered eleven oil paintings, thirteen drawings, two bronzes, seventeen prints, six illustrated books, two watercolours and a collage.
Of the oils, four are currently on loan to MoMA including ‘L'Asie’ from the collection of the Mollie Parnis Livingston, which made $10 million at Sotheby's on 10 November (bought by the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth) and ‘Harmonie jaune’which achieved a new world record for a work by the artist at Christie's on 11 November, selling for $13.2 million against an estimate of $5–7 million.
The market for top quality works by Matisse has not been subject to speculative buying, according to David Nash, head of Sotheby's New York Impressionist Department.
Lower priced drawings and prints, however, have been subject to a drop in prices in line with the general trends in the modern market.
According to Mr Nash the comparative rarity of paintings by Matisse at auction compared to other classic modern artists is dictated by the distribution of his pictures throughout his lifetime with large numbers now in museums.
At the end of the day, however, many of the works remained unsold.
Dealers & Galleries
The newly agreed EEC Regulation and Directive on art exports
More or less hassle?
EEC and British financial  thresholds 
A Regulation is the most weighty legislative instrument in the European Economic Community.
It is binding in its entirety and applicable simultaneously in all member States, and has been used mostly in the nationally sensitive area of agricultural policy.
The Regulation governing another sensitive area, the export of ‘cultural goods’ from the EEC, was finally agreed in Brussels, along with the Directive (see pp. 1–2), by the Council of Ministers for the internal market, on 10 November.
It does not replace each nation's own system for the control of the export of ‘national treausres’ from its respective boundaries, but runs parallel with it, only affecting goods being exported from the EEC, not between member States.
It applies to all goods in the categories listed in the box, irrespective of the time they have been in a country.
The licence will be issued by the State in which the good is ‘lawfully and definitively located on 1 January 1993’.
The Regulation enters into force on 1 January 1993 or as soon as it is approved by the European Parliament, which should be the end of March.
Silver spoons at Bourdon-Smith
London silver dealers J. H. Bourdon-Smith in Mason's Yard, are holding an exhibition of around 140 West Country silver spoons from 9 to 11 December.
The show is timed to coincide with the launch of a new book on the subject, West Country Silver Spoons and their Makers 1550 to 1750 by Timothy Kent, published by Bourdon-Smith.
Mr Kent, a liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths and past chairman of the Silver Society, has previously written London Silver Spoons and their Makers 1500–1697.
The present book is the fruit of twenty years' research and is an exhaustive catalogue of the families of silver makers who produced  commemorative spoons for generations of prosperous West Country yeomen and their families, above all for births and christenings.
The book discusses the influence of continental ornament on the patterning on the spoons and in one delightful case suggests the influence of a ship's figurehead on the form of a mermaid which terminates a spoon by the Quick family, whose workshop was sited on the quay at Barnstaple.
Former Spink's staff open New Oriental Gallery to deal in Chinese and Japanese art
After twenty-three years at Spink and Son, Roger Keverne has joined forces with fellow member of that firm's Chinese department, Ben Janssens, to open a new oriental gallery in central London.
Joining him will be Gerard Hawthorn, formerly a director of London oriental dealers Sydney L. Moss.
The New Oriental Gallery is located at 4 Davies Street and will be holding its first exhibition from 9 December.
The 127 items in the show are intended to show the gallery's extremely wide range of stock, and corresponding price range.
Included will be a magnificent Shang dynasty, bronze food vessel, a range of cloisonné pieces, a pair of Ming dynasty armchairs, and group of blue and white porcelain including a transitional Ming/Qing brushpot.
One of the more unusual pieces is a late Ming amorous couple in ivory, around 4 inches long.
Such erotic pieces are frequently mentioned in the literature but this may be a unique survivor.
The exhibition will also contain a small group of Japanese pieces, including a six-fold Edo period paper screen decorated with eagles.
Cologne
Art Cologne vs the Unfair a.k.a. the Funfair
Positive reports from both contemporary art fairs with success for new artists on show
This year, as in 1991, the heart of Art Cologne (from 12–18 November) was Hall 5, in which were concentrated approximately 140 galleries.
From an aesthetic perspective, the booths which successfully overcame the white-carpeted department-store ambience were those which staged one-man shows, or accrochages sharply focused upon a few artists, such as Galerie Jule Kewenig of Cologne with Peter Wutherich's ‘Literary Watercolour’(1992), a beautiful, ovoid configuration of books, with titles and spines facing downwards and inwards, in shades of turquoise, green, blue and violet and Sophia Ungers, of Cologne with eight works by painter Stefan Mattes.
Dacic, who specialises in Eastern European artists such as Braco Dimitrijevic and Georg Ettle noted with satisfaction that her audience at the fair continued to be ‘insiders’, intensive collectors from Belgium, England and the Netherlands.
From discussions with dealers, the central topic was the continuing importance of the fair as a forum for exposing new or foreign artists and for making contacts with collectors and curators, even if gallerists did not reap immediate sales from the latter.
By the fourth day, the tentative consensus was that small, cheap works (those under DM1000) were selling well, but that collectors — European, with a conspicuous absence of Americans — were taking their time over heftier purchases, and that the true bottom line would emerge after four to six weeks.
Laure Genillard said simply, ‘It's one of the greatest fairs there has been’; Jane Lingwood, of Frith Street Gallery had also made many sales.
Anthony Reynolds, a fifth-year veteran, was less sanguine, remarking upon what amounted to discrimination against foreign dealers by the Bundesverband, who allow selected German galleries ‘red-dot booths’— free, extra space financed by the state, in which gallerists can show younger, unknown artists.
A newcomer at the fair was Simon Lee of Gimpel Fils, who, while hesitant about sales at this early stage, had already accepted European exhibitions for two of the gallery's younger artists, and had had a piece requested for a public exhibition in Potsdam.
‘I've come to use the fair as promotion, and I think everyone is returning to this idea after the end of the bonanza period.’
At the Unfair (11–15 November), nicknamed the ‘Funfair’,(a break-away group of twenty European and American dealers intent upon showing young, established artists in a rough factory building across the Rhein in Ehrenfeld) the atmosphere was without question exponentially more energetic, communicative and chaotic than that of its progenitor.
Cologne gallerist Christian Nagel (expelled from Art Cologne for refusing to label his installation last year) effused that ‘one visitor at the Unfair was worth ten at Art Cologne.
It's a very well educated audience: critics, artists, collectors and dealers, a veritable stock-exchange for information on art.’
Karsten Schubert, who would have been eligible for Art Cologne this year, chose to ‘start something new, very rough, to which you could invite the people you really admire’.
All participants claimed to have sold well; of special note were Aurel Scheibler of Cologne (showing English artist Simon Crabtree and American Dan Asher), Jay Jopling of London (with a one-man show of Damien Hirst) and Nordanstad-Skarstedt of New York (with Korean Michael Joo's pink styrofoam meditations on ethnicity and Rachel Berwick's moths dipped in amber).
Paris
More visitors fewer buyers
Small works and small prices
A 15% rise in attendance — 150,000 visitors in all — proved meagre consolation for the 162 dealers present at this year's 19th annual FIAC (Foire Internationale d'Art Contemporain) in the Grand Palais from 24 October to 1 November.
They did business for a declared total of FFr100 million — only half last year's already poor performance and the same as that of 1987, the first year figures were kept.
The FIAC brought together galleries from fourteen countries representing some 700 artists and proved to be ‘a fair of small works and small prices’ as Andree Sfeir-Semler from Kiel in Germany said.
Prices were down by around 50% by comparison to two years ago in the hope of moving stock: Willy d'Huysser from Belgium, for example, with a very fine choice of works, offered a Jannis Kounellis sculpture of 1976 for FFr850,000 which he had failed to sell at the Salon de Mars in Paris last year for FFr1.2 million.
Clients were almost exclusively European and predominantly French and Belgian.
While most dealers were relieved if they covered costs a few, such as Leslie Waddington from London, did a comfortable amount of business.
Andrew Kalman of Crane Kalman of London was immensely relieved just to be out of Britain, commenting ‘It's dire.
If there were an art fair in Gambia it would bring more business than London.’
Austrian artist Herman Nitsch who staged a happening at the first ever FIAC in 1973 involving beef carcasses, was trying to épater les bourgeois again this year with ‘Altar’ made of blood-stained stretchers at Galerie Krinzinger from Vienna.
But most buyers shunned difficult or contentious works to seek refuge in the more accessible and socially acceptable: Claude Bernard of Paris, for example, sold all but one of his large, figurative and totally undemanding oil paintings of forests by Nicaraguan artist Armando Morales at prices between FFr500,000 and FFr900,000.
Italy, this year's guest of honour, was represented by twenty-five galleries.
A sculpture entitled ‘Esposizione Universale’ by Giulio Paolini, whose work was present on no fewer than eleven stands inside, stood outside the entrance to the Grand Palais.
It was good to see lesser known artists being championed again after years of witnessing a FIAC dominated by secondary sale galleries trading high priced, big name classics.
Aline Vidal of Paris showed drawings and sculptures by Frenchman Jean-Marc Andrieu at FFr5–50,000 alongside recent photomontages by the German Edmund Kuppel at FFr25–50,000.
Jennifer Flay, a New Zealand dealer who recently set up in Paris's arty Marais district of Paris represented work by a stable comprising Felix Gonzalez-Torres, Liz Larner, Christian Marclay and Matthew McCaslin.
Philippe Perrin, a tricksy and extremely clever artist-cum-poet who also operates under the nom de guerre of Starkiller attracted a lot of attention at the gallery Air de Paris from Nice with six sketches of Sarajevo under bombardment painted in blood.
Priced FFr4,000, they all sold.
London
Where did Britain's national treasures end up last year?
Jonathan Scott, Chairman of the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art has produced another of his elegantly written reports on how successful or otherwise Britain has been at retaining its preeminent works of art: the tally, eighteen out of forty-four retained — that is, a public institution or, in the case of the Delander stick barometer, a private citizen, has matched the price at which the item was being exported.
Note, however, among the failures all the really expensive works: Titian's ‘Venus and Adonis’(£7,599,000); Taddeo Gaddi's ‘Bromley Davenport Altarpiece’(£2,011,500); the Fiedler commode (£2,171,912) and so on.
Now that the national museums no longer have their purchase grants awarded separately from grant in aid for running costs, they fear that those will be further whittled away and they will be even less capable of competing for major masterpieces.
An interesting insight into the reality of the art market is given by the appearance of Italian names beside the U.S. exporters more traditionally on the list.
They all appear, however, to reside in Switzerland, due to the unfavourable nature of Italian laws regarding the import and ownership of works of art.
(•denotes retained.
The Waverley criteria are:(1) Is the item of outstanding importance to the history of Britain;(2) is it of outstanding artistic merit;(3) is it of outstanding importance to the study of that subject?)
Items considered by the U.K. Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art June 1991-June 1992
Taddeo Gaddi ‘The Bromley Davenport Altarpiece; the Man of Sorrows flanked by angels and saints’, tempera on panel, 1325.
Stopped for three months under all three Waverley criteria.
Exported by Christie's to Contaloc SA, Breganzona, Switzerland, at £2,011,500.
Workshop of Guido Di Merlino, maiolica dish, c. 1542.
Stopped for three months under third Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to Mr Paolo Sprovieri, Zurich, Switzerland, at £189,975.
The Orders and Medals of Sir Thomas Foley (1757–1833).
Considered under first Waverley criterion but not stopped.
Exported by Glendinning and Co. to Mr G. Pingle, Chicago, USA, at £41,350.
Gilt bronze mount, Irish, eighth-ninth century AD.
Considered under third Waverley criterion but not stopped.
Exported by Robin Symes to USA (name of purchaser withheld from Report) at £61,426.50.
•Inlaid bronze hexagonal box with millefiori enamel, Romano-Celtic, second-third century AD.
Stopped under the third Waverley criterion for three months.
Application was by Robin Symes exporting to a purchaser in Switzerland (name of purchaser withheld from Report) at £33,525.
Acquired by the British Museum.
‘The Clarence Hours’, Book of Hours, c. 1421–30.
Stopped for two months under third Waverley criterion.
Exported by Sam Fogg Rare Books Ltd to Frau R. König, Duisburg, Germany, at £510,000.
•Ferdinand Barbedienne, mirror, silvered bronze, French, 1867.
Stopped for four months under third Waverley criterion.
Application by Gander and White Shipping Ltd exporting to Musee d'Orsay, Paris, at £110,000.
Acquired by the Bowes Museum, Co.
Durham.
Sebastiano del Piombo,’ Pope Clement VII’, oil on slate, c. 1532.
Stopped for two months under second Waverley criterion.
Exported by Thos Agnew & Sons Ltd to the Getty Museum at £6,470,000.
•‘The Middleham Ring’, gold, fourteenth-fifteenth century AD.
Stopped for four months under first Waverley criterion.
Application by S.J. Phillips Ltd exporting to the Woodbridge Company Ltd, at £45,980.
Acquired by the Yorkshire Museum.
Francesco Monti, Pietro Paltronieri and Nunzio Ferraiuoli, ‘The allegorical tomb of William Cadogan’ and ‘The allegorical tomb of Sydney Godolphin’.
Oil on canvas, 1727.
Stopped for two months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Matthiesen Gallery to Mr M. Galleano, Lugano, Switzerland, at £450,000.
•Thirty-six pieces from a silver-gilt dinner service designed by Robert Adam, 1773–74.
Stopped for four months under third Waverley criterion.
Application by Asprey plc exporting to a US purchaser (name withheld from the Report) at £275,000.
Acquired by the National Museum of Wales.
Johann Gottlieb Fiedler, commode, ormolu-mounted and parquetry, c. 1785.
Stopped for two months under second Waverley criterion.
Exported by Bernheimer Fine Arts Ltd to the Stiftung Schlosser und Garten, Potsdam, Germany, at £2,171,912.
Attributed to Thomas Chippendale, commode, mahogany, 1766.
Stopped for two months under second Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to US purchaser (name withheld from Report) at £949,875.
William and John Linnell, pair of black and gilt-japanned armchairs, c. 1735.
Stopped for two months under second and third Waverley criteria.
Exported by Christie's to a US purchaser (name withheld from the Report) for £167,625.
Titian, ‘Venus and Adonis’, oil on canvas, c.1555.
Stopped for two months under second Waverley criterion.
Exported by Hazlitt Gooden and Fox Ltd to the Herman Shickman Gallery, New York (acting for the Getty Museum) at £7,599,000.
Christopher Dresser, album of twenty-one pages of designs, 1870.
Stopped for three months under third Waverley criterion.
The exporter, the Fine Art Society plc, was asked to produce documentary evidence of the agreed sale price of £45,000.
The album was withdrawn and dismembered.
The application for an export licence was withdrawn as each leaf was now worth less than the limit of £35,000, beyond which an export licence is required.
The leaves have since been acquired by the Metropolitan Museum, New York.
Attributed to Cesare del Palagio, ‘Venus Anadyomene’, bronze fountain figure, c. 1573–79.
Considered under third Waverley criterion but not stopped.
Exported by Christies to the National Gallery, Washington, at £585,000.
•Daniel Delander, stick barometer, ebony and silver-mounted, c. 1720.
Stopped for two months under second and third Waverley criteria.
Application by Asprey plc exporting to Mr S.J. Gerstenfeld, Washington DC, at £275,000.
Acquired by an individual in the UK (name withheld from the Report).
•Henry Jenkins, astronomical and musical pedestal clock, mahogany, 1778.
Stopped for three months under third Waverley criterion.
Application by Sotheby's exporting to Herr O. Berther, Erlanbach, Switzerland, at £122,925.
Acquired by the British Museum.
•Pirro Ligorio, design for a title-page border, from Cassiano del Pozzo's Museum Cartaceum, c. 1550.
Stopped for three months under second and third Waverley criteria.
Hazlitt Gooden and Fox, exporting to the dealer/collector Lodewijk Houthakker, Amsterdam, at £55,000, were asked to produce evidence of the sale price.
The application was withdrawn and the drawing then acquired by the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, at £55,000.
Ben Nicholson, ‘Collage with Spanish postcard’, oil on paper collage, 1933.
Stopped for three months under third Waverley criterion.
Exported by Deborah Gage (Works of Art) Ltd to the Aichi Prefectural Museum, Nakaku, Nagoya, at £275,000.
Antonello da Messina, ‘Christ at the Column’, oil on panel, c.1475–79.
Stopped for two months under second Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to the Louvre at £4,250,000.
Sir Thomas Lawrence, ‘Portrait of Mrs Ayscoghe Boucherett and other’, pastel on paper, 1794.
Stopped for three months under second and third Waverley criteria.
Application by Christie's exporting to Mr T. Clode, Jersey, Channel Island, at £83,812.
Deferral period unexpired.
•Nicholas Poussin, ‘A view of the Tiber valley’, drawing from Holkham Collection, mid 17th century.
Stopped for three months under all three Waverley criteria.
Application by Christie's exporting to the dealer Jan Krugier, Geneva, Switzerland, at £156,450.
Acquired by the Ashmolean Museum.
Nicholas Poussin, ‘A wooden landscape with River god’, drawing from Holkham Collection, mid-seventeenth century.
Stopped under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to Mr J.B. Davidson, Chicago, at £134,000.
•Guercino, ‘A reclining nude lifting a curtain’ drawing from Holkham Collection, c. 1630.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Application by Christie's exporting to Lino Bianchi, Geneva, at £106,162.
Acquired by the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool.
Guercino, ‘Landscape with castle’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1640.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to Mr D. Tobey, New York, at £61,462.
•Il Baciccio, ‘The sacrifice of Isaac’ drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1685–90.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Application by Christie's exporting to Miss A. Searle Bent, at £111,750.
Acquired by the National Galleries of Scotland.
Francesco Vanni, ‘Two women and a baby’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, late sixteenth century.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to Mr E. Scheinberg, New York, at £78,225.
•Ciro Ferri/Pietro da Cortona, ‘Allegory of the labours of Hercules’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1655.
Stopped for three months under first and third Waverley criteria.
Application by Christie's exporting to Mr E. Scheinberg, New York, at £35,670.
Acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge.
•Gian Lorenzo Bernini, ‘Design for a tomb slab of Cardinal Carlo Emmanuele Pio da Carpi’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1650.
Stopped for three months under first and third Waverley criteria.
Application by Christie's for export to C. Cuellar, Zurich, at £40,230.
Acquired by the National Galleries of Scotland.
•Salvator Rosa, ‘A philosopher pointing to the ground’ drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1625.
Stopped for three  months under first Waverley criterion.
Application by Christie's exporting to Dr J.O'Brien, Connecticut, at £50,287.
Acquired by the Fitzwilliam Museum.
Jan Cossiers, ‘Head of boy’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1650.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to Mr C. Boerner, Dusseldorf, at £44,700.
•Jusepe de Ribera, ‘The adoration of the shepherds’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1640.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Application by Christie's exporting to Mr A. Gernsheim Jutta, Aubonne, Switzerland, at £83,812.
Acquired by the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool.
Veronese, ‘Allegorical female figure’, drawing from Holkham Collection, late sixteenth century.
Stopped for two months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Christie's to National Museum, of Stockholm, at £38,000.
Pietro da Cortona, ‘Christ on the cross with the Virgin Mary and saints’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c.1650.
Stopped for two months under first and second Waverley criteria.
Exported by Christie's to the Getty Museum at £245,500.
Guido Reni, ‘Head of a woman’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1620–30.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Hazlitt Gooden and Fox to the Metropolitan Museum at £145,275.
•Pietro da Cortona, ‘St Ivo intervening on behalf of the poor’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1660.
Stopped for three months under first and second Waverley criteria.
Application by Hazlitt Gooden and Fox exporting to the Metropolitan Museum at £72,637.
Acquired by the National Galleries of Scotland.
•Pietro da Cortona, ‘Landscape’, drawing from the Holkham Collection., c. 1650.
Stopped under first and second Waverley criteria.
Application by Hazlitt Gooden and Fox exporting to the Metropolitan Museum, at £268,200.
Acquired by the Barber Institute of Fine Arts and Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery.
Attributed to Giovanni da Udine, ‘A squirrel’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, early sixteenth century.
Stopped under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Hazlitt Gooden and Fox to the publisher Leonardo Mondadori, Geneva, at £85,000.
Il Salviati, ‘St George and the dragon’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, mid-sixteenth century.
Stopped for three months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by David Carritt Ltd to the Cleveland Museum of Art at £104,975.
Frans Snyders, ‘A wild boar at bay’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1620.
Stopped for two months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by David Carritt Ltd to the dealer E.V.
Thaw and Co.
Inc., New York, at £64,700.
•Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione, ‘Head of an oriental’, monotype from the Holkham Collection, c. 1640.
Stopped under all three Waverley criteria.
Application by T. Rogers & Co.
(Packers) Ltd exporting to E.V.
Thaw & Co.
Inc., New York, at £201,150.
Acquired by the Victoria and Albert Museum.
•Pietro da Cortona, ‘Landscape’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, c. 1650.
Stopped for three months under the first and second Waverley criteria.
Application by T. Rogers & Co.
(Packers) for export to E.V.
Thaw and Co.
Inc., New York, at £72,637.
The British Museum's offer to buy the drawing was not accepted.
An export license has therefore been refused.
Pierre Cornelisz Kunst, ‘The seven acts of mercy: ransoming prisoners’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, 1532.
Stopped for two months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Richard Day Ltd to the Getty Museum for £40,650.
Valerio Castello, ‘The agony in the garden’, drawing from the Holkham Collection, early seventeenth century.
Stopped for two months under first Waverley criterion.
Exported by Richard Day Ltd to the Getty Museum at £52,300.
London Print Fair from 25 to 28 February
The eighth London Original Print Fair will take place from 25 to 28 February 1993 at the Royal Academy of Arts, London.
As last year, proceeds from the opening reception will go to the Print Fund, administered by the National Art Collections Fund which provides museums with a new source of grants for purchasing original prints.
Last year over 6,000 visitors attended the fair, an increase of 20% on the previous year.
World of Watercolours dates
The 1993 World of Drawings and Watercolours Fair will be held from 20 to 24 January at the Park Lane Hotel, Piccadilly and will include 2,000 works on paper.
Now in its eighth year, the fair will comprise around fifty exhibitors, showing works from the sixteenth century to the present.
This year's fair will neatly coincide with an exhibition at the Royal Academy on ‘The Great Age of British Watercolours:1750–1880’(15 January to 11 April).
Hanging gardens at the Louvre
This year's exhibition at the Louvre des Antiquaires is on the theme of private collections and includes Japanese fans, Russian boxes, feathers, walking sticks, eighteenth-century silver from Toulouse, nineteenth- and twentieth-century animal sculpture and more.
The Palais Royal courtyard entrance has been transformed by interior decorator Henri Garelli with pillars, chandeliers and hanging gardens.
‘Private collections of the Louvre des Antiquaires’ runs until 14 February, Tuesday to Saturday.
Eskenazi shows Dubosc Collection lacquer
Eskenazi, the leading London oriental dealers, are holding an exhibition of twenty-one pieces of Chinese lacquer from the collection of the art historian and connoisseur, the late Jean-Pierre Dubosc.
Dubosc's contribution to the field of Chinese studies included the 1954 exhibition in Venice which commemorated the 700th anniversary of Marco Polo's visit to China.
Many of the pieces were purchased by Dubosc in Japan where he lived for the latter part of his life and much of his collection is now in the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.
Among the items at Eskenazi are seven rare, early Song dynasty pieces (960–1279AD) including a small red lacquer dish modelled in the shape of a mallow flower.
Later, more highly decorated objects include a Yuan dynasty (1279–1368) black dish with mother-of-pearl inlay and two trays with gold-painted decoration known as miaojin.
The accompanying catalogue is introduced by Regina Khrahl, curator of the Barlow Collection, University of Sussex.
The exhibition, in Foxglove House, 166 Piccadilly, runs from 8 to 22 December.
When the going gets tough…
The Contemporary Art Society's idea of shopping for art at low prices and in an informal environment, has proved a great success over the past nine years.
Sponsored by Sainsbury's supermarket chain, this year's event at Smith's Galleries in Covent Garden from 26 October offered 508 works sold over a six-day period, raising £241,248.
Attendance was considerably higher than in previous years, with over 1,000 visitors per day.
Unlike previous years the majority of sales were at the cheapest end of the price range, between £100 and £500 with works at the top price of £1,750 harder to shift.
Thirty per cent of the total raised is put towards the Contemporary Art Society's museum purchasing fund.
The Society will be staging a ‘mini-market’ at ART93, the London Contemporary Art Fair, to be held from 21 to 24 January 1993 at the Business Design Centre, Islington.
When art fails, you can always turn to healing and personal development
Former marketing and promotions assistant to the now defunct David Messum Gallery, Michael Roosen has launched himself with considerable energy into the business of ‘Healing, Personal Development, and Stress Management as well as Visual Arts promotion’.
Passing swiftly over the visual arts bit — a series of paintings of living artists by Zsuzsi Roboz suggestive of nothing so much as chalk drawings on the pavements of Charing Cross Road — Mr Roosen is also offering ‘complementary and holistic programmes for use in the private and corporate sectors worldwide’.
Demonstrating his approach, Mr Roosen advises: ‘One scenario…is to focus thought on an ‘Open Door’ through which lies opportunity, growth and well-being’.
Let's hope some better art lies there too.
Around the galleries
LONDON
Five years for Francis Graham Dixon
Gilbert & George fill three galleries at D'Offay
‘The New Democratic Pictures’ is a series of new photopieces created by Gilbert & George.
A selection was previewed at Denmark's Aarhus Kunstmuseum in September and now nearly thirty works from the series are being shown at Anthony d'Offay (to 29 January 1993).
Detractors of Gilbert & George will find their usual ammunition but the series is the artists' most arresting set of images since ‘The Believing World’ of 1984.
Scenes of peace and meditation, enacted in a cemetery, alternate with chaos and consternation.
For some of the pictures, Gilbert & George have stripped to their underwear or appear completely naked, a development in step with contemporary art's current preoccupation with the body.
‘The Cosmological Pictures’, which have been winding through West and East European cities for more than a year, arrive at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, at the end of next month, and Gilbert & George will be pioneering in China with exhibitions in Shanghai and Peking next autumn.
The underlying theme of ‘The New Democratic Pictures’ may be the madness of modern life countered by the resolve of inner strength and it is the subject explored at Pomeroy Purdy in an exhibition titled ‘Heaven and Hell’and curated by Alistair Hicks, editor of Antique and New Art (to 19 December).
He has selected ten artists to illustrate his thesis in which he ponders whether art might have replaced religion as a vehicle for modern spiritual thought.
They include Paula Rego, represented by ‘Paradise’, an important picture of 1985, Ken Kiff with ‘Indian Goddess’, a large and violent image of 1982–83, RB Kitaj represented by one of his invented portraits in his ‘Bad Character’ series, and canvases by Gillian Ayres, Hughie O'Donoghue and Arturo de Stefano.
Paula Rego's new work, twenty-eight watercolours which are illustrations to children's stories, are showing at Marlborough (2 December-30 January 1993).
They extend her ‘Nursery Rhymes’, seen at the gallery in 1989, and include a large and ambitious series, recently completed in Portugal, of ‘The Ferry Girl’, a tale of the artist's own invention.
A portfolio of fifteen coloured etchings, created for The Folio Society's new edition of J.M. Barrie's ‘Peter Pan’ by Rego and printed by Paul Coldwell at Culford Press, has been published by Marlborough Graphics.
John McEwen's monograph (Phaidon Press, £29.95), surveying Rego's entire career and including an interview with the artist, was published a couple of months ago.
Former Marlborough staff member, Laurent Delaye, has opened a new space for showing contemporary art at 398 Coldharbour Lane, Brixton (by appointment 071–737–2798) and launches the venture with an exhibition of new figurative paintings by Simon English (to 19 December).
At Lisson, there is an exhibition of new sculpture by Tony Cragg (4 December-16 January) from whose studio in Wuppertal has issued an extraordinary stream of work in the last few years.
A summer exhibition of nearly twenty recent works, seen at Glasgow's Tramway and the Centre for Contemporary Art, demonstrated the range and variety of his vision and materials.
On that occasion, Richard Dorment, a critic not noted for exaggeration, described him in The Daily Telegraph as the most inventive sculptor since Picasso, and this new exhibition promises to be one of the season's notable achievements.
Karsten Schubert and Richard Salmon are showing a selection of oil paintings from Derek Jarman's ‘Queer’ series (24 November-22 December).
Previewed at the Manchester City Art Gallery in the spring, they are highly charged works bluntly tackling the issues of AIDS and the usually hysterical reaction which it engenders in the popular press.
As his angry response to such blatant prejudice, Jarman scratches his own message into thick paint dragged over the sensational tabloid headlines which he has silkscreened onto his canvases.
It is a powerful body of work and draws upon his own experiences with frank truthfulness.
Francis Graham Dixon has been operating his gallery in Clerkenwell for five years.
During that time, he has pursued his own path, favouring lyrical abstraction at the expense of changing fashion.
He marks this anniversary with an exhibition of works on paper by twenty gallery artists (to 20 December) including Sandra Blow, Jennifer Durrant, Sheila Girling, John McLean, Mali Morris and Jules Olitski.
Willard Boepple contributes an abstract sculpture, and Charles Quick, former artist-in-residence at Leeds City Art Gallery, has devised an exterior light sculpture, a minimalist Christmas decoration in the form of a vertical line of floodlights activated in a sequence by pedestrian traffic passing beneath it.
Quietly and surprisingly, Thomas Gibson, the leading dealer in Giacometti and the modern masters, has been redirecting his gallery towards contemporary art.
He has opened an exhibition of twenty works on paper, executed in inks, coloured crayons and pastel, by Glenn Baxter (to 22 January 1993), the surreal  humorist , formerly represented by Nigel Greenwood, who derives his style and characters from the illustrations of boys' adventure books.
Craigie Aitchison, another artist who has joined Gibson's gallery, is making the decorations for the Tate Gallery's Christmas Tree (10 December-6 January 1993).
Simon Salama-Caro is showing floor paintings and sculpture by leading Korean master, Kang-So Lee (to 9 January 1993), timed to coincide with the opening of the Samsung Gallery of Korean Art at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Julia Ernst, appointed manager at the beginning of the year, has left the gallery.
The following exhibitions were discussed in last month's issue and are recommended to readers: Sean Scully's convincing demonstration of abstract art at Waddington (to 23 December), the new graphic works of Roy Lichtenstein at Mayor (to 23 December), theatre paintings by Sickert at Browse and Darby (to 23 December), Bernard Jacobson's handsome selection of paintings by Stanley Spencer (to 5 December), with Spencer's drawings at Dover Street Gallery (to 18 December), and a fine installation of Grenville Davey's sculpture at Chisenhale (to 13 December).
PARIS
Corsets and maps at Anne de Villepoix
Philippe Perrin's parodies at Montaigne
Philippe Perrin, an artist whose activity also embraces writing, music and film-making, is one of the most controversial figures on the contemporary French scene.
Critics are divided in their judgement of his provocative and systematic use of parody, which goes beyond the anecdotal, distorting accepted aesthetic codes and reinterpreting minimalist and conceptualist forms.
In ‘That's all…my friends’, at the Montaigne gallery until 15 December, the young French artist has created a setting full of allusions to artists such as Courbet, Millet, Man Ray, Duchamp, Marinetti, Klein, Warhol, Raysse and Cesar.
Until Christmas Eve, Vidal-Saint-Phalle is featuring William MacKendree and his latest black and white fantasies.
Meanwhile, until 15 December, Area is exhibiting standing women by Serge Plagnol, sun-drenched silhouettes virtually cut from a thick layer of paint.
Sculptors' drawings — by Eberhard Bosslet, Robin Collyer, Donald Judd, Bernard Lallemand, Sol LeWitt and Wolfgang Luy — is the chosen theme of Gilles Peyroulet, until the 19th, whereas, at the Monde de l'art, until the end of the year, Mikhail Chemiakin is exhibiting his larger-scale works and Gustavo Vejarano his ‘mandalas’.
At the Jennifer Flay gallery, Ann Veronica Janssens discreetly applies elementary geometrical principles to glass panels, mirrors and metal fittings in order to modify our perception of our surroundings.
The Ukrainian Anton Solomoukha's ‘Mechanical Toys’, being shown by Philippe Gravier until 20 January, seem to have stepped from the pages of a 1930s toy catalogue.
Painted with the intensity of fresco, they haunt the memory, loaded with illusion and nostalgia.
The Di Meo brothers continue, until 30 January, to review Giulio Paolini's output from the years 1960–75.
Meanwhile, until 24 December, Paolini's latest works are being shown by Yvon Lambert.
Work by Christian Gattinoni is featured by Claude Samuel, until 6 January.
The artist has taken fifty round metal boxes, once used for keeping radio sound tapes, and on each has set up two photographs, supported by old film racks; blurred images from pornographic television films are shown side by side with black and white images from Holocaust archives.
Spacious stage sets and mythological allusions are the order of the day at Mostini Bastille, which is showing oils and watercolours by the Venezuelan artist Alexandra Poleo, while at the Delsol-Innocenzi Jean-Marc Haroutiounian pokes fun at contemporary pomposity with a series of minute impromptu landscapes on canvas and, in complete contrast, two enormous works painted in scrupulous detail and framed in velvet: a homage to trashy chinoiserie.
Until mid-December, Barbier-Beltz continues to show work by Patrick Dubrac — constructions whose heterogeneous elements are given unity by a lick of white paint — and by Jean-Loup Trassard, whose photographs record the immutable aspects of nature.
Fabrice Hybert still holds the stage at Froment-Putman, while Panamarenko remains chez Catherine and Stephane De Beyrie until the 18th, exhibiting a series of works entitled ‘Scimitar’.
Photo-canvases and sculptures by Vera Rohm are featured by Nikki Diana Marquardt until 16 January, together with Horst Haack's ‘Chronografia terrestre’.
Claire Burrus is now showing work by Michael Snow, having bid farewell to Nils Udo, while the material exhibited by Daniel Spoerri in Seville continues to occupy the Beaubourg gallery until next month.
Consisting of small squares of canvas stretched over a bamboo frame set in cement, the Pierre Druesnes composition being shown by Franka Berndt resembles a pyramid, pointing the way heavenward, a substitute for human presence, or emphasis of its absence.
This exhibition continues over into 1993.
Scheduled to run until 16 January is Zabriskie's exhibition devoted to the American photographer Paul Strand, who has recorded the changing face of his garden over nearly twenty-five years.
Anne de Villepoix displays corsets and maps: the most recent labours of designer Peter Fond, presented in collaboration with Cymo, Jansen, Vetorlank and Sophie Vieille.
Meanwhile, until 26 December, Marie-Helene Montenay is staging an exhibition entitled ‘Errances du Sacre’, which includes work by Freya Hansell, Georgia Marsh, Lydia Venieri,
Rivka Rinnu, Luciano Bartolini, Eva Lootz, George Rousse and Valerie Favre.
On display at the Contrejour gallery are photographs taken by the late Luigi Ghirri in the workshops and familiar haunts of Giorgio Morandi.
To mark the exhibition, which ends on 12 December, Editions Contrejour and Palomar of Bari are publishing Atelier Giorgio Morandi, with a commentary by Giorgio Messori.
Finally, Dina Vierny is showing self portraits by Vladimir Yankilevski, in all of which the Muscovite artist depicts himself in profile, among fragments of superimposed surfaces.
The exhibition is scheduled to run until 20 February.
BERLIN
Prison gates and prison towers
Views of Berlin at Zellermayer
The survey of paintings, drawings and prints by Paula Modersohn-Becker at the Berlin branch of Wolfgang Werner (until 22 December) promises to be a high-calibre exhibition.
High points of the show are large-format charcoal and red chalk drawings from 1898–99, a number of landscapes of the area around Worpswede, and a horizontal format variation on the theme of ‘Child Blowing a Horn’, which has not been on the market since the 1930s.
These are complemented by self-portraits from various periods, which are on loan.
Together with Gunter Busch, formerly director of the Bremer Kunsthalle, Wolfgang Werner is preparing a catalogue of works which will supersede the incomplete catalogue by G.Pauli (1919/1932).
Angela Grauerholz is a photographer, yet her interiors, landscapes and portraits, fragment-like in their appearance, are composed like paintings.
With their sepia tones and intentionally blurred outlines, her photographs give the impression of pictures from a past era.
More forcefully even than documentary photographs, they compel the observer to ask questions as to where, how, and why.
At Documenta IX, Angela Grauerholz showed a fascinating dialogue between her painterly photographs and paintings of the nineteenth century, which were juxtaposed in the Neue Galerie at Kassel.
The first German exhibition for the Hamburg-born artist (who is forty years old and lives in Canada) takes place at Franck & Schulte and includes the works for Documenta IX (until 23 December).
Photography is also the focus of interest at Zellermayer in December.
Here the protagonist is Frank Thiel, who explores current issues with large-format colour photographs on the theme ‘Gefangnistor und Gefangnisturm’(Prison Gate and Prison Tower).
Thiel (born 1966) attracted much attention in 1990–91 with his black and white views of East Berlin, and was awarded the German Kodak Award.
In Berlin in the late 1970s, Swiss painter and sculptor Luciano Castelli, along with Salome and Rainer Fetting, created the ragged style of the ‘Neue Wilden’(New Fauves).
Raab is showing key paintings of the last two years until 9 January.
Alongside nude and landscape studies, a personal revaluation of the work of Swiss painter Ferdinand Hodler (1853–1918) dominates the show.
G.L.Gabriel is the pseudonym of the daughter of a respected painter who prefers her work to be presented on its own merits rather than under an established name.
Eva Poll has been showing the work of this thirty-four year-old artist regularly since the beginning of the 1980s.
Looking back over the last two years, portraits and townscapes, in Berlin or in other locations, predominate.
Gabriel's use of colour is sublime, often radiantly transparent, and occasionally accentuated by the addition of sand or tar to give full impact to the overall artistic image.
Inga Kondeyne of the Galerie Rotunde in the Altes Museum promotes Berlin painting of a quite different kind.
The gallery represents those painters and graphic artists from eastern Berlin who have been working at the dissolution of figuration into pure chromatic values and abstract formal structures.
In December new works by Hanns Schimansky, Joachim Bottcher, Lothar Bohme and Mark Lammert are on display.
Gunar Barthel, whose gallery is devoted mainly to the members of painters' collectives, is showing a cross-section of works by its artists until 31 December.
The exhibition displays the as yet unwritten history of painting in the two Germanies, combining as it does abstract expressionists like H.Bachmayer, H.Prem and H.Sturm from the Munich ‘Herzogstraße’ group with works by C.Claus, G.Kozik, M.Morgner and S.Volmer from Chemnitz in Saxony.
Galerie im Kabinett is opening its new 300m2 factory space in central Berlin with a large exhibition of new works by Jurgen Bottcher, who uses the name Strawalde (until 1 February 1993).
When Strawalde freed himself of the constraints of narrative painting he became the father of sensuous abstract art in the DDR and now, in his sixties, is finally receiving the international recognition which was denied him before the Wall came down.
The Berlin branch of Cologne gallery Stolz is presenting collages and reliefs, mainly from the 1920s and 1930s, throughout December.
Suprematist, constructivist and dadaist works in newspaper, wood, glass and fabric are successfully combined with smaller sculptures by Jeff Beer, assembled from pieces of scrap iron.
Galerie Pels-Leusden turns its attention to painting by the mentally ill with an exhibition of large-format works in coloured pencil by Friedrich Schroder-Sonnenstern.
For Schroder-Sonnenstern, who lived in psychiatric institutions from 1919 onwards, drawing was a means of communicating with the world.
This centenary tribute was produced in collaboration with Brockstedt of Hamburg (until 22 January).
Galerie Brusberg is offering two exhibitions in December.
The smaller of the two is devoted to Picasso's prints and book illustrations.
The larger exhibition is of the latest sculptures by American Jim Lawrence, entitled ‘Die Geschichte von Hiob — Vier Jahreszeiten’(The History of Job — Four Seasons)(until 9 January 1993).
Lawrence took as his theme the idea of change and cyclical recurrence in nature as a whole and in Job as representative of humanity.
Just as the seasons are transient so are Job's fortune and his later misfortune and sufferings.
The most cheerful symbol for the joys of summer and wedded bliss is provided by an elephant on which Job and his wife embrace, shortly before the wheel of fortune turns.
Hans Redmann is showing a retrospective of the Greek artist Pavlos under the title ‘30 Arbeiten aus 30 Jahren’(Thirty Works from Thirty Years).
His works are easily recognised by their medium: no-one else is able to achieve such diverse, original effects with printed poster paper.
In the early 1960s Pavlos laid this advertisement material, cut into strips by machine, with the edges showing, producing abstract images with the different combinations.
In the following decades Pavlos created three-dimensional objects from bundles of paper strips: bottles, still lifes, ties and most recently also a cypress grove and a 250 cm-long flower meadow (until 12 December).
The muted colours of Pavlos's objects derives from the relation of the many cut edges to the printed colours of the paper, which are only visible where it has been spread open.
NEW YORK
How to survive Matisse
Wilhelm Lehmbruck at Michael Werner
Henri Matisse, as all the world by now must know, has replaced History at the Museum of Modern Art.
The sprawling retrospective of his work currently takes up the two vast floors normally devoted by the museum to setting forth the story of late nineteenth- and twentieth-century painting and sculpture.
To compensate a bit for the loss, Greatest Hits from that long and illustrious lineage —‘Les Demoiselles d'Avignon’ and its copains — have been gathered for the nonce in a smaller space elsewhere in the museum.
Necessarily some favourites have been left out of the selection and among them are the two larger than life, cast stone sculptures by Wilhelm Lehmbruck — the ‘Kneeling woman’ of 1911 and the ‘Standing youth’of 1913 (two of the museum's earliest acquisitions, by the way)— which have always within living memory afforded a moment of tenuous serenity in the same room with Kokoschka's simmering double portrait of the Tietzes and Max Beckmann's horrific ‘Departure’.
(It will be fascinating to see if, and how, the Lehmbrucks reappear when Kirk Varnedoe reinstalls the permanent collection after the Matisses are dispersed early next year.)
Meanwhile, respite is at hand for art lovers experiencing Lehmbruck deprivation as Michael Werner continues — until Christmas — a rare exhibition of the German sculptor's work.
The show has twenty pieces ranging from a female torso of 1910, lent by the Museum Ludwig in Cologne, to another treatment of the same subject from 1918, the year before Lehmbruck's death by his own hand in Berlin.
Unexpectedly, the show's catalogue text is an appreciation of the artist by Josef Beuys who, although born three years after Lehmbruck's death, refers to him as his teacher.
He credits the awakening of his own sculptural sensibilities to a chance encounter with a book in which ‘I…saw a sculpture by Wilhelm Lehmbruck, and there immediately arose the idea, the intuition: Sculpture — something can be done with sculpture.
It was as if that picture were telling me Everything is sculpture.’
(Beuys's own work — in the form of prints and multiples — incidentally , may be caught this month, until the 19th, at John Gibson.)
Two young German painters, both in their thirties, have December shows in New York.
Andreas Schon, in his first solo exhibition here, is at Jay Gorney until the end of the month.
He comes from Dusseldorf, where he studied at the famous Academy with Gerhard Richter, and shows large landscape paintings in which the natural is disturbed by human interventions, all seen from a rather high vantage point.
He also shows more recent work which takes the form, somewhat unexpectedly, of meditations on the slatted window blind.
At Luhring Augustine the Cologne artist Albert Oehlen — who was once a student of Sigmar Polke — shows six square paintings which look, at first glance, like pure abstractions but which yield, upon further perusal, figurative elements.
The show is up until 2 January.
An abstract-figurative admixture also obtains in the work of Darwin Nix, who shows a series of large, six by eight foot paintings until the end of the month at Fawbush.
More purely abstract paintings by Harriet Korman are, also until the end of December, at Lennon-Weinberg, as are those of Lawrence Carroll at Stux and Janis Provisor at Barbara Toll.
Veteran abstractionist Helen Frankenthaler turns up until the 17th of this month at a new gallery — new, that is, for her — Knoedler.
And for a selection of vintage abstractions go to Vanderwoude-Tananbaum, until the end of the month.
There you will find, among other paintings and sculptures from the Fifties and Sixties, pieces by Lee Krassner, Norman Bluhm, Theodoros Stamos, Alfonso Ossorio, Glen Goldberg and Louise Nevelson.
When you think of Robert Ryman you think of white.
Yet the eye-filling white of his work often, ironically, seems like its least important aspect.
Many times it appears to be used so that other qualities of the work — the wide assortment of materials it might be constructed of, say, or the way it is attached to the wall — can take centre stage, much in the way that a black and white photograph allows you to concentrate on matters otherwise obscured or de-emphasized by colour.
On 4 December Pace will open a show of sixteen new paintings by Ryman entitled ‘Variations’.
They come to New York fresh from a show at the hallen für Neue Kunst in Schaffhausen, Switzerland, and the catalogue for that show, which is available at the desk, contains an interview with the artist by curator Christal Sauer.
Geometric abstraction has been a mainstay in the art of Valerie Jaudon for many years: she has worked more patterned variations on the relationship between the curved and the straight line than might have been thought possible.
Her present show, at Janis until the nineteenth, continues her explorations.
Dan Graham has always been about geometry, at least in so far as it informs the quasi-architectural environments he makes (have you yet been delightfully disoriented by the series of glass-walled, open-to-the-sky rooms he has constructed on the roof of the DIA Art Center's Chelsea outpost?).
At Goodman all this month and until 2 January he shows a 1991 walk-in piece called ‘Hedges and two-way mirror labyrinth’ and four models for yet unrealized projects.
Taking a cue from Robert Indiana's emblemised letterings of the 1960s, Matt Mullican has over the years built a rich vocabulary of geometric symbols which he has used and re-used in a variety of formats.
Last month at Gladstone he remade the gallery space into his own architectural reality, placing within it various elements of his own invention including a human skeleton halved to make two, banners and posters bearing his iconic logos, knee-high tables and glass-etched panels.
This month, from the 2nd to the 19th, he has re-installed the space with new elements including a video computer visualisation of one of his own schematic architectures.
Architecture is also never very far from Ron Janowich's awareness.
Although both abstract and gestural, his paintings seem to yearn to express architectural space.
New work of his is on until 23 December at Pamela Auchincloss.
Modern artists have long been fascinated with the comic strip: MoMA's ‘High and Low’ show a while back provided a primer on the subject.
Where, for instance, would the late work of Philip Guston be without the example of George Crumb?
But no artist seems to have taken over the comic strip format whole until Art Spiegelman came along.
In 1978 he co-founded Raw, a comic book for sophisticated adults, and in the years since then he has explored every nuance of the form.
All of this finally resulted in’ Maus’, his book-length comic strip version of the Holocaust in which pigs stand in for Nazis and mice for Jews.
This month, and until 9 January, the Galerie St Etienne continues to show finished pages from the book with many of the numerous preparatory drawings in a show called ‘The Road to Maus’.
it coincides with the publication of the paperback version of the book.
The notion of cartoons is important to Elena Sisto, too, in that images from popular illustration and comics often pop up in her paintings to comment on various social issues.
New work by her is on this month at Germans van Eck, running until the 23rd.
Daniel Oates has invented a repertoire of three-dimensional cartoon characters to populate his work.
His ‘Happy Workers’— hand cast in plastic — take up residence at 303 until 19 December.
The early Pop artists — Lichtenstein, of course, but Warhol too — were fascinated early on by the possibilities of comic illustration.
After an initial flirtation with Dick Tracy and a few others, however, Warhol plunged irretrievably into the vast sea of photographs for raw material.
Downtown at Gagosian (until 9 January) is a selection of the artist's late works entitled ‘Heaven and Hell are Just a Breath Away’.
Featured are images of boots, motorcycles and muscle men.
One of Warhol's most indelible images, of course, is his relentless repetition of Jacqueline Kennedy's face in blue.
Deborah Kass, who used to paint splashy waterfalls and rocks, has turned pointedly political of late and at fiction/non-fiction (from 2 December to 2 January) she shows walls and walls full of variations on this iconic Warhol image, substituting Barbara Streisand for Mrs Onassis and calling the result ‘The Jewish Jackie Series’.
Jenny Watson's work addresses women's issues, too, however obliquely, by calling attention to some cliches of the feminine.
Using a range of soft, pastel colours, she paints images of women — often paired with horses, objects or texts — on supports of taffeta and silk.
She's to be Australia's representative at next summer's Venice Biennial, but if you're not planning a trip to Italy, just go down to Prince St where Anina Nosei is showing recent examples of her work from 4 to 31 December.
Luis Gordillo, a Spanish artist born in Seville in 1934, is a bona fide member of the artistic generation that blossomed in the wake of Pop Art's ascendancy over Abstract Expressionism in the 1960s.
It's been easier for later generations to deal with Pop — they simply ‘appropriate’ and no questions asked.
But Gordillo and his contemporaries have had to come to terms with it the hard way, following directly in its path.
Although well known in Spain, Gordillo this month holds his first show in the United States in the newly revamped quarters of the Marlborough Gallery.
The show (from 3 December until 2 January) is accompanied by a colour catalogue with an essay by Dan Cameron, a New York critic who has been keeping an eagle eye on the Spanish scene for some years.
Continuing this month at Emmerich is a large show, taking up both of the gallery's spaces in the Fuller Building, of recent work by the seventy-one year old Dutch painter, Karel Appel.
His work over the years has run the gamut from figurative-expressionist to purely abstract, always informed by an explosive sense of colour and whirlwind handling.
Lately he has been working on paintings of trees, large-sized drawings of nudes, painted low-reliefs in wood and a series of portraits of poets in which snippets from their work are inscribed (Beats Alan Ginsberg and Gregory Corso appear in the show).
An illustrated catalogue is available for the exhibition, which lasts until 31 December.
Until the 19th of this month Rachel Adler is presenting new work by the Columbian painter Santiago Cardenas.
He currently lives and teaches in Bogota, but his schooling took him as far north as the Rhode Island School of Design and Yale.
His past work investigated the notion of the blackboard as a surface upon which to coalesce imagery, making use of the strong tradition of drawing to be found in Columbia.
More recently objects — a vase of flowers, a brush, a palette knife — take up serene positions before backgrounds stormy and abstract.
The show continues this month until the nineteenth.
When was the last time you saw a show of William Blake's work in a gallery?
The great visionary poet and artist, is rarely seen indeed and so it is a special treat to have before our eyes, at Salander O'Reilly, a selection of over thirty watercolours, drawings and paintings by the master.
The show, with a catalogue by Martin Butlin and Robin Hamlyn, runs through the last day of this month.
Going from the ridiculously sublime to the sublimely ridiculous, another visionary — this time very much of our present day and very well known indeed — shows up this month on Greene St. He is, of course, Saul Steinberg, Horace of the high-heeled, poet of the pot-holed urban scene, cicerone to the foibles of the national consciousness.
Adam Gopnik actually once compared him to William Blake, saying Steinberg could, like Blake, ‘make the life of the mind visible…take metaphors and abstract ideas and turn them into drawings.’
From 5 December to 9 January at Pace.
COLOGNE
Art on the head of a pin
Karsten Greve expands yet more
As 1992 draws to a close, the undisputed star of Cologne is gallery owner Karsten Greve, who has not only opened a second gallery in Rudolf Zwirner's former space on Albertusstrasse 18, but has expanded his premises at Wallrafplatz 3 to include the second and third floors of the building.
Greve's reach is international as well as local, for in 1989 he founded a branch in Paris in the Marais, in an early eighteenth-century building once owned by madame de Maintenon.
This gallery was expanded by 900 m2 and inaugurated during the Paris fair, FIAC, this autumn with a retrospective of Louise Bourgeois (on show until January 1993).
Greve's impressive programme for Cologne and Paris includes Andre, Bacon, Flavin, Fontana, Knoller, De Kooning, Kounellis, LeWitt, Palermo and Twombly.
At Wallrafplatz until 10 January is Norbert Prangenberg's ‘Morgenlandfahrer’(‘Traveller in the Orient’), an exhibition of thirteen new abstract paintings in watercolour and pastel on canvas, and seven pencil and watercolour drawings on paper.
Following ‘Morgenlandfahrer’, from 14 January until 31 March will be a reprise of the Joseph Cornell retrospective first shown by Greve in Paris last summer and autumn.
Two floors at Wallrafplatz will be devoted to some twenty-two constructions and twelve collages by the American evocateur of nineteenth-century Romanticism.
The catalogue includes an essay by Robert Motherwell and extracts from Cornell's own diaries.
Greve's piece de resistance, at Albertusstrasse, is a show of twelve sculptures and twelve photographs by John Chamberlain.
The familiar carcrash sculptures have now been hand-painted and christened with punning titles: ‘Headly Lamarr’; ‘A Spear de Corps’; ‘Advice Squad’.
Six of the sculptures are so small in scale (21 x 27 x 17 cm) that they resemble goldsmiths' miniatures.
Until 16 January Gisela Capitain will be showing large-scale photographs by the American photographer Nan Goldin, taken between 1990 and 1992.
Goldin is best known for her 1986 book, The Ballad of Sexual Dependency, an account of her intimates in the seamy Seventies nightlife of New York and Provincetown.
The publication of a new book, The Other Side: 1972–1992, coincided with a show at the Galerie des DAAD in Berlin this year, and selected works, which reveal trans-sexuals and transvestites at home and at work in bars, will be featured at Capitain.
Also on show is Goldin's  elegiac portfolio of fourteen photographs of the New York writer Cookie Mueller, who died of Aids in 1989.
Alongside Goldin's work until 22 January are eleven watercolours by Cologne conceptual artist Michael Krebber.
At Sophia Ungers, independent curator and former optician Udo Kittelman has assembled works by ten, mainly New York, artists with remarkably near invisible effect.
‘A Whiter Shade of Pale’, launched during Art Cologne in November and on show until 19 December, is Kittelman's challenge to the ‘over organised audience’ attracted by the art fair, an attempt to present in a commercial gallery the type of exhibition more usually seen in a Kunsthalle.
The invitation card, which lists the titles of the works, serves as a sort of treasure map for the viewer, a series of hints on how and where to look.
These nodes in the architectural fabric, perverse in their faintness, include Alex Pearlstein's ‘Wall Bumps’— slight protrusions in the plaster surface of a wall — and L.C. Armstrong's ‘Breast Exam’, a five-line relief in Braille in which each line is the title, palpable, but unreadable, of a pornographic film.
Martin Kippenberger has inset ‘My Last Will and Testament’, a plain white canvas, flush with the wall; and Martin Gostner has sprayed a column with transparent glue, sticky but invisible.
Christine Ebert has enamelled a portrait of Alex Lambert on the head of a pin, and on another wall Gretchen Faust has tattooed the legend ‘an iconological solution’ with tiny punctured holes.
In a final jab at the purported blindness of the contemporary art groupie, Peter Hopkins has embedded a wad of garbage behind one wall, its presence indicated only by the screws securing it to the plaster.
At Maria-Hilfstrasse 17, Isabella Kacprzak is showing, until the end of the year, a series of twelve small paintings (50 x 40 cm) by the young Belgian artist Luc Tuymans.
The first painting depicts, more or less ‘realistically’, in black, white and grey, a comfortable villa in an Antwerp suburb.
The following works in the series, however, are a radically different essay in representation.
The artist has taken details — a window, a shadow, a curtain, bathroom tiles — and rendered them as dark brooding abstractions.
The mysterious culmination of the sequence is a painting of an invisible object, a small angel — presumably ‘the angel of the house’.
Kacprzak's windowless gallery is a particularly appropriate space for these claustrophobic efforts.
Next door, at Mayer & Mayer, are architectural records of a different sort: Felix Teynard's (1817–92) calotypes of Egyptian cemeteries, made in 1851–52.
Upstairs, the Bonn gallery owner Philomene Magers has taken over Monika Spruth's former gallery, showing, until the end of December, a single monumental painting from 1955 by Ad Reinhardt, in shades of black, entitled ‘Number 16’.
At Wormserstrasse 23, Otto Schweins has hung Felix Stephan Huber's large grainy photographs of his personal vie boheme, namely the unmade beds in which Huber has slept during his travels from Jena to Vienna, from Berlin to Brooklyn (Huber recently had a one-man show at the John Good Gallery in New York).
The hazy grey intimacy of the photographs is countered by a stark blueprint for an imaginary arrangement of beds in the gallery, executed on the floor in brown plastic tape.
This exhibition will be followed, from 11 December until mid-January, by prints by Penck, Dahn and Trockel, published by Brigitte Schenk and Andreas Hecker as two portfolios with three prints each, in editions of fifty.
Monika Spruth is also showing new works by Rosemarie Trockel along with three paintings by Andreas Schulze.
Trockel has created a video projection recording the unravelling of a garment on a female model, and of one of her own flat knitted paintings.
As uncertainty about the fate of commercial galleries grows, the burden of showing new artists has been picked up by unexpected agents.
Until 14 February, Germany's largest law firm, Boden Oppenhoff, Rasor Raue, at Hohenstaufenring 62, is showing five large paintings and thirty-five paper works by the American artist Ira Bartell, who lives in Cologne.
Bartell picks up where Rothko left off, painting rhythmic undulating wave patterns exclusively in red tempera and oil —‘the most ambiguous of all the colours’— infiltrated by a blackish smoky violet.
The paper works comprise a variety of techniques: collage, India ink swirled by an air compressor, and overpainted postcards, all of which serve as experimental preambles to Bartell's paintings.
At the opposite end of the spectrum of alternative art venues is the Schneiderei collective's presentation until 19 December of American, Alan Uglow's, ‘In the Name of the Game’, a series of Minimalist paintings executed in the enamel used for street signs and complemented by a sound recording of the noise of a football crowd at Cologne Stadium.
The show is a coda to Uglow's exhibition at the Kolner Kunstverein this autumn.
Lisa Zeiger 
Asian arts week
New York, Sotheby's, 1–5 December.
A series of sales will cover works of art from China, Korea, Japan and India over a number of days.
Top lot among the Chinese works of art is a fine Wucai-fish jar and cover in exemplary condition.
One of the most important Chinese ceramics to appear at auction and of Ming Imperial Porcelain, it should sell for more than $2.5 million (£1,633,000).
The Korean sale will feature a 14th/15th-century table with floral scroll, black lacquer with mother-of-pearl and wire inlay (est. $300,000–400,000; £196,900–261,000).
In the Indian sale will be a Tibetan thirteenth century Buddha Ratnasambhara (est. $40,000–60,000; £26,150–39,200).
For the wine-buff who has everything
Amsterdam, Christie's, December 3.
A rare oval monteith (used for cooling wine glasses) by the Hague silversmith Francois van Stapele will be offered in this sale of silver.
It is an important example of its kind and is estimated at Dfl 250,000–350.000 (£91,700–128,000; $140,000–195,000).
Also for sale is a two-handled tureen on a stand made in 1768 by Engelbart Joosten, a fine example of the high quality of silversmithing in the Hague in the eighteenth century.
It should realise Dfl 350,000–400,000 (£128,000–146,000; $195,000–223,000).
Donizetti ballet
London, Sotheby's, December 4.
An unknown opera by Gaetano Donizetti entitled ‘Elisabeth’ is being sold by the Royal Opera House to help cover its debts.
Acts I and III were found in 1984 but the crucial second act was missing until 1988 when it was discovered amongst some rubbish in the basement in a packet labelled ‘Ballet — no use’.
The work was in progress from 1827 until 1840 and represents Donizetti's career in microcosm; even the type of paper improves over the years with the progress of his career.
The manuscript should fetch around £150,000 ($229,000).
Paris a Monaco
Monaco, Sotheby's, December 4,5,6.
This four-session sale of paintings, works of art and furniture comprises around 700 lots from the Paris apartment of Charles Hathaway, and includes the collection of Hubert de St Senoch, a Parisian socialite.
Among the paintings, there is a small work by Max Ernst, ‘Les oiseaux’(est.
FF300,000–400,000; £36,600–48,800; $55,700–74,300), an untitled oil by Yves Tanguy of 1931 (est.
FFr200,000–300,000; £24,400–36,600; $37,100–55,700) and a drawing by Salvador Dali from his series ‘Le cannibalisme des objets’(est.
FFr200,000–300,000; £24,400–36,600; $37,100–55,700).
Among the pieces of furniture is a Louis XVI secretaire stamped Weisweiler and Mauter (est.
FFr400,000–500,000; £48,800–61,000; $74,300–93,000), a commode by Migeon and a Louis XIV bureau Mazarin.
Also from the collection is a selection of silver, vertu and works of art.
Jourdan-Barry collection of silver
Monaco, Sotheby's, December 5.
This is the most significant collection of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century French silver to appear at auction in twenty years.
Silver of this period is especially rare as much of it was melted down in the Revolution or to fund wars.
The collection has been consigned for sale by Pierre Jourdan-Barry who feels that his collection is as complete as is possible and now wishes to branch into new fields.
The December sale comprises some 90 lots estimated at FFr20 million (£2,440,000; $3,715,000).
Amongst the early pieces is a two-handled cup by Claude Payan, 1686 (est.
FFr550,000–650,000; £67,000–79,000; $102,000–120,000) and a bowl and cover decorated with acanthus leaves, dated 1678 (est.
FFr600,000–800,000; £73,000–97,000; $111,000–148,000).
From the eighteenth century are worth noting an oil and vinegar cruet by Francois-Thomas Germain and Louis Regnard and a pair of sauce-boats by Leopold Antoines (both lots: est.
FFr1–1.5 million; £122,000–183,000; $185,000–279,000).
Some provincial silver of fine quality will be offered, including two ewers from Montpellier (est.
FFr850,000–1,200,000; £103,000–146,000; $158,000–223,000).
Any offers for a dozen Caesars?
London, Sotheby's, 7 December.
The highlight of the winter sale of manuscripts and miniatures is a secular, high Renaissance French manuscript, ‘Lives of the twelve Caesars’, written around 1510.
Said to have been illuminated in Tours by the court painter Jean Bourdichon, it passed through several libraries before being sold at Sotheby's Sir Thomas Phillipps sale in 1946 for £900 ($1,400).
It is now estimated at £150,000 to £200,000 ($229,000–306,000).
There are several Books of Hours, the finest being from Rouen dated around 1460 estimated at £30,000–50,000 ($46,000–76,500).
The earliest item in the sale is a fourth-century fragment of the Gospel of St Luke (est. £2,000; $3,060).
Per-Neb the courtier
London, Christie's, December 9.
This sale of antiquities will be marked by a collection of Egyptian pieces acquired between 1920 and 1940 and now estimated at £2 million ($3 million).
Highlight of the sale will be a limestone portrait of Per-Neb which is especially rare for its perfect condition and its age (2360 BC).
The figure is seated on a throne on which can be read the text: ‘Friend of kings, Per-Neb the chamberlain and courtier’(est. £600,000–800,000; $918,000–1,224,000).
Other items of note in this important collection include two ‘ushabti’ statuary figurines in quartzite (est. £50,000–80,000; $76,500–122,000, and £15,000–25,000; $23,000–38,250), bronzes and glazed statuettes.
Sacred and profane
London, Sotheby's, 9 December.
The sale of Old Master paintings features an important consignment from a private German collection.
The highlight is a bull-fighting scene by Goya (see The Art Newspaper 22, p.27) and another work of Spanish origin is Murillo's ‘Holy Family with St Joseph sawing’ estimated at £300,000 to 400,000 ($459,000–612,000).
There are a number of Dutch and Flemish works on offer, including a country view by Philips Koninck from the estate of the Rt.
Hon The Earl Mountbatten of Burma (est. £1–1.5 million; $1,530,000–2,295,000).
A distant view of Vianen near Utrecht is typical of Aelbert Cuyp's work in its inclusion of cattle and use of southern light (est. £100,000–150,000; $153,000–229,500).
A late de Hooch depicting ‘An interior by night with a woman seated by a fire and two soldiers playing tric-trac’ is the only certain night-scene by the artist (est. £60,000–80,000; $91,800–122,000).
Italian paintings include an allegorical work by Garofalo which was mentioned in Vasari's ‘Vite’.
Depicting the ‘Calumny of Apelles’, it might appeal to Mr Mellor (est. £200,000–300,000; $306,000–459,000.
Finally, an extraordinary group of figures parading at a masked ball by Giovanni Antonio Guardi is estimated at £180,000–200,000 ($275,000–306,000).
Mirror, mirror…
Paris, Ader-Tajan, December 8. 250 antique bronze mirrors from a private collection will be sold in the glittering salons of the Hotel George V. The sale offers a rare opportunity to observe the use made of the same object by different cultures.
The mirrors span the entire period from the discovery of the first metal mirrors to the introduction of Bohemian and Venetian glass and their decoration reflect the culture that made them: dragons in China, goddesses in Egypt, Aphrodite in Greece, breasts in Java.
The collection also boasts Khmer, Thai, Korean, Roman, Coptic and Phoenician mirrors.
The sale is expected to realise about FFr5 million (£610,000; $930,000) with the most expensive lot being a fourth-century BC Greek mirror with a depiction of Aphrodite on the reverse.
Maastricht under attack
Paris, Drouot, December 9.
If you are sick of the whole business of Maastricht, then here is the picture for you: a depiction of the town under siege…by the French.
The battle, in which d'Artagnan lost his life, shows Louis XIV's army before the walls and is painted by the workshop of R.A. Houasse (est.
FFr60,000–80,000; £7,300–9,700; $11,100–14,800).
Modern art from Holland
Amsterdam, Sotheby's, 10 December.
Among the Dutch paintings on offer are two by Pyke Koch in the style termed Magisch Realisme, which may be compared to the German Neue Sachlichkeit.
His ‘Vrouw met dode Vogel’ should sell for Dfl80,000–120,000 (£29,400–44,000; $44,000–67,000) and ‘Het Signaal’for Dfl100,000–150,000 (£36,700–55,000; $55,800–83,800).
‘Largo II’ by Jan Sluijter, recently on loan to the Stedelijk Museum, is one of the few examples of Futurism in his work (est.
Dfl100,000–150,000 £36,700–55,000; $55,800–83,800).
Nearly thirty works dating from before 1945 from the estate of the Dutch publisher Johan Polak will also be sold.
Aquamanile
London, Sotheby's, December 10.
The sale of European works of art and sculpture features the only complete aquamanile in the form of a knight on horseback known to exist.
Dating from around 1200, it hails from Lower Saxony and should sell for £50,000 to 80,000 ($76,500–122,000).
A fourteenth-century stained glass panel of the Annunciation originally from Altenberg is estimated at £40,000 to 60,000 ($61,200–92,000).
Other lots include a seventeenth-century Florentine bronze pacing stallion from the workshops of Antonio Susini (est. £40,000–60,000; $61,200–92,000), and a collection of about seventy ivories dating from the fourteenth to the nineteenth centuries, comprising French gothic reliefs, South German concentric turned goblets, several statuettes and a number of tankards.
Dutch delight
London, Christie's, 11 December.
Pieter de Hooch's carefully-composed outdoor ‘snapshots’ are rare enough and rarer still for sale.
‘The courtyard of a house in Delft’ dates from the height of his career and will doubtless attract much attention from around the world (est. £4.5–6.5 million; $6.9–9.9 million) although it is well-known that Christie's have been trying to sell it privately for some time and the current estimate is regarded as quite strong.
Typical is its distillation of a tranquil moment from everyday life.
Rubens previously lost ‘Portrait of Madame de Vicq’, a pendant to the portrait of her husband in the Louvre, should sell for between £1 million and 1.5 million ($1.5–2.3 million).
Its sense of familiarity marks for the first time his ease within an international world of diplomacy.
Other works by Rubens to be offered include three modelli for the life on Constantine the Great tapestry cycle (around £1 million; $1.5 million) and an oil sketch of the ‘Holy Family visited by Sts Elizabeth and Zacharias and the Infant St John the Baptist’(est. £400,000–600,000; $612,000–918,000).
The modelli will be sold separately and provide fine examples of his unerring sense of form expressed through fluent, rapid brushstrokes.
Three pairs of Italianate coastal views by Lacroix de Marseille will be offered.
The largest two, depicting a port and a lighthouse should sell for £100,000 to £150,000 ($153,000–220,500).
Chic Sea-shells in the saleroom
Paris, Ader-Tajan, 14 December.
Maitre Tajan will be bringing the gavel down on two attractive paintings from the Polo collection in this sale of Old Masters.
The first, by Anne Vallayer-Coster (who has become tres chic since a runaway success at Sotheby's Monaco some five years ago) depicts a natural-history composition with marine animals and is estimated at FFr4–5 million (£488,000–610,000; $743,000–929,000).
The second is ‘Le chien Barbet’ by Chardin, sold by Tajan in 1988 and depicting a hunting dog sniffing at a hare and duck hanging from an urn.
Long regarded as the pendant to ‘Chien courant’ at the Norton Simon Foundation, recent studies have suggested Tajan's picture to be later (est.
FFr8–10 million; £976,000–1,220,000; $1.5–1.8 million).
Four portraits by Gaetano Gandolfi represent the four seasons through their age with winter facing summer, spring opposite autumn.
The four pictures should realise FFr800,000–1 million; £97,500–122,000; $148,000–186,000).
A delicately-painted flower-piece by Ambrosius Bosschaert verging on the trompe-l'oeil with dewy roses, leaves bitten through by insects and a caterpillar symbolising the passing of time will sell for FFr1.5–2 million; £183,000–244,000; $279,000–371,000).
Aphrodite and Demosthenes go to market
New York, Christie's, December 15.
This antiquities sale offers a Greek over life-size marble head of a goddess, probably Aphrodite, dated around the late 3rd century BC which should sell in the region of $350,000 to $500,000 (£228,000–326,000).
Other highlights include a Cycladic marble reclining female figure with folded arms dating from the early bronze age (est. $300,000–500,000; £196,000–326,000) and a Roman marble portrait of Demosthenes (est. $300,000–400,000; £196,000–261,000).
Nativity in the round
Milan, Sotheby's, 15 December.
This auction of Old Master paintings offers a number of Trecento and Quattrocento works, the most important of which is a tondo depicting the ‘Nativity with St John the Baptist’.
Attributed to the Master of the Borghese Tondo who has been tentatively identified with Jacopo del Tedesco, a follower of Ghirlandaio, the painting measures over 1 metre in diameter and is estimated at L150 to L200 million (£72,000–96,600; $109,000–146,000).
Other Quattrocento paintings include a diminutive ‘Crucifixion with the Virgin and St John the Evangelist’ by Domenico Veneziano (est.
L50–80 million; £24,100–38,500; $36,500–58,500) and the anonymous ‘Adoration with St Joseph and an angel’ for the same estimate.
Amongst the later works should be noted a ‘Venetian capriccio’ by Francesco Guardi (est.
L40–60 million; £19,300–29,000; $29,200–43,800) and a typical Albricci: ‘Dwarf sailors in port’(est.
L40–60 million; £19,300–29,000; $29,200–43,800).
Lincoln's ‘house divided’
New York, Sotheby's, 15 December.
It is appropriate timing, though doubtless coincidental, that this sale of manuscript and printed Americana should feature a previously unknown autograph leaf by Abraham Lincoln which preserves his earliest formulation of the ‘house divided’ doctrine.
Probably written in the winter of 1857, those two words were to propel him into prominence and, ultimately, the White House as newspapers across the country broadcast his speech (est. $300,000–500,000; £196,000–327,000).
Antiquities from the Norbert Schimmel collection
New York, Sotheby's, 16 December.
Norbert Schimmel was famous as a passionate collector of antiquities spanning 8,000 years of human creativity.
Recently, he  bequested 102 works to the Metropolitan Museum and over 100 to the Israel Museum and the Arthur J. Sackler Museum at Harvard.
The rest of his collection is going under the hammer.
Top lot will be an Egyptian limestone head of a god or goddess, dated to the late eighteenth Dynasty, around 1300 BC (est. $250,000–350,000; £163,000–229,000).
A Cycladic marble head of a goddess, early Bronze Age II (around 2600 BC) is estimated at $100,000 to $150,000 (£65,000–98,000) and an Egyptian wood figure of the Royal Scribe Seneb, twelfth Dynasty (1938–1759 BC) at $150,000–250,000 (£98,000–163,000).
Another wooden figure of a woman of a similar date should sell for $200,000 to $300,000 (£130,000–196,000).