

ART IN ACTION
Sally Bulgin comments
Judging by the increase in the number of letters we are now receiving from you, the enthusiasm for drawing, painting and other artistic activities continues to grow — in spite of what appears to have become a permanently gloomy economic climate.
Throughout 1993 we shall continue to encourage this enthusiasm by bringing you inspiring and informative features on drawing and painting in all media.
Our regular ‘In Conversation’ interviews with many of today's most successful artists have proved popular for the way in which they reveal the ideas and working methods of professional artists.
This month on pages 12–14 Royal Academician Mick Rooney shares aspects of his oil painting technique.
Indeed, features designed to teach and guide readers on ways of approaching all kinds of subject matter in a variety of media and styles are always a high priority.
Our ‘Aspects of Landscape’ series, for example, continues on pages 15–17 with Martin Taylor describing how acrylic colours can be used with watercolours to achieve a convincing representation of landscape details such as grasses and tree branches, while on pages 18–21 Peter Partlington demonstrates how to simplify drawing birds in the start of a fascinating new series.
Jonathan Stephenson's ‘Materials and Techniques’ demonstration on pages 29–32 shows how markers and brush pens can be used as sketching tools, while in ‘Talk of the Trade’on pages 40–41 Jackie Simmonds, Doreen Roberts and Brian Dunce put various art materials to the test.
And for watercolourists, on pages 26–28 Carmi Weingrod explains how to select the most suitable paper for your work in her specifically prepared report.
In addition to bringing you instructional and informative features, written by experienced tutors and professional artists, you will see that we have also been very busy organising events, activities and opportunities in which you are invited to participate.
Following last month's inclusion in the magazine of a complimentary sheet of Bockingford Tinted Paper, this month, for example, in association with St Cuthberts Mill and Daler-Rowney,The Artist is launching a major, nationwide competition to discover the most interesting work produced on this new paper — with substantial cash prizes for amateurs and professionals.
For full details see over the page.
And, as I write, our Art in Nature competition on an environmental theme, now in its second year, has already started to attract entries.
Organised by The Artist in association with the international Centre for Wildlife Art in Gloucestershire, the last deadline for submitting slides or photographs of work is March 31.
The entry coupon and further information can be found on pages 52–53.
To coincide with the exhibition of selected and prize-winning works we have also organised one-day workshops to be held at this wonderful museum during the course of the show.
Materials will be supplied by various sponsors and each of the four workshops, tutored by Jackie Simmonds, David Bellamy, David Curtis and Frances Treanor, will be allied to the exhibition theme.
For details and a booking form see pages 10–11.
Painting holidays offer an ideal chance to relax in a different environment and improve your painting, or try a new subject or medium in the company of other students, under the guidance of an expert tutor.
For 1993 we have organised four holidays to cater for students of all levels of experience and covering a variety of subjects.
On pages 24, 48 and 54 you will find details of our painting holidays to Austria, Sicily, Cornwall and the South of France tutored by Peter Partlington, Peter Welton and Karen Simmons — all of whom are well-known to The Artist readers for their teaching skills and reputations as artists.
But if you are still in the UK for the four days from July 15–18, put a note in your dairy to come and see us at this year's Art in Action at Waterperry House, Wheatley in Oxfordshire.
As well as the hundreds of demonstrations by artists and craftspeople covering all art forms, this year The Artist has helped organise a very much larger Materials and Techniques section where you will be able to try out art materials, ask questions and buy products from many of the UK's leading art materials' manufacturers.
Further details about Art in Action, and other events which we are currently planning for your interest, will be published in future issues.
But do note the Art in Action dates now.
It's an event which has a very special atmosphere and it makes a great day out for all the family.
We look forward to meeting you there!
Stop press:We have also just confirmed our involvement in The Greater Manchester Art Materials Exhibition, presented by Turner's of Stockport at The Piccadilly Hotel, Manchester on May 8–9.
See page 33 for more details.
TINTED Bockingford COMPETITION
Presented by Daler-Rowney and St Cuthberts Paper Mill, in association with The Artist magazine.
£7,000 WORTH OF PRIZES
Artists of all abilities are invited to submit work in any medium or subject matter, on one of the new Tinted Bockingford Papers.
The aim of the competition is to encourage artists to explore the many creative opportunities offered by the new Tinted Bockingford range.
The competition is divided into two categories: Professionals and Amateurs, with substantial prizes for the winners of each section.
MEET THE ARTIST & LEISURE PAINTER AT THE UK'S MOST DEFINITIVE ART FAIR
ART IN ACTION
JULY 15–18 1993
WATERPERRY HOUSE NEAR WHEATLEY, OXFORDSHIRE
Come and join us at this year's Art in Action, where you will not only learn from the demonstrations by many of the UK's leading artists and tutors, but you will also be invited to enjoy hands-on experience of art materials on display and sale by leading manufacturers such as Winsor & Newton, Daler-Rowney, Pro Arte, Liquitex, Schwan Stabilo, Faber-Castell, Berol/Osmiroid, Rexel Cumberland and many others.
You will also be able to see professionals demonstrating all kinds of art forms from drawing, painting, sculpture, ceramics, lettering and calligraphy, printmaking, textiles, illustration, metalwork and jewellery to glass work and enamelling.
Don't miss this exciting opportunity!
Mark the vital dates — July 15 to 18 — in your dairy today, and look out in future issues for more information.
Readers' FORUM
Readers whose letters are published will receive one of our attractive The Artist binders.
Please send your correspondence to .
Paint!
Paint!
Paint!
I have been subscribing to The Artist since 1965.
I have always found it to be most informative, stimulating and interesting — a really excellent magazine.
My bookshelf is sagging under the weight of all my The Artist magazines, all in order of date and so often taken out to peruse back numbers.
One particular article written in July issue 1967 called ‘A Case of the Emotional Painter’ by Dimitri Dejanikus I take out and re-read more often than the others.
The advice given is, and I quote, ‘I would recommend to any amateur painter that he put up a large sign in his studio or room.
On the sign will be three words: PAINT!
PAINT!
PAINT!
Don't wait for a muse to come take your hand.
And don't fret about the failures and the messes.
You don't have to display them.
Just date them and put them away.
But look at them once in a while.
It is surprising how much an artist can learn from his discards.’
Today, Pip Seymour's articles are most informative and I love the reproductions of his work.
I'm always disappointed if there isn't a painting of his to look at when I open the magazine at his technical page!
Watercolour washes
Other readers may be interested in the following observations concerning the effects of differing water quality upon watercolour washes.
If a wash is made using deionised water (which is purer than distilled water and is available from car accessory shops) then even difficult colours, such as cerulean blue, can be laid evenly.
Conversely, where an uneven and granulated wash is desirable (such as in a mixture of ultramarine and burnt umber, which tends to separate and granulate in a very attractive way and is a good alternative to the deadening effects of lamp black) then water with a high mineral content should be used by stirring a teaspoonful of cement powder or plaster into about half a pint of water, allowing the solids to settle and using the relatively clear overlying liquid.
Use it for the darker colours; the permanency of the pigments is not affected by the minerals in the water.
Granulation seems to be an electro-static effect, whereby the mineral particles in solution act as ‘seeds’ for the pigment.
The clumps of colour grow in size until they become visible and are held together whilst the water evaporates.
By varying the water quality, even in the same painting, advantage can be taken of this effect and a further area of interest of a difficult medium obtained.
Alwyn Crawshaw Oil Travelling Studio
In the October 1992 issue, page 49, you had a report by Peter Partington on Alwyn Crawshaw's Oil Travelling Studio.
Peter found that the slide-out palette was immediately whipped out onto the ground by the wind.
What else could one expect?
It is a design oversight.
This problem can be easily overcome by 1) boring a very small hole in the palette and 2) making the same size hole on the top of the left-hand side of the box.
When these two holes are lined up just push a panel pin or maybe a nail or matchstick or something else suitable into the two holes.
In such a small box as Alwyn Crawshaw's I would not recommend compartments which restrict space in effect.
Do without them.
Holding paint brushes in the hand while mixing paints from tubes cannot be that comfortable, so find a suitable plastic or tin container to hang onto the oil travelling box; screw a hook into the side of the lid as a place to park your brushes while you fiddle with the tubes of paint.
Lastly some art societies only accept pictures for exhibition not less than 10×8 in.
Alwyn Crawshaw's box is smaller.
As we are all busy people we might not have time to repeat the picture onto a larger surface.
A box of larger dimensions could be ordered.
There are several pochade box makers.
Euryl Stevens
I am in the process of compiling a catalogue for the collection of 20th century religious art belonging to the Methodist Church, a collection that was created in the early 1960s.
Among the works in the collection is The Raising of Lazarus by an artist I have not so far managed to trace: Euryl Stevens.
She was born in the Rhondda Valley in 1939 and trained at the Birmingham College of Art and Crafts and at the Royal Academy Schools in 1965, when she was living in Smethwick in the West Midlands, she won a Cinzano Art Foundation Award with her painting The Whale , which enables her to spend six months at the Academy of Fine Art in Rome.
She went to Rome in 1966, after spending 12 months as a lecturer at Rochdale College of Art.
I have been told by an old Rochdale colleague of hers that she may have married a doctor and that he thinks she was left a cottage in Tonypandy some time in the mid to late 1960s.
I don't know whether she continues to paint and if so whether under her maiden or married name (which I don't know).
If she reads this, or if any one reading it knows of her present whereabouts or has any information which would help me contact her, would they please let me know by writing to me at .
Chance encounter
I wonder if you can help me with two back copies: June and August 1992.
I passed my June copy to a friend who lives in Norfolk feeling sure I would be able to replace it but without success, and I was away on holiday for the August copy.
You may be sure that I have now placed a regular order with CRA St Albans, my local stockist, so that I am not disappointed in the future.
In fact it was quite by chance that I attended a drawing lesson at CRA, not having done anything like that since failing my O-level art miserably many years ago.
Whilst there I discovered your excellent magazine.
Please don't change it — it's brilliant!
Art in Nature Workshops
JULY TO AUGUST 1993
Wildlife within the Environment in Watercolour with David Bellamy
MONDAY 5 JULY 1993
Well-known artist and tutor David Bellamy will demonstrate how to enhance landscapes by the inclusion of wildlife.
He will advise on how to select the most suitable Tinted Bockingford paper for your subject, show examples of his finished paintings and discuss the advantages of the Tinted Bockingford papers for watercolour painting.
Pastel Techniques for Landscape Painting with Jackie Simmonds
MONDAY 12 JULY 1993
Popular pastellist Jackie Simmonds will demonstrate and encourage students to explore different pastel techniques, using Schmincke pastels, and show how to translate these into landscape features.
Landscape elements such as skies, trees and foliage, textured foregrounds, water, moving and still, will be covered during the day.
Landscapes in Oil with David Curtis
MONDAY 26 JULY 1993
Versatile painter and member of the ROI, David Curtis will demonstrate his approach to landscape painting using Daler-Rowneys's Artists' Oil Colours.
David will demonstrate varied techniques and approaches, show you some of his oil paintings and tutor on this theme throughout the day.
ART IN NATURE
To celebrate The Artist's ‘Art in Nature’ exhibition we have organised four, one-day workshops for our readers on painting and drawing various aspects of nature.
These will be held during the course of the show at the International Centre for Wildlife Art in Gloucester.
Each workshop will include demonstrations and a full day's tuition from tutor, a FREE package of materials worth up to £70, morning coffee, buffet lunch, afternoon tea, and a critique of the work carried out during the day.
Places on the workshops are limited so please apply Now by sending your cheque/postal order and the booking form opposite indicating which of the workshops you would like to attend.
THE VENUE: The International Centre for Wildlife Art at Wallsworth Hall, near Twigworth, in Gloucestershire, is an ideal location for our workshops.
This imposing Georgian mansion on the edge of the beautiful Cotswolds houses the finest collection of wildlife art in all media from all parts of the world.
You will also be able to see the exhibition of selected and prize-winning works from our ‘Art in Nature’ open competition.
Other attractions include a nature garden and pond, life-size sculptures in the garden and art studios.
Flowers in Pastel with Frances Treanor
MONDAY 2 AUGUST 1993
Experienced tutor and demonstrator, and member of the Pastel Society, Frances Treanor will show her approach to flower painting using Conté Pastel Pencils, Conté Oil Pastels, Conté Carres Pastels and Conté Soft Pastels.
She will cover aspects such as geometric shapes and relationships, objective and subjective analysis, and colour and tone during the day's teaching.
Mick Rooney in conversation
‘I am constantly painting, scrubbing out and reworking areas of a picture and often marvellous unexpected results will emerge’ explained Mick Rooney when Julian Halsby asked him about his working methods in this special interview for The Artist 
Anyone visiting Royal Academy Summer Exhibitions will have noticed the unusual and striking work of Mick Rooney.
He is not a painter of the world in front of him, more a painter of ideas and thoughts.
‘All my paintings are ultimately about the human condition, figures doing something or nothing.
My work is based on things remembered or imagined rather than the real world around me.
I hope that my work is poetical and lyrical as a result.’
Rooney's large canvasses and works on paper are always memorable and, on reflection, I see his work as part of an English tradition of individual ‘eccentricity’ which stretches from Blake to Stanley Spencer, Paul Nash and Carel Weight.
Early Influences
Born in Epsom, Rooney left school young to join Sutton East Junior Art School.
He then went on to a pre-foundation course, then the intermediate course at Sutton Art School, followed by two years at Wimbledon Art School.
‘The old system of junior art schools worked well; you joined young, continued a general education in the morning, followed by art in the afternoon.
By the time I started my NDD I had already spent five years at art school.
Carel Weight visited Wimbledon and encouraged me to try for the Royal College.
This I did three times before getting in, largely on the strength of some Moroccan paintings I had recently completed.
Being perverse, having got into the RCA, I immediately became an abstract painter!
In 1967 I was awarded the Rome scholarship and I spent a marvellous year at the British School in Rome.
I saw the student riots in Rome and it was an experience which greatly moved me.
‘Coming back to England in 1968 was a hideous return to reality.
I lived in Hastings getting up at dawn every day to teach part-time in art colleges all over the country.
I showed paintings in many south coast towns and in the early 19802 began to show in London, first at the Patrick Searle Gallery in Motcomb Street and then at the Mercury Gallery, my present dealers.
I have now returned to live in London where I teach for two days a week at the Royal Academy Schools’.
We discussed the influences on his work.
‘Carel Weight has always been important to me both as a painter and as a father figure.
As a boy I liked the impressionists, but I soon turned away from them.
There is a certain romance about the way Impressionists and their followers lived and painted, but the idea of the artist working on the spot or in the studio with romantic bravura simply doesn't appeal to me.
For many years I never had a proper studio, just a room in the house, and, of course, I never work on the spot.
I try to be receptive, allowing images to develop in my mind.
I am influenced by many painters, usually those with a social or religious message such as Breughel, Velasquez, Goya, Delacroix, Gauguin or El Greco.
‘When my father died my mother took me on a trip to Spain and I was bowled over by the El Grecos.
You often need to see pictures in situ; those marvellous Caravaggios painted for Santa Maria del Popolo in Rome with their foreshortening calculated specifically for their position and their chiaroscuro sparkling in the candlelight.
As a student I admired Bratby, Prunella Clough and the Kitchen Sink School, but somehow it all fizzled out and abstraction took over.
I also look at other areas such as Persian and Indian miniatures, trecento Italian work, the German Expressionists such as Beckmann.
I am open to influences; I want to be ‘plugged in’ to all sorts of artistic movements.’
Why are we Leaving, 1989, oil on canvas, 34 × 38 in..(86.4 × 96.5 cm)
Materials and techniques
I asked Rooney how he set about completing a picture.
‘Maybe I'm perverse but I never plan a picture.
I have a general idea of what I want to express, but no specific imagery.
I often start with something agreeable such as a head which I will then paint over.
I am constantly painting, scrubbing out and reworking areas of a picture and often marvellous unexpected results will emerge.
For example I often paint an area with retouching varnish mixed with pigment as a glaze, then I absorb much of it with newspaper dabbed onto the canvas.
This can create marvellous textures which can themselves be reworked.
I also use this method on paper using egg yolk and water mixed with gouache; I apply it over a painted area with a big brush, then blot it out with newspaper.
‘I use a rough canvas for my oils so that many layers of paint can be absorbed into the grain.
If I were to use a fine grained canvas the paint would become thick and unworkable.
For paper I use a rough unsized paper which I stretch onto boards 5′ by 4′.
I then prepare the paper myself using rabbit skin glue and whiting.
I was once a professional cook and I still love mixing sauces.
I see the process of preparing paper and canvases as being similar to cooking, but less scientific.
‘My basic palette is composed mainly of Winsor & Newton paints and consists of terracotta, yellow ochre, Naples yellow, ultramarine, alizarin crimson, cadmium red, turquoise blue (Rembrandt colour) and white.
I never use black as only the Spanish could really use it.
For works on paper I often use a mixture of techniques applied in successive layers and these might include gouache, tempera, watercolour with acrylic applied as a final layer.
I also use oil on paper finishing with gouache over the top.
‘I paint about 30 pictures a year and I usually have about four on the go at once.
At the moment the economic climate is against artists and it is very difficult to sell anything; as a result I'm probably painting less.
Essentially I use paint as a vehicle for my ideas and I'm not interested in it for its own sake.
In fact I rather hate paint and I seem to be constantly at war with it.
It's like a love affair — long periods of war followed by peace when the problems are solved!
‘I am fascinated by the idea of focus.
I like to know that I can paint a hand or fingernail in great detail, almost photographically in contrast to areas of detail.
I also like to work one area in great detail and then to wash over the whole thing to blur it out.
I suppose I like a certain roughness in my work; I'm certainly not a ‘civilised’ painter.
By that I mean that I see the New English Art Club as standing for a cultured, civilised, very English approach to art — a kind of visual stability.
This is not my approach.’
Street Ceremonies, 1991, oil canvas 30 × 24 in. (76.2 × 61 cm)
Recent work
We turned our discussion to some of Rooney's recent projects.
‘An organisation called ‘Art for Work’ arranged for a commission for a large tapestry for TSB's headquarters in Birmingham.
I produced the original cartoon in tempera; it was entitled Treasure Trove and based on an Aesop Fable.
The cartoon was woven by Edinburgh Tapestry Company into a tapestry 8′ by 10′ and I found the whole process of an artist collaborating with weavers quite fascinating.
I tried to leave certain areas vague so they could use their own creativity rather than just copying my cartoon.
‘Another commission is a tie for Tie Rack based on an image from a recent painting.
In 1992 I was commissioned to design a plate for the Royal Academy to be made by Masons in Stoke-on-Trent, but possibly the most exciting commission is my poster for London Underground Windy Day, Brick Lane.
It is a fascinating project and I believe that it does really bring art to millions of people.’
I asked Rooney to discuss some of his recent paintings starting with ‘Why are we Leaving?painted in 1989.
‘I am interested in the plight of humans.
I have read Primo Levi's experience at Auschwitz and I produced a series of paintings based on the Holocaust which were exhibited together at the Mercury Gallery.
Why are we Leaving?is a related subject, portraying the condition of refugees waiting for deliverance.
I suppose the current situation in Yugoslavia influenced me.
Street Ceremonies arose as a result of a recent trip to Mexico; I did no painting while there, but relied upon my memory, trying to recall the things that really mattered such as street sounds.
I also bought books and Indian woodcuts.
I don't believe that you have to sit in front of a Mexican scene in order to paint Mexico.
If you want to paint a cactus you can always go to Kew Gardens, and likewise, I don't believe you  have to go to Africa to paint a lion.
This is a painting about the timelessness of Mexico, the moment the crown appeared, a distilled rather than a specific view.
Good Friday is about punks at Hastings, where I lived for many years, seen feeding a hot-cross bun to pigeons.
The punks are almost icons of modern life seen at Easter which is the beginning of the tourist season when Hastings comes to life.
Costa del Sol is a comment on the package holiday, a couple being serenaded by Antonio.
In contrast Lady Feeding a Parrot is a quiet scene of a typical French bourgeois interior, the sort of interior I image lurks behind the shutters in a small French provincial town.
It's an interior waiting for the arrival of Maigrait.
I hope that my painting stands beyond the moment; I want it to be about the human situation rather than a fleeting moment in time or a specific view’.
An artist apart
Mick Rooney is an artist who stands aside from the current vogue of somewhat conservative, civilised English painting as exemplified by Ken Howard and Bernard Dunstan.
He admires this tradition, but is not part of it.
He sees himself more as a poet, his mind receptive to many ideas and influences, some visual, some musical, some literary, which he amalgamates into his work in a similar way to Proust writing A La Research du Temps Perdu .
He has been an abstract painter and understands the pull of abstraction and the need for decorative patterns and composition.
‘If you turn an Italian trecento panel upside-down you have an abstract’, and he is also fascinated by the constant struggle between fine art and illustration in many modern paintings.
I found him a fascinating, knowledgeable and eclectic artist, someone who thinks deeply about his work and is not content simply to record the bare facts of the world in front of him.
Mick Rooney RA
was born in 1944 in Epsom.
He studied at Wimbledon College of Art from 1962–64; the Royal College of Art from 1964–67 and the British School in Rome from 1967–68.
He was elected an Associate of the Royal Academy in 1990 and became a Royal Academician in 1992.
Good Friday, 1984, gouache and tempera on paper, 40 × 36 in..(101.6 × 91.5cm)
All paintings reproduced courtesy of the Mercury Gallery
Costa del Sol, 1983, gouache and tempera, 38 × 34 in..(96.5 × 86.3 cm)
Lady Feeding a Parrot, 1986, gouache and tempera on paper, 34 × 29 in..(86.3 × 73.7 cm)
ASPECTS OF LANDSCAPE
4 Martin Taylor on skies, trees and grasses
Martin Taylor working from his jeep
Over the Fence towards Lamport , watercolour and body colour, 14 ¼ × 15 ½ in. (36.2 × 39.3 cm).
I realised many years ago that I was not a studio painter.
I wanted to paint landscape directly from nature.
With this came the decision to specialise in watercolour, even though I have a natural tendency towards the oil painter's way of thinking.
Watercolour is a very convenient medium to use in the field.
I only need to carry a few tubes of paint and some water in an old squash bottle, all packed into my fisherman's box which doubles for a seat, and my paper masking-taped down to my board.
I use 200lb Bockingford watercolour paper, which does not need to be stretched beforehand.
I spend days walking and looking for compositions.
Very often the ‘next picture’ presents itself after a spell of working when I least expect it.
It is very important at this time to make a quick drawing in my small sketchbook, as ideas are just as easily lost as they are found.
I think of my paintings as journeys into which the viewer enters, looks around, travels in, through and out.
I find many compositions on hills or high vantage points from where you can see into the far distance.
First the sky
My first consideration is the sky, which needs much thought.
Constable spent time closely studying clouds alone, and indeed we can learn much from the Masters by observing the colours they used.
I am always aware of the close relationship between sky and landscape and the effects of light upon it.
The sky needs to be worked as carefully as the tiniest twig or grass.
Studying the sky at any given moment through 360 degrees I can see all sorts of colours, tonal changes and different cloud formations.
But what really concerns me is the area directly relating to my composition.
The ‘white’ of the sky and clouds appears to me not as pure white, but as a very pale tone, so I start with a wash of cadmium orange fading out from the horizon upwards.
I am careful to make this only the slightest of tints, then from the top down I was in a tone of cerulean fading out into the orange.
Note the perspective of clouds and colour in the sky; how the clouds recede in distance nearer to the horizon.
The actual sky colour ‘blue’ may not necessarily be found straight from the tube.
I use 14 ml tubes of Artists' quality watercolour paint, and mix cerulean, French ultramarine, violet, Payne's grey, cobalt and neutral tint to achieve that elusive colour.
Neutral tint is a good base for the colour of  cloud shadows.
This can be dropped in when the sky washes are just damp.
I avoid generalistic spreads of very wet colour in favour of more careful work.
I try to maintain pure watercolour technique here, as the introduction of a white body colour such as gouache can lead to all sorts of awful problems.
It is sometimes necessary to overlay successive washes — when washes are bone dry — in order to create the depth of watercolour required.
Timing in watercolours is all important.
I never leave a wash until it is dry, as unwanted effects can occur right up to the last minute.
If you look at the skies of the Victorian watercolour artists, in particular Miles Birket Foster, you will see how ‘drawn’ they are.
It is possible to paint with quite a small brush the details of shadows and shapes of clouds — in fact more so than is generally accepted.
Finally, I use dampened white toilet tissue to get rid of any hard lines that may have occurred in my sky, and most importantly I try not to overwork or rework the sky once I am satisfied, just because I see another effect.
Right Off the Lane at Hanging Houghton, fully worked preliminary pencil drawing for The Lane at Hanging Houghton, 15 ¼ × 16 ¼ in. (38.5 × 41 cm).
Martin always starts by working out the elements in detailed pencil drawings which become works in their own rights, before lightly sketching in the compositions for his paintings
Watercolour and acrylics
As well as the scale of the drawing, distance is achieved through the use of colour and aerial perspective.
I must add here that I do not use any ready-made greens as I prefer to mix my own colours: azo yellow light, cadmium yellow medium, and titanium white mixed with my blues for this, with the addition of burnt sienna, yellow ochre and Vandyke brown for the earth colours.
Popular advice on watercolour technique would be to use pale tones of the correct colour and to allow the white of the paper to show through.
I ‘distance’ my colour by layering washes of white acrylic.
It takes some nerve, and it seems as though I am eradicating what I have, but the white ‘sinks’ and through practice it is possible to judge the correct strength.
This technique originated from the need for correction, as colour dries differently from its appearance when wet.
I feel that the effect of my white washes gives an airy, atmospheric quality.
Trees and grasses
Coming to the middle distance, I now encounter trees.
In the winter months when the trees are bare I use a pen with a nib to draw the branches with the paint.
I apply the paint to the nib with a brush.
This allows me to mix any colour I want, and to be economic as I have no need for numerous bottles of ink.
ABOVE: The Lane at Hanging Houghton, half completed, water colour and body colour, 15¼ × 16¼ in. (38.5 × 41 cm).
Starting from the left-hand side, Martin works across the picture, completing the work in small areas as he goes along.
At times whole sections will be finished while others remain blank.
In the smaller areas he starts with pure watercolour but then uses white and yellow acrylic to enable him to work back light over dark.
This allows him to add further washes if he wishes and the painting progresses in layers until he is fully satisfied
LEFT The finished painting: The Lane at Hanging Houghton
The medium is also consistent throughout.
The same effects can be achieved with an 000 size sable brush and very often the point at which the brush takes over from the pen is indiscernible.
The nib allows for greater speed and directness of drawing.
Light on branches can be overlaid with the yellow and white acrylic paint used with a dry brush technique, followed by  subsequent washes.
Spinney Silhouette, watercolour and body colour, 10¼ × 20 in. (27.3 × 50.8 cm).
Often taking up a large part of the composition, a sky establishes mood and atmosphere
There are no shortcuts to the painting of leaves.
It is worth noting here the scale of brushmarks used to create depth, and I try to see the mass of form as well as its parts.
I enjoy focusing in on single leaves and always try to differentiate between tree types: the oak, ash and sycamore.
The outer leaves are very important for the effect of the painting, especially against the sky, whereas it is possible to lose myself in the inner masses to some extent.
I am aware of the light source and how this affects the tree as a whole.
I see the tree very much in the round and try to create depth rather than just a silhouette.
Underneath the trees and in the closer edges of fields I spend hours layering grasses and nettles.
For years I tried to paint around grasses and tried masking fluid; however neither approach gave me a satisfactory result.
I now use washes of neutral tint, indigo, Vandyke brown and Payne's grey for the darkest colours, and when bone dry will overlay each grass in turn with a fine brush.
In a similar way to leaves, I again use white and yellow acrylic paint for putting line over line, then washes until the required depth is achieved.
The use of acrylic colours in my palette allows me in all aspects of landscape painting to correct and add light; in fact it enables me to work more in the manner of an oil painter.
It is a struggle to paint grasses in a true watercolour technique and the purist may well react against the use of white and acrylic here, but I have found a release from the restrictions of technique through this method and comfort myself with the knowledge that white has been in common use by artists throughout the history of watercolour painting.
White is also particularly useful when depicting cow parsley or May blossom — so characteristic of their season.
A detailed approach
After the sky and distance, I proceed to work from top left to bottom right, and prefer to complete small sections as I go.
This allows my hand to remain clear of the work.
My compositions are usually carefully worked out through separate preliminary drawings, often also in great detail.
These drawings stand as works in their own right, and in fact I see painting as an extension of drawing with the added dimension of colour.
Sometimes, though, I will begin on a central motif, such as a tree trunk, right in the middle of a blank sheet, and having established that will then proceed to work left to right across the paper as already mentioned.
Here the composition may unfold and develop as I work.
Either way, all of this is contrary to the popular understanding of the overall build of a watercolour painting.
These are not paintings employing the wonderful accidental effects of free watercolour washes that so many artists adopt, though most of this goes on with the underneath base washes.
Painting by this method I am told requires great patience, and it does indeed take time to achieve such detail.
My paintings are, I hope, works of contemplation and meditation, and they encapsulate the joy of seeing and recreating nature in all its finest detail.
ABOVE Seeing Through , watercolour and body colour, 14 × 21 ¼ in. (35.6 × 54 cm).
For the dark lines of bare tree branches Martin uses a pen loaded with paint.
Sometimes a finger pressed over semi-wet paint will create a controlled smudge for distant branches.
Light is then added by painting with acrylic colours over trunks, branches, fence posts or where branches cross and shadow
BELOW April Landscape with Blackthorn Blossom , watercolour and body colour, 13 ¼ × 15 ½ in. (33.6 × 39.3 cm).
Grasses are applied in fine, light lines using a fine brush loaded with acrylic paint.
White acrylic mixed with cadmium orange, yellow ochre or burnt sienna allows Martin to overlap and cross-hatch.
As acrylic dries quickly he can then wash over, apply more light lines, wash over again and so on until the required depth is achieved
All paintings reproduced courtesy of Chris Beetles Ltd
Martin Taylor
Was born in 1954 in Middlesex.
He studied at Ealing School of Art, Wimbledon School of Art, Goldsmith's College and later taught at a comprehensive school in Essex.
In 1987 he moved to Northamptonshire to paint full-time.
His work can be seen regularly at the Chris Beetles Gallery, where he is having a solo exhibition from March 31-April 16 
THE WONDERS OF WILDLIFE
In the first of a new series Peter Partington shows how to draw birds by looking for the essential scaffolding of shapes on which to build form and detail
Art styles and techniques may have changed but our subject, the bird, has not.
The shapes of birds themselves can be fairly simple; but at the same time they are subtle.
To master something of the knowledge to put them down on paper not only requires some study and drawing skills, but I believe a sense of rhythm as well.
And your memory will improve!
Do not be discouraged from drawing by complexities of plumage or the mobility of smaller birds.
Hedge sparrows and woodpeckers, for example, rarely remain still, but are accessible with a little study and knowledge.
Some of the larger birds can remain stationary for many minutes and the poses they adopt are all interesting and therefore present easier subjects.
When we start with the basics, any short cuts to understanding and drawing them are valuable.
Let us study three birds which are very different in anatomy and lifestyle.
They may co-habit in the landscape but their ecological niches make very different physical demands and their shapes have evolved accordingly: they are the barn owl, the herring gull and the mallard duck.
FIGURE 1 Three triangles make a gull!
Or at least the basis for further development.
All accurate drawing depends on finding the underlying forms.
Character, plumage, feather details, light and shade can be worked in over this framework.
The upright posture of the owl is very different from the gull.
It often perches on posts listening and looking with its large eyes, which are dark and elfin-like.
They almost look human.
If we can capture that human look it helps to characterise the bird
Shapes behind Shapes
Fundamental to all accurate drawing is the search for the shape behind the shape; the scaffolding on which to hang form and detail.
Owls, the barn owl in particular, seem to be all head whether at rest or in flight.
The long wings fold easily over the small body.
Reduced to its simplest elements the owl's form can be drawn as an ice-cream cone shape; a large circle atop an inverted triangle.
To develop the scaffolding, add more lines to indicate the folded wings and begin describing the legs and feet.
To the circle of the ‘head’ add the heart shaped facial discs that are so characteristic of this owl and from this work out the eye position.
You can see that by adding more detail to the eyes, feet and feathers as well as shading you can carry this as far as you wish to go (Figure 1).
The ‘three-triangle’ gull arose from a student's problem whilst on a course in Wales.
The bleak rocks which interested her in the landscape were liberally salted with nesting gulls.
The triangular format was a simple solution to the problem of indicating gull personality and presence without going into needless detail.
Gulls are gliding birds and thus have long narrow wings.
At rest they consist mostly of head and neck and their wings project well beyond the tail.
The neck is conical, narrowing to the head which itself is a pointed shape.
It can be difficult finding the leg position so remember that most of the gull's weight is forward; so place them almost under and in line with the head.
This first sketch can be completed by adding the small eye and the hatchet shaped bill (Figure 1).
Ducks are amongst the most popular birds; not least because of their amusing gait on land and for their grace in the water.
The guidelines drawn here (Figure 2) are based on the familiar mallard, a dabbling duck and the pochard, a more streamlined diving duck.
Here we almost enter the realms of the calligrapher.
By taking the duck's eye as a centre and developing a spiral out from it then altering direction for the bill the duck's head can be formed from these rhythms; in this case the ‘noble’ profile of the pochard.
Dabblers like the mallard seem to demand that the spiral moves clockwise from the eye over the full round forehead.
I  would always encourage students to carry on playing with these rhythms and curves that the full shape of these ducks demand.
A complete contrast to these three species must be the tiny passerines like the chats, the tits and the finches for example.
The simple childhood device for sketching them by superimposing a small egg shape for the body remains unrivalled.
A line through the eye to place the bill is helpful, although in fact the eye is slightly higher.
A cursory line from the eye to bisect the body helps to supply the tail angle.
To find the angle of the legs draw them from well back under the tail coverts and place the feet under the head to balance the body (Figure 3).
From a front view the small birds can look almost circular and a circle drawn within a circle can quickly capture, for instance, a robin when seen head on.
Other small birds like the house sparrow can follow a similar format but have squarer crowns to the head.
The flycatcher stands up more stiffly.
As you learn more about the character of individual species the more you can build on this simple approach.
The egg shape is a clue to building in the sense of rhythm when drawing the small birds; you can practise drawing ovals and thus build up bird shapes.
It is worth remembering that a sparrow has more vertebrae in its neck than a giraffe.
This enables its neck to stretch, coil and almost revolve the head; the most extreme example being the owl.
Even at rest, the sparrow's neck will suggest an ‘S’ shape, adding further to the rhythmic flow.
This is even more apparent in the long necked birds such as the heron, which has one special vertebrae in the middle of its neck which enables it to thrust its head suddenly at unsuspecting fish.
Its neck, when coiled, forms a broken ‘S’ shape (Figure 4).
This imparts a rhythm to the neck even when it is straight and gives a sense of alertness and tensile strength.
This long neck and dignified strut makes the heron's posture an enduring image.
It often stands motionless in pools for long periods and is easily watched from a car or hide.
FIGURE 2 of all the birds, ducks seem to have the most rhythmic lines — here the head can be resolved from controlled spirals.
The golfclub head, large crop, strong breast muscles create these and they taper off to the tail with a harmonious unity.
Duck A's curves reflect the streamlined head of a diving species.
The mallard (C) is altogether more relaxed.
To master the head-on view, use a tall rectangle with a figure of eight within it.
Duck legs (D) are sturdy, the toes joined by a web, and lack a rear toe
Above FIGURE 3 A flock of small birds.
As children we rendered a bird as a small on a larger one.
Build on it, as I have done to create permutations of shape.
A longer wing or tail here, a different beak there create new species.
The small birds move quickly, and this presents a challenge.
When you draw them at the birdtable do not be afraid to put down any characteristics squiggle.
You may find you can develop this into tits and finches you have been watching.
I always use a soft pencil as it glides over the page.
A trace of colour added to the sketch will help the memory as well Left FIGURE 4 The longer-necked birds, the cranes and the herons are much beloved by artists.
The heron's special neck vertebrae provides it with the speed to spear fish and donates to the neck a broken ‘S’ shape which is very dynamic.
This is evident when the bird coils its neck (D) and is suggested even when the neck is straight (B).
The grebes and the  cormorants (G) appear to possess this snaking form.
The storks and cranes (H) who forage for their food have a neck with a sagging curve — elegant, nevertheless
Right FIGURE 5 This diagrammatic sketch is meant to demonstrate the elements involved in the movement of legs and wings.
In the robin (A) the ‘arm’ beneath the feathers is extended as if for flight, and folded within the ‘wrist’well up under the cheek.
The pheasant (B) illustrates where the true knee might be, and how the bird rests on its leverage to walk or to stretch out its legs
Above FIGURE 6 On a cold day in the fields, red-legged partridges can become spherical in shape, and sit round looking like a collection of footballs.
All birds obey the perspective of round objects.
Like the human head, features disappear very quickly round the corner.
A slight change of angle and a full wing shape becomes distorted into a thin one.
In (A) the feathers have been treated as sculptural masses, which fold round the form.
This is useful on which to hang feather patterning.
In (C) the bird is aroused and has elongated its form and (D) is feeding, circles within circles.
Wood pigeons (E) and (F) are hardly more than partridges with shorter leg and longer tail
Bird anatomy
Now we should have a look at further aspects of avian anatomy and keeping terminology to a minimum.
Many beginners have difficulty in bending the knee, and I don't mean to their art tutor!
I am referring, of course, to the fact that birds' knees apparently bend in the opposite direction to ours — they appear to lift their legs backwards in contrast to our forward movement (Figure 5).
The solution to the enigma lies in the fact that the bird's ‘knee’ is not a knee but more akin to an ankle; it is walking on its toes rather as a cat walks on its hind feet.
The actual knee is concealed beneath the plumage and is almost contiguous with the body.
You can understand this is you can imagine yourself crouching with your knees close to your chest and balancing on your toes at the same time.
You can see why the bird needs such a spread of toes to keep balance, but also why they are so springy.
Our own arm bones correspond roughly to the bird wing bones.
Our fingers can imitate the primary feathers and we can fold the elbow in a similar way.
In small birds ‘wrist’ is folded up tight almost under the cheeks (Figure 5).
To realise this is a great help in capturing their posture.
Drawing feathers becomes easier when you perceive the way they often form into well defined masses.
Individual feathers clad the bird's body almost like roof-tiling.
Try to see these masses and not see each individual feather as a separate entity and use the patterns of plumage to reinforce the bird's colour and form (Figure 6).
Sometimes, of course, the plumage is designed to break up and visually disrupt the bird's body, like the red-legged partridge with its ‘dazzle’ camouflage.
It is here that the visual cat and mouse game in nature becomes so fascinating lending itself to multifold design possibilities.
Drawing feet demands some more applied study in anatomy and perspective.
Being lazy myself I sometimes conceal them in grass, water or strategic pebbles — happily often observed like that in any case.
Perching birds use the feet to grip branches as we use our hands.
They make a fist-like shape when clutching something.
Use your own hand as a model for this — with your thumb reversed behind.
Left FIGURE 7 The gliding flight of gulls — the further wing leads as it approaches (A, B and C) and trails as it departs (D).
The wings close slightly and become more angular as the wind-speed increases (E), when stooping for food, the gull spills air by raising its wings (F).
A herring gull (G) hardly moving a feather as it follows a boat, the long wings are foreshortened dramatically as we view them from the side
Flight patterns and movement
Flying is the most enviable of avian skills.
In small birds it can hardly be rendered except  as a blur of wings; we can sometimes see their wingspread clearly when they threaten each other or quarrel at bird tables.
The full expression of flight can really be conjured up when drawing the gliders and soarers.
Prettiest amongst these must be the gulls and terns.
Their wings are the long and narrow ones that belong to the born gliders.
In the updraughts of cliffs or when following boats out to sea they can fly with barely a movement of their wings and thus make ideal subjects for study (Figure 7).
As they approach the viewer whether from right or left the far-side wing, perspective wise, will lead the near wing.
As it goes away the reverse is the case.
Wing joints and flight angles of this family present interesting problems.
One answer is to cut out a gull in white paper and sketch it from all angles; at other times you can catch these interesting shapes with a camera.
Use any means available to increase your understanding.
The watercolour sketch I have started here Gulls Feeding (Figure 8) is a compilation and uses repetition of the shapes in the sketches to build up a sense of activity.
Eagles by contrast are soaring birds which rise on hot-air thermals appearing to balance their ‘barn-door’ shapes on their ‘finger-tips’— the long primaries on the end of their wings which smooth the air-flow at slow speeds.
Their wings are often swept forward slightly although they can close them and dive at tremendous speeds (Figure 9).
An eagle diving to the hand from 500 feet whistling down like an express train is a sight not often forgotten.
It would take a number of sketches and some research should you wish to recreate such a dramatic visual experience.
Equally exhilarating are the slow circles across the sky that buzzards make on summer days.
It is interesting to realise how different the emotional effect in a painting can be when different species of flying birds are portrayed.
An eagle looking down from above implies a threat whereas a heron flying from A to B suggests a more peaceable purpose.
I will explore this theme in the future.
Enjoyable exploration
In conclusion, how much you as an artist needs to know about bird structure and character is your choice.
I have hardly covered the basics here let alone the wide range of bird species that are waiting out there to be explored through drawing.
I suggest that you will derive much enjoyment from drawing stuffed birds, skeletons, photographs, videos as well as wild birds.
You may wish to recreate realistically the feather and form you see before you or, as I do, enjoy the birds' interaction with light, weather and locale.
Take as much as you need of the information I have provided.
Above all, however much you feel you do not know, never be afraid to respond with immediacy to what you see before you.
Use any medium, charcoal, ink or pencil to explore and express the richness and vitality of the bird world.
Peter Partlington
is the author of Learn to Paint Birds in Watercolour , published in 1989 by HarperCollins.
For equipment and materials for sketching birds in situ he recommends a good cartridge sketchbook, 6B pencils, a halfpan watercolour box, square tipped and fine brushes, a small watercolour block, water jar and water bottle, a camera and binoculars 
FIGURE 8 Black headed gulls in winter — hence their black heads are lacking.
I have used the sketches of gulls in flight to compose this study for a vertical composition — a gathering around food.
Repetitions and variations can be easily built up easily to create an atmosphere like this.
Here I have used a soft pencil to describe the birds after tracing them out.
Black lighting is suggested by painting the shadows in a mixture of raw sienna and grey.
The clouds, sea and sky were permanent blue and light red with touches of Winsor blue.
The upper wings of the gulls were painted a deeper shade of the cloud grey
Below FIGURE 9 Birds of prey in flight (A).
The long rectangle of the eagles' wing-spread which you can draw into to suggest ‘wrist’ and ‘elbows’, and a slight forward sweep.
The long fingers of the primary feathers can be opened or closed (C).
When diving on its prey (E) the long wings close up and the ‘allula’ or little wing becomes apparent.
On the ground the eagles' wings must be folded and the rugged shape is echoed in its posture, and in the head from front and side view
The art business
USING YOUR INITIATIVE
Many artists derive enormous rewards in terms of feedback for future work by working in or with the public.
Oliver Lange looks at residencies, sponsorship and other initiatives and shows how useful these can be for artists.
ABOVE Janet Boulton Patient with Electric Fan, watercolour and pencil, 9 × 13 in. (22.8 × 33 cm)
RIGHT Janet Boulton Oxygen Time for Alice, watercolour and pencil, 16 × 10 in. (40.6 × 25.4 cm)
Both paintings were completed during the artist's appointment as artist-in-residence at Radcliffe Infirmary.
The residency was set up for the Oxfordshire Area Health Authority by the City Gallery Arts Trust
Soutine and Van Gogh are amongst those well-known artists who epitomise a resilience, passion and selfless devotion to their work.
Whilst few would wish to emulate their struggle, many would like to rival the quality and impact of their paintings.
Most artists, like everyone else, need some points of success to help fire their enthusiasm and keep them going.
Not unreasonably, they need to make a living and survive with a degree of comfort.
But financial prosperity, of course, is only part of the story.
Ideally this does not ensue from flagrant compromises in outlook and working methods but rather as a result of being true to real aims and objectives.
The complete freedom to work entirely in an individual way eludes most artists.
Nevertheless, our personal philosophy and artistic goals must always play their important part in shaping our destiny.
And our work remains healthy if a sense of achievement is tempered by a constant appetite to explore new problems and ideas.
The equation of balancing artistic integrity with commercial considerations is further influenced by the relationship of artist to patron and public.
How far should he who pays the piper call the tune?
Works of art are not a high priority in most people's lives; a recession soon underlines this point!
The artists business acumen and creative powers can therefore be stretched to the limit!
Mere survival apart, some artists need to finance projects which will help the long-term development of their work.
Other view the relationship between artist and public as one which should be bridged in a more direct manner.
Exhibitions are fine, but they often assume an impersonal and detached form.
Many artists see the value in or with the public, breaking down barriers and thriving on the experience and feed-back for their future work.
Problems of making ends meet, financing special projects, and getting involved in public commissions and placements are often all interlinked.
In this context residencies, sponsorship and other initiatives can sometimes provide a solution.
Residencies and placements
Working in a situation which encourages general contact with the public or involves their active participation creates advantages for both the artist and his audience.
This is an opportunity for the public to gain a better awareness and understanding of the work of the artist, whilst he or she in turn can benefit from questioning and discussion if this leads to constructive self-evaluation and the stimulation of a fresh direction.
Here is more than the chance to do a bit of direct selling or attract further commissions; there should be the desire to communicate and work with others.
Residencies and placements can take several forms: in schools, hospitals and factories and other institutions the artist might divide time between personal work and teaching, demonstrating or consultation; the concept of transplanting the studio can also be adapted to other venues, for example an arts centre or library; working on a public commission or community project the artist would aim to involve others in the planning and execution of the idea.
In all of these situations the relationship between artist and public is important.
An interchange of ideas, skill-sharing and instruction could all be involved.
This sort of placement or residency would be for a period of time, perhaps weeks or months, so there must be a commitment of time as well as purpose on the part of the artist.
Residencies will not always prove very rewarding financially, although some public schools, for example, offer quite attractive terms for their artist-in-residence.
The rewards, both financial and artistic, of any proposition have to be carefully assessed.
People-contact may be important to you and having your work exposed and publicised can be advantageous.
This can lead to other opportunities and commissions.
It also has to be said that the number of residencies and placements have been severely curtailed  recently by the cost-saving measures of many authorities and organisations.
However, opportunities still exist and the contacts listed here should help in exploring various possibilities.
Any sort of placement depends for its success on a good working relationship between artist, organiser and location.
The aims and intention of any project need to be identified and discussed.
The artist will seek a project which suits his or her work yet offer some challenges and opportunities.
The organiser or sponsor will, of course, want something in return.
This will usually take the form of a piece of work, a series of lectures, an agreed number of sessions devoted to teaching or consultation, or working as co-ordinator and adviser for a project group.
Avoid situations where you are merely an added attraction or gimmick!
Get an agreement in writing of the conditions, expectations and remuneration for your residency.
As well as investigating lists and potential backers, consider if there are way in which you could instigate a residency which would match your particular skills and expectations to the benefits, tangible or otherwise, for a particular firm or organisation.
There is an increasing number of local authorities, universities and schools wishing to try out the artist-in-residence idea.
Any schemes which promote the arts and lead to a wider understanding are obviously most welcome.
There are now more adventurous ways of teaching and examining art and design, with greater emphasis on the educative value of the subject, particularly in developing critical and aesthetic judgements.
The contact with ‘real’ artists is therefore extremely valid.
A school placement, like those in other community situations, usually allows time to be divided between personal work and participation in discussions, teaching and similar activities.
Here, as in a factory, hospital, prison or whatever, the artist must respond to the particular environment and the special needs of those involved.
And whatever the reasons for considering a residency, there is little point in merely setting up your studio somewhere else and carrying on with your work oblivious to new surroundings and fresh inspiration.
Large-scale public commissions and community schemes, such as housing estate and subway murals, are often forms of residency.
These often involve enthusing and organising others to create a work which is obviously for the community rather than the artist.
Similarly, in some other placements the artist will act as adviser and consultant, offering expertise and information rather than creating actual works of art.
Whatever the type of residency it is interesting and helpful to evaluate your experience whether through an exhibition or a written report.
Sponsorship
As with residencies, a sponsorship package must see advantages to both parties.
Certain funds are available from Regional Art Boards, local authorities and some trusts and charities.
Again, the contacts listed here will point you in the right direction.
However, don't be afraid to use your own initiative and approach individual firms and organisations.
Target your proposed sponsor carefully.
Why are they suitable?
What will they gain?
It is probably best to avoid approaching the obvious High Street names as they receive so many requests.
Try smaller local companies who might benefit from some publicity or for whom you could attract extra business or perhaps create an enduring and prestigious work of art.
Sponsorships and commissions can therefore be linked.
They could involve funding from a number of different sources.
A community mural project, for example, might attract backing from the Regional Arts Board, the local authority, shops, firms and organisations within the community, and artists' suppliers.
Other sponsorships could be for travel or study overseas or for specific research or a long-term project.
The personal approach is best: telephone or arrange a preliminary discussion.
If your possible sponsor sounds interested, arrange to return with a proper, detailed proposal.
You must sound dedicated and convincing.
Remember that you will be often attempting the hard-sell on people who are used to aggressive business practices.
Seeking sponsorship is hard work yet the right investment of time and planning could help to set up an opportunity which will have long-lasting benefits to your artistic career and reputation.
Other initiatives
Commissions for companies, public places and so on are usually advertised in the press and art magazines.
But if you see an office wall, an open space or some other situation simply crying out for your work, why not check if the owner would be interested in commissioning something?
Other initiatives, such as skill-sharing and studio-sharing, forming a group or association, or joining an arts guild, can help reduce some of the financial overheads or create cheaper and often better ways of exhibiting work.
The attractiveness of these ideas will depend, of course, on the nature of your work and whether you could contribute to and benefit from working with others.
Some associations specialise in offering advice and information and some contact sources are included here.
ANIMALS BIRDS AND LANDSCAPES
SKETCHING AND PAINTING COURSE IN AUSTRIA WITH Peter Partington
From May 5 to 15, 1993
The Artist invites you to learn, or improve your techniques in the field with expert and enthusiastic tuition from well-known artist, water-colourist and tutor Peter Partington.
The course is designed to assist everyone interested in wildlife art, from the bird watcher who wishes to record and paint more effectively, to the painter, beginner or more experienced, who wants to discover and appreciate birds as a subject for expression.
Our studies will look at colour, light, plumage, behaviour and the landscape they inhabit.
We will spend informal days in the field when Peter will encourage us to use our sketchbooks to maximum effect.
The information we gather will give us months of future material to work from — there will be opportunities both indoors and out to expand our notes into larger works if we wish.
Peter will be on hand to assist our drawing and painting, and will be working alongside us.
He will demonstrate techniques and approaches and help us with our questions as they arise.
On some evenings he will lecture with slides of his own and other nature artists' work, followed by lively discussion.
Other talks will cover colour, composition and capturing animal personality in drawing.
National parks and wildlife sanctuaries provide as near perfect conditions as you can expect for painting wildlife and we have chosen the Seewinkel area and Lake Neusiedl in Austria as our base.
This is an 18 mile long lake fringed with reed beds containing a breathtaking spectrum of birdlife.
Our local guide will give us an unrivalled insight into places of interest and bird habitat.
There can be few other places in Europe which offer the wildlife art student such a plethora of interesting species; Black Necked Grebe, Spoonbill, and Purple Heron to name only a few.
More than 250 species of bird can be seen here and thousands of waders, geese, ducks and marshland birds.
Hidden in the reed beds we will also find brown frogs, red-bellied toads and colourful dragonflies.
Jetties, piers and hides have been built out into the reeds and these make ideal observation platforms.
Alternatively we can rent a small boat and row along the channels through the reeds and into the lakes.
The area is also home to scores of storks every summer.
These magnificent white birds start to arrive in April and stay until August.
They nest on the roof-tops of the villages, providing further unique painting opportunities.
The villages in this area are picturesque with white-washed houses, brightly painted windows and doors, flower filled window boxes and hanging baskets.
This has been a wine producing area for years and there are many ‘heurigen’(wine houses), with their ornately carved wooden gates leading through to shady courtyards and ‘Flaschenwein’ signs indicating that local wine is available.
There are endless painting subjects in these delightful rural villages.
Illmitz is such a village and is in the heart of the Seewinkel area, providing an ideal base for our course.
From the village there is a three mile causeway down to the water's edge where there are reed-beds.
Our hotel, Zur Post, is a former coaching inn and provides comfortable accommodation including a restaurant, lounge bar and studio facilities.
All 40 bedrooms have private facilities.
This will be an instructional and practical course, most of which will take place in the field, with supplementary lectures and slide presentations.
Places will be restricted so please book early.
The cost per person in a twin room is £1095.
Single rooms are available for a supplement of £50.
The cost includes: return scheduled flights, private coach for transfers and four days' use in the local area, ten nights at Hotel Zur Post, Illmitz, breakfast and dinner daily, tuition from Peter Partington, the services of a professional travel director, travel insurance, porterage and basic gratuities.
For further details and a booking form please contact   
HERRINGBROOM Studio
Three artists have come together to paint and teach in an idyllic setting in West Sussex.
They explain the principles behind their idea for this place of intensive and serious study for painters of all levels
Herringbroom Studio has been developed by three working painters — Piers Ottey, Catherine Somerville and Christopher Baker.
Each felt the need to study and take their work to a more intensive level following a year painting together from the life model at Piers Ottey's studio.
Here, they were inspired by the energy produced by their exchange of ideas and approaches compared with the limitations of painting alone.
After losing Piers behind a seven foot canvas and unable to negotiate an easy exit between pots, palettes, paints and general pandemonium, the three artists concluded they no longer has enough space.
At the same time a derelict barn offered the possibility of a new and spacious studio, and after several meetings the idea of Herringbroom Studio was born.
As all three painters also taught, the project developed to include the idea of classes and workshops which would be ‘intensive’ and ‘serious’.
The combination of painting and teaching together in one venue has obvious advantages.
As the links between painting and teaching are close, the mixture of the two elements has important consequences.
With this in mind, careful consideration has been given to light, heating, working space, study areas, library and audio-visual facilities.
The studio is set in the heart of the South Downs surrounded by woods and fields with Lavington Common, once home to the painter Ivon Hitchens, only a two minute walk away.
The combination of practising painters.
ideal facilities, the surrounding landscape and desire for uncompromising inquiry gives Herringbroom Studio its unique spirit.
The tutors
Piers Ottey, Catherine Somerville and Christopher Baker are all graduates and have each been painting for over 20 years.
Piers Ottey studied at Chelsea School of Art, where he obtained an honours degree in Fine Art.
Christopher Baker studied at West Surrey College of Art and Design and at Gloucestershire College of Art and Design gaining a landscape scholarship from the Royal Academy.
He later studied art in education at Exeter University.
Catherine Somerville studied at York University, Toronto gaining a degree in Fine Art, and later studied printmaking with Robert Patterson at Georgian College.
Their backgrounds have an important bearing on their teaching.
The intellectual foundation of Piers Ottey's work, with its emphasis on drawing and life painting, influences his classes.
Since moving to Sussex, landscape has become an important vehicle for his ideas.
But it is in the study of the life model, with its cool observation and eloquent construction that his passionate interest can be seen.
The wish to retain an awareness of the two-dimensional quality of the surface is behind all his work.
Catherine Somerville brings to her work a wide experience of people and places and a dramatic sense of colour which is combines with her ability as a draughtswoman.
Her work is deeply involved with landscape and shows an insight that is also seen in her portraiture.
She reflects these concerns in her teaching.
Christopher Baker's work, once founded on her romantic nature of landscapes, embodies a deep and sensitive understanding of tone and atmosphere, and is already well-known to The Artist readers.
Latterly his painting has shown a new freedom of expression, developed through a complex series of preliminary works to final canvas.
His technical freedom combined with an orderly classical method influences his teaching.
Embodied in the concept of Herringbroom Studio is a wide experience of oil painting, watercolour and mixed media, as well as an understanding of the technicalities and mechanics of these media.
Herringbroom is not concerned with conquering a technique, however, or showing an impressive facility; it is about approach, about an attitude that allows the student to evolve, to move forward within his or her own work.
The logo, a life study of a foreshortened figure, represents an ideal of development.
Inside Herringbroom Studio
Catherine Somerville Jessica , oil, 8 × 14 in. (20.2 × 35.5 cm).
Piers Ottey Julie , oil, 36 × 48 in. (91.5 × 122 cm)
Christopher Baker Portsmouth , oil, 20 × 30 in. (50.8 × 76.2 cm)
WATERCOLOUR PAPERS
WEIGHTS AND SURFACES
Carmi Weingrod outlines the factors a watercolourist needs to consider when selecting papers and explains how papers differ in their absorbency, texture, weight and colour
I do not believe that any other paint system can be applied as thinly as a watercolour wash and still yield as much colour brilliance.
This is largely the result of the white, coarse-fibred paper traditionally used with the medium.
The real beauty of watercolour lies in the ability of the paper, with the help of the gum arabic binder, to hold the pigment particles within its fibres — thus reflecting light from the pigment itself, as well as the paper's surface.
In this way, the paper contributes to the illuminating play of colour and light found only in watercolour painting.
Because the paper is so critical to the final outcome of the painting, watercolourists generally prefer high quality papers that will not yellow over time and minimise the original brilliance of the washes.
The finest quality watercolour papers are either hand-made or mould-made.
The latter are made on a slowly-rotating machine called a cylinder-mould, and the resulting sheet closely resembles a hand-made sheet in appearance, though the deckle edges are generally more regular and less pronounced than those of a hand-made sheet.
Today, a fine selection of quality papers is available to watercolourists and no doubt there is among them one that best matches your painting style.
After deciding that a paper looks, feels and smells to your liking, a few other factors should be considered.
I have found absorbency, texture and weight to be the three most important.
And for those watercolourists who choose to stray from the white papers traditionally used with the medium,colour is a fourth factor to review.
Jeanne Dobie Cornish Sea Village, watercolour on Arches 140lb Not surface paper, 12 × 16 in. (30.5 × 40.6cm)
There are a number of tests you can conduct in your studio which will reveal one sheet's attributes over another — in terms of absorbency, texture, weight and colour.
While I have included some of my own test results here, yours will be far more valuable.
Many of the colour differences among papers are very subtle; although you can detect them with your eye, they are perhaps too subtle to be translated into the four colour printing process used in magazine productions.
Consider the sizing
Of all the factors a watercolourist must consider when selecting paper, sizing is perhaps the most critical.
Sizing is added to make the paper less absorbent.
Papermakers use a variety of synthetic resin, starch and organic gelatin sizes in the manufacture of watercolour papers.
The amount of sizing determines the paper's resistance to water penetration and abrasion, as well as its printability and porosity.
Sizing affects the way washes sit on the surface of the paper and the degree of luminosity with which they dry.
It also determines the paper's resilience to scraping and other colour removal techniques.
Watercolour papers undergo different sizing treatments at various stages of the papermaking process — applied internally or externally.
Internal sizes are mixed into the vat with all the other ingredients at the pulp stage of the papermaking process.
Tub-sizing occurs in a vat after the paper has been formed and dried.
During submersion, the paper fibres become thoroughly saturated with sizing.
Some papers are also surface-sized, which prevents bleeding or additional absorption.
A paper without any sizing is called a waterleaf .
Most Japanese papers traditionally are made in this way, as are some printmaking papers.
Japanese papers contain extremely long fibres which make them very strong, even in the presence of water.
But because there is no sizing, colours tend to bleed or dry with blurry outlines.
Note the way the same wash responds when applied to a rough hand-made waterleaf and Fabriano Esportazione Rough, which is sized.
Although waterleaf  effects are more characteristic of sumi-é painting than of traditional watercolour, some western artists enjoy painting on waterleaf papers.
The same colour can appear subtly different on papers manufactured at different mills, due to the variance in type and amount of sizing used.
The best way to compare papers is to mix up a batch of wash colour and apply it similarly to different sheets of watercolour paper (Not surface), as I've done here.
For the sake of convenience, I drew a box on each paper and dampened it before applying my wash.
Let the samples dry thoroughly, then tack them up on a wall and note the differences.
Some of the washes will undoubtedly look more vibrant to your eye than others.
Over-sizing (under-absorbency) can cause uneven washes, as not enough colour is absorbed into the paper's fibres; undersizing (over-absorbency) can cause washes to sink, making them appear dull and lifeless.
For watercolourists, it is critical to find a paper that is perfectly sized, so washes simply shimmer on the surface.
As mentioned earlier, a paper's sizing also determines its resilience to scraping and other colour removal techniques.
To see how well the paper responds, try this test.
Mix up a batch of colour and apply a wash to several different watercolour sheets (Not surface).
After the wash is thoroughly dry, scrape away some of the colour with a burnisher or other tool.
Reapply the same wash in the scraped area.
Let is dry and note the results.
If the paper takes the reapplied wash differently than the original one, this is an indication that the sizing has not thoroughly penetrated the papers' fibres.
Watercolourists who incorporate colour lifting and removal techniques into their paintings will obtain better results with a paper that is sized consistently throughout the sheet.
LEFT The same wash applied to 1) a Rough hand-made waterleaf paper and 2) a sheet of sized Fabriano Esportazione Rough surface paper
RIGHT Texture test: the same wash applied to 1) Saunders Waterford Rough surface texture paper and 2) Saunders Waterford Hot Pressed surface texture paper
The same wash applied to different sheets of Not surface watercolour paper:
1
Arches 140lb
2
Fabriano Esportazione 147lb
3
Fabriano Classico
4
Lanaquarelle140lb
5
Saunders Waterford 140lb
6
Winsor & Newton 140lb
7
Fabriano Artistico 140lb
Consider the texture
Watercolourists can choose papers with three different surface textures.
Tough, Not or Hot Pressed.
Although textures do vary according to manufacture, Rough papers are the most heavily textured.
They undergo minimal pressing after sheet formation.
Not papers are mildly textured — a surface produced by some pressing of the papers between specially textured felts.
Hot Pressed paper pass through a set of heated rollers after sheet formation to give them a smooth, plate finish.
Washes look different when applied to papers of varying surface texture.
The rougher the surface, the darker the wash will appear when dry, as pools of colour get trapped within the tooth of the textured sheet.
Here, the same was applied to Waterford Rough and Waterford Hot Pressed and the difference in colour value is visible to the eye.
Some artists simply don't believe the results of this test.
So I urge you to try it yourself!
Watercolours of a very delicate or atmospheric style will exhibit greater subtlety when painted on Hot Pressed  surfaces.
When colour vibrancy is your goal, Not or Rough surfaces are recommended.
Colour test: the same washes applied to Bockingford 140lb Not surface papers in
1
eggshell
2
oatmeal
3
white
4
cream
5
grey
Charles Reid Karen and Friend, watercolour on Fabriano Artistico cold pressed surface paper, 24 × 30 in. (61 × 76.2 cm)
Consider the weight
Watercolour washes dry by evaporation, so it is essential that the wash remains in a liquid state long enough for the pigment particles to disperse uniformly.
For this reason, most weights of watercolour paper are dampened and stretched before painting — so the surface can remain flat until the washes are dry.
Painting on unstretched paper causes uneven buckling when water is applied, resulting in distorted images or uncontrollable brushwork and washes.
The most versatile paper is perhaps the 140lb weight, because it is strong enough to handle traditional watercolour techniques and a reasonable amount of water, yet it is moderately priced.
For best results, however, it does require stretching.
Thick sheets of paper — 300lb or greater — will dry before the sheet begins to buckle from the water and thus do not require stretching.
Working on a sheet of this weight is truly a delight although the cost can be prohibitive.
Consider the colour
Traditionally, white papers have been used exclusively with watercolours because they contribute to the brilliance of the colours.
You can, however, obtain some charming colour effects on a tinted background.
Note the availability of St Cuthbert's Paper Mill's Bockingford Tinted Watercolour Papers which come in four subtle shades: oatmeal, eggshell, cream and grey.
You will have found a sample sheet of this new paper in last month's issue.
To see for yourself how a coloured background can alter the colour of a wash, try this experiment in your studio.
Take a small sheet of Bockingford white (140lb Not) and one of the tinted colours.
Mix up a couple of wash colours of varying intensity.
Apply the same washes to both samples.
Let them dry thoroughly, tack them onto a wall and note the difference in colour shade, value and vibrancy.
With thin washes and the more transparent pigments, colour differences between the white and tinted sheets will be more apparent.
Although using a tinted background may not be the traditional mode for watercolour, you can achieve unique colour effects and moods.
When watercolour is combined with gouache, or with the new water-soluble drawing media, the results can be quite striking.
With paper, as with most other artists' materials, experimentation will eventually lead to successful results.
No paper survey can replace your own intuition about a paper you have actually tried.
By trying different sheets and pushing them to perform your working requirements, you will find your favourite papers in time.
Fortunately for watercolourists, the choices are plentiful.
MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES
Sketching with Marker Pens
by Jonathan Stephenson
The Materials
a massive array of colour, tone and possible technique
The new ZIG Kurecolor Twin KC-1100 and the ZIG Kurecolor KC-400 Brush Pens are professional marker systems designed for use by illustrators, graphic designers and all professional artists.
To understand fully the potential of this medium you need to appreciate that a professional marker range offers a massive array of colour, tone and possible variations of technique.
The Kurecolor KC-1100 range boasts 106 different values; each pen is twin pointed, carrying as standard a broad, oblique cut tip for wide and medium fine use and a fine point for line and detail.
These points are also interchangeable.
Nine styles are available, including a calligraphy tip and a flexible brush point.
The range is accompanied by a Blender Pen of colourless fluid that may be used to soften colours into graduated effects and by a Blank Pen Kit that enables you to make a marker carrying a colour of your own choice.
The pens are also refillable and, if you wish, the refill ink can be applied directly with wide brush pads supplied for the purpose, or it can be used as an airbrush colour.
The fat bodied pens are comfortable to hold and the hand does not become fatigued by prolonged use of them.
The KC-400 range of brush pens has a more modest but still comprehensive 60 colours and is fitted with a slim, flexible brush-like tip.
It is a more delicate and responsive drawing instrument to use.
than a typical marker and it lends itself to softer and more characterful styles.
Both pen ranges use an alcohol based ink which is less offensive and injurious than the xylene used in many spirit based marker ranges.
It is permanent in the sense of being waterproof and the colours used in each range are co-ordinated and compatible.
Practical Desk Sets or Systems Stations are available to house the pens and, in addition, the KC-1100 range is offered in sets of 12 twin pointed markers, each representing one of the nine colour groups into which the full range is divided.
These are basic colours, brilliant colours, natural colours, dull colours, pale colours, deep colours, grey colours, cool greys and warm greys.
Also of interest is the ZIG Artist Sketching Pen, a fine pointed black drawing pen that may be used with the marker ranges or as a drawing instrument on its own.
Pens with a purpose
ZIG Kurecolor KC-1100 Markers and ZIG Kurecolor KC-400 Brush Pens deliver a free flowing transparent ink that sits luminously on white paper.
Colours may be overlaid, one over another, to produce an effect that is not unlike watercolour to look at, although of course it is not watercolour; it is an alcohol based ink which dries very quickly — almost instantaneously in fact — and encourages rapid expression.
Professional markers are a superb sketching medium, adaptable to a great many styles and very fast to use.
Because they are offered in ranges containing almost every nuance of colour and tone they are also useful for visualising ideas in considerable detail.
For gathering reference material and for working out ideas in sketch form it is hard to imagine a more convenient and practical medium.
It would probably be unwise to frame original market drawings since their intended role does not assume the importance of long term permanence.
Fastness to light may be a problem, but this does not mean that they cannot be used to make finished pieces.
Works in marker pen can be reproduced on colour photocopiers or by printing and need not be displayed themselves.
In any case, successful sketches will often be translated into works in other media, after which they will have served their purpose.
Creative choice
The creative possibilities of a professional marker range revolve around choice and the availability of numerous instant options with which to address your work.
The more markers there are to choose from, the greater the possibility of being able to tackle any subject.
The Kurecolor Twin KC-1100 clearly has tremendous scope given the number of colours, interchangeable points and other variables that can be introduced.
The KC-400 Brush Pen range offers attractions of its own and an ample colour range for the serious user.
The other significant variable in marker pen work is the paper type.
As a preliminary design medium for professional illustrators and designers markers are often used on bleedproof marker paper, a specially coated surface that accepts marker pen cleanly without any fuzziness of edges resulting.
This paper is also translucent, so a new sheet can be put over a previous attempt and the work can then be repeated with modifications by tracing through.
A good idea can therefore be brought to a successful and polished conclusion in a very short time at the cost of only a few sheets of paper and with the minimum of effort.
On other types of paper marker ink sinks in and may create marks with a slightly fused and feathery edge.
This too has its attractions and its uses.
It occurs on watercolour paper for example, on which a scuffed and scumbled mark is also possible because of its textured surface.
Sometimes it makes sense to use a particular type of paper so that other media can be applied as well.
Markers lend themselves in particular to mixed media sketching and to mixed media artwork for reproduction in print.
The Kurecolor KC-1100 markers are refillable and have interchangeable points.
The refill ink may also be used broadly from ‘Zig’ brush pads
BELOW This portrait sketch on bleedproof marker paper began as a loose drawing in cool grey 01 — just visible around the unfinished hand.
Cool grey was also used to shade the face and hair.
Because marker colour is transparent the different layers of colouring act together
Sample sketches
Because of the range of the respective sizes of each range and the feel of the marker pens themselves, I chose to try out the KC-1100 Twin Point Pens in a studio context and the KC-400 Brush Pens in the field.
My first attempt was a portrait study of a child done from life; an impossible subject to do directly in paint and not so easy even as a simple drawing.
To get a good working sketch in colour would be quite an achievement and a good illustration of the potential of the Kurecolor KC-1100 Markers.
I started by using the fine point of cool grey 01.
With this faint translucent grey the face, pose and clothing were rapidly sketched from life in a free and speculative manner although care had to be exercised around the face where the tint of grey would also shade the flesh.
Once I had a loose outline and the beginnings of a  likeness, I switched to the broad tip of the same pen and with its flat edge broadly modelled the shadows of the face.
I then overlaid the same area with marker 420 flesh, flatly, so that the white areas of paper now showed a peach pink and the grey areas appeared as neutral shadows of pearl grey pink.
The Kurecolor markers gave good results on watercolour paper.
The colour used here were nos: 504, 520, 501, 508, 100, 741, 420, 705 and 767
Already colour and form were coming together, but the drawing lacked contrast and required sharpening up.
I selected marker 793, light brown, and with the fine point drew over the face, accenting the eyes, nose, mouth and line of the jaw.
The lips were added with 221, light pink, overdrawn with 262, pale rose, and a touch of 229, dark pink.
The eyes were coloured in 315, Persian blue, and black, 900, while I used a fine ZIG Artist Sketching Pen for the lashes.
The hair, dress and hat followed a similar sequence.
My method throughout was to begin faintly, after which I progressed to more definite drawing in a suitable colour or tone.
Broad transparent colour was then placed over the top to complete the effect, with minor details added as necessary.
The attraction of doing a sketch like this is the speed at which it can be achieved.
The basic idea can be captured in minutes and the total concept fully realised in, at most, a couple of hours, which is a lot faster than it takes for the same degree of finish to be achieved in any other medium.
Hence the importance of professional markers in advertising and design where a client needs to approve an idea before committing resources to it.
Of course, the same applies to fine art, where the resources involved are usually the artist's own time and materials, though in the case of a commission the parallel is exact.
Still in the studio
Next I tried out a different approach.
A simple still life was sketched onto a grainy watercolour paper, again using the Kurecolor KC-1100 Twin Pointed Markers.
I looked for a textured effect by taking the broad tips sideways over the paper surface.
In some places, notably at the base of the celery stems where the green blanched to white, I used the blender pen to fade out the colour.
On watercolour paper, graduated effects are easily achieved by wiping back colour with the blender.
For other types of paper it is best to leech out some of the colour from a marker pen point by placing it tip to tip against the blender pen.
Immediately afterwards the colour begins to return and, as it is used, the mark of the pen progressively becomes richer so it draws in a graduated fashion.
The rest of the technique was fairly straightforward.
I drew with appropriate colours, starting with a suitable mid tone for a rough shaded drawing.
Then I laid a paler colour into the gaps left for the highlights and took it back over the previous work as well to unify the colour.
Detail was then drawn in graphically with the fine points of the markers in medium and dark colouring.
Kurecolor Marker Inks are not much disturbed by subsequent overlaying and it does not make any real difference whether line or broad colour is put down first.
In other words, you can draw outline then colour and draw over it as you like.
Out and about
Because the Kurecolor KC-400  Brush Pen range is easily portable — all 60 pens fit into a compact work station with a rest that doubles as a carrying handle — I took it with me for some outdoor sketching.
The conditions were ideal for showing off the practicalities of using markers.
It was exceptionally cold with a heavy frost.
Watercolour would never have dried and I would have died of exposure whilst setting up for oils.
Even under these circumstances, however, the marker inks dried almost instantly and I was able to make my sketch in a matter of minutes.
Kurecolor brush pens were tried out for on-the-spot sketching.
Pale colours were used to map out the image and fill in areas much as they might have been used in watercolour painting.
A blender pen was also used to soften, blend and lift out colour.
Contrast and details were introduced by over-drawing with a fine black Artist sketching pen
This time I worked in a watercolour sketchbook, deliberately to achieve the softening effect that the paper would have on the marker inks as they spread into it.
There was also a satisfactory combination of responses between the textured surface and flexible marker tips.
Kurecolor Brush Pens can be used from the point or from the side to give a variety of stroke qualities and they flex as they are drawn along the paper surface, adding character to the marks.
They are particularly good if used with a light touch.
My subject of frost covered trees and hedgerows involved little colour and was mostly worked up in a sequence of colour tinted greys bearing reference numbers in the 800s.
These consist of pale neutral shades of blue, green and brown with some definite greys included.
Where I needed more obvious hints of colour, values such as 221, light pink, were overlaid with 821, pale grey.
In the sky, for example, 302, light blue, and 821, pale grey, were combined and the blender pen from the KC-1100 range was taken over them to fuse, lighten and graduate the effect.
To increase the definition I finished off by drawing with a fine line, using a ZIG Artist Sketching Pen.
The contrast between its black ink, the white paper and the otherwise pale colour had the desired effect and confirmed the sense of a cold, wintry landscape.
This feature is sponsored by Kuretake and independently produced by The Artist () in association with Jonathan Stephenson.
© April 1993  
AN AIR THAT KILLS
For David Prentice the desire to paint the landscape encompasses much more than simply an aim to record its appearance
David Prentice Four-hour sketchbook sequence — north along the ridgeway.
Malvern
What is it that motivates painters to work directly from the landscape motif?
I would like to suggest that an answer to this question should address broader concerns than simply a desire to make a representation of appearance.
Most advice on the subject concentrates on technique and materials, giving the impression that it is the most natural thing to do; it is just a matter of how.
In fact the procedure is quite contrived.
Sitting in one position to observe and record appearances does not conform to the majority of our everyday experience of landscape.
For most of us, our day to day experience of the environment has changed from an essentially static, rural condition to a highly mobile technological one — in less than two centuries.
In some respects the time for making images of landscape from a static viewpoint might seem to be over.
A personal viewpoint
Landscape painting provokes intensely important issues for me.
To have meaning the landscape must have some significance that overrides or gives direction to a response to its everyday aspect; the actual appearance of the landscape must further an understanding of its significance in the process of making work on the spot.
The intention to make a graphic verisimilitude of appearance has no virtue in itself, nor does it seem to me to be the most important reason for spending long hours working directly from the subject.
Appearance is a concern, but what I see is conditioned by my preconceptions, attitudes and information, all of which influences in varying degrees my choice of working locations.
When I work in a particular area I want to know why a landscape looks as it does.
The more work I make there the more reason I research the geography, social history, climate, agriculture, literature, music, painting and individuals associated with it.
This information can be practical, and is often gained from studying maps or books on geology.
For example, my understanding of the appearance of the landscape where I live on the Malvern Hills is increased by the knowledge that, ‘The water table appears as a regular springline at about 600 feet above sea level, corresponding to the limit of cultivation and of historic settlement’.
This explains the distinctive banding of flora on the hills and why most buildings and gardens are at, or below this level.
It confirms some of the things that can be clearly seen in paintings and drawings made before reading this.
What is most important, however, is that this information has become a conscious part of my understanding about that which I am seeing.
Along with other information of a similar nature, it forms a model in my head that I can apply and compare with what I see each time I work there.
ABOVE David Prentice An Air That Kills, oil 57 × 59 in. (149.8 × 149.8 cm).
Private collection
Laura Knight (1877–1970).
Harvest, oil on canvas, 60 × 72 in. (152.4 × 182.8 cm).
Reproduced courtesy of the Art Gallery of South Australia
Other insights
Another kind of insight to be added to this model can be gained from other people's responses to the same, or similar places Dame Laura Knight RA, in her autobiography The Magic of a Line gives an insight into how the Malverns were seen in the 1930s.
In her book she describes a conversation with a poet friend while resting on a climb to the top of the highest beacon in the Malvern range.
Her description of the scene is purely visual: ‘Stretch of blue cloud, shadow and sunlight over cornfield and green meadow — right to the Severn Valley, and Malvern town looking like a lot of toy houses’.
Her companion comments: ‘Can't you hear the children playing in that field over there, the old blind man's harmonica at the Well's tea-rooms, and the cars on the road below, the puff-puff of that little train…=?
And what about the scent of the bracken, the feel of the grassy bank we're sitting on — to say nothing of those people over there who, like ourselves, are resting before climbing to the top?’
Laura Knight listens and hears a woman urging an old white pony and donkeys up the hill with children abroad.
After the summer is over that year (1939) Laura spends time in Malvern making studies of Mrs Betteridge's old white pony ‘Kitty’ and the donkeys.
I can compare my own barely remembered childhood experience with Laura Knight's words and paintings.
I too was taken to the top of the Worcester Beacon on a donkey as a three year old in 1939, along with my little gran, ‘to save her legs’.
The donkeys have now gone of course, but you can still get to Malvern by train, and through the tunnel right under the hills, although not by steam train.
Poetry and novels can be a wonderful introduction to landscapes.
For me A.E.
Housman offers acute observations of this area.
Early in A Shropshire Lad he describes Worcester/Hereford/Shropshire as the ‘coloured counties’.
Comparing the work I have done here to that produced in other areas of England and Wales this seems to be to be a perceptive observation, which is verified by Laura Knight: ‘But whatever the month, and whatever the time of day, the beauty of the landscape for the painter in the West Midlands would be hard to beat.
I wish I had a spare lifetime to spend in trying to paint it.’
If I misrepresent the subject of war (but not the concern with love and loss) in Housman's poetry I can even fuel my own paranoia about the condition of our planet.
‘Into my heart an air that kills From yon far country blows:…’
It is this concern about what is happening that gets me out of my studio into the landscape carefully to scrutinise its every aspect for meanings.
It is the focus which all the other information serves.
The landscape is like a book that is constantly being edited and rewritten.
All kinds of information informs my attitudes, but I need to verify this by inspecting the real thing very carefully.
The dying planet has a metaphysical relationship to  my own mortality and to that extent my inquiry into landscape is inherently ironic.
Further information
Even if your painting activities are confined to a week's holiday, preparing yourself by looking into a range of information can be invaluable.
I take the information with me.
I remember Dinah Prentice reading aloud to me from John Prebble's The Highland Clearances when I was drawing near Arisaig.
On another occasion when I was holed up for two days in a tiny cottage in Snowdonia while it poured with rain, an ordnance survey map, my first hand knowledge of the area and an illustrated catalogue of Turner's work allowed me to prepare for locating the sites where he worked.
ABOVE Late Afternoon — Worcester Beacon, Malvern, pastel.
23 × 34 in. (58 × 86.4cm)
RIGHT Three-hour sketchbook sequence — incoming tide Bank Holiday, Trebarwith Strand, North Cornwall.
A form of writing that deals with the historical evolution of the landscape can be recommended to anyone interested in understanding why the English landscape looks as it does.
Books of this kind include The Making of the English Landscape by W.G. Hoskins (Penguin Paperback).
The Landscape of the Welsh Marches by Trevor Rowley (Michael Joseph) and Reading the Irish Landscape by Frank Mitchell (Country House).
No doubt there are more.
Practical considerations
I do a lot of walking.
I carry a pocket size sketchbook and paintbox, or no equipment at all.
Stalking might be a better description.
I find that the weather and seasonal changes play a large part in my ideas about landscape and I shall persist in stalking the same places throughout the seasons and years.
I have a habit of filling small sketchbooks with hour or day-long sequences of watercolours.
I call them my ‘Ernie Wise’ paintings.
You may remember that in the  Morecambe and Wise show he wrote six plays a day and inflicted parts in them on long suffering celebrity guests!
My sketchbook sequences record places along a walk or events in time at a single site.
The little paintings are a sequential record of the kind of information that would be synthesised into a finished work.
Surprisingly, perhaps, I find that walking with no means to draw or paint at all often has the effect of revelation at a particular place and time along the walk.
This image stays in my mind's eye as the unequivocal focus of attention.
It seems to epitomise the whole range of values and ideas that have taken me there in the first place.
The work made in response to this moment often gains immensely from a period of marination in further reading and research.
I return to work on the spot with insights into what I am looking at and a clearer sense of intention.
In Search of Metaphor
Raymond Spurrier continues his journey through the land of the reluctant vista to reassess the nature of landscape painting and pick up hints from Aboriginal art
I have been discovering how much travel writing relies on metaphor to describe the unfamiliar, using an imagery that the folks back home will recognise.
The trouble with the Australian outback is the absence of metaphor, either verbal or pictorial.
The word wilderness is not quite right because of its Biblical connotations and the way it appears in Renaissance paintings.
Nor does the American wild west analogy fit.
There is little to remind you of anywhere else.
The outback is vast enough to contain several landscape types: stony desert, the Crocodile Dundee wetlands of the Top End, forest, high prairie, and hot red centre.
All are different but their common denominator is one of predictability and a tedious, limitless consistency.
If the purpose of art is to simplify reality into significant patterns then, here, nature has already done the job on a superhuman scale.
Sugar Cane Country near Cairns, Queensland, pencil and watercolour, 10 × 7 in. (25.4 × 17.8cm)
Of course there are places that have become tourist hotspots, varied enough for an artist of traditional tendencies to find subject matter of a familiar picturesqueness.
And, as anywhere else, transitory lighting can turn a nondescript topography into a picture, as up on the Barkly Tableland where the narrow tarmac ribbon is frayed at the edges into blond tussocky grass as far as the eye can see.
Towards sunset: touches of egg yellow in the distance, ochreish to the west turning a subtle pale green against the light.
Over to the east the smooth blue sky is tinged with a violet strip along the horizon.
Straight ahead and aiming at a silver moon the tarmac is a dark rich salmon colour, burnt orangey in places and patched with indigo.
In a moment of disquiet worthy of a de Chirico, the setting sun has pushed the shadow of the car half way to the horizon.
This is cattle country though you rarely see any until dusk when they appear from nowhere to stand about morosely in the middle of the road, waiting to be run down.
Enough there for a painting — but for the most part there is an awful lot of nothing and no canvas seems big enough to contain it.
Yet you could say it all with a horizon line  drawn across an empty rectangle.
Clever compositional tricks would only trap a fraction of the space and diminish the distance.
So the little sketchbook doodles I made from the car might be all that is needed: a few slight marks pointing to the lack of incident in a country where you can travel a long way without seeming to get anywhere — which is what I felt about my own artistic journey.
After several weeks in this empty terrain I began to reassess, or at least seriously question, the very nature of landscape painting of the usual sort where every prospect pleases.
There is little enough of that in the outback and one must search for alternative modes of expression, perhaps among the varieties of modern art which have taught us to see in different ways.
Or in The New Landscape of 1956 when Gyorgy Kepes demonstrates with photography at different scales how the images of art and science and geography were almost interchangeable.
I recalled north India seen from 36,000 feet, laid out like a Liberty print in various shades of silt: Art Nouveauish abstractions of dark arbitrary patches and wriggling river lines in wide sandy beds, whiplash meanders and ox-bows and dried up curves where rivers once flowed — a palimpsest of an earlier topography counterpointed by the rare human impositions of road and railway in thin straight lines.
But geographical patterns like this demand the jet-eye view, or of course maps.
The more I puzzled about how best to paint the outback the more I realised the Aboriginals had got it right, making spiritual maps on the ground or on bark stripped from eucalypt trees.
Pigments, some with mystical powers, were dug from the earth and mixed with fixatives derived from turtle eggs, tree sap, or orchid bulbs.
With these primitive materials the native painted those elements of his surroundings belonging to the mythology of the Dreamtime when the earth was fashioned and the life thereon: snakes, birds, fish, turtles, crocodiles, and humans, all depicted in a rich and decorative formalised style.
The native does not (or did not) own the land he inhabited: the land, so to speak, owned him; he was part of the ecological mixture.
One can therefore presume that he was not looking at the landscape as scenery but as habitat.
His art is symbolic, diagrammatic, highly decorative, repetitive and, like the landscape itself, apparently endless.
Apart from the sheer aesthetic delight of these native works I began to feel that somewhere among them was a clue for solving my own artistic dilemma.
And that tuned in well with my inclinations to look for formal qualities and make more or less abstract patterns out of nature.
But anything I might do in that way would have to await my return home.
It could not be accomplished on the run though I made some schematic doodles based on observation: the way, for example, drainage run-off channels bulldozed off the sides of the track echoed the pattern of the tree branches or veins on a leaf.
City Place, Barringtonia Asiatica, ink drawing, 8 ¼ × 11 ½ in. (21 × 29.2 cm)
Sketchbook subjects
We eventually left the outback by way of some tiny townships, widely spaced, and came down onto the Queensland coast at the busy city of Townsville with a modern cylindrical building surmounted by a silvery roof feature.
It wouldn't surprise me to hear it was locally referred to as the sugar sifter (a metaphor at last!), one of those useless gadgets  dispensing too little or too much in cheap cafés.
But this is sugar cane country so it may have been designed with that in mind.
The sugar landscape is distinctive and paintable.
The plantations wave silky mauve tassels against dark cloud capped mountains.
The grass margins are trimmed neat as a Home Counties lawn and there are single-storey farmsteads with shuttered balconies all perched on stilts to suit the climate.
The whole is interwoven with narrow gauge tramways for transporting the harvest to the crushing plant.
Further north, near Cairns we take a spectacular railway trip through steep mountain scenery over all creaky bridges near rushing waterfalls to a shacksville for tourists set among lush rain forest.
Here is everything the visitor could wish for: knick-knacks, fish and chips, Devonshire teas, with fruitbats in the trees and on the menu.
On a village green an Aboriginal gentleman demonstrates the use of the boomerang — assisted by a retriever dog.
One Sunday morning I drove out to Port Douglas where, behind the beach, is a market loosely spread beneath the trees rather like a village fete at home.
There is even a stall for St Mary's-by-the-Sea — a dazzling white wooden structure in tropical gothic.
Instead of the usual stained glass behind the alter an open picture window frames a view of sea and palm trees.
Sedate and relaxed it all is, but for the warning: ‘crocodiles inhabit these estuarine waters’.
On the way here the highway borders what must be some of the most delectable coastal scenery in the world: wooded headlands enclosing beach after sandy beach, empty of people.
But I cannot stop.
My yellow peril, caked with the red mud of the interior, is trapped in a convoy of vintage cars all polished to perfection.
Cairns itself is a spacious city with large areas of grass under low spreading forest trees and tall Alexander palms.
When the tide goes out it leaves mud that the mangroves are trying to colonise.
There is a nice grassy  esplanade for strolling, cycling, picnics, kiddies' games, jogging, and in my case sitting and sketching.
Bordering the sea front is a brief strip of fast-fooderies, ice cream parlours, and booking agencies where the sunbronzed, scantyclad young relax at sidewalk tables.
Some assiduously fill notebooks with writing: incipient novelists or thesis writers?
Three streets back promenade the more elderly, gentlemen in smart shorts, long socks, hat, and walking stick, mingling sedately with the backpackers.
Cairns lives off the tourist potential of the rain forest, the barrier reef, and some strenuous activities such as bungy jumping which means throwing yourself off a tall cliff at the end of a elastic rope.
I check on some of the offshore islands of the reef where the empty coral beaches with palms and pandanus are like Bounty ads and the tropical fish are like rubber hot water bottles painted in psychedelic colours.
But my idea of tropical paradise is to relax on the seafront at Cairns from sunset till dark when the sea breezes temper the humidity and there is no sense of urgency, none at all.
But time is running out and I am suddenly discovering lots of subjects for my sketchpad.
Thereafter we head south again through coastal plain and adjoining mountains, through pineapple country, eucalypt forest, seaside resort, along freeways and dirt roads with houses here and there that might have been obtained through mail-order catalogues.
We pass some strangely shaped mountains that must have been volcanic plugs poking up through vast panoramas.
And so to Brisbane where we began and onto Sydney where, after 10,000 miles of motoring, we left off.
I clutch my wad of sketches that, one day, I hope to turn into pictures that might somehow express the essence of this strange topsy-turvy continent where, believe it or not, there are birds that are scared of heights.
LEFT Outback Small Town Cafe, Richmond, Queensland, ink sketch, 5 ¾ × 8 in. (14.6 × 20.2 cm)
Above Typical House, Gordonvale, Queensland, pencil sketch, 4 × 5 ½ in. (10.1 × 14 cm)
The big Pineapple, Gympie, Queensland, pencil and watercolour, 7 × 10 in. (17.8 × 25.4 cm)
TALK OF THE TRADE
Product news and reviews
Jackie Simmonds Sunlit Patio, Schmincke Soft Pastels, 21 × 27 in.
SCHMINCKE SOFT PASTELS
Pip Seymour reports and Jackie Simmonds comments
Jackie Simmonds will be tutoring a pastel workshop on July 12 at the international Centre for Wildlife Art in Gloucestershire (for full details see pages 10–11) using Schmincke's Soft Pastels.
Schmincke is Germany's leading artists' quality colourman.
Their Horadam watercolours, Mussini resin oils and artists' gouache may already be familiar to many readers of The Artist .
Schmincke's materials, including their Soft Pastels, are distributed in the UK by C. Roberson & Co.
They are available from L. Cornelissen & Son, where you will also find a full range of back-up materials for the serious pastel artist.
In addition to the Schmincke range, Cornelissen also stocks five ranges of pastels.
All are available by mail order but a visit to the shop offers an opportunity to see and try a thoroughly comprehensive selection of colours for pastel painting.
To give a better understanding of how Schmincke's Soft Pastels perform, we asked Jackie to outline her working methods and give her judgement on the Schmincke range: ‘Working with pastels is, for me, a constant joy: I am hooked!
I love the immediacy of pastels, the feel of pastel stick against the paper, the ease with which you can create either whispers of colour, or strong, dynamic statements.
‘I particularly like to work with Schmincke pastels.
They are very high quality soft pastels, with a wonderfully creamy texture which varies not at all from colour to colour, unlike other pastel ranges I have bought, where I have sometimes found that the darkest colours have been brittle and irritatingly scratchy to use.
‘Each Schmincke stick is satisfyingly substantial to hold; not so thin and fragile that the slightest pressure will result in breakages and big enough to work with for a considerable length of time.
I have, on occasion, bought sticks of pastel which have crumbled into pieces when I removed the paper wrapper — this has NEVER happened to me with Schmincke pastels.
‘I use the sides of the sticks to create bold strokes with which to cover large areas quickly.
This causes facets to develop on the surface of the pastel, which can be used for different kinds of marks and details.
Obviously the pieces gradually reduce in size but I do find that I can work with even very small pieces, as they stay whole and workable down to the last tiny fragment.
‘Sunlit Patio was painted on location in Majorca, using Schmincke pastels on grey-toned Canson Mi-Teinte paper.
I used the smoother side of the paper as I find a definite, rough texture rather intrusive.
I tend to have a fairly light touch, often only skimming across the surface of the paper, or over the top of previously applied colours.
The softness of the Schmincke pastels allowed me to work confidently in this way, knowing that no matter how subtle the marks, they would clearly show.
‘In the early stages of the painting I often apply colour loosely and blend with fingers or tissue.
The Schmincke pastels blend very easily.
Also, I like to build up dark areas in this way, spray-fix and then apply lighter tones over the top, as in the foliage areas of the painting.
Because of the opaque quality of the pastels mistakes are easy to rectify; unwanted passages can be brushed away with a stiff hog hair brush, leaving a hint of colour on the surface of the paper which can be covered simply and quickly with subsequent applications of pastel.
‘Because Schmincke pastels are so buttery in texture, it was easy to apply thick impasto strokes of light colour on the column and wall to achieve a brilliantly sunlit effect.
Also, using the edges of the pastel sticks, I was able to pick out sunlit trailing stalks, edges of leaves and flower heads and petals, with flecks of pure colour — delicious!
‘Of course, having excellent tools with which to work is no guarantee of an excellent end result, but I firmly believe it always helps to use the best materials you can afford.
These lovely pastels will give great pleasure, en route to excellent results!’
For more information about Schmincke Soft Pastels contact: Trade enquiries to:
W&N's OILBAR
Brian Dunce reports
Winsor & Newton's Artists' Oilbar is available in three sizes, Slim (17ml), Original (50ml) and Stump (165ml).
A trial pack comprising the three primary colours plus black, white and a colourless bar are available in Slim and Original size.
The colour range of 35 artists' quality pigments is available in Original size.
Pigments are confined with linseed oil and blended with selected waxes, which means that colours dry to form a less brittle film than conventional oil colour.
The Oilbar medium is firm but mobile in handling  and has a buttery smoothness which allows for delicate or robust application directly onto the painting surface.
ABOVE This drawing by Doreen Roberts was made with Neocolor crayons using some of the techniques described, but not using turps
As the product is oil-based the surface on which you are working should be prepared as for any oil-based medium.
To work with Oilbar you must first break the surface film, which will reform when not in use.
Each bar has a paper sheath which is lightly scored to allow for peeling away as the Oilbar is used.
Drying times are similar to oil paint and all types of oils and mediums formulated for use with conventional tube oil colours can be combined with this product.
Attractive features include: a lighter product, no tube to create extra weight when working out of the studio, a cheaper product without sacrificing the quality of the pigment, simplification of process, no need for palette and knife, mediums and preparations; neither is there a need to clean up and put caps back on tubes and tops on bottles at the end of a day's work!
Of course you can always simply take pigment from the end of the Oilbar with a brush and use the colour like a paint, but this is to deny the advantages inherent in the product.
My own preferred method of working is to lay the Oilbars out on a marble slab and apply them directly to the canvas, mixing colour into colour as the picture develops, using fingers and rags to extend or blend as required.
The immediacy of this direct working is exhilarating and the Oilbars are responsible to a variety of ways of handling and touch; my chosen canvas allowed me to apply Oilbars smoothly and evenly over large areas.
Oilbars can be picked up and used, put down and left, and even after long intervals picked up and used again immediately without lengthy preparation.
Working in this way and at the large scale of the painting shown here, is a very physical, expressive and exciting experience.
On a smaller scale I often find it better to work on the floor.
If colour is applied in a robust manner you may need some support to the canvas where it crosses the stretcher, or you could work on canvas mounted on board.
Brian Dunce's completed Oilbar paintings and cartoons together with other related works can be seen in the gallery in the basement of St Martin-in-the-Fields, Trafalgar Square from April 11–18.
For details telephone  
ABOVE Some experiments by Doreen Roberts showing what can be done with Neocolor crayons
CARAN D'ACHE'S NEOCOLOR
Doreen Roberts reports
I can't remember when I first bought a box of Neocolor crayons but I do remember wondering just what they'd do.
I took the advice I always give my students — try every new tool ‘every-which-way’ to find out what you can do with them.
Neocolor crayons are very versatile and, of course, depend very much on the surface used.
Watercolour paper is very difficult for using crayons on as the ‘pits’ in the paper interrupt the crayon colour.
On a smooth paper life is easier and the colour lies much more smoothly, so do try different papers for yourself.
Neocolors are greasy and are therefore lively for creating textures of all sorts and for using as a water resist.
If they are used thickly, a top colour can be scraped to reveal one underneath.
A dark colour applied thickly over lighter and brighter ones can be very exciting and dramatic.
The crayons can be sharpened in an ordinary sharpener as long as it's designed to take the thicker pencils or crayons.
This makes it easy to use each crayon as a fine, crisp ‘tool’ as well as a blunter one or rubbed on its side.
If you save the scrapings from sharpening, these can be squished hard on to the paper.
Colours can be speckled or drawn, in patches or with smooth line; they can be made to ‘jump’ or flow, overlap and, to a certain extent, rubbed into or onto others.
The one thing it's difficult to do is erase, but if you draw in your subject very lightly first and take as much thought and care as you would with a full painting, then erasing takes care of itself.
In other words, you won't need to.
Very soft graphite pencils which are rich and velvety combine happily with Neocolor and so does watercolour — not just for making resist textures.
Use them over as well as under watercolour.
If you are drawing faces, then, of course, control has to be more precise than in something more loose, like a landscape, where overall effect is sometimes more successful than delineation.
A smoother paper is a ‘must’ and the crayons, too, should be used smoothly unless you want your faces to have complexions like sandpaper!
Here your lines should be fine, light and crisp and areas of colour must be blended carefully for a smooth result.
There is, of course, the obvious!
As the crayons are oily, they can be dissolved with turpentine.
If you intend to turn your work into an ‘oil’ then suitable paper must be used so that oily edges don't form and, when the oil finally dries out it won't make the paper brittle and liable to crack.
A turpsy rag can make a colour quite transparent and will combine beautifully with thicker colour.
Trying out new materials depends on what the artist wants to do and how the medium can be used to advantage; at the same time it would be foolish to try to fit a new tool exactly into your pattern of work and thus limit it.
Make the most of it!
Opportunities
COMPETITIONS
Art in Nature '93
Following the success of last year's competition The Artist magazine, in association with the International Centre for Wildlife Art, is once again organising this open competition/exhibition at Wallsworth Hall from June 29 to August 8.
Sponsored by Chevron UK Ltd., over £6,000 worth of prizes can be won.
For full details and entry forms please see pages 52 and 53 of this issue.
Details and booking forms for the workshops which will be taking place in conjunction with the exhibition can be found on pages 10 and 11 of this issue.
Bockingford Paper Competition
Please see pages 6 and 7 of this issue for the Bockingford Tinted Paper Competition with valuable cash prizes for professionals and amateurs.
COURSES
From Holbein to Hockney
For the first time in its 28 year history, the Study Centre for the History of the Fine and Decorative Arts is offering a six week History of Painting Course from May 4 to June 10.
The series will cover the history of painting in Britain from Holbein to the present day, in its wider context of European art and its development through the 19th and 20th century.
The course will be held at The Royal Entomological Society, For further information contact the Study Centre  
FAIRS
On April 10 and 11, Rye in Sussex will be hosting a major Art Fair and competition at the Adult Education Centre, from 10am to 4pm daily.
Over 300 paintings are expected for the open competition and there will also be painting demonstrations, displays by art suppliers as well as an auction of paintings by well-known artists.
LECTURES
Turner and Architecture
On Wednesday April 21 the Tate Gallery, London will be holding a special Kurt Pantzer memorial Lecture on ‘Turner and Architecture’ given by John Gage at 6.30pm in the Auditorium.
Admission is free but by ticket only, which are available from the Education Department 
British Watercolours
A number of events have been organised to coincide with ‘The Great Age of British Watercolours 1750–1880’ at the Royal Academy of Arts, Piccadilly which continues until April 12.
For further information on these and other events at the RA, contact the Education Department 
SENDING-IN DAYS
Laing Art Competition
The annual Laing Art Competition and Exhibition, with total prize money of £15,000 plus five additional prizes of £1,000 and 10 regional prizes of £500 will take place at the Mall Galleries, London from April 30 to May 6.
The handing-in day is April 5.
For full details send a large sae to  
Royal Society of Portrait Painters
Annual exhibition will take place at the Mall Galleries, London from May 12 to 27.
The handing-in days are March 26 and 27.
For full details send a sae to  
Pastel Society of Ireland
The 4th annual exhibition will take place in the Higgin Gallery  from April 21 to May 1.
Handing-in day, April 5.
For further details contact    
Mrs Gail Lilley at work in the Nave of St Albans Abbey, the venue St Albans Art open exhibition.
Artists living or working in Hertfordshire, North London, Bedfordshire and Buckinghamshire are invited to enter.
Full details of how to enter are given on this page
United Society of Artists
The 72nd annual exhibition of paintings and sculpture will take place at the Westminster Galleries, London from June 1 to 8.
The handing-in day is April 17.
For details and application forms send an A5 sae   Artists interested in membership possibilities for this year should inquire now.
St Albans Art
The Hertfordshire Community Trust and the St Albans Cathedral Education Centre have organised a giant art exhibition in the nave of the Cathedral from May 20 to 23.
The exhibition will include paintings, drawings, photography, prints, pottery and ceramics, sculpture and woodcarving, calligraphy and collage, and aims to raise money for the Education Centre and the Community Trust.
Work must be handed in on Saturday April 24.
For further information and application forms please send a sae (241 × 165mm) to  
Not the Royal Academy
The Llewellyn Alexander Gallery is once again holding A Salon Des Refuses of work which was not hung in the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition.
All work must have been submitted to the Royal Academy to be eligible for this exhibition.
Selection will take place on May 22, 24, 25 and 28.
For further information contact   
WORKSHOPS
Oil Bar
The Artist and Leisure Painter magazines have organised a one-day oil bar workshop in conjunction with Winsor & Newton on May 22.
For full details and booking forms please contact   
Gallery Insights
On April 15 The Artist and Leisure Painter magazines have organised tours around the RI annual exhibition at the Mall Galleries.
Members of the RI will lead the tours discussing their techniques and answering questions.
Full details and booking form can be found on page 42 of this issue.
Book reviews
ART IN PRINT
Essential Art History
This book intentionally sets out to be a companion to art history by cataloguing movements and critics rather than artists, who are included if they have written on art.
If art history is only the history of art history and a dog chasing its own tail, then this is appropriate.
The entries are informative and, in some instances, such as the entry on ‘kitsch’ amusing.
The habit of using > as inverted commas is irritating, but goes with the general tone of the book.
For those who need to have a view of art as a journalistic approach, as a science, as sociology, and never mind the actual people on the ground, the creators, then this would, I imagine, be a useful addition to their library.
The text is written in a breezy matter-of-fact manner and the introduction sets up questions which to those concerned with the kind of intellectual knock-about ideas belonging to the esoteric world of criticism, would be important.
A book for art historians, journalists, writers on art, but not for the artists themselves.
Painting Solutions — Houses and Buildings
 Maybe it is the implication that drawing and painting buildings demands a sound knowledge of perspective that deters many artists from attempting such work.
Yet, as the immense variety of splendid illustrations in this book clearly demonstrates, it is subject matter full of surprises and inspiring challenges.
Interesting buildings are not confined to the ancient, ornate or foreign; we are shown that there are plenty of ideas on our own doorstep!
A simple shop front, for example, can have more impact and visual excitement than a whole townscape, so too a dimly-lit interior, or a group of chimney-stacks.
Light and dark, colour, texture, viewpoint and composition all play their part, as they do in any painting.
However, we are shown that success doesn't only depend on technical skill, but in selecting just the right view to paint.
In the first part of the book the daunting business of perspective and proportion is thoroughly explained, whilst additionally there is good advice on drawing architectural details, curves and ellipses, and making use of shadows and reflections.
Occasionally, specific topics are covered as an ‘art school’ lesson, for instance, how to work from photographs and photocopies.
And a third source of instruction comes from demonstrations by professional artists and analysis of ‘master’ paintings.
I can recommend Houses and Buildings as an excellent instructional resource book to those already interested in this theme and as a tempting introduction to a new subject area to those who are not.
Pastels Masterclass
If, like me, you are fascinated by watching professional artists at work, and find yourself inexorably drawn to watch demonstrations in class, or at exhibitions, then this book will probably prove irresistible!
It is an opportunity to learn from ten professional artists, who share their knowledge with us, providing insights into their working methods.
Pastel is an intriguing medium — to quote Ken Paine, one of the chosen artists featured in the book.
‘The pastellist is literally in touch with the colour and texture of the materials, and with the fabric of the painting.
The directness of the medium is inspirational.
You don't have to mix your colours, squeeze your tubes out, you just pick up a colour.
It's a spontaneous feeling; you can put it all down in one go.’
Direct and inspirational it may be — what is very clear, however, is that none of these artists works without a great deal of feeling, thought, and analysis.
They make it clear to us that painting is a challenging process of continual decision-making — what to paint, how to apply the characteristics of the medium to the subject, how to retain the initial idea, or convey a particular mood.
We learn that they have achieved their expertise by hard work, trial and error, brave experimentation and exploration.
They set a marvellous example indeed.
Although we are treated to a number of informative step-by-step demonstrations of work in progress, the real value of the book lies in the breathtaking range of styles, subject matter and techniques, which demonstrate the extraordinary versatility of pastels.
Diana Armfield's sensitive, delightful figure compositions contrast with John Blockley's powerful and emotive landscapes, and Frances Treanor's witty and colourful flower pieces.
Every page of the book has at least one stunning, full colour illustration — a rich and inspiring treat.
The book opens with an introduction to materials, and discusses types of pastels, papers and grounds, and then there are two general chapters — Techniques, and interpreting the Subject.
The rest of the book is devoted to the ‘Masterclass’ contributors.
Their thoughts and comments are accompanied by the author's intelligent and knowledgeable text, which will prove extremely valuable to both the newcomer to pastels, and to more experienced artists who have yet to discover the full potential of the medium.
As a painting tutor, I was conscious that complete beginners may be a little overwhelmed by the sophistication of the written material — some of the thought and painting processes are quite advanced — but this should not prevent them from thoroughly enjoying this unique opportunity to ‘look over the shoulder’ of the experts.
As we grow and develop as artists, our understanding increases bit by bit, along with our ability — and this book will draw the ambitious artist back time and again, to re-read and appreciate anew, as his, or her awareness and understanding expands and matures.