

Chapter One
INTRODUCTION TO SOURCES
If I hadn't made it, I wouldn't have put it down to my colour.
I would just have said: ‘Well, I wasn't good enough.’
But I did make it and the colour did make a difference in a way I didn't expect.
Maurice Hope, boxer
Trying twice as hard
There was rain in the air outside; inside, the air was suffused with a mixture of cigar fumes and evaporating sweat — the fumes from the audience, the sweat from the boxers whose endeavours were the principal attraction of the evening.
In the lobby, Maurice Hope and I talked casually, neither of us knowing that the idea behind this book was evolving from our conversation.
He had, some months before, wrested the World Boxing Council title from the Italian Rocky Mattioli and was reaping some of the ancillary benefits for his achievements: he was guest of honour at the boxing show.
Yet, despite being Britain's only world championship claimant at that time, he was relatively unknown outside boxing circles and had boxed most of his important contests outside the UK, winning the European title in 1976 in Rome, then drawing in his first world title attempt in Berlin in 1977, before finally taking the title in San Remo.
He did not crave recognition, but was understandably regretful about his lack of it.
In his words, he had ‘sacrificed a lot’ to get to the top and, now that he was there, it was an anticlimax.
Yet he was unmoved and found the situation in keeping with his whole career which was strewn with obstacles.
In his analysis, such obstacles were vital to his development in boxing.
My interest was aroused when he reasoned that it was his blackness which constituted the major  drawback in his life at one level, but at another, proved an indispensable asset to his eventual success.
‘It does something to you when you get in the ring,’ he explained.
‘Knowing you're black makes you try even harder.’
Slightly perplexed, but fascinated, I invited him to elaborate and he outlined how, since arriving in London in 1961 at the age of 9, he had been rocked by the awareness that his colour could place him in a position of possible — or probable — disadvantage.
Before leaving his native Antigua, he had no recognition of this.
But his experiences of street life in Hackney and his boxing ventures in Bethnal Green taught him that blackness presented him with a unique set of problems.
By the time he was approaching school-leaving age, he had formed, from his angle of vision, two alternatives: ‘To buckle under, or be determined and ambitious.’
He opted for the latter route and took up the gauntlet he saw set before him by steeling himself for a career as a boxer, a career in which he distinguished himself as a man of immense resolve and purposefulness.
Hope and I continued our conversation a few weeks later, this time at his terraced house in Stoke Newington.
He fleshed out the bones of the skeleton he had constructed, making it clear that, in a very massive and consequential way, his perception of blackness had affected his whole career.
But not necessarily in a negative way: he had used his blackness to become a better boxer.
How he used it opened up a new realm for investigation.
It could have been Hope's unknowing repudiation of the popular notion of black people which fired my imagination.
Conventional wisdom dictates that the experiences at school, in the transition to work, at work itself and in society generally, tend to imbue the black youth with a jaundiced view of the world; recoiling from the ‘pressures’, he retreats to a street-corner gang existence, detaching himself from society and cultivating a posture of indifference or even hostility towards the rest of society.
The pressure is seen as too burdensome for the black kid, who ‘buckles under’ it and withdraws into his enclave complaining about ‘Babylon’and its inequalities but without doing anything about them.
What Hope had to bear was exactly the same kind of pressure as other blacks of his generation.
Sons and daughters of Caribbean and, to a lesser extent, African migrants of the post-war period, did have to face racialism and there is evidence to support this (for instance, Daniel, 1968; Patterson, 1969).
Hope perceived this as acutely as  anyone else; he had experienced being called a black bastard, being physically abused, being spat at, being excluded.
He was black and it was conveyed to him in a most unambiguous way that this would mean pressure for him, but it was the way in which he responded that challenged conventional images of black kids.
Being black was a potential impediment he transformed into a stimulus.
It hardened him and hardness proved an extremely valuable asset in the ring.
Was Hope unique?
Well, with my interest intensifying, I went to see a number of other black sportsmen who had achieved a measure of success to compare their perceptions and experiences.
A vague but discernible pattern emerged.
Boxers, footballers and athletes who eventually broke through at the highest level, in championships in football league, in international meetings, made it not so much in spite of their blackness but because of it.
People like Garth Crooks, Mike MacFarlane and Garry Thompson traced back how they could have made their blackness the basis for defeatism, admitting that ‘there's no way a black guy can make it in this society.’
But they did not: in their eyes, blackness was a resource to be used; and use it they did — to strengthen their resolve, redouble their efforts and forge a will to succeed.
Black sportsmen presented me with vivid examples running counter to the stereotypical black youth and, as such, they lent themselves perfectly to my general purposes, for I am hopefully in the process of shattering some of the popular images of blacks.
How I long to see the black kid depicted as something other than the tam-donning, dope-smoking, unemployed gang member, structuring his life around reggae music, blues parties, and thieving, and phrasing his life's ambitions in terms of one day to the next with little or no positive orientation to the world and an outlook flavoured by prejudice and ignorance.
In the past, I have been guilty of reinforcing this icon; now I am committed either to destroying it or affecting major reconstructions.
Black sportsmen I saw as contributors to my task and they were ready allies.
With my impressions stored up from the initial set of interviews, I came to see an intriguing challenge.
Visits to sports grounds in London and Birmingham had made me realize just how many second generation black kids were following the likes of Hope and Cunningham and channelling their efforts into sport.
The kids at places like Haringey and Repton were not, in the sporting vernacular, ‘messers’: these were young but serious sportsmen seeking to  emulate the ‘stars’ and acquiring the requisite mental and physical equipment to do so.
Taxing work, determination, application, steadfastness, resilience: these were some of the qualities needed to make the grade as a sportsmen even at the more modest levels.
If they believed they had ‘natural ability’, they well knew that it had to be refined and fastened by a bridle of discipline.
These kids were obviously pursuing success and they were sinking inordinate amounts of energy, week in, week out, into their efforts.
They were highly motivated, prepared to learn, willing to comply with demands, eager to listen; perhaps they didn't want to follow rules, but they did.
Yet could these be the same kids who were, with law-like consistency, achieving little of significance at school, who were showing no aptitude or promise of improvement, who seemed undermotivated, feckless, lacking in both ambition and determination?
The abundance of energy, commitment and enthusiasm many black kids manifested in sport contrasted strikingly with the languor they took to their formal education.
The end-product of their orientation to education was year after year of miserable results.
Blacks consistently performed badly compared to whites and Asians: they ‘underachieved’(see The Runnymede Trust and the Radical Statistics Race Group, 1980, chapter five).
All sorts of reasons were advanced, including language barriers, teachers' racism, biased curricula, deprived homes, inadequate material conditions and, most pejorative of all, lack of intellectual equipment.
None of these struck me as particularly penetrating answers to a thorny problem.
But, by exploring the aspirations and motivations of groups of blacks who were highly charged and who brought extraordinary energy to their chosen tasks, I thought I might find some clues as to the kinds of things which move black kids: what makes them tick.
It soon became obvious to me that no study of black sportsmen could proceed without a very careful consideration of why blacks fail in other areas, the most important one being school.
There are, of course, those only too ready to malign my whole project and offer instead a much shorter and simpler account.
In answer to the problem I set myself (reports of which were carried in the provincial press in 1980), a certain Mr A. Hatton of Birmingham wrote: ‘If you visit some of the pubs, clubs and places of enquiry, you will get the solution to your enquiry…just speak to the majority of working people, blacks do not have the intellect or  inclination for academics’(personal communication, 12 June 1980).
Whilst accepting that ‘inclination’ was absent I could not agree that blacks lacked the intellect to do well at school and my work was, in a way, intended to lay bare as false such assumptions.
So, it came as something of a disappointment when a Ms Mel Chevannes, who ran a black supplementary school in the West Midlands, wrote to the Wolverhampton Express and Star to protest at my testing ‘hypotheses that black people are ‘happy-go-lucky or very physical in their outlook’’ and that my aims were to ‘damage even further the life chances of black children’(25 June 1980).
The suggestions, ridiculous as they were, pointed to the sensitivity of the area I had moved into.
By looking at black sportsmen I had invited the accusation that I was unwittingly accepting the traditional stereotype of the black man physically endowed with the properties to excel in sports, but incapable of performing well in academic pursuits.
If anything, this whole book is intended as a pulverization of the stereotype.
I replied to Ms Chevannes through the same newspaper thus: ‘Generally, black kids do not demonstrate interest in school work and do not sink much enthusiasm into their efforts.
They do, however, demonstrate a vigorous approach to sporting pursuits.’
A reasonably well-supported statement, I thought, though the late Maurice Ludmer found it ‘astonishing’ and wrote in Searchlight :
The reason why sport is such an attraction is not hard to understand.
It is an area of activity where it is possible to compete on an equal basis, with less of the difficulties of overcoming the discrimination found in commerce and industry in terms of employment (July 1980).
Whilst agreeing in part but disagreeing substantially with the assumptions of Ludmer, I felt — and still feel — that the attraction of sport for black kids is a little more complex and that any full understanding cannot assume that sport constitutes an area freed of racialism, or that black youths are attracted to it simply because they see it as such.
Contrary to such a view, black kids believe that, for them, being successful is more difficult than it would be for the white person of comparable proficiency.
Many believe it is tough for a black person to make it and that leaves them two choices.
The most available is to drop out, resign.
The other is to take stock of the overall situation; if it's doubly difficult for a black person, then a  redoubling of effort and determination and perseverance is necessary.
If it's twice as hard, you try twice as hard.
Although Hope was the first sportsman to convey this view, it was replicated time and time again by black footballers, athletes and boxers.
Hope's manager, Terry Lawless, himself white, told me of how he first became aware of this.
During the 1950s, he talked to the handlers of a black American opponent of Randolph Turpin.
He asked one of them: ‘How come there are so many great black boxers in the States now?’
The answer was: ‘Well, it's so tough for black guys to make breakthroughs that they try like mad to be better.
And when they do eventually make it, they're really, really good.’
In a way, black sportsmen in Britain are responding to what they perceive as a challenge.
The reasons for their getting involved in the first place are multiplex, involving many related processes, which I will endeavour to uncover.
But a sense of challenge permeates the whole experience.
This book is about that experience.
Wrong reasons, right results
Discussing successful black sportsmen, Horace Lashley of the Commission for Racial Equality wrote: ‘it is unlikely that their success can be divorced from the British schooling they have received.’
He goes on: ‘PE is regarded as a subject of low priority and status within the curriculum.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the black community resents this focus on the ‘success’ that black youngsters enjoy at PE’(1980, p.5).
Most components of education are highly valued and thought of as necessary to the overall development of the child.
Physical education is an exception in this regard.
As Lashley points out, we have not recognized ‘prowess on the sports field as genuine educational success.’
This derives from the dualistic conception of mind and body and the associated belief in the mind as superior and the body inferior.
Howard Danford and Max Shirley call education ‘a vitally important process involving the mind and emphasizing intellectual development, while recreation is a relatively insignificant operation centering around the body, amusement, fun and frivolity’(1970, p.26).
This split which ensures that the main emphasis in educational achievement rests on cognitive or intellectual pursuits contrasts with  the situation in the Soviet Union where the central unity of the human being pervades all levels of education.
Physical education is highly valued and forms part of a fully integrated educational programme based on a unitary conception of man.
The work of Norman Shneidman has been of some value in highlighting the way in which sport in Soviet society is ‘directed towards the all-round development of the human individual’(1979, p.7).
It is regarded as a matter of national importance and, as such, it is emphasized in much the same way as other elements of education.
As Shneidman makes it clear: ‘While different components of the educational process aim at the development of different qualities and values, it is impossible to draw a clear distinction between them and to separate physical education from other segments of communist upbringing’(1979, p.6).
Without wishing to champion the Soviet system and the way in which it ‘manufactures’ its sportsmen, I believe the general philosophy underlying the integration of sports with other components of education is much more realistic than the irritating duality with which we labour in the Western world where educators are prone to see justification for particular studies in terms of their practical value.
I agree with Eldon Snyder and Elmer Spreitzer that: ‘Like all of education, physical education should provide opportunities for students to try their hand at a variety of activities as sources of possible self-realization.
To be able to recognize opportunities for self-actualization is a basic skill that can be carried through life’(1978, p. 170).
Such characteristics as initiative, purposefulness, persistence and self-control are developed through sport and, while I am not sold on the idea of sport as a builder of ‘character’, I do believe that these capacities serve important functions in self-actualization, that tendency of all human beings to develop their full potentialities.
I will argue later that kids involved in sport are able to broaden their intellectual scope, partly because they can bring the characteristics chiselled out of sport to bear in other aspects of life, and partly because, through improving health, the kids increase their capability for intellectual work and reinforce their resistance to mental stress.
I think there are many benefits to be gleaned from sustained involvement with sport and would emphasize strongly its creative dimensions.
The reasons behind thousands upon thousands of black kids immersing themselves in sport may stem from basic inequalities  which I find unacceptable, and, indeed, immoral, but I cannot affirm that sport is some device for the perpetuation of these inequalities any more than I can agree with some critics, such as Paul Hoch, that sport is a mere instrument of capitalist domination designed to slough off energies or divert them into meaningless channels (1972).
Black kids may be in sport for all the wrong reasons, but that does not render the results wrong.
My biases are already clear: I see sport as a supremely creative enterprise in which the competitor exerts a mastery and control over himself and his environment.
Blending discipline with spontaneity, rigidity with flexibility, the sportsman develops and refines skills, forming objectives, sometimes meeting them, often falling short, but always extracting meaning and gratification.
My conception of sport elevates it to the realms of art, where the producer finds room to express himself and the consumer studies and appreciates; both seek satisfaction.
This view might be too romantic for some who prefer to see sport as a destructive force, leaving black kids, their hopes shattered, with no qualifications, few prospects and little career orientation.
What follows will be an attempt to examine sport in both of these differing lights.
The attempt is structured in terms of an historical overview of blacks' attachments to sport, starting the analysis in the eighteenth century and seeking to document the social sources behind the enduring link.
The chapter sets the tenor for the whole work in so far as it tries to examine the social conditions under which blacks became involved in sport, first in the USA and then in Great Britain.
My contention is that no account of the emergence of black sportsmen in contemporary Britain can ignore the social and historical circumstances in which that emergence occurred.
The popular view of black sportsmen's rise is more simple: they have a ‘natural ability’ that equips them to do well in physical enterprises.
For many reasons, I reject this, not only because it is vile in its implications but because it is theoretically suspect and unsubstantiated by research.
Its main proponent has been Martin Kane and I give some attention to his work in chapter three.
Over a period of three hundred years, black people have achieved a growing presence in sport in Britain yet it seems pathetic that we have no account for it apart from reference to the mysterious attribute called natural ability.
To begin with there is no single ability, rather there are several like speed, accuracy, strength, endurance  and resilience which combine in manifold ways to determine the ‘raw material’ to be shaped.
This ‘raw material’ is formed through an interaction between what we are born with and what we live through, or as James Michener puts it: ‘Heredity establishes the perimeters of what we can accomplish; environment determines whether we acquire the character to reach those perimeters’(1976, p.130).
There are certain properties we inherit but it is the conditions we live under which dictate how we will develop them and to what purpose we will put them.
Brian Wells notes: ‘Of course, all behaviour is ultimately controlled by the influence which our genes exert upon the development and function of our biological system’(1980, p.29).
I am more concerned with the ways in which social mechanisms work to permit the growth and refinement of abilities necessary for sporting involvement.
By examining social processes, I am not throwing out the baby with the bath water: I do concede that inherited properties play a part.
But ability conceived in a singular way is not sufficient; one cannot assume a situation of perfect competition in which those possessing the necessary physical attributes will emerge as the best sportsmen: the notion of natural ability is not sufficient.
My alternative theory does not deny the influence of genetic characteristics, but, when history throws up a patterned sequence of black people entering sports in large numbers, excelling at them and continuing to demonstrate extraordinary zeal for particular disciplines, a more penetrating analysis of the social conditions beneath the sequence is necessary.
This is exactly what I have attempted in this book, beginning in chapter four with my version of why so many black kids commit themselves to sport, then moving, in chapters five and six, to the experiences in family life and at school and how these affect the ties to sport.
In chapter seven, I explore the important relationship between education and sport, which is so vital to any understanding of the rise of black sportsmen.
American research has been instructive and I survey this before moving to my own views.
Perhaps one of the most disturbing elements of black youth's attraction to sport is that they tend to eschew more ‘earthly’ pursuits and go in search of sporting success.
Given that the chances of establishing oneself in sport are extremely small regardless of colour, this is a rather dangerous channelling of objectives.
Sport is a slender thread on which to hang one's hopes for the future.
How and why sport assumes the  status of a central life interest for black kids are the questions I set out to answer in chapter eight.
What is it in sport that black kids find so compellingly attractive?
It cannot be the cheap medals and worthless trophies they hope to accumulate and the chances of making big money are so tiny as to make it untenable as a career.
In chapter nine, I offer an alternative: through sport, the black youth generates a fresh, exhilarating and positive image of himself, in short, a new identity.
The organizing theme of the book is distilled in chapter ten, where I delineate exactly why black sportsmen regard themselves as at a possible disadvantage in sport, how they perceive blackness as an impediment and, most crucially, how they react to it.
Finally, I round off with some of the social implications of the continued involvement of black youth in sport.
Much of my attention is devoted to both the positive and negative aspects of sport within education systems and society generally.
In April 1980, the National Association of Head Teachers reporting to the Rampton Committee on the education of ethnic minorities stated: ‘If there is a difficulty of cultural identity among second generation West Indians, there is also much to counter-balance that deficiency including their natural sense of rhythm, colour and athletic prowess.’
The reader, after completing this book, must decide how much sense this makes.
Chapter Two
ENTER THE BLACK SPORTSMAN IN HISTORY
Desire and dedication.
Without both, a dream is a fragile thing.
And desire and dedication are easier to come by when the alternative is a one-way ticket back to the ghetto.
Bob Waters, American sports writer
Bad men and Uncle Toms
During the American War of Independence, beginning in 1775, a certain General Percy of the British forces captured the town of Richmond, after which he named a slave whom he met there.
Impressed by the slave's apparent physical prowess, Percy took ‘Bill Richmond’ under his tutelage and groomed him for prize fighting.
Richmond travelled through Europe gaining a rudimentary education on his tours before basing himself in England where he continued to box with a measure of success while working as Lord Camelford's valet.
Although not an outstanding boxer himself, he assisted a number of other young boxers including the more famous ex-slave champion Tom Molyneux in whose corner he worked during the Virginian's classic fight with the English heavyweight champion Tom Cribb in December 1810, Cribb finishing victorious (Egan, 1812).
Molyneux, like Richmond, won his freedom as a result of his boxing and it was he, more than any other early black sportsman, who ‘showed how prize fighting could be the means by which a man of his colour might gain prominence and a certain undeniable importance akin to a theatrical star’(Farr, 1964, p.3).
Together, the  cases of Richmond and Molyneux present many of the themes which characterize the entire history of blacks' collective involvement with sport.
Richmond was the first black man to find in sport a route out of the despair and misery which were integral parts of his enslavement.
Through his competence in sport, he was able to leave Richmond and establish himself as something of a sporting celebrity in Europe and England where, according to Edwin Henderson, he came to know, among others, Lord Byron (1949, p. 16).
Molyneux was both sponsored and trained by his forerunner, who came to be his mentor (Knebworth, no date, p.31).
There was a close relationship between the two.
Both men improved their education whilst engaging in sporting exploits and, indeed, Molyneux was fêted in the London circles of the early nineteenth century.
Molyneux built on Richmond's earlier successes and became a figure of public renown.
For both men, sport was a ‘way out’.
But, although these two set precedents, there was no conspicuous increase in the number of slaves gaining their freedom.
Indeed, for the most part, slaves demonstrating boxing proficiency were pitted against each other locally at the behest of slave masters; few trod the same paths as Richmond and Molyneux (McPherson, 1976a, p. 123).
The years on either side of emancipation in 1865 saw blacks filtering into other sports, most successfully in horse riding and baseball (see Quarles, 1964).
In the latter, social circumstances permitted them to compete only against other blacks (from 1898 to 1964), thus prompting what Robert Peterson called ‘a uniquely American spectacle called Negro baseball’(1970, p.3).
Ninety-eight years after the first Molyneux-Cribb duel, a black man ascended to the apogee of sporting achievement.
John Arthur Johnson was born in 1878 and worked on a milk wagon, in livery stables, in bakers' shops, at Galveston docks and in various other occupations while establishing himself as a boxer of some distinction.
When, in 1908 he challenged a white man, Tommy Burns, for the heavyweight championship of the world, he carried into the ring far more than his gloves and gear: he carried the hopes of a considerable portion of black America.
His status by that time had taken on an additional dimension: ‘When Johnson battered a white man to his knees, he was a symbolic black man taking out his revenge on all whites for a lifetime of indignities’(Gillmore, 1975, p.5).
Fighting as ‘Jack Johnson’ he overcame the barrier known as the ‘colour line’which effectively forbade blacks from boxing whites and wrested the  supreme prize under the most dramatic circumstances.
Police had to enter the ring in the fourteenth round of the prize fight to rescue the pre-fight favourite Burns from further, unnecessary punishment (Farr, 1964, p.60).
Such was Johnson's dominance that Jack London wrote: ‘Plucky, but absolutely helpless, the white man seemed to be a victim of a playful Ethiopian who did just as he would’(quoted by Gillmore, 1975, p.29).
That Johnson had so much social significance as a black man challenging white oppression, albeit in a symbolic way, was attested to by the scenes following his dismissal of Burns and after his defence against the revered bastion of white pride, Jim Jeffries.
‘Gentleman Jim’ had previously retired from the ring rather than do combat with a black man, but was tempted in an effort to curb the mounting confidence of blacks and re-establish white dominance in the sport.
In less than fifteen rounds, Johnson had delivered the goods for his people.
‘It was my honour, and in a degree the honour of my race,’ he later reflected.
The aftermath of the fight was tumultuous with blacks, enraptured by the triumph, celebrating in the streets.
Whites responded, provoking conflict in virtually every state (Levine, 1977, p.432).
Al Gillmore calls them the ‘Jack Johnson Riots’ and reckons the fight itself ‘had the effect of a second emancipation’(1975, p.60).
Responses from whites were swift for, within days, calls for the abolition of boxing were heard and films of Johnson's fights were soon suppressed for fear of further riots.
Many blacks were also concerned, particularly after Johnson showed a predilection for escorting white women.
Their apprehensions were summed up by the New York Age : ‘As a black champion, he has given the Negro more trouble by his scandals than he did in twenty years as a black tramp’(quoted by Gillmore, 1975, p.99).
No one was more strident in his condemnation than the black leader Booker T. Washington who charged Johnson with being: ‘A man with muscle minus brains.’
Though Washington's rival Marcus Garvey lauded Johnson and held him up as man to be revered by blacks (1967, volume I, p.13).
Despite the controversy, Johnson captured the hearts and imaginations of most black Americans in a way which only folk heroes had done previously.
The myth developing around Johnson took on an existence of its own and he became known as a hero of black folklore, fitting into that tradition of ‘bad niggers’, moral hard men who were, according to Lawrence Levine, ‘admired because they had the strength, courage and ability to flout the limitations imposed by white society’(1977, p.420).
One folk tale about Johnson suggested he was protected by an extraordinary power.
In 1912, he was believed to have attempted to board the ill-fated Titanic only to be refused, thus saving his life.
In fact, blacks used the Titanic disaster as a symbolic setting for the confrontation between the privileged whites and the poverty-stricken blacks who were excluded from the vessel (Levine, 1977, p.427).
Johnson was elevated into the panoply of black culture heroes and martyred after he was forced into exile in Europe for seven years from 1913 after his arrest under the Mann Act.
Not surprisingly, Johnson's ascendancy led to the search for the ‘Great White Hope’, someone who was capable of wrenching the title from Johnson's grasp and restoring supremacy to the whites.
The crusade eventually produced Jess Willard, who, in April 1916, challenged Johnson in Havana, Cuba.
Sixteen thousand people watched an astonishing scene as Johnson was knocked to the canvas in the twenty-sixth round and made no attempt to regain his feet, merely shielding his eyes from the sun.
Allegations of a ‘fix’ were unsubstantiated but rumours were rife.
So ended the reign of the first black sporting symbol of significant proportions.
Willard re-drew the colour line and the heavyweight crown was insulated from black threats.
Over the next eight years, the unemployment rate grew to 5 per cent and the Ku Klux Klan's membership to 4½ million (Roberts and Kloss, 1979, p.133).
Not until 1937 was the colour line erased, when Joe Louis beat James J. Braddock to start a succession of black champions interrupted only by Rocky Marciano (1952–5) and Ingemar Johannson (1959–60).
In 1946, when Louis was nearing the end of his far less controversial occupation of the champion's berth, Johnson was killed in a road accident in North Carolina.
His career had gone into an ignominious period following his deposition and he had spent time in prison in Kansas, fought bulls in Barcelona, performed stunts in circuses, played ‘Othello’ across the country and even boxed all-comers in exhibitions at the age of 68 years.
Joseph Louis Barrow was, like Johnson, a formidable boxer who exerted total domination for a long period.
Johnson reigned for six years, Louis for eleven.
There the similarity ended.
Louis, in the black American vernacular, ‘tommed out’.
He did not use his position as a potential leader to mobilize black sentiment or cull support  for black people; he simply conformed to the mould of a black sportsman without showing much inclination for socially significant causes.
The image Johnson had smashed was restored by Louis: he was controllable.
Not so Muhammad Ali, who was without doubt the most socially important sporting figure after Johnson, and his career parallels that of his predecessor in many ways.
An Olympic gold medallist in 1960, Ali came to prominence shortly before his assumption of the world heavyweight title in 1964.
As Cassius Clay, he proclaimed himself ‘The Greatest’ and split the heavyweight division asunder.
Once champion, he relinquished his name believing it to be a relic of slavery and announced his allegiance to the Nation of Islam, the segregationist sect popularly known as the ‘Black Muslims’(see Lincoln, 1961; Essien-Udom, 1962).
For three years, Ali made inflammatory statements about what the Black Muslims called ‘white devils’ and proved somewhat embarrassing with his views on black-white separatism.
He lost no opportunity to use his status as an ideological lever for black causes, eventually refusing to serve in the army on the grounds that blacks had no interest in the Vietnam War.
For this he was relieved of his world title and, like Johnson, was involuntarily immobilized.
While Johnson was prevented from defending his title in the United States, Ali had his taken from him.
His return to the ring reached a climax in 1974 when he once more became the world's supreme heavyweight with an eighth-round win over George Foreman in Kinshasha and, apart from a temporary spell in 1978, held the championship until his first ‘retirement’ in 1979.
As with the latter-day Johnson, his exploits in the autumn of his career were inglorious: pathetic exhibitions, a shameless contest against a martial arts exponent, Anonio Inoki, and a misguided come-back fight against Larry Holmes in 1980, when aged 38.
Having done so much to point up the plight of blacks in the 1960s and 1970s, Ali reduced himself to little more than a comic figure in much the same way as Johnson had.
Very wealthy comic figures, it should be noted.
Quite obviously, the black population which attached so much importance to Johnson in the early years of the century was very different to the one which looked to Ali for leads in the 1960s and 1970s.
Indeed, according to Louis Lomax, there had occurred ‘The Negro Revolt’, meaning that there had been a gradual but  discernible rejection of the notion of blacks as inferior and a series of social movements orchestrated to sound this (1963).
Martin Luther King's civil rights campaign had resulted in legislation against the segregationism which existed in parts of the USA well into the 1960s.
King denounced not only whites for their paternalism and racialism, but blacks also for their enduring ‘slave mentality’.
His aim was to restore pride in being black and inspire black Americans to campaign for equal rights.
Improvements in the general conditions of blacks had taken place between Johnson's era, when white supremacist groups like the Ku Klux Klan articulated deeply-held sentiments, when at least three hundred and fifty blacks were illegally lynched and mixed marriages were forbidden, and that of Ali, when conflict manifested itself in the Watts riots and radicalism came in the form of the black power movements.
From the time when Ali was stripped of his title until 1975, the material conditions of blacks deteriorated; unemployment tripled so that figures of 35–50 per cent were commonplace in urban ghettos (Roberts and Kloss, 1979, p.72).
Ali proved a personal focus for his movements and the Nation of Islam became a forceful agent of cultural change amongst blacks, offering, through the leader Elijah Muhammad, a reassertion of the lost culture of black people with the creation of separate hospitals, schools, farms and industries.
Social isolation was encouraged to preserve racial purity and ‘freedom from contempt’.
By 1977, the movement's name had changed to the World Community of Islam in the West.
‘Bilalian’ replaced ‘Muslim’(Bilal was an Ethiopian thought to be the first black follower of the prophet Muhammad).
Several prominent black sportsmen followed Ali's example and underwent conversion to the faith (two world light-heavyweight titles in the 1980s were held by converts, Matthew Saad Muhammad and Eddie Mustapha Muhammad).
Sport has been called by many, including such opposing writers as Robert Boyle (1963) and Paul Hoch (1972), a ‘mirror’ reflecting, in often exaggerated ways, aspects of social life.
The period between Johnson's demise in 1916 and the rise of Ali, provides a good example of how reflective sport can be.
Caution must be shown when reviewing the progressive eradication of the colour line and the subsequent successes of blacks in many fields of sport.
It would be unwise to assume that because sport became an arena where colour lost its significance — if, indeed, it did entirely — the rest of society  followed suit.
It seems feasible to agree with the sports historian Edwin Henderson that, with the exception of show business, sport was the only area ‘in which blacks were able to assert themselves’ and so ‘on a large scale, Negroes identify with people in sports and entertainment’(1970, p.4).
Certainly, as I will argue later,’ sport and show business constitute the two spheres in which blacks have made immense contributions and which seem to throw up figures with whom black kids tend to identify and on whom they model themselves.
There are reasons for this, reasons rooted in social circumstances rather than natural abilities and these can be highlighted by examining the period between Johnson and Ali.
Willard's restoration of white dominance in heavyweight boxing in 1916 coincided with the re-establishment of the colour line.
He and subsequent champions refused to defend their titles against blacks.
Their policies drew little disapproval from sports authorities or the rest of the white population.
Harry Wills, a black boxer, was a contemporary of Jack Dempsey who reigned from 1919 (when he beat Willard) to 1926.
It is perhaps surprising that Dempsey is ranked among the greatest champions of all time when he was artificially protected from the challenge of black opponents.
Wills, from Louisiana, campaigned for a shot at the title, but Dempsey had acquired a status somewhat akin to Johnson's.
But, whereas Johnson had been ‘bad’, Dempsey was a symbol of everything wholesome in white America.
Racial disturbances and the ‘Red Scare’ were parts of the changing social climate in which Dempsey fought in the aftermath of World War I, yet ‘Dempsey seemed something stable, something people could depend on’, according to Randy Roberts (1974, p.66).
Dempsey defended his title only six times in as many years and constantly snubbed black challenges, one interesting one appearing in the pages of the New York Times from a certain Prince Mohammed Ali Ibrahim of Egypt whose special weapon was a ‘pyramid punch’(4 March 1924, p. 14).
But it was Wills who posed the most potent threat from the number one contender's corner.
Dempsey's manager Tex Rickard was, as another outstanding black heavyweight of the time recalled, ‘determined to keep the title white’(Gains, no date, p.54).
Gene Tunney disposed of Dempsey in 1926 and, after that, Larry Gains observed, blacks' frustrations about the colour line spiralled:
Harry Wills' campaign had caused a lot of soul searching.
Dempsey with his image of the ex-hobo riding the roads to fame had been big enough and glamorous enough to blur the controversy from the minds of the crowd.
But now that Dempsey had gone, the question had to be asked (no date, p.82).
Answers came in the form of an alternative world championship for the excluded black boxers.
Gains himself was one of the holders, as was George Godfrey, whom Gains rated as at least the equal of Dempsey.
As Gains (from Toronto, but now living in Croydon) told me in an interview in 1980: ‘The only time Godfrey had the handcuffs off was when he was fighting another black man.’
The black title lost its meaning after Joe Louis began the black occupation of the heavyweight scene in 1957 and, after that, the colour line was erased, in boxing at least.
Athletics, too, had moved away from the days when black sportsmen in the USA were forbidden to compete against whites.
1936 was the year in which a performance of theatrical proportions signalled the arrival of black athletes on an international scale.
Black athletes had already represented the United States: George Poage at the Olympic Games in 1904; de Hart Hubbard won the long jump in 1924; Eddie Tolan won the 100 yards and Ralph Metcalfe competed in 1932.
But, after this, the scene was set for the 1936 Berlin Olympics where, as Richard Mandell points out: ‘Racial policy permeated all aspects of German life in the Nazi era.
German sport was not excepted’(1971, p.58).
Jews bore the brunt of such policies, but blacks were similarly despised as Hitler's refusal to recognize Jesse Owens signified.
James Cleveland Owens, as he was christened, eclipsed the achievements of every previous Olympian when he swept through to win the sprint and long jump events, only to be rebuffed at the presentation ceremonies.
The Games were to be used as what Mandell calls ‘The Nazi Olympics’, a spectacle to underscore the supposed physical and intellectual superiority of the Aryan race.
Owens, together with Archie Williams (400 metres), John Woodruff (800 metres) and Cornelius Johnson (high jump), punctured that myth decisively, winning gold medals for the USA.
Owens, along with Louis, became an establishment figure.
Mandell depicts him thus: ‘a self-effacing gentleman, Jesse Owens was both a paragon and a refutation and therefore was considered ‘a credit to his race’’(1971, p.225).
A ‘credit’ he may have been, but  Owens was expelled from the American Athletics Union for refusing to compete in a Swedish tour and was eventually reduced to freak show racing against horses and motorcycles.
He also made it clear that he was against black boycotts organized around the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico, at which Thommie Smith and John Carlos demonstrated on the victory rostrum with a gloved black power salute.
The two were banned from international athletics for their parts in ‘The Olympic Project for Human Rights’(details of which can be found in Edwards, 1970).
Owens was submissive in the extreme and, though at first adulated, he was later despised by more vociferous blacks.
He may have established the credibility of blacks as sportsmen, but, as Harry Edwards notes in allusion to Owens: ‘From their [whites']perspective, the only difference between the black man shining shoes in the ghetto and the champion black sprinter is that the shoe shine man is a nigger, while the sprinter is a fast nigger’(1970, p.20).
It is a sobering statistic that in the twelve months either side of Owens' triumph there were twenty-six lynchings of blacks in the USA.
Also, it was not until 1947, eleven years after the Berlin Olympics, that black and white athletes were allowed to compete openly in a lull track meeting in the USA (Henderson, 1949, p.96).
The year before that, 1946, baseball allowed a black man into its major league for the first time.
Strict segregation had held firm for years and, as in boxing, a world series for blacks was organized in the 1920s.
But Peterson contends: ‘By the early thirties, gentle waves were washing against the hull of organized baseball’(1970, p. 175).
And, at the start of the 1940s, a baseball administrator named Branch Rickey began his search for the man destined to become the first black player in a white team.
Like Louis and Owens, Jackie Robinson was an uncomplicated, uncontroversial, non-drinking, non-smoking and, importantly, non-political sportsman.
In 1946, he played in Montreal and in the following year, he transferred to the Brooklyn Dodgers, where he had to weather a strong protest by the rest of the team before making his debut.
Lomax describes Robinson as a ‘moderate’ and his sympathies with the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) underlined his initial reluctance to be involved in mass direct action (1963, p.103).
The organization favoured social change through legal processes.
Robinson became much more confident and outspoken in the 1950s and eventually criticized the NAACP for its gradualist policies.
Presumably, his testing years as the first black in major league baseball affected his perceptions; he was abused verbally and physically, was sent threatening notes, was boycotted by many teams and at one stage, came to the brink of a nervous breakdown (Henderson, 1970, p.71).
Henderson believes that Robinson was ‘wrapped in all the dreams and aspirations not only of negro people but of all Americans of whatever colour who knew that segregation was wrong’(1970, p.69).
The hostility of his reception may have daunted other administrators from recruiting black players, but there was a gradual incursion of blacks into baseball in the 1950s and 1960s.
The basketball equivalent of Robinson was perhaps Chuck Cooper, who, in 1951, signed for Boston Celtics and precipitated a rush of black players to the major league clubs.
Within sixteen years, over half the registered players of the National Basketball Association were black.
The impetus behind this increase was probably provided by a decision given by the United States Supreme Court in 1954 which declared forced segregation unconstitutional in all public educational institutions.
Previously all-white colleges with heavy emphases on sporting achievements were then able to recruit blacks for their institutions.
Two pieces of apparent racialism surfaced in basketball.
First, in the 1967–8 season, ‘dunking’, a shooting strategy employed almost exclusively by blacks, was outlawed.
second, in the 1972–3 season, the management of the American Basketball Association's Dallas franchise removed four of its ten black players (of an eleven-man squad) because, according to the coach: ‘Whites in Dallas are simply not interested in paying to see an all Black team’(quoted by Edwards, 1973, p.214).
One all-black team whites seemed very interested in paying to see was the Harlem Globetrotters, which began life as ‘The Savoy Big Five’ and changed its name in 1927.
It is difficult to categorize the team alongside the previously mentioned sportsmen simply because it was more a comedy outfit than a competitive unit.
Its historical and current popularity with whites is accountable in terms of its members' conformity to the image of the black man as physically adept but lacking in the intellectual equipment to harness his skill to firm objectives.
The goals were more in making audiences laugh than scoring baskets and so they were clowns, even if skilful ones.
The team was regarded by many, including James Michener, as having a negative impact: ‘I strongly suspect that the Harlem  Globetrotters did more damage racially than they did good, because they deepened the stereotype of ‘the loveable, irresponsible Negro’’(1976, p.145).
It was not a historical accident that the sports in which blacks were overrepresented compared to their proportion in the general population were those demanding little in the way of equipment or facilities.
Such events as rowing, swimming, shooting, fencing, skiing and yachting were, as Edwards puts it, ‘outside our cultural reach’(1970, p.79).
The desegregation of education helped bring sports such as American football inside their reach during the 1960s and, by 1972, black players comprised 40 per cent of the total of professional footballers, most, however, occupying ‘positions with the fewest intellectual and leadership demands’(Eitzen and Sanford, 1975, p.959).
The general pattern established by blacks' involvement in sport in the last two hundred years is that they have excelled in all those areas within their cultural reach and such excellence is repeated generation alter generation.
Blacks in the USA achieve success in sport in numbers that belie their minority status in the population at large.
In the mid-1940s, explanations for this were offered in the form of theories which presented anatomical features as the cause of the blacks' advantages.
‘A long thin shank, a long heel, a peculiar patella, a stronger tendon of Achilles or larger adrenalin glands’ were some of the attributes thought to enable blacks to dominate certain disciplines (Henderson, 1949, p.362).
However, there are social sources for the high value placed on sport by blacks and, in this short and somewhat cursory account of blacks' involvement in American sport, I have hoped to bring out some of them.
Obviously, when sport offers itself as one of the few accessible routes away from deprivation, as it was to the early slaves, it takes on an attractive quality.
Those slaves distinguishing themselves through their sporting efforts in the ring were able to win their freedom and, in some cases, elevate themselves to social prominence.
As a consequence, those figures became inspirational to other slaves who attempted to emulate them: the Richmond-Molyneux effect.
Even today, sport is seen as a ‘way out’ and black sportsmen provide important reference points for young blacks.
As I will indicate, black sportsmen of distinction wield considerable influence, often unknown to them, and unwittingly act as lures for black kids, as Bill Richmond probably did in the late eighteenth  century, not only in the United States, but in England too.
Yet, given their potential influence, few outstanding sportsmen have used their position to challenge the notion of the legitimacy of sport as a way out and a method of social mobility, and few have pointed out that blacks' continued domination of sport is more a reflection of limitations in other areas of a society permeated with racism than of blacks' talent.
Thommie Smith and the other members of the 1968 Olympic protest against black-white inequality were vivid exceptions.
His expulsion by American authorities contrasted strikingly with the reception he received from Rap Brown, Stokely Carmichael, Elijah Muhammad and other black leaders (Edwards, 1970, p. 107).
George Foreman, who also won a gold medal (for boxing) in Mexico, held the stars and stripes as he received his medal and was celebrated throughout the United States by whites.
But, then again, he was more in the Louis mould, ‘a good nigger’, rather than the bad Mr Smith.
Foreman's opponent in 1974, Muhammad Ali, is the other important articulator of protest, and his dominance over other heavyweights for a period of fourteen years was so complete that he was impossible to suppress, even though his enforced incapacitation for four years did seem to dull his sharpness in criticizing white racism.
He saw that it was this very racism that was responsible for forcing blacks into positions of marginality.
He emerged from a culture in which positive values were attached to sport and, in a black perspective, for good reasons — that was where other blacks were making it.
Ali himself has acknowledged this: ‘I started boxing because I thought this was the fastest way for a black person to make it in this country’(quoted by Torres, 1971, p.83).
From this viewpoint, racism contributed in significant measure to Ali's achievements as it did to every other black sportsman's.
The effects of racism were not restricted to the USA, but were apparent in England too, where my focus now shifts.
Escape: the British experience
The existence of successful black sportsmen in Britain is not the recent phenomenon it is often considered to be, though the upsurge in the post-war years makes it appear that way.
Unlike the USA, where emancipation released slaves from plantations to develop into  a large indigenous population, Britain acquired its black contingent initially through immigration.
In the twenty years after 1951, Britain's settlers from New Commonwealth countries increased from 0.2 million to 1.2 million, the majority being black workers attracted to England in the 1950s and 1960s by expanding job opportunities (for more details, see The Runnymede Trust and the Radical Statistics Group, 1980).
Recruitment schemes such as those of London Transport were operated in the West Indies to encourage immigration.
Most West Indians settled in areas where the chances of employment were highest, London and the Midlands attracting the majority.
The sportsmen came mainly from the children of this first wave of immigrants in the 1950s and 1960s.
But not all: for black sportsmen have staked a presence in Britain, albeit a small presence, since 1777 when Bill Richmond was uprooted and given his freedom in recognition of his sporting achievements (at this time, Walvin, 1971, p.12, estimates there were 15,000 blacks in London).
He handled and advised Tom Molyneux, the next black figure on the sporting scene, and actually fought until 181 5, five years after the famous Molyneux-Cribb encounter, which Henderson describes as ‘the first great fistic battle of the century’(1949, p. 17).
Henderson's early work,The Negro in Sports (1949), contains references to a number of other slaves who followed Richmond and Molyneux to England where they campaigned as boxers, thus effecting an escape.
Jim Wharton for example, born in Virginia in 1813 (five years before Molyneux's death in Scotland at the age of 34), campaigned in England in the 1830s.
In the second half of the century, Britain received, amongst others, Bob Smith from Washington DC and Bob Travers, who was noted for his contests against Jem Mace and Patsy Reardon.
Slightly later came heavyweight Peter Jackson, born in St Croix, West Indies, in 1861, four years before emancipation.
He travelled as a seaman to Sydney where he won the Australian heavyweight title before transferring to San Francisco where he was persuaded by the Earl of Lonsdale to operate in England, a move which enhanced his status greatly, as a contemporary noted: ‘I knew him in the days of his greatness when sitting on top of the pugilistic world, fêted and lionized, he might well have been excused some slight vanity’(quoted by Henderson, 1949, pp.20–1).
Viscount Knebworth notes an early colour line drawn by the world heavyweight champion John  L. Sullivan who took on white challengers but refused to fight Jackson (no date, p.56).
By 1896, however, Peter Corris reports: ‘Jackson became a publican and a drinker and his decline was rapid’(1980, p.53).
He was reduced to playing Uncle Tom in a touring version of Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin and, in this sense, became something of a prototype.
Travelling with Jackson when he left the USA was perhaps the most awesome of all black boxers to come to England.
Born in Halifax, Nova Scotia, George Dixon moved to Boston where he acquired a knowledge of boxing.
Fighting as ‘Little Chocolate’, his campaign in England culminated in his winning the world bantamweight title by stopping Englishman Nunc Wallace in eighteen rounds of a contest at the Pelican Club, London, in 1890 (though he had informally been recognized as the premier bantamweight for some years before).
Like Jackson, he enjoyed a comfortable life style, staying in quality hotels and dressing rather ostentatiously.
His inability to make the weight limit forced him to relinquish his title, but two years later, at the age of 22, he moved back to the USA and won the featherweight crown (subsequently losing it, regaining it, losing it again and winning it back finally in 1898).
While Jackson and Dixon were performing regularly in the English rings, a black man distinguished himself on the track.
He was Arthur Wharton, a Jamaican about whom little recorded evidence exists apart from his sprinting achievements.
Running for Darlington, he became the first man to run 100 yards in even time (10 seconds dead) under championship conditions when he took the Amateur Athletics Association (AAA) title in 1886 at Stamford Bridge.
Interestingly, he remained in sport, becoming the first black professional footballer when he signed on as goalkeeper for Preston North End.
He kept in touch with athletics, running in the professional Powder Hall competition in 1889.
(For further details on the historical aspects of athletics, see Watman, 1968.)
In 1902, Andrew Jeptha migrated from Cape Town to Liverpool, working his passage on a freighter.
He had been boxing in South Africa for three years and, according to boxing historian Gilbert Odd, had remained unbeaten for the first two years (1978, pp.18–19).
After moving to Willesden in north-west London he became the scourge of local boxers and eventually became the first black man to hold a British title when, in 1907, he beat Curly Watson in the fourth of a scheduled twenty rounds to take the welterweight championship  at the ‘Wonderland’ venue in the East End of London.
He continued to box until 1910 when a deteriorating eye condition signalled the end of his active career.
Jeptha is not popularly credited with being the first black British champion.
This is because the British Boxing Board of Control (BBBC), the governing body of the sport, was not formed until 1929 and quite openly barred non-whites from challenging for British titles until 1948.
Charles Donmall, in this period the secretary of the BBBC, justified the discrimination by pointing out that: ‘It is only right that a small country such as ours should have championships restricted to boxers of white parents — otherwise we might be faced with a situation where all our British titles are held by coloured Empire boxers’(quoted by Henderson, 1949, p.340).
If anyone was a source of embarrassment to the BBBC because of this rule, it was Larry Gains who was born in Toronto in 1900 and moved to England rather late in his boxing career when 30 years old.
Gains' involvement in the sport was a perfect example of role modelling for, in 1913, he fleetingly met Jack Johnson.
From that time, he made it his ambition to become ‘another Jack Johnson’, as he told me: ‘It was a kind of inspiration to me as I was the only black kid in the area.
Every time we used to fight from then on, I used to pretend I was Johnson and the other kid used to say he was Sullivan or somebody.’
The ambition was what Gains, in his autobiography, calls the ‘impossible dream’; the colour line effectively prohibited him from challenging for the world title, though he did beat George Godfrey for the black version of the championship in 1928.
After moving to England, he fought for over two years without being defeated and reckoned: ‘Ninety per cent of the public wanted to see me win the British title.
There wasn't prejudice amongst the public then 'cause there was only a handful of coloured here, anyway.’
His ring record alone demanded the attention of the BBBC and he believed that: ‘It was through public opinion that I eventually got a title.
The board thought, ‘we've got to give Larry Gains a title; give him an Empire title and he'll be satisfied with that.’
I reckon I was the People's Champ.’
Accordingly, he was granted and Empire title challenge in 1931 at Leicester where he duly disposed of England's Phil Scott in under two rounds.
He continued to campaign successfully without ever managing to secure the British title he wanted to win and retired in 1939 with the racist rule still intact.
This rule was  eventually changed after the war so as to permit the Leamington-born middleweight Dick Turpin to contest the British championship.
He did so successfully in 1948, outpointing Vince Hawkins at Birmingham and thus becoming the first black champion to be recognized by the BBBC.
Black involvement in athletics had continued in the inter-war period, first through a Guyanan, Harry Edward, a prodigious sprinter who was interned in Germany during the war, but returned to England taking seven AAA sprint titles in the 1920–2 period.
He still remains the only man to win the 100, 220 and 440 yards in one AAA championship (in 1922).
Also from Guyana was Jack London, though he was brought to London when just 3 months old.
He went to the 1928 Olympics, equalling the 100 yards record in the semi-final.
In the following year he won the 100 yards AAA title; he had for a while reigned as the British number one high jumper.
He was also the first sprinter in Britain to use starting blocks.
After retiring, he went into show business.
Between the wars, the credibility of black sportsmen generally was enhanced by the tours of the West Indian cricket team in England.
Later, the 1950 series against England, won by the tourists, gained black cricketers recognition as world forces.
World War II was an important factor in the emergence of the two black athletes who, according to Mel Watman, ranked alongside Roger Bannister in terms of national popularity.
Collectively, Bannister, McDonald Bailey and Arthur Wint formed what Watman calls ‘the Holy Trinity’(personal communication, 1981).
Bailey competed as an unheralded schoolboy in a AAA meeting in the late 1930s, then returned to his Trinidadian birthplace.
He joined the Royal Air Force during the war, after which he settled in London.
Between 1946 and 1953, he was virtually invincible over 100 and 200 yards, achieving an all-time AAA record of sixteen titles (including two relays).
He won a bronze medal for Britain in the 1952 Olympics.
One of his ‘trade marks’ was an all-white kit to contrast with his dark skin.
‘Unusual, but totally accepted’, is how Watman described him.
‘A big hero’.
As ‘heroic’ was Arthur Wint, also in the RAF during the war.
He joined Polytechnic Harriers (also Bailey's club) and took the AAA 440 yards and 880 yards titles in 1946 and added three more titles before 1952.
Representing Jamaica, he won the 1948 440 yards Olympic title in London and added two silvers to his haul.
He  studied at the University of London whilst competing and qualified as a doctor of medicine.
After retiring from sport, he became the Jamaican High Commissioner in London.
This was in contrast to Bailey who attempted to capitalize on his athletics success by venturing into rugby league.
Business interests in the music industry occupied his later years.
It is wise to remember that these men were competing at a time when the black presence was of only tiny significance.
Curiosity may have been aroused by their performances but, according to Watman, ‘they enjoyed incredible popularity at the time and there was never any suggestion of race as a factor’(personal communication, 1981).
During the decade after the war, immigration, most particularly from the West Indies, rose sharply in response to the employment opportunities I mentioned earlier.
Active in that period was Lloyd Lindbergh Delaphena, born in Kingston, Jamaica, in 1927.
He played soccer for Middlesbrough in the immediate post-war years and, in 1950, moved to Portsmouth where he played professionally until 1958, after which he drifted away from the club never to contact Portsmouth again (W. J. B. Davis, Portsmouth FC Secretary, personal communication, 1979).
More black boxers were becoming active during the same decade.
Indeed, on one night in June 1946, five black successes prompted the ambiguous headline from a London newspaper: ‘Black Night For British Boxing’(Henderson, 1949, p.340).
As well as the home-grown Turpin, boxers like Yolande Pompey from Trinidad and Cliff Anderson from Guyana were making regular appearances.
They were, however, not allowed to take part in British title contests.
Regulation 31, paragraph 4 of the BBBC's constitution specified that a title contestant ‘must be a British subject who was born and is normally resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom…
And has been resident in the United Kingdom for a period of not less than ten years.’
This effectively ruled out the overwhelming majority of black boxers based in Britain.
The ten-year qualification still stands.
The life of Dick Turpin's brother Randolph fits almost perfectly into that pattern created by Jack Johnson, Peter Jackson and Jesse Owens: an emergence from abjection and poverty to world recognition and wealth amounting to £300,000 from boxing earnings alone, followed by a slide into debt and obscurity and a reduction to the  kind of fairground exhibitions engaged in by the others (Birtley 1976).
Turpin was born in the Midlands town of Leamington Spa in 1928.
His father was an immigrant from British Guyana, his mother a local woman who, according to Turpin's biographer Jack Birtley, had to withstand the stigma attributed to those making ‘mixed marriages’(1976, p. 13).
Inspired by the example of his eldest brother Dick, he began boxing in 1937, the year in which Dick made his professional debut.
His career climaxed in 1951 when he upset Sugar Ray Robinson by taking his world middleweight title after fifteen rounds at Earls Court.
His reign as champion, however, lasted only two months and he was stopped in the tenth round of a return contest in New York City.
For two years, he persevered in an attempt to regain the title but was outpointed by Carl ‘Bobo’ Olsen in October 1953.
Thereafter, his form fluctuated as irregularly as his training and his domestic affairs.
Lacking any financial acumen, he ran into difficulties with the Inland Revenue which filed a bankruptcy petition against him for the unpaid tax on his ring earnings: the order was for over £17 000.
His career plunged to humiliating depths when he engaged in ‘boxer v. wrestler’ bouts and even consented to making a fully fledged comeback in a boxing promotion at Peterborough (which was not licensed by the BBBC) at the age of 35 (Birtley, 1976, p.133).
On 16 May 1966, he committed suicide by shooting himself, though rumours of a ‘gangland murder’ remained, according to Birtley (1976, pp.140–53).
Boxing continued to attract black participants after the initial post-war period.
Among the more conspicuous were Yolande Pompey, who challenged unsuccessfully for Archie Moore's world light-heavyweight title in London in 1956, and Hogan ‘Kid’ Bassey, a Nigerian who moved to Liverpool in 1952, three years later won the Commonwealth featherweight title and, in 1957, won the world featherweight title, before eventually returning to Nigeria as national boxing coach.
Neither athletics nor soccer prospered from black participation in the same way as boxing, but there were exceptions.
Roy Hollingworth, a discus thrower from Trinidad, and Clive Long from Guyana gained international athletics honours in the 1960s, though it was a Jamaican, Marilyn Fay Neufville, who, over the period, rose to prominence in athletics, eventually gaining the Commonwealth  Games gold medal and, simultaneously, the world's 400 metre record (51 seconds) in Edinburgh in 1970 when she was 18 years old.
Neufville ran for Cambridge Harriers in South East London though she opted for competing for Jamaica in the prestigious games.
Leeds United's winger Albert Johanneson became the first black player to appear at Wembley in the 1965 Cup Final against Liverpool, who won 2–1 after extra time.
In the early 1970s, Clyde Best, a Bermudan, played for a spell with West Ham and, I am told by one of his former team mates, was made to feel isolated by fellow players.
John Miller, the son of a Jamaican father and English mother, aroused interest by being mooted as the first black player to represent England.
‘Miller for Munich’(the site of 1974 World Cup Finals) anticipated Maurice Smith in the People (19 December 1971).
Blacks continued to involve themselves in boxing after the war though it was not until 1970 that a black boxer emulated the Turpins in winning a British title: Jamaican-born Bunny Sterling became the first immigrant boxer ever to win a British title when he beat Mark Rowe at Wembley.
He had been domiciled in England since 1954 and so fulfilled the BBBC residential qualifications.
The racially inspired threats which Sterling told me he received after taking the title illustrated the resentment felt at a black man being a British champion.
It was only because of fortuitous circumstances that Bunny Johnson was allowed to carry through his successful challenge in 1975.
The BBBC ordered an eliminating series of contests to decide who should gain official contender status.
Johnson was highly ranked but had been based in England for a few months under ten years.
He was excluded on these grounds when the eliminators were announced even though, by the time the fights would have taken place, his ten years would have been up.
In the event, John Conteh dropped down a division and Johnson took his place, proving the legitimacy of his claim by beating two contenders and then the champion to become the first black heavyweight champion of Great Britain.
Conteh's decision brought benefits in the form of a world light-heavyweight title in 1975 though his desire to sever links with the main promotional power bloc led to his eventual demise.
Born in Liverpool to a West African father in 1951, Conteh won ABA, British and Commonwealth titles but was stripped of his world title by the World Boxing Council for failing to go through with a  contracted defence in 1977 and failed three times to regain the championship before retiring in 1981.
By the time of Johnson's accession, the second generation West Indians' enthusiasm for sport was beginning to germinate and, by the end of the decade, decisive steps had been made in both athletics and soccer.
International representations in athletics came in abundance with Ainsley Bennett, Mike MacFarlane and Daley Thompson and football went through a veritable upsurge in the 1978–9 season with the likes of Viv Anderson, Laurie Cunningham, Cyrille Regis, Garry Thompson providing the vanguard of a train of black first-division players.
Anderson became the first black player to play in a full international game for England in 1979.
Cunningham detached himself from the British game negotiating a £1 million transfer to Real Madrid in 1979, the same year in which Maurice Hope of Antigua emulated Dixon, Turpin, Bassey and Conteh by winning a world boxing title.
London-born Mike MacFarlane established himself as the top black British athlete by winning the 200 metres European title, though his form thereafter lapsed and, although he made the 1980 Olympic sprint team, he failed to make the finals.
A surfeit of black footballers appeared in the early 1980s, some, like Garth Crooks and Justin Fashanu, of exceptional competence.
In boxing too, blacks continued to participate: out of 448 professional boxers registered with the BBBC in 1981, approximately one-third were black and four out of the ten British titles were held by boxers of West Indian origin or descent and Cornelius Boza-Edwards, a Ugandan who moved to London in 1974, won the world superfeatherweight title in 1981.
Athletics continued to prosper by the increasing infusion of blacks into sprint and jumping events, though it was a decathlete, Daley Thompson, who, in 1980, became the most successful black British-based athlete since Arthur Wint, by winning an Olympic gold medal and, for a spell, holding the world's decathlon record.
The early 1980s was a time of immense fertility for blacks in sport: as well as their presence in athletics, boxing and soccer, Desmond Douglas established himself as the top table tennis player in the UK,; Eugene Codrington consolidated his captaincy of the British karate team (composed mainly of other blacks) and Roland Butcher became the second black player to play for an MCC touring side (the first being Basil  D'Oliviera of South Africa).
Though less of a working  class sport than the others, cricket has played a part in gaining blacks' acceptance as legitimate sportsmen through exposing black West Indians as players of enormous proficiency.
Clearly, the intense involvement of blacks in sport is no recent phenomenon and any study of black sportsmen must pay careful attention to history.
To gain an understanding of the persistence and excellence of black sportsmen, the analysis has to begin in the eighteenth century.
I outlined earlier how several of the themes developed in early slave days continue throughout the course of black involvement in sport.
Sport constituted an avenue of social mobility for any slave willing and capable enough to pit his sporting skills against another.
It is no surprise that the gladiatorial sport of boxing was the most accessible route.
Slave masters matched their gladiators and rewarded the successful with relief from plantation duties, the possibility of travel and, ultimately, freedom.
Few or no other routes were available and so it was a most logical decision to opt for the sporting escape.
But only the very superior pugilists made the ultimate escapes and so it was in every boxing slave's interest to wring out his best efforts on every occasion.
If training and competing were exacting, they were not nearly so exacting as plantation work.
Boxing was also the sport in which blacks first grew to prominence in Britain, though, of course, their presence was the result of the predilection of the wealthy to engage their interests in the noble art and therefore encourage the cross-fertilization between Britain and America.
The first black sportsmen to appear in Britain were either slaves or ex-slaves.
As in America, boxing overwhelmingly dominated the attentions of blacks simply because it was the sport in which other blacks had been allowed to compete and they had done so with extremely conspicuous success.
I have emphasized the part played by people like Jack Johnson in uplifting the morale of other blacks and providing reference points for the ambitions of many, and I will argue for the importance of successful black sportsmen in galvanizing blacks' interests.
Athletics, to a more limited extent, commanded some attention, beginning in the late nineteenth century with Arthur Wharton who later became the first black footballer to play league soccer.
At that time, athletics was more genuinely an amateur sport, less the ‘invisible’ crock of gold it is today with its often overt forms of ‘shamateurism’.
So, although a rich source of status and prestige, athletics could not compare with professional sport in terms of material gain.
Because of this, boxing remained the major sporting area for blacks right up to and beyond the World War II period, though it was not until 1948 that they were allowed to contest a British title.
The blacks, like Bailey and Wint who were in athletics, tended to be from established occupational and social backgrounds and, to them, sport may not have yielded a direct material benefit.
But, indirectly, the prestige accorded them because of their achievements no doubt aided their later successful careers.
And, even in itself, prestige through sport is a valuable commodity for those unlikely to receive it from any other direction.
The elliptical path paved by Peter Jackson in the 1890s was followed by another black comet, Randolph Turpin, in the 1950s.
Leaving poverty and strife behind them, both went into orbit via sport only to return dispirited to their take-off points.
Stories such as these are more regular in the USA where, according to Nathan Hare, black boxers begin with visions of wealth and glamour but complete their careers ‘dissatisfied now with their present lot’.
He gives the example of Johnny Saxon who, three years after winning the world welterweight title, was charged with burglary and eventually institutionalized at New Jersey State Mental Hospital: ‘Boxing does not leave all its scars on a fighter's face’(1973, p.325).
Such scars were left on Jackson and Turpin, but it would be facile to accept these as rules rather than exceptions.
And, in any case, it is ridiculous to condemn boxing itself for attracting black aspirants when the reasons for their involvements are rooted in historical and social processes.
It is not so curious then that blacks have manifested a predilection for sport and have achieved high orders of success in their chosen disciplines.
Maurice Hope, no less than Jack London or Lindy Delaphena or Tom Molyneux, was involved in sport because of the social circumstances common to black people.
Not particularly these circumstances in an objective sense, but the way in which they are perceived and oriented to by black people.
And the source of those circumstances lies in the imperial expansion of the seventeenth century, the settlement of the West Indies and the expansion of the trade in slaves, gold and sugar between Africa, the Americas and Britain.
Slavery meant that whites maintained their domination over blacks and so kept a rigidly structured inequality.
Such an inequality has been modified and refined in the decades since emancipation, but blacks have never quite shed the remnants of their shackles and have stayed socially unequal.
Men of sport must be understood in relation to their historical and social conditions.
Where opportunities exist in realms offering longer term and, therefore, more secure futures, sport does not figure prominently for it is always precarious, invariably venturous and frequently treacherous.
Where such opportunities are absent and material conditions suffer, resulting in apprehensions about employment, housing and diet, more accessible areas are approached.
Sport and entertainment are two such areas.
They are both gladiatorial in the sense that the participant; train or practise and exhibit their skills and enthusiasm for one end, the amusement of others.
Training and preparation may be the most isolatory activities, but sport itself is performed to be appreciated.
When all is said and done, the modern day season ticket holder or the viewer of closed circuit television, no less than old time slave masters, have decisive effects on the destinies of sportsmen.
Historically, where there has been a demand for sport, the particulars of participants seem to lose significance.
Thus the severe animosity against Jews culminating in the Aliens Act of 1905, a product of what Bernard Gainer calls ‘The Anti-Alien Mentality’(1972, chapter 5) did not prevent sport's patrons delighting at the scores of immigrants seeking material rewards through boxing.
As with the blacks, sport for Jews became a possible way out of the dreadful circumstances which beset their lives.
That sport and, for that matter, entertainment may not be viable avenues from despair is less important than the fact that they were seen as such by groups who saw no alternatives.
‘Shout down any coal pit in Yorkshire and half a dozen fast bowlers will come up’ was an adage born out of the 30s depression when cricket was one of an extremely limited range of alternatives to a miserable, lowly paid struggle in coal mining.
The potency of sport in magnetizing certain minority and under-privileged groups is obvious.
But there are no inflexible rules concerning its power to draw on such groups: first generation Caribbeans in the UK showed little interest in sport, nor did Asians of either generation on any scale.
But the first generation did not see their opportunities as restricted: migration itself was an optimistic move.
The prospect of improved material conditions in a new social environment was a strong one, as many studies indicate (for example, Patterson, 1963; Davison, 1966; Peach, 1968; Lawrence, 1974).
Although their reception by whites was more hostile than they anticipated, their conditions were still improvements on what they had left behind and their thoughts for the future would have turned about accumulating money through regular, if uncomfortable, comparatively rewarding employment.
Asians were products of a culture emphasizing the value of education as a means of social advancement and, because of the tight control they were able to exert over their children, could imbue the second generation with similar values.
Various factors militated against this happening with Caribbean children and I will spell them out in the chapters to come.
The tenor of the work so far indicates my view that any account of the rise to prominence of black sportsmen in Britain is hollow unless constant reference is made to the social conditions amidst which black people lived and live.
I hope it is already apparent that the intense enthusiasm for sport generated by blacks in both the United States and Britain is no historical accident.
Nor is it due to black people's possession of special gifts or talents which equip them more satisfactorily for certain sporting events.
The latter point has been a cause of some concern because, in the 1980s, black kids continue to involve themselves in sport with a fervour which alarms many, fearful that blacks' achievements can only reinforce traditional stereotyped images about blacks being adept at physical pursuits, but inept at intellectual ones.
One does not logically follow the other, of course, but trying to establish theories purporting to explain blacks' achievements as resulting from alleged natural gifts unique to blacks, by implication, reinforces the stereotype.
In the next chapter, I will consider one such theory.
MAURICE HOPE
fighting for others
Born: Antigua, 1951; father: Antigua (railway porter); mother: Antigua; occupation: professional boxer — formerly a leather tanner.
‘If he wasn't a successful boxer, Mo would probably have been doing ten years for something or other now,’ reckoned Tony Burns, Hope's former coach from the Repton club.
‘Around here, there are two things for a working-class kid to do: steal or box.’
Hope opted for boxing and became a world champion.
I came to England when I was 9, that would have been in 1961, and that's when I saw the world for what it's all about, I was still a child but I saw it, the black and white thing, it was a reality.
Not that it came to me just thinking: I realized it at school.
Most of my school mates were black, though I had a few white ones.
From the age of, say, 11, I began to see that I'm black and others were white and there was no use putting it behind me.
At this age, he started boxing, principally at the instigation of his brother Lex.
There were only three other black kids at Repton at the time and Hope had to withstand some daunting reactions to his presence at the club in the East End of London.
I had to mix and tolerate.
There were a few of them who put it straight at me and I was forced into getting into rows.
I remember one fellow spat in my face.
I'd be in the shower and they'd push me out, actually push me out saying, ‘you black so-and-so’.
This shocked me 'cause I'd left Antigua with no idea what colour prejudice was, no idea.
You can imagine how frustrated I felt.
I'm only human.
Outside the ring, you feel frustrated, but you try to argue and get some facts.
But that's the most you can do outside the ring.
You argue with one another and put it down to the fact that people who are  prejudiced are ignorant.
It makes no sense arguing with them, so I had to walk away or get involved in fights.
Most of the time, I'd walk away.
Now, in the ring it's different: it's all legal there.
In a way, he was able to vent his frustrations in his boxing and his sport became like a cathartic experience; it provided a perfect outlet for his aggression.
It doesn't sort of get to me nowadays, I've learned to deal with prejudice, but in a funny kind of way, it's helped me get from the bottom to the top.
I still get the comments.
The only difference is that, now I'm somebody, they don't say it to my face.
But because they don't say it to my face, it doesn't mean to say I don't still get them: now they say things behind my back.
Hope's emergence as ‘somebody’ was almost glacial.
He turned professional in 1973 under the management of Terry Lawless.
After winning his first four contests, he was outpointed, but strengthened his resolve winning his next nine, eight inside the distance, including an eight-rounds victory for the British light-middleweight title.
After that win, Hope's family and supporters celebrated with champagne in the dressing room and Lawless recalled: ‘We only had a few glasses and Mo and I were drinking out of the same one.
I can still see the looks of astonishment on his friends’ faces when they saw me, a white man, drinking out of the same glass.’
After having a challenge for the domestic middleweight title demolished by Bunny Sterling who stopped him in eight rounds, Hope once more returned with a vigorous sequence of wins culminating in a challenge for the world light-middleweight title held by Eckhard Dagge in Berlin.
The result was a highly controversial draw, most ringside commentators agreeing that Hope deserved victory.
That was in 1977 and Hope had to wait two years before making his second attempt.
Rocky Mattioli, an Italian, had displaced Dagge, but Hope overwhelmed him in San Remo to take the World Boxing Council light-middleweight title.
Three defences made him one of Britain's most successful world champions ever before being dethroned by Wilfred Benitez in 1981 (in a fight for which his purse was 400,000 dollars) yet, curiously, he stayed at his terraced house in Stoke Newington, London.
This was partly because of his sense of responsibility to black people.
I haven't led a life of freedom: I've sacrificed a hell of a lot.
But they all know me as one of them.
They see that I do things different.
That's why I feel kind of different, like a leader, like an example to them.
Things are getting harder and harder and we're going backwards.
I also think that a lot of black kids think that this is a white man's country and, when any little thing goes wrong, a set-back, the first thing they jump on is colour.
I've been through everything; set-backs and fear.
Where publicity is concerned I've had a raw deal.
Naturally, I put it down to colour.
I've looked at it on both sides, from different angles and colour is something to do with it.
Even in the later stages of his boxing career, he held a most acute perception of the problems besetting black people and he continued to carry such a perception to the ring.
I've really had to work hard to get where I got to and when I fight a black guy, I know that he's had to do the same thing, I think: ‘Well, he's had it as hard as me’ and little zest goes out of your punching, I just want to beat him on points.
I'm professional, of course, and it all changes as soon as he hits me.
All of a sudden, I want to get it over with no matter if he's black, white, pink or yellow.
But, I know black people who are watching me in the audience or on the TV are thinking it's a black versus white thing.
Before his defence in 1980, against Carlos Herrera, he announced: ‘This is a white man's country and the black man is being held back.’
Accordingly he dedicated the fight to ‘black people of the world’, and was criticized for his sentiments.
However, Hope, by that time, clearly regarded himself as the embodiment of blacks' ambitions.
People like myself and the footballers and athletes, we're black and have been pressed down.
OK?
But they can't keep us down forever 'cause we're going to show whites that we're better than them at their own game.
We've made it, so we're showing other blacks that they can make it as well.
Asked if he thought an over-emphasis on sport could disadvantage black kids in academic subjects, he answered:
No.
I think if you've got it inside you, I don't think you have to turn your back on any one subject and concentrate on another.
If you're  sensible enough, you know you've got to learn your lessons and not be ignorant to the fact.
I know that a lot of blacks are just expecting things to come to them; they're sort of free living, it's our nature to sit down and enjoy life.
But you've got to compete.
There are a lot of black boxers because blacks are natural fighters.
but there are very few that have made it really big in this country.
They haven't got perseverance, haven't got the dedication; they want to enjoy themselves, not sacrifice things.
Really, I've surprised myself being a black man and being by my nature free living.
but it's amazing how I'm affecting black kids.
they come up knocking at my door asking me to teach them boxing and even stopping me on the street.
My winning has done something for them as well as me.
Fighting inside the ring, I'm not just thinking about myself.
I'm thinking about black people as well as Antigua and Great Britain and, lastly, myself.
Chapter Three
THAT BLACK MAGIC OF NATURE
Ability
One of the most apparent features of blacks' involvement in sport is the continued standard of excellence they achieve.
It seems that, whenever blacks turn their attention to a particular sport, they rise to a high order of competence in it.
In history and in modern times, any sporting pursuit which seriously engages blacks is sure to see them become the leaders in the field.
As I argued in the previous chapter, boxing was the first sport in which institutional arrangements permitted a black presence: almost every weight division produced black boxers of such brilliance that they were virtually without equals (see Henderson, 1949, 1970; Maher, 1968).
The examples of Sugar Ray Robinson, Henry Armstrong and Ike Williams attest to this and heavyweight boxing was dominated by black boxers almost totally from 1937.
Jesse Owens' mastery of multiple athletic disciplines is well known and since then the sprint events have become virtually the property of American blacks with figures like Jim Hines in the 1960s, and hurdler Ed Moses in the 1980s, exerting unparalleled supremacy in their respective events.
Basketball was all but taken over by black players; grid-iron football became a platform for such star performers as Jim Brown and O. J. Simpson and baseball, to a lesser extent, absorbed many black players of distinction, including Hank Aaron and Willie Mays, the number one and number three leading home-run hitters, after Jackie Robinson broke the colour bar in 1947.
The pattern was similar in the UK with second generation blacks rising to prominence in the late 1970s and early 1980s, getting a foot-hold first in boxing and later in athletics and football, not to mention karate and table tennis.
Blacks' recent involvement in sport began in the 1950s and continued spasmodically through the next two decades, intensifying as the 1980s approached; in the spheres in which they opted to compete, many achieved excellence.
Their visibility in sports and success in certain events led many to speculate on the reasons behind the supremacy of blacks in some sports and non-involvement in others.
Generally, blacks in the UK concentrated on boxing, the traditional ‘open sport’, which was historically the most accessible to them, the sprint and jumping events of athletics and, more recently, soccer.
Amongst the sports in which blacks showed no interest were swimming and golf and there was little obvious interest in racket sports while middle distances of the track were disregarded.
Explaining this seemed of no particular concern to those involved with sport: blacks were patently good at some events and not good at others.
When pressed for reasons, they would draw on such ‘obvious’ facts as blacks are physically equipped or conditioned better for some sports, or reference was made to the explain-ail theory of ‘natural ability’.
Even today, these types of explanation are prevalent amongst sporting communities.
They would seem to be of integral importance to any manager or coach handling black sportsmen, yet few theorize at any level other than the physiological or, more occasionally, the psychological.
It is my purpose to expose such ideas  as erroneous and offer in their place an account based on social processes.
The theories held, often implicitly, by managers, trainers and coaches are of interest because of the effect they have on all involved in sport.
If a coach believes that the black sportsman he is helping to prepare is naturally endowed with the physical equipment to produce fast sprints or hard jabs, or mazy runs through defences, it will affect his judgment as to the areas of speciality into which he should channel the efforts of that sportsman.
It will also affect the manner in which the coach attempts to motivate the sportsman, the light in which he analyses his performances and tries to improve them and more basically, the very nature of his personal relationship with his protêgê.
Some folk theories of sport have achieved a myth-like status, and they are often seriously entertained and elaborated upon by those in sport.
The old chestnuts about blacks having weak ankles and heavy bones which militate against their achieving success in swimming still retain credibility in sporting circles, and there are other similar theories in abundance.
Birchfield jump coach Kevin Reeves insisted that blacks possessed ‘a muscular structure’ which gave them advantages in power events, where short, explosive bursts of uncontrolled energy were needed.
Fellow coach Robert Millington reckoned: ‘Physiologically, they [blacks]are much better equipped than whites; not so much with what they've got to start with, but what they can achieve in a short space of time.
They develop their bodies in no time.
Whites can't do that.’
Athletics coaches were unanimous in their opinion on the physical suitability of blacks for specific events and Haringey's black coach John Isaacs made the extreme assertion that: ‘A black kid can do a 100 [metres]without any training at all; they can just come along with their kit and knock out 11 seconds.
They just have that natural ability.’
The ‘natural ability’ angle is appealing in its simplicity and comprehensiveness.
Athletics coaches allude to it constantly, believing it to be the basis of blacks' successes.
‘It's a question of physical make-up: black kids are built for the explosive events.
White kids are always at a disadvantage,’ speculated Charles Taylor.
As a foil for this argument, white sprinter Mark Garmeston offered his view:
There isn't a chance of competing on level terms with black guys.
It's depressing really.
I trained hard all last winter and in one race I came up against a black who I knew hadn't prepared properly.
He just blazed out and killed the rest of the field.
It's got to be something natural.
The argument gains force when applied to boxing where the emphasis shifts to the muscular flexibility and, as manager Terry Lawless put it, the ‘natural fluidity’ of black fighters which gives them a distinct edge over their more rigid white counterparts:
You see a black guy in the ring and he moves around in this relaxed way, totally lacking inhibition in his movement.
It's the same when you see black guys at a dance or a disco; they have this natural fluidity in their bodies.
Whereas a white guy will be starchy and throw punches only when he's sure he'll land, a black guy will stay loose and throw six or seven jabs in the hope that one or two will land.
Continental Football Club manager, Mitch Daley, himself a West Indian, expanded a similar notion into a full-blown philosophy on black footballers:
Take the white player: he's very rigid, upright, stiff.
Now, the black man he's different: he likes to step on the ball, control it, express himself with it.
He has natural flair which gives him the ability to do anything with the ball he wants to.
And he believes that it is precisely because black footballers know of each other 's natural ability, that they are able to construct the most intricate and seemingly planned movements without any preparation at all: ‘They've got the receivers built into their heads and can pick each other up on the same wavelength.’
So, the natural ability goes beyond the physical and manifests itself mentally when players are in the process of play.
On the other hand, Jim Smith, ex-manager of Birmingham City Football Club, believes that black players make only limited use of intellectual abilities when playing soccer: ‘They seem to use very little intelligence; they get by on sheer natural talent most of the time.’
Daley countered this with his idea that black players can use the mental facility only with other blacks, believing that even the  black players who had commanded football league places had not been allowed to play to their utmost because they were engulfed by whites who were on ‘different wavelengths’.
Overall, the view that blacks' success in certain sports is not chiselled out of hard work, determination and perseverance, but out of a somewhat intangible capacity called ‘natural ability’ holds sway amongst coaches, managers and even amongst athletes themselves.
Modifications to the general view are only minor and it is obvious that relationships between black sportsmen and their coaches and managers are structured by such a view.
It is stressed repeatedly how some sportsmen had the potential or the promise yet lacked the application to develop it.
Blacks are thought to have natural advantages and, if they do not capitalize on them, they are seen as lazy and lacking in conviction.
So, tensions occur in relationships where the sportsmen are thought by their coach to be naturally gifted and yet they fail to achieve success.
Sportsmen who believe themselves to be blessed with natural advantages, after being told so by others, become depressed by the lack of success of the magnitude they had come to expect after being fed the natural ability line.
Leroy Brown, at one stage a prodigious sprinter, reflected on a career which never materialized: ‘I just don't know why I couldn't put it together when it mattered.
Physically, I was all right.
I knew I had all that it takes; the others told me.’
He dropped out of athletics after a season without a win.
For the most part, black sportsmen accept that they have advantages, in an unspecified way, over their white counterparts.
A natural propensity for physical rather than intellectual pursuits was cited by Coventry City footballer Garry Thompson: ‘I think blacks are the most athletically gifted race.
We may not be the cleverest but we're athletically gifted.’
This view was endorsed by Repton boxer Jimmy Dublin, who confirmed: ‘It's natural; we're just good at sport.
We don't do very good at reading and writing, but we're made for physical things.’
It will be obvious by now that my account of the emergence of black sportsmen runs contrary to such views and I cannot accept that blacks are ‘made for physical things’ any more than I can that their continued failure in more formal academic realms is based on inadequate intellectual resources.
The point is: virtually everyone in sport, to some extent, accepts that blacks have a natural ability at sport which functions at both physical and intellectual levels.
As  sprinter Ainsley Bennett put it: ‘Most black kids seem to be natural and fluent in what they do and what they think.’
Agility, speed, muscular power, sharpness of reflex, accuracy of judgment, these I presume to be some of the attributes with which blacks are thought to be born.
Certainly, they are useful characteristics for sportsmen, as are the more psychological ones, intuitive vision, resistance to pressure and the ability to remain calm under stress being among the more obvious ones.
But few sportsmen or coaches could be more explicit on this point than Haringey's sprinter John Skeets: ‘It's part of our make-up, physically and mentally.’
Hardly a scientific viewpoint, but efforts have been made to review the available evidence and assess the plausibility of such an idea.
Although not specifically related to sport, Robert Malina's work begins with the observation: ‘populations differ in a variety of biological and cultural characteristics and motor performance and strength are no exception’(1973, p.333).
Malina looks at the ways in which black youths in elementary schools seem to possess different basic motor skills to whites: they can, amongst other things, run quicker, jump longer and grip stronger.
There are a number of reasons for this and Malina is aware of how such phenomena as poverty, crowded home conditions and poor diet can affect physical performances.
However, the upshot of his research is that differences in motor skills do exist between black and white kids.
Now, although he ignores many of Malina's suggested causes for these differences, Martin Kane uses his evidence to support what is, without doubt, the most exhaustive attempt to find some biological foundation for theories purporting to explain blacks' natural ability.
It is instructive to preface an exposition of the theory with Kane's somewhat ingenuous comment on the ancestors of modern blacks:
the West African was no savage.
He created an architecture of respectably high standards.
He was a skilled and artistic weaver…
A highly competent woodworker…
A good herdsman…
A fine farmer….
He had not, though, for the most part, reached that fine state of civilization in which he was able to make gunpowder…he never invented the wheel and the plow (1971, p.81).
Through the medium of Sports Illustrated , Kane analysed three strands of thought, all originating in the belief that blacks possess  unique, natural talents.
For his article, ‘An assessment of black is best’, Kane assembled copious data and marshalled the support of medical scientists, coaches and sportsmen (1971).
The result is an argument organized in three categories, all of which connect in the idea that sporting superiority is racially linked.
This in itself is, of course, highly problematic since the concept of race is regarded by contemporary social scientists as, at best , misleading and, at worst , viciously destructive to understanding.
The argument, therefore, proceeds from a precariously weak premise: that human populations are divided biologically into discrete, bounded units, designated ‘races’.
(For a further discussion, see Baxter and Sansom, 1972, part
Kane's first category of race-linked physical and physiological characteristics, then, is in doubt from the start but he delineates them as follows: proportionately longer leg lengths, narrower hips, wider calf bones and greater arm circumference among black athletes than among whites; a greater ratio of tendon to muscle among blacks, giving rise to the condition typically termed double-jointedness, a relatively dense bone structure; a basically elongated body structure among black athletes, enabling them to function as more efficient heat dissipators relative to whites (1971, pp.74–5).
Quite apart from the conceptual fragility of the enterprise, Kane's work suffers from a problem of method: his evidence for the above assertions was collected from a sample of sportsmen who had already achieved a level of success, in other words the sportsmen he studied had ‘made it’.
The attempt was not to take a sample of the total black population, but of the minority of sportsmen of proven excellence.
The absence of black swimmers is explained by Kane as the result of such factors as bone and muscle density, distribution of fat and small lung capacity.
Cold climates are said to affect blacks adversely because of their body fat deficiencies, weak ankles would account for the lack of black hockey players, etc.
In short, genetic factors are regarded as crucial in determining the eventual performance n sport.
The inference is quite clear: blacks are innately whites, these differences are genetic and so can be passed from one generation to the next, and they have a critical effect on sporting performance.
And whether they like it or not, the vast number of coaches and sportsmen who harbour similar ideas on the natural ability of blacks also implicitly, and occasionally explicitly, hold what amounts to a racist explanation of black sporting success.
The first category of Kane's analysis has to be called into question because it is patently obvious that black people do not share physical and physiological characteristics.
Stand former British heavyweight and light-heavyweight champion boxer Bunny Johnson alongside the diminutive British international sprinter Ainsley Bennett and one begins to get the idea.
Some black athletes do look alike and have similar builds, but there is also much physical diversity amongst them and between them and whites.
What are the salient physical diversities amongst them and between them and whites?
What are the salient physical characteristics shared by 20-stone Repton boxer Ray Tabi and Danny Thomas at 5 feet 8 inches, relatively short for a top football defender?
These extreme examples highlight the ludicrousness of trying to draw together the physical traits of black people when it is clear that there exist as many differences between individual blacks as between blacks and non-blacks.
To foul up the analysis further, Kane's alleged physical characteristics are meant to predispose blacks to the sports demanding speed and strength while whites, because of their body make-ups, are rendered liable to go for endurance events.
One supposes that Kane would find the performances of Henry Rono of Kenya, Miruts Yifter of Ethiopia, and Suleiman Nyambui of Tanzania difficult to explain.
In fact, he claims that the Kenyans, in particular, have black skin but have a number of white features!
A not dissimilar offering came from a Birchfield sprint coach who suggested that the Africans were ‘built differently to West Indians…
And this makes them better suited to the longer distances.’
Wherever they are now, black people are descended from Africans, but over the centuries their genetic heritage has become diversified and complicated by various permutations of mating.
Why Kane ignored this and chose instead to propose a one-dimensional view of black people sharing physical characteristics is perplexing, but his next step is utterly stupefying: he suggests that blacks have psychological characteristics which are also determined by race.
In this category, blacks have a greater capacity than whites for remaining relaxed under pressure.
This conforms neatly with what a great many coaches, especially in boxing, believe.
Lawless, as well as remarking on the lack of inhibition in throwing jabs, connected this with a more general ‘relaxed approach’, and others concur with this, agreeing that the black sportsman shows a remarkable tendency to  bring to his work a resistance to tension.
Often the ability not to become tense infuriates coaches and managers who think that a sense of urgency and resolve are missing in the performance of a sportsman who seems too relaxed.
Frank O' Sullivan, head coach of Birmingham City ABC, regarded ‘the majority of black kids’ as ‘too casual in their approach’and as a consequence ‘they can't react to pressure.’
As well as being an aid then, being cool is also seen as an obstacle to digging deep into the ultimate reserves under stringent conditions to produce a better performance.
Kirkland Laing, former British welterweight champion and an ex-member of the Lawless camp, provided a nice example of this.
He, more than anybody in sport, personified cool: he boxed with the most consummate self-assurance, drifting around the ring almost somnambulistically, often dispensing with his guard and rapidly discharging clusters of punches.
In his 1980 title defence against Colin Jones, a white Welshman, he performed with his usual calmness, accumulating points with ridiculous ease for the first eight rounds.
Then, quite unexpectedly, he took a clubbing right hand to the head and lost complete co-ordination.
He did not react but lay back grasping the top rope.
Jones mounted a quick two-fisted assault and the title changed hands in those brief, dramatic seconds.
Laing was at pains to stress that at no time did he feel under pressure: ‘It was that I'd never been caught before and I didn't know what to do.
It was the shock of it more than anything.
I suppose I could've been too cool!’
This story is tangential, but it illustrates the downfall of a sportsman who epitomizes Kane's ‘couldn't-care-less’ black sportsmen.
Lloyd C. Winter, an established American coach, lends Kane's theory some credence: ‘As a class, the Black athletes who have trained under me are far ahead of whites in that one factor — relaxation under pressure’(Kane, 1971, p.76).
But let me balance this with an inside view from triple jumper Aston Moore:
Everyone used to say to me, ‘how do you manage to stay so cool and relaxed for a big event, Aston?’
If only they could know how I feel every time I compete!
If they could have only known what's going on in my head.
I suffer from so much tension it's not true.
The thing is I disguise it.
But my head is totally taut.
It should also be understood that black sportsmen work sedulously at perpetuating their popular image of being relaxed at all times.
Examples of blacks consciously and deliberately projecting this image, radiating cool and total relaxation, abound, but two in particular stand out.
One is a track side scene: five white runners and two black limbering up, shrugging shoulders, stretching legs and trying desperately to loosen up in an intensifying ambience; sitting on the grass some way away from the main group is a black guy awaiting his call to marks; while the others shuffle about nervously, he remains casually sitting, seemingly unoccupied with the imminent race as he nonchalantly sharpens the spikes of his running shoes with a nail file.
The other concerns a light-middleweight boxer of Repton and Young England, Leon Young, who, when asked which aspect of his boxing he was trying to improve, answered: ‘My laziness, really.
I'm trying to be relaxed like Frank Edwards [also of Repton]and get a lazy jab like his.’
What these examples illustrate is an attempt by black sportsmen to convey an impression of themselves as cool: they like people to believe they are always relaxed and unflustered.
In other words, they work at it — which is a quite different thing from saying they are psychologically predisposed to remain relaxed under pressure.
Ainsley Bennett revealed: ‘I give this careful impression in training and competition that I'm lazy and never provoked into action, always relaxed, even if I'm not.’
What limited evidence there is on the relative propensity of blacks and whites to be relaxed suggests that, in contrast to Kane's view, black sportsmen were more ‘concerned’ and ‘serious’— uptight — than their white counterparts (Ogilvie and Tutko, 1966).
They also exhibited a more controlled orientation to their sport, a finding which goes against Mitch Daley's theory on the spontaneous, free-flowing approach of black footballers compared to whites.
While it is most certainly the case that black sportsmen try to present the image of being cool, calm and unaffected by tension, I doubt if there is any foundation for pointing to psychological states.
If anything, the psychological condition of the black sportsman should be tension-packed given the social circumstances surrounding his involvement.
As I will suggest in chapter eight, the black sportsman sees sport not as a hobby, but as a central life interest, a sphere in which he might find scope for self-expression and a possible avenue out of his mundane, everyday existence.
Consequently  sport is of paramount importance to him and every event has to be approached as if it is the most demanding in his life; failure is not easily assimilated, as a result.
Also, many blacks perceive themselves as severely disadvantaged in both society generally and sport in particular.
In every competition, they believe the odds are against them and one consequence of this is that they always know that they have ‘to be twice as good’ and, as indicated in this book's theme, ‘try twice as hard’.
Hardly the type of perception designed to elicit a relaxed orientation.
There is a curious way in which psychological factors might come into play, and Harry Edwards has reasoned this through:
many white athletes, some of whom may themselves be of exceptional athletic potential, believe blacks to be innately superior as athletes.
These white athletes under such circumstances may start off at a psychological disadvantage.
The ‘white race’ thus becomes the chief victim of its own myth (1973, p.197).
Whites allow themselves to be psyched out.
The afore-mentioned view of Garmeston that ‘There isn't a chance of competing on an equal level with blacks’ would support this.
One is left to wonder how many whites have fallen foul of ‘their own myths’ and begun at a ‘psychological disadvantage’to blacks because of the misguided belief in ‘natural ability’.
Another angle on psychological differences between blacks and whites is given by Worthy and Markle who argue that white sportsmen do better at self-paced activities, ‘ones in which the individual responds, when he chooses, to a relatively static or unchanging stimulus’, whereas blacks have an edge in reactive activities, ‘in which the individual must respond appropriately and at the right time to changes in the stimulus situation’(1970).
So, for example, in football, whites should be more suited to take penalty and free kicks (self-paced) and blacks to more spontaneous out-field range shooting (reactive).
Worthy and Markle cite basketball, finding that whites excelled in free throws from a static position and blacks at field goals on the move.
Their findings were repudiated by Jones and Hochner (1973) but supported by another study by Dunn and Lupfer (1974) who assessed the performance of 55 white and 122 blacks in a modified game of soccer, calling the forwards' functions self-paced  and the defenders' reactive.
Blacks were superior at the reactive activities.
Interesting as such studies are, they leave too many questions unanswered.
Even if one accepts that the thesis accounts for why blacks are overrepresented in reactive activities such as boxing and soccer, and underrepresented in self-paced sports such as golf and swimming, it does not explain why blacks do not excel in such reactive sports as motor racing, tennis, fencing, squash or even skiing!
Second nature
Slavery is the key to unlocking the third chamber of Kane's theorem about why blacks excel in sport: ‘Of all the physical and psychological theories about the American black's excellence in sport, none has proved more controversial than one of the least discussed: that slavery weeded out the weak’(Kane, 1971, p.80).
The historical experiences undergone by blacks during slavery are invoked to explain why blacks are so demonstrably well equipped physically and psychologically for the demands of sport.
In essence, the argument advanced runs that the slaves, originally wrenched from their African homelands, had to withstand the ‘most inhuman conditions’ during the passage to the Americas and the seasoning period which followed (when they were ‘broken in’in much the same way as wild horses — with force).
About half the captured Africans survived the rigours of capture, passage, seasoning and eventually worked on plantations and, Kane concludes: ‘only the strongest survived.’
Calvin Hill, a former footballer with Dallas Cowboys, extends the theory: ‘Well, Black athletes are their descendants.
They are the offspring of those who were physically tough enough to survive’(quoted in Kane, 1971, p.76).
Maurice Hope held a similar view, though he favoured social rather than genetic factors: ‘Black people are natural fighters; they've been fighting for survival and they've been in that condition all their lives.
So fighting comes natural.’
Coach Kevin Reeves concurred: ‘The weakest didn't survive and, over the years, the strongest features of their physical make-up have become refined.’
Lee Evans, the controversial black Olympic sprinter, contributed a further element to Kane's model when he added: ‘Then, on the plantations, a strong Blackman was mated with a strong Blackwoman.
We were simply bred for physical qualities (quoted in Kane, 1971, p.79).
Whilst not doubting that the slaves were treated by their conquerors and masters as akin to live-stock rather than like human beings, it strains credulity to say that, in the decades after emancipation in 1865, the stock somehow remained ‘pure’.
The sexual behaviour of blacks has hardly been controlled in such a way as to create a gene pool in which specific physical traits related to power, speed and agility became dominant.
(In fact, even in slavery, it was quite common for slaves to have white fathers or grandfathers; certainly nowadays, most blacks have some sort of white ancestry.)
Also, physical characteristics such as power, speed and agility were perhaps of lesser importance to survival than ingenuity, tact and intelligence.
Of course, some were able to pull through on sheer physical strength, quickness and resilience, but there is evidence to suggest that shrewdness or guile were useful properties to have when it came to self-preservation.
Extending this theme, David Targett, medical officer of Aston Villa FC, reasoned that:
Intelligence is essential to the modern sportsmen; there are so many losses and benefits to be weighed up that a sportsman needs a rational, calculating mind.
I think nearly all the top sportsmen are reasonably intelligent people.
They have to be.
No sphere in which physical prowess is necessary, whether survival in slavery or excellence in sport, is devoid of the need for intellectual properties.
No one who seriously appreciates sport believes that even the most overtly physical sports are founded solely on physiological characteristics.
In the physically gruelling sport of boxing where ‘brawn’ is said to rule, the most stringent demands are made upon mental agility, speed of thought, anticipation and sense of strategy — at all times, it is necessary to ‘box clever’.
Despite the two serious drawbacks to this strand of Kane's theory, the non-existence of a pure gene pool and the uselessness of purely physical attributes without intellectual characteristics, I must stress that many modern black sportsmen hold theories which seem to harken back to their slave heritage.
Boxer Brian Johnson, for example, suggested that: ‘Blacks are conditioned to sport by their slave ancestry…toughness is part of our make-up, it's been drummed into us.’
This type of view is very prevalent amongst black sportsmen, though some even trace the causes back to Africa, an environment which was thought to foster physical abilities useful for running fast, jumping far and being strong.
Like Justin Fashanu: ‘Back in Africa, there were the conditions for running about and fighting — speed and strength were essential.’
I find this final strand of Kane's theory as unacceptable as the first two in its pretensions to scientific validity and equally as objectionable in its racist undertones.
All three categories gel into a coherent formulation which states that blacks' achievements in sport are related to factors determined by their race.
Sport is seen as the black man's second nature.
He takes to it as a duck takes to water.
I will argue that the affiliation is not nearly as simple as the formulation implies.
I have contended that the success, and for that matter failure, of blacks in sport has nothing to do with so-called physical characteristics which they are all meant to share, nor with psychological predispositions which they clearly do not have, and certainly not with physical inheritances which are said to have been somehow transmitted genetically from their slave forefathers.
All three of Kane's categories suffer from implausible assumptions which belong in the realms of racist folklore rather than scientific inquiry.
The whole model of race-linked characteristics ensuring success in sport has the solidity of a house of cards.
One of the serious problems with Kane's work is that, despite its theoretical fragility, it is simple, comprehensive and, unfortunately, appealing; it explains everything to do with blacks' sporting success as rooted in race.
Less obvious is the misguided logic it offers, for, if it is accepted that blacks have the natural ability and talent to do well in sports, then it can do no harm to encourage their participation in sport.
The outstanding results they continue to produce would seem to confirm the validity of the first assumption that they are naturally gifted.
The counterpart to this is that they are naturally limited intellectually and so not actively encouraged to excel in academic and the more cerebral pursuits and, of course, they do not.
So, the prophecy of blacks' doing well in sport but poorly in intellectual realms is self-fulfilling.
And by accepting it, the believer tacitly ignores the complex social mechanisms which uphold the mistaken logic.
One beautiful example of such logic came from Tony Zaidman, a white field athlete from Haringey, who said: ‘Black people are good  at sports just like Jews are good at making money!’
This is not so far away from saying: Blacks are naturally superior in sports and physical endeavours; whites are naturally superior at intellectual pursuits.
Without impugning the motives of any believer in this, I point out that it reeks of a vile and dangerous racism.
Fresh substance is given to old stereotypes.
That blacks do reach standards of excellence in sport, while failing in academic spheres, is beyond doubt.
But by accepting an explanation of this which is manifestly racked by conceptual, methodological and theoretical shortcomings, one gives purchase to the type of idea which is likely to prove injurious to the general interests of ethnic relations and the particular interests of black people.
In the chapters which follow, I will attempt to offer a more satisfying and, hopefully, iconoclastic alternative; satisfying because it will place the explanatory emphasis on definite social processes which perpetuate the invidious position of blacks both in and out of sport; and iconoclastic because it will at least go some way towards smashing the outdated image of the black man as possessing natural physical abilities that are determined, in the last instance, by his race.
For every black sportsman that becomes a Maurice Hope, a Daley Thompson or a Laurie Cunningham, there are thousands upon thousands who either slide into ignominy and failure or, in the sporting idiom, ‘go nowhere’.
Considering the disproportionate number of black kids who feed their ambitions into sport and zealously cultivate goals around sport achievements, the high number reaching standards of excellence is not so surprising.
Underlying the visibly successful black sportsmen are countless other black youths enthusiastically chasing sporting objectives and, perhaps later, organizing their life's ambitions around their sporting discipline.
The reasons why so many seek futures in sports, and in rather specific areas of sport, do not lie in the rather obscure realms of anatomy, physiology or psychology.
I argue that race may be a factor in the puzzle but only in so far as blacks feel their belonging to a specific race may affect their futures.
The idea of race is in people's heads only, but they act on that idea.
I reject natural ability arguments as vehemently as I reject the notion of ‘born sportsmen’.
Sportsmen are not born: they are made and they are made through social processes.
How?
This will be the question to be answered in the coming chapters.
JUSTIN FASHANU
law of the jungle
Born: London, 1961; father: Nigeria (lawyer); mother: Guyana (nurse); foster-father: England (engineer); foster-mother: England (music teacher); occupation: professional footballer.
When he was 3 years old, Fashanu was taken from his mother and placed in a Dr Barnardo's home in London.
His mother had been deserted by the father and, with five children to support, could not cope.
After a year in the home, Fashanu and his younger brother John were taken by foster parents to East Anglia.
He went to school in Attleborough and it was here he developed what he considered a ‘natural advantage’ in sport.
The reason I became a footballer was simple: I could run faster than anybody else, that's about it.
I didn't have any skill whatsoever, but I could run with the ball and hold it.
I think blacks were designed to use our speed and agility.
I'd never do anything that didn't come easily to me.
I wouldn't do anything that took a long, long time before it showed a reward.
Blacks start off with an added advantage of being able to move.
So you've got a good start over whites.
Then it's up to you.
If you've got 10 yards and you don't want to run, that's the end; whites will soon overtake you.
I thought I'd got the initial start and I wanted to keep ahead all the time.
Unlike many black kids who consider themselves singled out as possible sportsmen because of stereotyping, he found only his PE teacher took an interest in his sport.
I was the one black kid in all the school and school teachers around here have got their set ways.
Everybody was there to be academically acknowledged at the highest level they could and sport was just something that came as well.
So everybody bar the PE teacher hated me playing football and everything they could do  to stop me playing football they did.
If they needed a punishment to hurt me, they'd stop me playing.
They put as many blocks in my path as they could.
But the PE teacher was strong-willed and I associated myself with him more than anybody else.
Even my mum and dad (foster-parents) used to hate me playing.
Their natural children are very well qualified academically — they only played tennis — but my brother and I were into sport.
And I think that's good for me 'cause I'm so independent now.
At the time I used to think: ‘I wish my mum and dad were like other people and come and watch me play and be involved with the football.’
Because nobody could tell me about sport, nobody could guide me, which is what I needed.
Even at the age of about 13 I'd be guided only by people who I thought knew something about the game, and who were not thing to stitch me up-I was always thinking people were trying to stitch me up for some reason.
In his words, he ‘sold’ himself to the Norwich City Football Club, persistently going to the training ground when aged 14 and 15, until the club offered him an apprentice's contract.
He was convinced that a career lay in sport and reckoned the media influenced his perception of himself.
Before I left school, the local papers were full of me, They were always saying things like ‘This boy will go all the way to the top’ and that, and I suppose you could say I took notice of the media.
But I was into boxing pretty heavily as well.
I'd met Gordon Holmes, who knew the London managers and he was guiding me.
Gordon was like another father to me.
He was sport-minded.
I took notice of him 'cause he knew everything about football as well as boxing.
I was split between boxing and football when I was 16 and, at one stage, I wanted to turn professional boxer and thought that, as I was on Norwich's books and I couldn't get a pro boxer's licence till I was 17, anyway, I'd play football for twelve months and then steam into boxing [he was a double ABA junior finalist].
Then, lo and behold, at 17 I'm in the first team.
So I couldn't jack it in when things were going well.
I was still boxing by going down the London gym of Danny Peacock-Gordon was a friend of his.
I still love boxing but things have happened so quickly in football.
The thing with me and with ‘Crooksy’[Garth Crooks, his friend]as well is that, if you're black in a small community where there aren't too many blacks and you've got a little bit of stile, then you cannot go wrong.
If you can be just a little bit clued-up and not be Rastafarian with dreadlocks, you cannot fail.
The jet setters like  novelty and things like that!
As long as you hold yourself well and don't embarrass people by letting them think, ‘Oh he's so thick’ or ‘his ways are so silly’, you're all right.
You have to have a little bit of presence about you; and that's what made me here.
I'm not the kind of fellow that's going to creep to anybody, but I didn't cause aggravation unless I had to.
I didn't give anybody a chance to hate me.
Not that he was so popular with crowds outside Norwich or other players.
‘I got slaughtered,’ he reckons.
‘I'd rear up on players if they said anything and footballers aren't the bravest people in the world, so they used to think twice before they said anything to me and that helped me.’
He did not regard such experiences as without worth:
They're good for you.
If you've been through it, it's in the bank.
If you've had it easy all the time, as soon as trouble comes, you don't know how to handle it.
If I was to break my leg tomorrow I'd be as sick as a parrot, but it wouldn't be the end of the world.
I'd live off my wits even though I've geared myself to be a footballer.
Football isn't the be all and end all to me.
I know I can always do something to earn a living.
You have to have confidence in your own ability and being black is a good thing as far as I'm concerned 'cause I've had to sample bits and pieces of how life can be nasty and it's done me good.
It's made me independent; I don't like to be beholden to anybody, I like to be my own boss.
Maybe his life in Attleborough afforded him insulation from the rigours of inner city life, but he never understood his colour to be an obstacle.
In fact, it never occurred to me that it made a difference until I was in a trial and a scout said ‘We're quite interested in the coloured lad’ and that was the first time I realized they thought of me as anything other than my name.
In his early days with Norwich he took ‘stick’ from fellow players and the opposition, but reflected on this favourably in a way which says much of himself and of other successful black sportsmen.
At the end of the day, it doesn't matter what colour you are, black, blue, pink, white or green.
If you've got a strong enough  personality and you want to do it badly enough, you'll get there.
It's going to be hard and you're going to have set-backs, but you'll get there.
I don't want to sound as if I haven't got sympathy with people 'cause I know it's bloody hard, but I know a lot of blacks who use it [blackness]as an excuse and we've got to be careful that we don't use it like that.
You can use it for a lot of things, but when you get down to analyse it, I think it may be the law of the jungle where the strongest survive; and I don't know necessarily whether that's a bad thing.
I've had it all said to me: I've got no bottle and stamina; and I don't think it's a bad thing that people think black players have got no bottle.
It may strengthen them.
Anyway, it might have been true before.
But now we've got a new breed of black sportsmen.
The heartache and suffering over the centuries has made them tough and strong and it's been a slow evolution.
I think if you've got it too easy in life you don't know how to react.
There's something to be said for experiencing bad things and coming back and doing the business.
Chapter Four
THE PROSPECT OF BLACKNESS FOR KIDS
When you get to about 13 or 14, you begin to realize that your colour, even if you hadn't thought about it much, means that other people are going to be different to you.
And you get the idea that a few qualifications aren't going to make that much of a difference to your life.
I mean, they can't change your skin can they?
Curt Nisbett, boxer
I think black kids look towards sport as a means of achievement or a means of getting out of society.
There's going to be a great emergence of blacks in sport soon.
I mean there's only a few stars, but they only need one or two heroes and the rest will come through.
The thing that really motivated me was seeing the 1968 Olympics; I saw Thommie Smith and thought, ‘God, that's it!’
Ainsley Bennett, sprinter
That's when I felt different
Status and privilege accrue to successful sportsmen in contemporary society.
To be an international athlete, a top flight boxer or a first division footballer is to have access to a range of resources not available to the majority of the population.
Modern sportsmen are lionized and fêted, their achievements are models for evaluation, their ambitions are the ambitions of others.
They are depicted by the media as glamorous, exciting and interesting.
Once near the top of their particular sport, money becomes available: percentages of transfer fees, fight purses, appearance monies make sport a financially healthy occupation — provided success is attained.
The money coupled with the status granted makes sport a  lucrative and desirable way of earning a living.
But, it is not the only way and it is a most precarious way.
A sports career, in the Western world certainly, is reckoned to span about twelve years, terminating sometime after the thirtieth birthday.
It can be finished sooner by incapacitating injury incurred during play, training or away from sport entirely.
More likely in statistical terms is that it will close down even earlier due to judicious coaches' or managers' recommendations on the inadequacy of the majority of aspirants ‘to make the grade’.
Sport is just one avenue, and a narrow one at that, through which a young person can achieve access to resources, prestige, wealth, feelings of self-adequacy.
The professions, the civil service, the academic world and commerce are amongst the other routes, but travel along these requires two qualifications: an educational achievement motivation and a career orientation.
Black kids seem to fail on both counts.
They consistently underachieve at school and demonstrate little desire to make headway along a career avenue to success.
Their collective attitude stands in stark contrast to that of the other major second generation immigrant group in modern Britain.
Asian youths persevered assiduously in academic work.
By the end of the 1970s, they compared most favourably with white youths in terms of examination results (see Bagley, 1979, for evidence).
Indeed, I would project that Asian youths in the early 1980s are poised to outstrip both whites and blacks educationally.
Interestingly, education is a highly valued commodity in Asian culture: it is seen as the starting line to a career.
Asian families, for the most part, are organized in such a way as to keep a firm control over their children, integrating them into a tightly knit web of relationships within the community where religious traditions remain strong and create in the members a respect for norms, seniority and morality.
The internal control lends the Asian community a stability somewhat lacking amongst Caribbeans and their offspring.
The values placed upon formal education are transmitted to the second generation Asians and consequently many achieve educational success.
Dedication and steadfastness go into school and college work.
There are few top Asian sportsmen in the UK and that is no small coincidence.
Whites and Asians perceive a range of activities available to them.
The avenues to prestige and financial security are multiplex and, to a large extent, unrestricted.
Sport is but one and, seductive as it may be, it is precarious and, inevitably, short-term.
There are many instances of white youths being pressured by their parents to give up their sport in preference for more reasonable and secure occupations, lest they invest their time and energies in a pointless pursuit of intangible dreams.
Often, apprentice footballers refuse to sign professional forms seeing them, as one Midland youth put it, as ‘bad risks’; and young boxers would, in the pugilistic vernacular, ‘swallow’ before they had given their careers time to bloom — usually on the say-so of parents.
One 18-year-old insurance clerk from Birchfield explained how he reached a sort of cross-road after his training began to detract from his studies: ‘I came to the conclusion that my career came first and, at 18, I had to look at my prospects.
Now, I treat athletics more as a hobby than I used to.’
Another strategy employed mostly by white youth is to delay a possible career in sport whilst completing higher education.
Alan Gowling, for example, gained a Master's degree before pursuing his professional sports career with a variety of football league clubs.
Only those whose prodigious skill gives them leverage for negotiating secure contracts are prepared to forsake higher education for sport.
Whites and Asians entertain a variety of ways in which they can advance, usually locating their careers in some long-term perspective and thus making security an important consideration.
Blacks, on the other hand, harbour a much more narrowly defined set of possibilities on how they might advance.
Whereas sport occupies a somewhat peripheral place in the spectrum of career possibilities for most members of society, it occupies a central berth for a great many blacks.
The enthusiasm for sport as a career, as a central interest in life, is very prevalent amongst black kids, even those facing the possibility of another three years minimum at school.
As Derek Brown of Birchfield, who at 13 years old and speculating on a career in athletics, spending two evenings and a Sunday morning training, said: ‘I don't let it bother my school work 'cause I can get it all done in my other time, but this [athletics]is what I'd really like to do; I keep setting myself goals every year to get to the top.’
(He was also anticipating to gain at least six ‘O’ levels before leaving school.)
The vast majority of the black sportsmen have aspirations of detaching themselves from the routines of school, employment — or unemployment — and wringing out a career in sports, even athletics, ostensibly an amateur sport but bountiful enough in ‘gifts’ and sponsorships to make it a lucrative career.
Sport is seen by many black kids as much, much more than a hobby; in the words of decathlete Fidelius Obukw, it is ‘a way of finding yourself.
It is simply the salient feature of their lives and so, quite predictably, occupies a lot of their time, absorbs a lot of their interest and provides a lot of their ambitions.
Why?
Well, the answer is wrapped in a skein of social processes and, in the course of this book, I plan to unravel as many of them as possible.
Having rejected physical, psychological and historically endorsed properties as ‘naturally’ predisposing factors, I now have to offer alternatives.
Bunny Johnson, who was born in Jamaica, but came to England in 1963 when he was 16 provides a good starting point:
If there was a black kid and a white kid with equal qualifications who both went for the same job, I would have to put my money on the white kid getting the job, because we're in a white-dominated society.
And, if the positions were reversed and we lived in a black-dominated society…
I think the white kid would still get through!
The point is that black people are not only at a disadvantage in the job market on account of their colour, they also perceive sharply that this is so and, despite Johnson's tongue-in-cheek addendum, the consciousness of belonging to a group which feels itself to be at a disadvantage is clear enough.
Black kids, at a stage during their latter secondary-school years, begin to feel different because of their blackness.
It may be a gradual, one might say glacial, movement of perception, piecing together items of experience which collectively form an awareness that colour places a black person at a disadvantage.
Or the awareness may arrive in a sudden moment of revelation, one vivid encounter bringing with it the perception of blackness.
An example of the first came from international sprinter Mickey Morris, born in London to Jamaican parents:
At school, to start off you integrate with everybody, it doesn't matter about colour right up to the third year [when aged about 13 or 15].
So that in the third year, friends, who you know as ‘friends’ might call you a ‘black bastard’and it doesn't mean  anything.
And then, when you find they say it in the fourth year, they mean it and you begin to look at yourself and realize what colour you are.
Instances of the second more sudden realization are rarer.
Garry Thompson, the Coventry City footballer, told how he was made to take stock of his colour slightly earlier, just after beginning secondary school in Birmingham: ‘I went up to some guys and asked to play football and they just shut me out.
One of the older guys called me a nigger, and he influenced the others so that they all started calling me it.
That's when I felt different.’
For London-born pro footballer Vince Hilaire, the realization was more gradual: ‘I didn't really think about the black and white thing until I was about 14 or 15.
I think it's when black kids and whites start thinking about what they're going to do when they leave school.
But it doesn't happen all of a sudden; you have to think about it.’
I am not making the exorbitant claim that every black youth reaching adolescence in the 1970s and early 1980s underwent such traumas.
Nor, indeed am I claiming that all black sportsmen, at some stage in their development, come face to face with their blackness and are made to reflect on the probable disadvantages it carries with it.
By way of total contrast, I can point to Birchfield sprinter Phil Brown, who never really felt himself to be any different from other school children and admitted to having ‘no identity with other blacks’.
Even more extreme was Olympic decathlete Daley Thompson, who straightforwardly stated that he wanted nothing to do with blacks: ‘I've never let the fact that my father was Nigerian [his mother was Scottish]interfere with me.
I don't feel black and I don't think my friends regard me as such.
Most of my friends are white, anyway.’
These two are in a very small minority of black sportsmen who had not at some stage faced the distressing realization that they were black and so they were different and that difference could significantly limit their chances of access to the kind of resources available to others, prestige, affluence, esteem in the eyes of others.
It seems that this perception is a common one amongst black kids, whether they are headed for a sports career or not.
My own work and that of Barry Troyna (1978) has strongly indicated that, at around school-leaving age or just before, black youths encounter an incident or  many which incline them to reconsider their own identities.
Troyna has called the perception of ‘a shared destiny’ the critical feature of black kids' gang formation during late school years.
They come to the recognition that being black places themselves and other black kids in a similarly disadvantaged position: ‘It would seem, on the basis of the pupils’ own perception of this tendency, that this withdrawal into racially exclusive peer groups results from the pupils' realization of a common identity and shared destiny' (1978, p.64).
all their futures will be affected and so they band together in groups.
Such banding was called by boxer Brian Johnson ‘automatic’ and it starts ‘when you're at school, because it happens there.
I used to have some white friends at school but they fell away.
You identify with other black kids 'cause you know and feel what they do by just looking around you.
We have to identify with each other.’
Black sportsmen are not exceptional in so far as they too undergo the turbulence of having to refashion their ideas about career and, indeed, life prospects at around this age.
Jackie Jackson, a girl shot putter whose parents were Jamaican, put it like this: ‘No matter what they say, all black kids go through a phase when they want to be white…
And when they come to terms with the fact that they aren't, they have to think of the possibilities.’
Those possibilities are seen as restricted and, although many would not agree with Jackson's controversial view that all blacks go through stages of white envy, all would appreciate the point that blacks resign themselves to more limited prospects.
Whether or not blacks' career prospects are blighted by covert racialist policies in the occupational sphere is not the question under consideration.
Though, parenthetically, I might note that there is plausible evidence enough to convince the most liberal of minds that such policies do operate (see for instance, Lee and Wrench, 1981).
What matters is that black kids believe them to operate systematically and continuously.
Such beliefs are born out of first-hand experience and second-hand stories.
An example of the former came from Continental FC's captain Barry Dennis, who, having left school, went to college where he gained a Full Technological Certificate enabling him to take a position in the computer industry.
When a senior member of his department left, he expected, not unreasonably he felt, to get promotion, but:
They brought in a white guy to replace him.
He had the same qualifications as me but he was from a different department and had less experience.
I resented this and, frankly, was ready to leave over it.
The only thing I had going against me was: I was black.
He made his gripe known to one of his superiors and the decision was changed, but only after he had, in his own words, ‘kicked up a fuss’.
The Dennis case was by no means unusual: many of those employed had encountered some form of what they perceived as racialism in the transition from school to work.
Perceptions such as these would have affected general conduct and attitude.
The ‘resentment’ at being denied possible access to positions of respect and maybe responsibility manifests itself in a number of ways, not least in the social posture of black youth in the UK.
They create the impression of resenting society, for they feel that society is structured in a way that is detrimental to their progress (see Cashmore, 1981b).
There are, however, other more important processes working: beliefs get transmitted downwards from one generation to the next.
The kids who have experienced the problems of occupational discrimination and believe their opportunities are limited make their beliefs public to those with whom they most identify — in this case, other blacks.
There is a kind of feedback into the black community: stories about going for a job, getting turned down and explaining the failure as caused by being black get fed back to other blacks and so nourish conceptions about the structure of society.
Those conceptions hold that it is not so much the white individuals who are the oppressors, for they are only part of an overall structure which has been designed to exclude blacks from positions of seniority.
The currency of the concept of Babylon, depicting the system of white domination as endemically evil, amongst black kids in the 1980s attests to this (see Cashmore and Troyna, 1982).
In other words, black kids teach each other about the world and about how it works contrary to their interests.
Repton welterweight, Franklin Edwards, a telephone salesman, who left his north London school with three CSEs (Grade 1), illustrated this transmission of ideas:
This guy I used to know, Babs Eadon, he told me of how he went to get a holiday job when he was doing a Masters degree.
Anyway, he gave them a few examples of the jobs he was looking for and they told him he was unqualified.
That was even before they'd asked him what qualifications he'd got.
They just assumed that, being black, he hadn't got any — and he'd got a degree.
Garry Thompson had a friend named Malcolm Percival about whom he recalled:
He went for a job just after leaving school and the guy at the interview asked him if he'd ever encountered prejudice and he said, ‘Well, sometimes.’
The guy went mad at him saying, ‘How dare you say there's such a thing as prejudice!’
And, really, it only showed ‘Percy’ that there was.
That's the way we always thought it was: against us.
The abundance of such stories amongst black sportsmen indicates clearly that, at the point of exit from school, they had fairly clear and well-rounded conceptions about what lay ahead of them in the world of employment.
Their peers shared such conceptions and served mutually to reinforce each other.
Defeatism is not a useful property with which to enter the world of employment: failure is too conveniently assimilated into a horizon of limited expectations.
If you go to an interview anticipating you are not going to get the job, chances are you do not get it.
Grim prospects do hang over the heads of black school leavers and the research of Gloria Lee and John Wrench does much to nail down the specific ways in which employment opportunities are much narrower for the black kid seeking apprenticeships in industry (1981).
So black youths' apprehension about gaining jobs with career possibilities are not without foundation.
A kind of downward spiral results, the kids growing progressively more pessimistic about their chances, their hopes plummeting and their general postures making it more difficult for them to get jobs.
‘Black society, as does the dominant white society, teaches its members to strive for that which is defined as the most desirable among potentially achievable goals’, observes Harry Edwards about the American scene (1973, p.201).
And, although progress in conventional careers may not be regarded as achievable, clearly certain things are, as I will now show.
Models
Black kids are not totally without ambition: they have several guides to follow.
Having made the point that blacks identify with each other‘automatically’, it is no surprise to learn that, when it comes to organizing aspirations for the future, blacks set their sights on blacks who have made it to, or near to , the top of their chosen occupation.
Black politicians, lawyers, surgeons, business executives are in pathetically short supply; very, very few have managed to overcome the problem of restricted opportunities, and break what Douglas Glasgow, in his discussion of the chronic unemployment of American blacks, calls ‘the cycle of entrapment’— few raise themselves above ‘cellar-level jobs’(1980, p.71).
Black incumbents of high prestige positions fall into two main divisions: Stevie Wonder and the late Bob Marley are in the van of the one; Muhammad Ali and Pelé are at the fore of the other.
Music and sport are areas in which blacks have made the most celebrated and acclaimed contribution.
Even if the odds are stacked dauntingly against blacks in most spheres of society, the numbers of black musicians and sportsmen provide living proof that success can be gained.
Here are two domains in which blacks have risen to prominence, seemingly without having to overcome the conventional restrictions strewn around other occupations.
The appearance, albeit a misleading one, of an area uncluttered by the constraints characterizing other areas is an attractive one…the blacks who follow in the wake of Wonder and Marley make them models for their behaviour.
Godfrey Amoo said of Ali: ‘I try to copy his style, his footwork and the man generally — everything about him.’
Similarly, for Harvey Dennis, there was, ‘Pelé…just him and no one else.’
In this light, it can be seen that Ali and Pelé were potent symbols.
These were the figures who embodied the hopes of black youth in the 1960s and 1970s, not only in England, but in the USA too where
the athlete has been an important person and model of success for Black youth for a long time.
A man like Muhammad Ali not only symbolizes what can be done with talent and ability but shows that the ‘man’ and his system can be beat (Glasgow, 1980, p.78).
Black kids, suspicious and pessimistic about their chances of gaining success in regular employment in the ‘system’, look to alternative models upon which to base their own roles in society.
The visible glamour and affluence of the likes of Maurice Hope, Justin Fashanu and Daley Thompson are seductive and in many cases, irresistible.
Fashanu himself had thoughts on this: ‘If you can relate yourself to somebody, it's a big spur to you, ‘cause, if someone else has done it, you can always follow him.
It's harder when you do it the first thing.
And, like James Brown (the American singer) said on TV the other day, ‘black kids need black people to associate themselves with.’
The energy and enthusiasm black youth have for certain sports and the disproportionately high number wanting to take up sport as a career provides at least the initial indication that they see in successful black sportsmen models for themselves.
Hence the preponderance of doleful black amateur boxers in the immediate aftermath of Ken Norton's one-round eclipse by the Great White Hope of the early 1980s, Gerry Cooney.
‘You ought to see how the black guys’ heads have dropped after Norton got beat,’said boxer Kirk Gibbons of Birmingham.
Not surprisingly, Ali is chosen by most boxers as the most proto typical figure, though Bunny Johnson cites Jack Johnson and many of the newer recruits to boxing look to Sugar Ray Leonard, the quick-fisted American multiple world champion who blazed his way from an Olympic gold medal at Montreal in 1976 to an estimated 30 million dollars by the end of 1981.
Nick Pitt's description helps one understand why his appeal was not confined to blacks: ‘clean, well spoken [he really was a choirboy], a political eunuch, black but not really black , cuddly’(Sunday Times , 28 June 1981, p.30).
‘You're looking at the next Sugar Ray,’ I was assured by one youth before he had even sparred in training!
Pelé is the focus of most footballers' attentions.
The apparently unbridgeable gulf between him and his contemporaries in terms of sheer footballing skill made him an exceptional and enormously wealthy black man, after a childhood spent amidst the poverty and squalor of Bauru (see Pelé and Fish, 1977).
In athletics, there is a more even spread of influential figures, with political martyr Thommie Smith, who was banned from international competition after his Black Power stand at the Mexico Olympics, influencing the hopes of a great many black kids.
His fellow Black power advocate John Carlos is also frequently cited as a major influence.
Ali, of course, more than any modern figure, crystallized the  concerns of black people.
He capitalized on his Olympic success by lauding himself, pronouncing himself ‘The Greatest’, and arrogantly winning the world title under the most outrageous circumstances.
Immediately after, as I have previously noted, he became a member of the black segregationist sect, The Nation of Islam, and  publicly denounced the white world and its domination over blacks.
‘Aint no VietCong ever called me a nigger,’ was his simple, but penetrating, reason for not accepting the draft for which he was stripped of his world title and forced into inactivity for three years (only to return from adversity and carry on boxing, often successfully, for world titles until aged 38).
He was a black man raised in poverty, but who used his initiative, wit and boxing skill to rise to prominence, command multi-million dollar pay days and criticize the ‘man and the system’ which ensured him such monies!
It is little wonder that this figure cast what almost amounted to a spell over aspiring black sportsmen.
No one escaped his all-pervasive influence.
It was an influence summarized by Herol Graham, himself a redoubtable boxer who wallowed in his reputation as a ‘Flash Harry’, as follows: ‘There weren't many blacks in my area [in Nottingham]and I'd get called black….
There was only him [Ali]for me then 'cause he was black and there was racialism.’
Ali's cutting edge was his intellect: not only was he a renowned sportsman of brilliance, but he also commanded the world's attentions through his insight, sarcasm and satire.
In this respect, he deviated from the conventional ideas about blacks possessing physical but no mental prowess.
Mickey Morris summed it up: ‘He's a great sportsman and he's got a brain.’
Generally, black kids' aspirations are coloured by the achievements of other blacks with whom they share an affinity.
History shows that sport has been one of the two major areas in which blacks have been allowed or even encouraged to do well.
In sport, as in entertainment, black performers have ploughed a tradition and the furrows of that tradition deepen with every successive round of kids entering the fields of athletics, boxing and soccer in direct emulation of their models.
The lack of black swimmers, golfers or squash players indicates the extremely limited extent to which black kids are inspired in those areas.
It is not that they are not capable of competing; it is simply that there have been no great black performers in these areas in history (due to lack of opportunities and facilities) and no tradition exists.
But questions remain.
Virtually all kids, black or white, entertain hopes, often little more than visions, of emulating their role models or ‘schoolboy heroes’.
Most are brought back into line by their parents and made to organize their lives around achievable objectives, to persevere at the more mundane, sometimes uninteresting but attainable positions in society.
Then why are so many black kids allowed to let their wilder notions run rampant and dictate how they structure their ambitions and careers?
Why is it that black kids are so amenable to the influences of their peers?
It is through other black kids that some aspirations are fostered and others snuffed out by stories of racialism.
Why is it that black kids develop their sporting progress to the point that, by the time they leave school, their educational motivation is rather low, while their sporting motivation is soaring?
And, finally, why is it that black kids find support for the idea that they have only limited employment opportunities ahead of them, not only from their peers but also from the school?
All these questions must be answered if a satisfactory appreciation of blacks' relationship with sport, and indeed society, is to be attained.
In this chapter, I have argued against the natural ability of black sportsmen theory and offered the bones of an alternative, suggesting that the intensity of blacks' involvement with sport stems from their perception of restricted opportunities in other major occupational areas.
Various factors, including actual experience and transmitted beliefs, play their parts in solidifying the conception of society as biased against black achievement in all spheres except music and sport and so, looking to those characters who have achieved the desirable commodities of prestige and affluence, black kids zealously follow their example.
But to understand fully why and how they are allowed to do this, the above questions must be tackled and to do this I need to document the black kids' experiences at two levels: the family and the school.
These experiences have extreme consequences and an interpretation of them will occupy the next three chapters.
BUNNY JOHNSON
a point to prove
Born: Jamaica, 1947; father: Jamaica (car worker); mother: Jamaica (part-time machinist); occupation: professional boxer — formerly welder, insurance salesman and nightclub owner.
Just before the Christmas of 1963, two unrelated boxing enthusiasts, both named Johnson, wandered into a Birmingham gymnasium and asked to work out.
The one Johnson's enthusiasm faded and he soon drifted away from the sport; the other had his first competitive contest in the following January and so began one of the longest and least celebrated ring careers in British boxing.
Sixteen years and one month later, Bunny Johnson became the fourth black boxer to win a Lonsdale Belt, the most coveted award in British boxing (Randolph Turpin was the first in 1956, Bunny Sterling the second in 1973, Maurice Hope the third in 1976).
Johnson presents an intriguing case study.
He arrived in England in 1963 when aged 16 and almost immediately immersed himself in sport; as such he was one of the very first sportsmen to energy from the second generation West Indian immigrants.
In 1975, he realized an ambition he had nursed since his arrival: to become the first black heavyweight champion of Great Britain.
My interest in boxing began in Jamaica.
I wasn't really good at anything sporting-wise, not to compete rigorously, anyway.
I wasn't an outstanding athlete at school; I had more of an interest in reading.
That's how I got interested in the sport: I read about the first black champion, Jack Johnson and it created my interest for the first time.
From then on, I thought, I'm going to do it and I'm going to do it well.
But in Jamaica at the time, there were no facilities for kids, just for professional fighters, so I just used to look at them through the fence, sparring and punching the bag.
I didn't really know how to take up boxing.
When I came over here I got to know about Kyrle Hall [a Birmingham amateur club]and went along there with my pumps and shorts and that was my introduction to boxing really.
He had completed his secondary education in Jamaica but his mother implored him to continue in England.
She always encouraged me academically; she wanted me to become a lawyer.
I'd read about the Old Bailey and that sort of thing.
So you could say I was prepared for the ‘English way of Life’ from what I'd read.
My mother would always try to influence me.
I was still under the influence of my parents compared to my English counterpart and it was a strict influence.
After work, I used to come home and watch television and, at weekends, I'd maybe ask to go to the pictures, But I hadn't really made any friends so I was still in a very narrow circle.
That was until I met this fellow Johnson and we went to Kyrle Hall.
Then I widened my circle to boxing friends.
I still kept the idea of being a lawyer through studying at night school, but, after a short while I decided I was really going to follow up a boxing career.
Quite early, I made up my mind that all I wanted to be was a top flight boxer, to follow Jack Johnson in my own way and become the first black British heavyweight champion.
The early 1960s were turbulent times for blacks as the reverberations from the spate of immigrant intimidations following the Notting Hill and Nottingham episodes had barely subsided.
But Johnson did not sense hostility in his teens.
Maybe it was because boxing is an enclosed network, you work in teams as amateurs.
Or maybe it was just the environment: there was a majority of blacks at the club so the whites were in a minority.
SO even if they felt hostility, they were going to keep it to themselves.
Wouldn't you?
I never experienced any direct insults.
A proficient rather than brilliant amateur, Johnson went professional in 1968 and progressed well, winning thirty-two of thirty-eight contests.
Throughout 1971 and 1972 he remained in Britain's top three heavyweights, but was overlooked when the BBBC ordered a series of eliminators to decide the next British title challenger.
The nationality rule was a beautiful get-out for them, but I only had a few months to go before I'd been here for ten years and would have been entitled to fight for the title.
For nationality you can read ‘racialism’.
I couldn't interpret it as anything but racialism.
But, at  that stage, the only thing that prevented me from saying, ‘oh well, I'll go and find a regular job instead,’ was that I was aware that this thing existed — racialism — and that whatever happened, getting away from it, getting out of the firing line, wouldn't help me.
I could prove my point much better if I kept on, I'm determined, so I kept on.
I had a point to prove.
And prove it, he did.
John Conteh's withdrawal from the eliminating series left Johnson as the only credible replacement.
As Johnson put it: ‘You could say that was a bit of ‘luck’, in inverted commas!’
The opportunity was not lost and Johnson eventually captured the title he sought.
Never a ‘natural’ heavyweight, he suffered weight disadvantages against bigger men and lost the title to Richard Dunn.
He then switched his efforts to the light-heavyweight division, the British championship of which he won spectacularly (in one round) in 1977.
Two defences in 1979 and 1980 (an all-black contest against Hackney-based Guyanan Dennis Andries) brought him a Lonsdale Belt.
A year later he was in more conflict with the BBBC which delayed granting him permission to fight in Australia after he had left the country.
After four months, he vindicated himself, beating Mike Quarry in seven rounds — again, ‘proving the point’.
I know I've never had some of the breaks I deserve but I don't allow myself to dwell on this.
That's the way it goes; inequalities exist, but I have to look at it healthily.
That is making being black secondary.
My initial motive in going to do something is having the desire to do it, thinking I can do it and moving towards it.
I'm black and I've got to be better than the next applicant, but I don't let it hold me back.
The way I approach anything is to do it to the best of my ability, whatever.
But, then when you've done it to the best of your ability and you can't really see the rewards, then you have to analyse why.
Then you go back and you think: ‘Well, although I've done my best, maybe I have to find that little bit extra as a black person.’
And either you say to yourself ‘I can't find it’ or you can go on and get to the middle of things and keep trying to find it.
A lot of black kids don't do that.
Too many of them are saying: ‘There's racialism, so what's the good of trying?’
But, if they give up, they can't really contribute to the better quality of society.
Being black has always been in my subconscious, but I've tried never to let this come to the fore.
I don't feel bitter about being excluded.
Bitterness isn't part of my philosophy; I've always said if  you let bitterness overwhelm you, you let it distract you from your path, I've got no time for it; it cramps your style.
I've never lost my belief in myself.
You see, one thing that influenced me was reading about the great American champs and I saw how all the good champs were side-tracked, avoided, yet always seemed to make it late.
Jack Johnson, Archie Moore, I could make a list of them.
They all seemed to make it, there were lots who didn't-with the exception of Floyd Patterson and Joe Louis.
So I always thought: ‘If you're good enough, you have to keep on, 'cause if you stop, you haven't got a chance, obviously.’
I've said all along if I'd been a white man with my ability, I feel I'd be a wealthy man.
But the boxing power structure is white and it's going to be a slow change.
Chapter FIVE
ALL OR NOTHING FROM FAMILIES
The only sport my old man was interested in was beating up the rest of the family.
Howard Brown, boxer and full-contact karate fighter
If you don't make the goal at school that they've set you, you're considered by your parents as a failure and that's when your head starts to go down.
Danny Thomas, footballer
They've never seen me play
It is tempting to see the source of black kids' sporting involvement and success as the family.
A rough-hewn psychological explanation would hold that, because many second generation Caribbeans and Africans in the UK are raised in single-parent families, in almost every case the parent being the mother, the children pass into an emotional void at the ages of 13 or 14 and seek out father figures in the shape of sports coaches with whom they form compensatory attachments.
Positive, meaningful, often intense relationships with coaches yield stable, lasting bonds with sport and so guarantee commitment and perseverance.
The surrogate father guides his protégé through his turbulent teens into his twenties when he develops into a mature and secure sportsman with an abundance of technique and a conviction challenging enough to take him to success.
The explanation is appealing and has much merit.
It lends itself quite suitably to the UK sporting scene which is populated by many black sportsmen growing up in broken homes, settling on the side of  the mother and eventually seeing the father as an anathema, as did Repton heavyweight Ray Tabi:
As far as I'm concerned, my old man died when I was 12 [his age when his father left home].
The man's a complete cunt.
I hate the bastard.
We crossed each other on the street some time ago and he went to talk; I just pushed him aside and told him to fuck off.
I wouldn't talk to the cunt.
The hatred is vivid but instructive, for Tabi is representative of about half of those sportsmen from single-parent families.
The next step of adopting a coach as a father figure is more dubious, however, though a great many sportsmen would describe their trainers or managers as Maurice Hope describes Terry Lawless: ‘He's been like a father to me; no, more than a father, actually.’
Without wishing to drown the explanation in cold water, I feel that a few sprinkles are needed to chill it down.
For example, the case of Hope, who did not come from a broken home, is atypical: most black sportsmen have much more instrumental relationships with their mentors, seeking to learn techniques, draw inspiration and get motivated for important events.
These are the usual limits of the sponsor-protege relationship m sport.
It is fair to assume also that there is a high proportion of black sportsmen who come from single-parent families, but, in absolute terms, there are huge numbers of black kids who are reared in broken homes who do not enter sport in any serious way.
What remains missing, therefore, are the processes compelling some to take up sport and others not to.
Presumably, there are psychological needs at work influencing a young person to look for suitable father figures of which there are many in sport.
Fine, but we are still unclear about the exact nature of these processes.
Perhaps many of those from broken homes search for surrogate fathers, but only those with the physical assets necessary for sporting success, such as strength and speed, are able to foster attachments in the sporting fraternity.
The others lack the faculties to stay in sport and so lose the option to form a stable relationship with the coach.
It all remains rather vague and some clarity should come from an examination of the actual backgrounds and domestic circumstances of black youth in sport.
An extreme example of parental involvement in children's sports is the phenomenon which Dorcas Susan Butt calls the ‘sports parent’, the parent ‘who pushes the child onward in the sport…sometimes encourages the youngster and sometimes criticizes, and will often go to any degree to further the child's interests…the parent's main interest is to maximize the performance and benefits of his or her own child’(1976, p. 120).
There are many ‘sports parents’ in the UK who follow their sons and daughters around athletics meetings, football matches and boxing tournaments; they attend training sessions, often consulting with coaches and trainers; they invest many hours and considerable amounts of money in their children's sports.
Yet few are black.
For the most part, black parents are not interested in their offspring's development in sport and are sometimes oblivious to the fact that they are involved in sport at all .
Commenting on the influence of his parents on his footballing career, Carlos Francis, brought up in the East End before moving north to Birmingham City FC, said: ‘They've never even seen me play.
They gave me no encouragement at all and didn't even realize I was so into football.
Even now, they don't take an active interest.’
Danny Thomas' experience was a repetition: ‘My parents were never interested in sport.
They never came to watch me play.’
This theme is a recurring one, with some sportsmen actually being belittled by their parents for their involvement, like sprinter Mickey Morris:
My parents used to ignore me when I used to go home and tell them I'd won a race.
I'd be all proud and they'd just say, ‘Oh yeah, so what?’
It used to get me down so much.
Sometimes, they even used to laugh at me because I got so serious about athletics.
So, in the end, I never used to tell them anything about the athletics.
I don't much now.
Even more extreme and, frankly, disturbing was the case of Jamaican-born boxer Winston Davis who came alone to England (his parents preceded him) in 1970, when aged 13.
He communicated nothing about his sporting ambitions to his mother with whom he lived in Rugby.
‘My mother used to treat me like a stranger,’ he reflected.
‘I wasn't close to her.
I had to take care of myself.
I never got near enough to her to tell her about the boxing and eventually left home as soon as I could.’
The outstanding feature of black parents' relationship with their children's sport is that it does not exist.
Black families offer virtually  no encouragement.
So the black youth's progress in sport is partially or totally neglected by parents.
In the case of Repton light-middleweight Leon Young, there was no encouraging influence at all as he was brought up in a Dr Barnardo's home in Barkingside.
Similarly, Daley Thompson, the celebrated Essex Beagles decathlete, was brought up in a home where he was denied parental encouragement for his sport.
The black parents are often apathetic and perform no positive function in their children's progression in sport and stir from their inertness only when some measure of tangible success has been achieved.
‘They don't mind so much now I've got a few trophies in a case that they can show their friends and boast about it,’ Carlos Francis recollected his parents' change of posture after it became evident that he could make a career out of soccer.
Such retrospective interests are not uncommon but often elicit only disdain from the youths who see clearly that their parents' belated enthusiasm is a product purely of the tangible rewards sport brings along.
The passive role of the black family in the children's sport jars with the discordance of a cracked bell when compared to the part played by the white family, usually a source of encouragement from which affirmative, strengthening and, when necessary, consoling influences come.
Invariably, white sportsmen are introduced to their discipline by their parents, actually taken to clubs and made members under the direction of their fathers and, less frequently, mothers.
After that, the parents' involvement often continues and may escalate.
That white parents support their children morally and financially is confirmed by the number of families in crowds at athletic, boxing and football competitions.
On one occasion, for example, the AAA Under-21s and Youths' championships, I counted eight blacks in the whole non-participating sectors of the Alexander Sports Stadium, yet black participants comprised over half of the competitors.
Regularly, at athletic clubs, white parents can be seen to drop off (or maybe stay with) and collect their children.
Very few black sportsmen are afforded this facility by their parents.
There is nothing in the black youth's experience to compare with that of javelin thrower Paul Brice, a white boy, whose father carefully supervised and monitored his training programmes and competitions at considerable financial expense.
‘I've spent over £400 in petrol alone over the past few months, taking him to meetings and  training’, Mr Brice confirmed.
Nor to that of Wally Swift Jun. whose father, a former British welterweight and middleweight boxing champion, would meticulously plan and implement training programmes at Birmingham City ABC and insist on taking charge of his corner in competitions.
Obviously, a positive sports evaluation by parents is likely to give rise to sporting interests in children and the above examples are illustrative.
So where there is a virtual absence of such evaluations, such as amongst the first generation Caribbeans, there is also no direct influence from the family to children.
Not that Caribbean parents are totally without sporting involvements: there are rare exceptions in the form of Ray Tabi's father whom he disowned but still acknowledged as his ‘first lead into boxing’; and the father of heavyweight Howard Henlan had also been a boxer and was instrumental in stimulating his son's interest.
Other boxers too acknowledge sometimes unknown fathers as their inspiration, for example, Danny Evans, who was raised in an orphanage but was vaguely aware that his father was once a boxer and tried to emulate him.
There are, however, precious few parallels amongst athletes and footballers.
It seems, then, that, for the most part, black parents are not interested in sport and have no role to play in generating and sustaining their children's involvement which intensifies despite the lack of parental support.
A glance back at the collective situation of first generation Caribbeans in the UK is enough to understand why black parents do not encourage their children's sporting endeavours.
Simply expressed, they have insufficient time, inadequate resources, not enough basic interest and, crucially, other priorities.
John Isaacs, a Jamaican-born coach with Haringey, believed most black sportsmen to come from what he called ‘limited family backgrounds’, where their parents are unable to give them positive guidance.
Certainly, most black sportsmen are brought up in what are, by conventional criteria, large families (the median size being six).
Obviously, they would receive less parental attention than children from smaller families.
Often the family is disrupted by a split during the sportsman's upbringing, as in the case of footballer Lennox Smith, who, when aged 16, had to undergo the turbulence of his father's leaving (his case is representative of about a quarter of the black sportsmen I encountered).
Often, the child is brought up from birth by only one parent, usually the mother, or is taken into care at a very early age, as in the  cases of Young, Thompson and Justin Fashanu.
Sometimes, mothers find it necessary to work (mainly in service industries) and so have little time to spend with the children.
Under such circumstances, the influence of the father would, of course, be absent and so, therefore, would what is for most white youths the main stimulus behind sporting involvement.
Even in apparently well-integrated families, fathers exert only the smallest of influences on the child's sports participation.
It seems that sporting interest in the older black community is very limited.
As Derek Brown, the sprinter, said: ‘I wouldn't say my dad isn't interested in sport; he's mainly interested in horse racing.’
Cricket is the other major sporting interest of first generation Caribbeans — understandably enough in view of the popularity of that sport in the West Indies — but, of course, in the UK, it is a rather club oriented, many would say middle-class, sport, access to which is narrowly circumscribed.
There is a much more limited interest in boxing, which is probably due to the lack of significant boxers from the islands.
Joe Bygraves, the heavyweight who beat Henry Cooper and drew with Dick Richardson in 1957 to defend his Commonwealth title, Bunny Grant, who outpointed Dave Charnley to win the Commonwealth lightweight title in 1965, and Percy Hayles, who held the same title from 1968 till 1974 (all from Jamaica) provide notable exceptions.
Caribbean interest in athletics has been enlivened by the Olympic success in 1976 of Don Quarrie of Jamaica in the 200 metres and Hasely Crawford of Trinidad and Tobago who dominated the 100 metres event in the mid-1970s.
Turning to football, the West Indies have done nothing on an international scale, though the game is popular and played at a domestic level.
Not much enthusiasm was transferred in the migration to the UK and the enthusiasm which appeared to grow in the 1980s seems mainly due to the successes of young black players in the football league.
Birmingham pro-footballer Mike Stowridge, whose Jamaican parents split up when he was 16 (in 1979), said his progress in soccer was ‘without influences — all down to me’ and his view encapsulates the feelings of a great many young black sportsmen who see no support coming from their parents.
The overall picture is of the first generation harbouring little interest in sport, apart from horse racing!
Perhaps they have no time available nor money to squander on what they consider to be point  less pursuits.
A skim across the occupations of sportsmen's parents reveals that most are employed in skilled or partly skilled or unskilled jobs as such things as carpenters, electricians, fitters, machine tool operators, assemblers, plumbers and porters.
Deviating from the normal pattern is the father of decathlete Fidelius Obukw, a Nigerian, whose father was a barrister.
The general occupational picture of black sportsmen's parents is consistent with the rest of the first generation Caribbeans in the UK and as nearly all of them came from the West Indies (mostly from Jamaica, but others from Dominica, Antigua, St Kitts, St Lucia, Montserrat and Guyana and fewer still from Trinidad, Nevis and Barbados and a small number from West Africa) this is not unusual.
Most came over during the period 1955 to 1963 and took what work was commonly available (the vast majority were unqualified academically).
This would have probably entailed working involuntary overtime, possibly long, awkward hours and, almost certainly, making a physical input, one consequence of which would have been a limit on the amount of time spent with the children and energy contributed to their amusement.
Compounding this was the fact that some of the budding sportsmen, who were not from broken homes, remained in the Caribbean with relatives while their parents settled into the new environment, so their contacts would have been severely and massively interrupted.
What I am speculating — and it can be no more than a retrospective speculation based on reports from sportsmen themselves — is that black parents were too preoccupied with maintaining a material existence to attend to sport: they were too busy making ends meet.
As sport is popularly thought of as a leisure time distraction rather than a central life interest or a possible career, it would have held only a marginal interest to the first generation.
As sprinter Mike MacFarlane said of his parents' total lack of encouragement: ‘It was 'cause they hadn't got the time to think about it.’
At home, sport has no salience; yet, outside the home, sport becomes the source of expectations and aspirations, quite often the only one.
Considering that the youths have little in the way of positive reinforcements at home for their sports, they develop an impressive voracity for sports.
The role models in the form of key sporting figures to imitate or emulate are, as I have pointed out, important as external stimuli, providing the youths with evidence of the successes blacks can achieve in certain spheres and heightening  awarenesses of the possible routes to the top.
But, then, all kids have heroes; they don't all become rock stars or footballers, though.
Most opt for the more mundane pursuits as their peers abandon their grand schemes and resign themselves to working in an office, a factory, a building site, or taking a cushioning three years in tertiary education.
Sport becomes relegated to the peripheries, whereas, for many black kids, it retains centrality — not because the other areas are seen as worse risks, but because they are seen as less accessible, they believe there are only a limited number of entrances to the upper reaches of the employment world.
And, as I stressed earlier, the props for such beliefs come from within the black community: black kids tell each other stories about how difficult it is to get a decent job if you are black and, in a self-fulfilling way, it does becomes difficult.
The decisive role in the black youth's continued enthusiasm for, participation in and commitment to sport is played by others of similar inclination.
Contemporaries in sport and coaches exert the main influences and the family's role in the sports process is redundant.
If family members are not concerned about or appreciative of sporting accomplishments, then the black youth cares not; at least his contemporaries will be impressed.
‘I couldn't care less,’ was the reply of Philip, a 16-year-old sprinter from Birchfield, when asked whether he was displeased with his parents' lack of zeal.
‘It don't bother me whether they know about it [his involvement in sport]or not.’
Mickey Morris' continued involvement in spite of his parents' derision, Carlos Francis' determination to defy his parents' ridicule of football as a career, former British and European middleweight boxing champion Bunny Sterling's refusal ‘to let on to’ his parents about his boxing: these are typical examples of black kids cutting themselves away from the strings of their parents and locating the vital, influential figures in their lives elsewhere.
The family's loss of control over the youth is crucial to his development in sport, for, if there was a more balanced social management within the West Indian community, it is likely that the vibrance and energy expended in sport could be directed into more orthodox areas.
But a combination of factors, including a high proportion of broken or at least deteriorating homes and single-parent families, an absence of parent-child contact due to migration and possibly compounded by the necessity of devoting excessive time to earning a  living and, as I will argue shortly, a distorted appreciation of the parent's function vis-à-vis education crystallize to release the black youth from the influence of his parents and jettison him into a world in which his peers, with whom he shares the common experience of being black in a white society, are the dominant forces.
Such forces carry him away from the mainstream of Caribbean life into the tributaries of a distinct black youth culture.
In many cases, the work ethic is denigrated and impulse repression is replaced by an incitement to self-expression.
Sport is one vehicle for such self-expression.
Thus we have the permitting conditions: the lack of parental control which might have brought the youth into more conventional alignments rather than setting him free to explore the more extravagant possibilities of a sporting career.
Now it remains to focus on the circumstances which promote the youth's interests and involvements in sport.
Here the spotlight turns to the school, the crucible in which interests melt into each other to produce the mixture of concerns which characterize black sportsmen.
This will come into view next.
The ten foot wall
Having made the somewhat contentious statement on Caribbean parents' distorted appreciation of their function in relation to their children's formal education, I am left to qualify and substantiate, particularly as it has a weighty bearing on the general argument of the entire book.
The study of black sportsmen and society brings into relief the way in which the youths' orientations to school and what they expect to achieve from education affect, not segmentally but totally, their attitudes, postures and the way in which they apportion their time and energies.
Perceptual lenses ground at home and school provide the youth with the equipment he uses to see the society around him.
Something not unlike tunnel vision ensues in the case of black kids.
The overwhelming evidence on black youths' achievements at school suggests they do badly (see Tomlinson, 1980, for a review).
They continue to fall away alarmingly when it comes to formal examinations and so decrease their own chances of gaining stimulating and challenging employment.
Yet there is undoubtedly a very positive value placed on formal education by black families.
Parents may shun sport, but one could not accuse them of doing the same  with education and, as Haringey's Clarence Callynder pointed out: ‘Some overdo it; they push their kids too much at school.
You obviously need some encouragement, but not too much.,
Sportsmen, no less than other black kids, are the recipients of pressure from both parents to do well at school.
Birchfield triple jumper Keith Hunter reasoned that it works in a compensatory manner:
In the West Indies, they had no proper education and so didn't have the qualifications to get good jobs.
My old man works at Dunlop and he wants to make sure we [he and his brothers and sisters]do better than that.
It sounds plausible and most black sportsmen agree in broad terms that Caribbean parents anticipate that the greater availability of education in the UK will enable their children to advance more meaningfully in a career than they did.
(Nancy Foner's study of Jamaicans in London, 1979, supports this.)
Immigrants the world over have such ambitions for their children.
Why then, given the emphasis on the value of education amongst first generation Caribbeans, do their children do so abysmally and, further, show little interest or desire to do well at school?
There are three strands of answer to this, each of which has much purchase; I can do no better than to let the espousers of the three strands speak for themselves.
First, Winston McLeod, a back four player for Continental FC: ‘The school system isn't equipped to deal with the black kids’ needs.
It simply caters for white kids, but black kids have special problems.
They come from totally different circumstances at home and the school doesn't fit in with these.’
In 1964, at the age of 8, he moved from Jamaica to Islington, London, where he resumed schooling, but found the demands at home often contradictory:
The West Indian families have different values — they still put a lot of faith in education, but it's the way they bring this home to the kids that causes the problems.
There's the discipline for one thing: our family wasn't too bad compared to others I know, but, generally, the West Indian family is very, very strict.
But it isn't just the discipline, it's the type of things they make you aim for.
Virtually, every West Indian family tells their sons and daughters that they have to be a doctor or a  lawyer.
Doctor is the favourite, that's the one all black kids are meant to go for.
But, of course, they're not equipped in a lot of senses.
It's not as if they say to their kids: ‘try to the best of your ability.’
With them, it's: ‘You've got to pass your exams and carry on in education.’
It's not ‘try to do well.’
It's as if they're saying: ‘There's a ten foot wall — jump over it.’
It doesn't matter if you're only two foot tall.
McLeod added insightfully: ‘It makes failure impossible to take.
The West Indian family values education, but the way it goes about it makes it impossible for the kids.
They're treating the kids wrongly.’
This trenchant delivery needs no elaboration from me; it captures perfectly the chasm astride which the black kid stands: on the one side, the reasonable, more limited demands of the school which he is capable of fulfilling, and, on the other, the often unrealistic insistences of the family reinforced by discipline.
Another strand is contributed by triple jumper Keith Hunter, born in Marston Green, West Midlands, of Jamaican parents, and schooled at Perry Common, Birmingham.
‘They're strange people, West Indians,’ he prefaced his comments:
My old man had this thing about all of us [a family of ten]growing up in this society and not getting into a black thing.
He never had any real education in Jamaica and he wanted to make sure we all did.
But the way he went about it!
He used to smash the fuck out of all of us; he used to belt all of us, my sisters as well.
We were all bruised and cut all over, if the slightest thing went wrong.
His mother was equally committed to the value of education, but never imposed her will with such harshness.
The vast majority of black parents are uninterested and even disapproving of their children's involvements in sport and Hunter's were no exception: ‘It [sport]didn't help, but now I'm doing good at it, he [his father]doesn't mind so much.
But he had this thing about us [seven brothers — two in Jamaica — and two sisters]concentrating more and more on school work.’
In his initial phase of competition, Hunter remained undefeated for eighteen months.
Academically, he did reasonably well, picking up three ‘O’ levels at the first attempt, then adding three more plus  two ‘A’levels before leaving school to take up a trainee manager's position at Fine Fare supermarkets, continuing his studies on a day-release business studies course.
In the event, the job proved a disappointment and, in his own words, he spent most of the time ‘stacking shelves, pushing trolleys and sweeping floors’.
The news filtered back to his father, who was unremitting in his insistence on academic excellence and career worthiness: ‘The old man was wild about this and he used to kick the shit out of me.
Eventually, all the pressure built up and I had a nervous breakdown.
I had to take treatment from a headshrink.’
Astonishingly, he added: ‘I never even told my parents.
I kept it from them.,
Extreme as it may sound, the Hunter experience brings out many disturbing features of West Indian family life: the relentless pressure on children to achieve often unattainable objectives at school; the stern physical measures adopted to back up the pressure; the inflexible refusal to accept anything short of total success; and the youth's eventual collapse under the pressure.
At the other pole, there is the case of boxer Cecil Williams, the eldest of a family of six, who moved from St Kitts to Handsworth in 1960 when aged 5 and was brought up by his grandparents.
He introduced a quite different strand:
I was a slow learner.
I couldn't read till I was 14.
The only thing I was good at was art [he got a grade 1 CSE in this subject].
Generally, with education, I didn't recognize it for what it was.
‘Starved of stimulation’ was how he summed up his childhood with his grandparents.
I can't remember them reading any books or even having any books around the house to read.
So I didn't even read comics.
My grandparents didn't push me towards academic life.
Being as they weren't too clever themselves, they ended up with a dull kid.
Succinctly, he added: ‘If your parents are poorly educated, what chance have you got?’
By the time he arrived at school-leaving age, he had realized the value of education for his career and so enrolled on a day-release college course, eventually completing a Full Technological Certificate, whilst training to be a painter and decorator.
Presented here is an experience very divergent from the first two: a total neglect and, indeed, ignorance of educational considerations.
The child was never imbued with any conception of what education  was all about —‘I didn't recognize it.’
The grandparents, whom Williams referred to as ‘mum’ and ‘the old man’, were, according to him, uneducated and barely literate; they had little comprehension of the values, demands and functions of education and, as a consequence, were unable to make any contribution to the child's involvement at school.
Education, of course, does not end at the school gates: the home is one of a complex of factors which combine to affect the child's chances at school.
An active, verbal home atmosphere is, as many studies have shown, of critical significance in determining how the child will fare at school (see J. W. B. Douglas' 1964 study for one of the main contributions to our understanding of how factors in the home environment affect educational careers; also, Douglas et al., 1968; Bernstein, 1971, 1975).
Obviously, a child returning from school to find his own study quarters where he has books at his disposal and sympathetic parents who can offer cogent remarks on his work and broaden his outlook with lively, stimulating conversation, will be able to get more out of education than a child who, when doing his homework, has to share the kitchen table with plates, cutlery and cruet as well as the pet cat and having to contend with ‘Crossroads’ as the main intellectual challenge of the evening.
For Williams, home life was an intellectual void.
There was, he said, ‘no interest whatsoever’ to the extent that: ‘When I left junior school, they [his surrogate parents]never even came to the school to see about it.
I had to go and find a new damn school myself.’
His case is perhaps not typical; neither are the first two.
His family knew nothing of education and so gave him no support or encouragement, still less active aid.
Hunter suffered emotionally from the opposite: an almost obsessive urging and prompting from his parents, in particular his father, to do well at school and the promise of a physical beating in the event of failure.
McLeod's family placed a similarly strong emphasis on the value of education but failed, not because of the methods the parents chose to ram it home — on his own admission, they were not ‘overstrict’— but because they set unachievable objectives for him; nothing short of these objectives would satisfy and so there was no reward for his best efforts.
Presented then are two polar opposites: parents, at the one extreme, neglecting their children's education; at the other, overburdening them, whether by abrasive discipline or by setting impossible targets.
Both are ultimately destructive to the child's  aspirations at school and the achievements he will gain there and, so, consequently, have a deciding effect on the child's eventual career.
Quite obviously, the examples constitute extreme types, but, as Newtown full back Alfonso Clark, part of a family of nine, put it, after describing two similar cases: ‘There's nothing in between; it's all or nothing from West Indian families’(he was from Nevis).
Three CSEs are what he took to his job at a glaziers.
Lest I be accused of caricaturing the West Indian family's approach to its child's education, let me add some tempering comments from sportsmen who found their parents' blend of discipline and encouragement satisfactory.
Both professional boxer Achille Mitchell and Aston Villa footballer Noel Blake travelled to the Midlands when they were 9, Mitchell from Dominica, Blake from Jamaica.
One would expect both to have experienced upheavals, having completed about four years primary education before having to take up again in the UK.
Yet neither told of any problems and both cited their parents, in Blake's case his mother only, as important ‘uplifting’ influences (as Mitchell put it).
Tellingly, neither gained any qualification; Mitchell supplemented his ring earnings with work as a carpenter and Blake became a pro footballer.
Such cases are irregular: for the most part, black sportsmen's family influences fall into the neglecting or overburdening types.
Aston Moore of Birchfield, yet another 9-year-old traveller from the West Indies (from Jamaica in 1968) reflected on his parents' giving him hardly any encouragement at all: ‘I got the odd comment now and again —‘how are you doing?’ or whatever….
As regards to homework, I just got on with it myself or didn't do it at all.’
(He got five CSEs.)
Decathlete Derek Anderson, born in London's East End, his father Jamaican, his mother Cuban, reasoned perspicaciously that: ‘I had no encouragement from my mother and very limited contact with my father.
They had to struggle bringing us up so they had no real time to bother about anything else.’
He attributed his gaining ten ‘O’ levels, four ‘A’levels, a psychology degree and (in process) a Masters degree to his own ‘determination to take up the challenge of the idea of the black kid who's got no brains.’
It seems that if Caribbean parents are not too preoccupied with the ‘struggle’ to bring their kids up, and there is every reason to believe that, due to the aftermath of migration, familial ruptures and large, possibly unmanageable families, it is a struggle, they are so eager to  compensate for their own lack of education that they encumber their children with over-ambitious objectives backed by inflexible, often demoralizing, discipline.
Yet, I will go on to argue that black kids seriously involved in sport tend to be rather better placed academically than others who may not be immersed in sport.
The overall retardation of black youth is due, in no small measure, to the inadequacy of Caribbean families to cope with the exigencies of education in the modern UK.
‘The next generation which has grown up over here and understands what their children have to go through will handle them much, much better,’ Cecil Williams speculated.
Overall, the family's role in the education process is, at best, non-productive and, at worst , destructive.
And, as I have pointed out, its part in the sports process is non-existent — unless it acts as a deterrent.
All this is not meant as a massive, unqualified slight against the Caribbean family, for there are understandable reasons for its failure, amongst them fractured relationships and the prime necessities of having to feed, clothe and shelter their children.
In Anderson's terms, they ‘struggled’ and education may have seemed a little remote to them as it was not freely available in most parts of the West Indies until the 1940s.
But there is a very urgent sense in which the Caribbean family fails to encourage sufficiently or places too much pressure on their offspring at school; and there is every reason to surmise that this is of general relevance — not just to sportsmen.
Black sportsmen are drawn from the ranks of black working-class youth and these generally grow up under similar conditions, being subjected to the same kind of pressures or lack of them.
Black kids go to school ill-equipped to do well and, of course, the majority do not do well academically.
Indeed, they demonstrate little interest in or carry any vim into their academic work; certainly nothing to compare with the avid desire for technique and expertise many take to the sports field.
Family influences help account for the languor of black kids at school and the regularity with which they underachieve.
But it is the experience at the school itself which prompts the youths to channel their energies into sport.
The relationship between the experience at school and the involvement in sport will occupy the next two chapters.
MICKY MORRIS
learning to be black
Born: London, 1958; father: Jamaica (fork-lift truck driver); mother: Jamaica (nurse); occupation: athlete — employed by DHSS.
Two sets of contradictory forces accompanied Mickey Morris's development in sport and, indeed, generally.
His Jamaican parents gave him absolutely no encouragement in sport and little more in education yet his school teachers exerted often crude pressures on him to participate in the school athletics and football teams.
At ‘13 or 14’ he realized that ‘most black kids are not respected for their knowledge or their brains.’
His initial promise in sports gained him the tag of ‘the runner’ which he despised: ‘So, I thought: I'll try to be academic and good at sports as well.’
Conflict with teachers came when he refused to play in a school football match which clashed with a geography class.
He was castigated by a teacher and told he was letting the school down.
His commitments were divided between sport and education, and between blacks and whites, but he was loath to let his sports lapse if only because of the purgative effect they brought, as he explained:
At school, you start off, you integrate with everybody right up to the third year so that, in the third year or the fourth year, your friends or who you know as friends, they might call you a ‘black bastard’.
At that age, it doesn't mean anything.
And then you find that when they say it in the fourth year, they mean it and you begin to realize.
You begin to look at yourself and realize what colour you are.
And that's where the rift begins: then you have to make a choice, staying with my white friends or going with my black friends.
Now, I was more readily accepted by my black friends than my white friends.
I remember this time after school there was a fight between blacks and whites; I went and stayed in the toilets for a half-hour thinking what I should do and that's when I really took a look at myself and thought about the white kids calling me  names and the black kids saying ‘come on’ so I said ‘all right’.
So, I made up my mind from then: ‘right, I'll have to stay with the black guys 'cause I am black.’
I looked at myself properly and carried on from there.
Then, there's a process of learning to be black.
I mean you look at yourself and you've got a black face and a Cockney accent and you realize you don't fit.
And there's a learning process of being black: you start going to black clubs you start speaking black, you read history, you learn more about blacks and slavery; it's a process of learning.
There's a rift that grows at that stage in your schooling between, not only white people, but the actual teachers as well.
You try to be a white person or you go to them and try to be accepted and you go back to blacks and they don't like it.
So I went through this process and I started to read my thoughts generally, not to be too much one way or the other.
I was learning, trying to be impartial all the time.
This is really frustrating.
To get off my frustration I used to come down to the track and run it out.
I used to play football just to get out the aggression.
Ordinary kids might go robbing or beating up old ladies, something like that; I used to come down here 'cause I knew that wasn't the right way to let out the aggression.
After being noticed by Haringey coach Sandy Gray, Morris was invited to train with the club (then called Haringey and Southgate).
He agreed, still seeing sport as ‘an outlet’ but ‘in time, it just got serious.’
The infamous John Carlos who made the black power gesture on the Olympic rostrum in 1968 became a source of inspiration: ‘I said ‘yeah, I'd like to be there.’’
(Morris even now wears an all-black track suit and black socks,à la Carlos.)
Muhammad Ali was also influential: ‘He's a great sportsman and he's got a brain, he's not stupid.’
Before leaving school, he was interviewed by a careers officer who asked him: ‘Do you want a job in a factory?’
His initial reaction was one of elation:
I was happy about it when I went home and told my mum, but she said, ‘what are you talking about a factory?
What about a clerical job or a nice doctor's job?’
And I thought ‘she's right.’
They didn't even offer me the opportunity to say what I wanted to do.
One CSE Grade 1 is all he could muster from school, so, fired by the grim prospect of a factory job, he went to a college of further  education where he gained four ‘O’ levels after a year and then took a job at a wholesale jewellers, where they weren't too optimistic about his chances of promotion.
They said I'd never make a manager.
I said ‘right, I'll show you’ and got a job in the Civil Service.
And I find with my running it's the same: they said ‘you're too short.’
I thrive on people telling me that so I can react to it.
I put myself down as well to prove myself wrong.
His progressions in employment and athletics were in harness.
He long jumped for a while before concentrating solely on sprinting 200 metres: he clocked 22.8 seconds in his first year and reduced this to 21. 13 seconds, his personal best, making him the club's number one until the rise in form of Mike MacFarlane.
But, his career with the DHSS was never eclipsed by athletics and he consciously made exams and promotion prime targets.
There was no changed priority for Morris.
I've never made athletics my route to the top.
I wouldn't train full-time; I thought: ‘No, I want a good job.’
I run for my own satisfaction really.
I don't think I could train full-time like MacFarlane and that-s one of the things that's kept me going: to know that, as a junior, I was as fast as MacFarlane.
I had the potential.
It's just a self-satisfaction.
I don't tell my parents about it 'cause they only laugh; it's a big joke to them.
I think you find it with most West Indian parents…it wasn't so much lack of enthusiasm, they just didn't have the time.
On the track, Morris still feels very much a sense of identity with blacks: he presents a funereal image in all-black, a cowl covering his head.
This identity gives him what he calls ‘a stability, a feeling of belonging’.
But it contrasts strikingly with the pin-stripes he sports for work.
He keeps the two spheres as separate as possible, leading an almost Jekyll and Hyde existence.
‘I've mellowed a lot,’ he told me.
‘If you'd have come to me when I was eighteen I wouldn't even have spoken to you.’
His blackness he now regards as a personal stabilizer rather than a means for rejecting society.
Chapter Six
EXPECTED TO FAIL BY TEACHERS
I was pushed into certain spoRTs at school, like athletics.
The teachers naturally thought, because you're black, you must have some sort of athletic ability in you; but I didn't even want to do athletics, at all.
Vince Hilaire, footballer
The push
As I have already suggested successful black sportsmen play a passive but vital role: however unwittingly, they act as role models, figures to be copied and emulated.
Black kids look to them as blueprints for their own development.
They do so because they are black and black youths tend to identify strongly with other blacks, and because they have achieved visible success and black kids want clues as to how they too might be successful.
But it is still a passive role and, while many major figures in sport express a sense of responsibility for black youth, none actively encourage or discourage them from following their examples.
In crude terms, they act as ‘pull’ factors: the past and current successes of Hope, Thompson, Crooks and others effectively radiate attractive powers.
The loss of the grip of the family during the critical adolescent years releases the youth from the ‘straightening’ influences, thus making him amenable to other fields of force.
Whereas a white youth may have visions of becoming a successful sportsman, his parents may have a strong enough hold over him to deflect him and set him on course for a ‘straight’ job; often this is not the case with blacks.
Yet the black family plays very little part in supporting, less still in encouraging, their children in sport.
The ‘push’ often comes from school, in particular, from teachers.
It is the influence of  teachers in guiding black kids into sport and, often, into sporting careers I now want to consider.
In emphasizing the parts played by school teachers in prompting black youth into sports involvement, I am neglecting many other influential figures, including elder brothers and sisters and occasionally even parents.
Other members of the family are often important in at least stimulating an awareness of the possibilities of sport and, at most, actively encouraging the brother or sister to take up the sport.
The success of one family member can be inspirational as the examples of ABA champion Garfield McEwan, or giant field eventer Robert Weir show; the successes of the older brother bred involvements amongst younger members of the family.
In some cases, the successes of the older brother are far surpassed by the younger: Maurice Hope's entry into boxing was preceded by his little-known brother Lex's involvement.
The eldest must have got interested somehow, however, and, in many instances, the initial influence comes from teachers.
They often play a pivotal role in the transitional process of moving from casual, playful flirtation to serious, sometimes intense involvement.
With the virtual absence of parental encouragement and the rather remote, even abstract, images of successful sportsmen as guides, black kids lack any personal focus for their ambitions.
Not images, but people who can direct them or lead them, channel their energies or expand their scope are what they need.
The parameters of sporting involvement are, in the first instance, drawn by teachers.
To choose one of many examples, I can point to the case of Nottingham-born Herol Graham, whose parents came from Jamaica and gave him no support in his sporting endeavours, at first in sprinting and then in boxing where he made his mark as a light-middleweight.
In boxing, I was encouraged a lot by school teachers.
Every time I boxed, they'd say, ‘Good fight, very good.
Keep it up.’
And they presented me with a Winston Churchill half-crown for my boxing.
We used to have a showcase at school with just my boxing trophies in it.
His achievements in sport made him something of a celebrity at school and his status was in no small way boosted by the teachers' approval.
One school teacher in particular influenced the course of the life of  Kenny Mower, who participated in a number of sports, including middle distance running (at county level), cricket (for Walsall Boys), basketball (he had trials for England juniors) and table tennis (in his spare time!) before concentrating on a career in professional football (for Walsall FC).
‘The only thing that affected my sport was my teachers,’ he recalled.
‘There was one teacher, Mr Richardson, and he encouraged me in all the sports I did, really.
He pushed me along more than anybody.
Now, I'm a pro footballer, I'm grateful to him for pushing me so hard.’
A similar tale was told by quarter-miler Winston Martin, born in London of Montserrat parents; he got interested in running when ‘about 8’, and consistently won running events at primary school (in north London):
When I moved to secondary school, the PE master used to encourage me in my running and, when he saw I had some potential, he took me down the North London AC and made me a member there so I could train a couple of times a week.
Such stories about school teachers taking an interest, lending assistance, providing support and, generally, giving the black youth a shove in the direction of sport are commonplace and the parts played by teachers in the dynamics of sports involvement shine through the stories.
They are willing to contribute to and collaborate with the youths, often spending long hours coaxing and prompting.
But for all their interest and benevolence many brilliant sportsmen, black and white, would have been lost, possibly wasted in the barrenness of the mundane world; but also possibly recruited to occupational domains fertile with status and affluence.
Possibly.
So immersed are many black kids in their sport or sports, they sometimes neglect their academic work.
Sometimes, they are abetted in their negligence; but for the moment, let me abstract from the recollections of Sonia Lannaman, a sprinting prodigy from Aston, Birmingham, whose PE mistress introduced her to Solihull AC (she transferred to Wolverhampton and Bilston in 1975 to train under Charles Taylor: ‘I outgrew Solihull’).
At only 14, she had made the national junior side (in 1970) and, by 1973, she was the European junior champion, but, she reckoned, at a cost:
I suppose the fact that I'd made it at the age of 14 was important because it meant I would go a long way in athletics.
As a result, I  spent a lot of time in training — sometimes a whole afternoon — when I could have been at school.
At school-leaving age, she was training seriously at least four times a week and attributed her total lack of educational qualifications to her athletic indulgences.
To compensate, she took a secretarial course: ‘So that meant I had something to fall back on if the athletics failed.’
But only ‘if’: athletics was clearly her main source of ambition.
Sport does occupy a great chunk of the time of black schoolkids and the attention they give it is directly related to the rewards it brings.
Lannaman's exaltedness stood out against the bleak, colourless squalor of working-class Aston, cluttered with roads of derelict, condemned or should-be-condemned houses.
Like Graham, she was hoisted on a platform at her school.
The prestige and repute connected to sporting success at school made it a viable, intriguing and challenging venture for her, as it would be for many otherwise nondescript black kids already faced with the adversity of being black in what is perceived to be a  hostile environment.
But, very often, the victories on the track and pitch or in the ring are Pyrrhic: they are costly in other areas.
Sprinter Phil Brown began athletics at the instigation of two PE teachers.
After a school meeting, he was invited by Tony Hadley, a teacher and coach, to go to Birchfield Harriers where he was told: ‘You must join the club.’
In his Handsworth Comprehensive School, he was fairly consistent: ‘I was in the A-stream from the first year all the way through.’
He was 14 when he began at Birchfield and that is when his interest in athletics spiralled.
His relationships with his games teacher, a Mr Jewitt, and Hadley intensified.
He started to distinguish himself as an athlete of no mean promise and, understandably, invitations to meetings out of the area were forthcoming.
‘There were some meetings that were during the week and I enjoyed going away,’ he remembered.
‘Games teachers would say, ‘There's a meeting at such and such a place on Wednesday afternoon; would you ask your teacher if you could miss your lessons?’
And I'd get the afternoon off.
It was quite nice.’
In July 1978, his ambitions on the educational front were well stoked up and he took six CSEs.
Disappointment came with only one grade 1 pass — in PE — and he returned to school to take three GCE ‘O’ levels.
Another year passed and, though his personal best  times in sprinting improved markedly, he failed all his examinations.
He re-sat the ‘O’ levels at the next available opportunity (November 1979) and crashed once more, thus having to abandon his initial ambition of becoming a police officer.
After this, he resigned himself more or less to an athletics-oriented existence, taking up the offer of a job in a sports equipment shop, where he would be granted ample time off to compete in meetings and train regularly.
Brown was not a reluctant athlete flummoxed out of academic success by mercenary PE teachers and coaches eager to capitalize on his obvious potential.
He flung himself into athletics and, eventually became a top-flight international sprinter; which is just as well, for, had he not realized his early promise, he would have been stuck in a sports shop with no qualifications — which would not have reflected what he considered his genuine educational aptitude.
There are several illuminating aspects of the Brown experience: the early promise of educational attainment; the not unreasonable anticipation of good qualifications; the gradual intensification of involvement with sport; and, crucially, the persuasive parts played by teachers and, to a slightly lesser extent coaches, in fostering an interest in sport, which he admitted was detrimental to his education.
‘It's a case of what I know now….
If I had my life over again, I'd see the mistakes coming up and I'd correct them.’
The ‘mistakes’ of being led and compliantly drifting into sport are not unusual.
Brown's fellow Birchfield member Aston Moore, himself an international representative, who left Kingston, Jamaica, for Handsworth when aged 9, conceded: ‘Educationally, I wasn't really into it.
I wish I had been 'cause I took CSEs at school and I got sort of fairly average grades (1 in music; 2 in English; 3 in history, general science and woodwork).
Moore's start in athletics came relatively late when he was 14: ‘One of the PE teachers at school had a son at Birchfield and, after he'd seen me jumping well at school, he said, ‘Why don't you come down?’
After that, I joined.’
It was through school generally and school teachers in particular that his interest was aroused and: ‘When I was approaching the time to leave school, my interest was in athletics; I either wanted to join the army as a PE instructor or I thought about taking a course in physical education.’
The latter choice would have required two ‘A’ levels and his involvement with the Birchfield club prevented his joining the armed forces.
He opted for a job as an arc metalworker for a firm that allowed him plenty of time off for competing in  meetings and, as he was an international, he travelled overseas often.
(Interestingly, he gave up athletics for one year after leaving school — and the influence of teachers — because ‘there was no one to say, ‘go into this and I'll help you do it.’’
He resumed to find his best form: ‘I was a late developer, I guess.’)
Very few athletes enter sport without the assistance and encouragement of a teacher who might innocently create serious tensions, as with Jackie Jackson, whose PE teacher strengthened her commitment to athletics, a commitment which proved destructive to her educational aims, as she pointed out: ‘I was spending so much time in athletics that I couldn't give enough time to my ‘A’ levels.’
She was, in her terms, ‘thrown out for wasting my time’.
Footballers and boxers, too, often have their entry into the sports world aided by zealous school teachers, though, overwhelmingly, they choose to see only the formative years up to, say, the age of 13 as affected by teachers.
There is almost a tinge of predestination in footballers' reflections on how they came to sport in the first place.
Noel Blake summed up the general view: ‘I always wanted to be a footballer; there was never anything else.’
This perception in itself is, of course, sufficient to predispose youths to the influence of seniors who would seem to be able to help in the realization of the ambition.
Boxers are less susceptible because many schools do not include the sport in their curricula and, as a consequence, many kids either start independently of school or get involved shortly after leaving school.
The ambivalent attitude of schools towards boxing guarantees that many youths, even those encouraged by teachers in the sport, will have to seek access to boxing facilities elsewhere.
Birmingham City's Peter Crawford, who claimed a ‘school record’ for the number of suspensions from Mirfield Secondary School, was taken, along with other pupils, to the then Aston Manor Club (now Aston Villa ABC) by ‘a school teacher called Kane who'd boxed for Ireland at one stage’.
(Crawford's ultimate suspension from school came two weeks before he was due to take his leaving exams and he gained two CSEs by taking them in the hostel he was staying at.)
Exams?
Nothing!
The effects of the roles of teachers in precipitating an active sports interest can be, as I have pointed out, debilitating academically.
This  is not always so, but according to a great many sportsmen, their overconcentration on sport, often as a result of the encouragement of teachers, led to a neglect of academic work with the consequence that examination results failed to convey accurately what they felt to be their actual capability.
This sometimes leads to a resentment of the teachers responsible for guiding the youth into sport, particularly if it becomes obvious that the interest in the youth was purely because of his sporting success.
Herol Graham's case is a useful one to follow through for, in his fourth year at school, he realized that he had ‘left it too late’ and pinpointed one of the causes:
There was one particular teacher; if you done sports for him, that came first.
Exams?
Nothing!
You'd got to do your sport for him and, if you didn't, you'd get a bad report.
If ever he used to take us for a spare lesson, all he used to do was draw on the blackboard the scrum lineouts and things.
We should have been taking French or English, or something.
Eventually, we realized that our school work was suffering and a few of us turned him down flat when it came to the sports and he didn't like it.
He didn't speak to us after that.
If we wanted to speak to him, we'd have to go through the headmaster.
We resented that.
A disquieting parallel is found in the career of Winston Martin who reasoned:
The teachers didn't seem to care about your academic work as long as you were all right in sport.
A friend of mine [also black]used to get taken out of his lessons to compete in football.
The teacher used to come in and take him and he got fed up of it 'cause he couldn't get on with his other work.
So, eventually, the guy said: ‘No, I'm not going’ to the teacher and the teacher turned his back on him and didn't ever speak to him again.
He underwent a similar experience after a teacher had taken him to North London AC in his first year of secondary school.
When his initial interest waned, the teacher paid no more attention to him: ‘Then I realized what he was interested in me for and we ended up just walking past each other, completely ignoring each other .’
Enmity arising out of the often inordinate emphasis laid on sports by some teachers is quite commonplace amongst black kids; much less so amongst whites.
Maturity brings new perspectives and the  idea that they are often manipulated for their sporting prowess brings with it a clarity of perception, a perception succinctly summarized by Birchfield's sprinter Lincoln Asquith: ‘I was used by school teachers 'cause I was good at sport.
They used me.’
On the occasions when the realization translates into a rejection of the teacher, if not the sport, perceptions become even clearer and can become a source of new-found motivation.
Mickey Morris, having left school with a grade 1 CSE, ‘managed to scrape four ‘O’ levels at college' and then progressed admirably through the internal examination system of the Department of Health and Social Security; but not before he had come to terms with what he called ‘a home truth’.
Shortly before he was due to take mock exams, he was at a geography lesson which was interrupted by a teacher calling for his services in a football match.
He refused to co-operate and was told he was ‘letting the school down’ and given an indication that this would affect his school report, ‘and that's when I realized that I was only acknowledged for my sporting ability.’
Paul Morris, a Birchfield triple jumper, reckoned that, after he and some others at his Handsworth school dropped some sports in order to devote more time to GCE preparations, the PE teacher reacted angrily: ‘He thought we were ganging up on him as most of us were black.’
The motivation to achieve at school in the face of what are the deflecting influences of at least some school teachers in some cases takes the form of a challenge.
Derek Anderson, for example, showed considerable promise in a number of sports and was encouraged to work at them by his teachers, but, when asked whether he ever thought of making sport his eventual career, he replied:
No.
I knew I could do well academically and I did it as a challenge to the conventional idea of the black kid who's good at sports, yet with no brains.
There was one black kid in every year at my school [King Edward's, Aston]; just one in each year.
But, on prize-giving for sports day, they were always there.
I wanted to prove that I wasn't just good at sports.
The remarkable Anderson, in addition to playing rugby and cricket at area and county junior levels, competing as a decathlete for Birchfield and qualifying to coach nine sporting events, gained an impressive tally of educational qualifications culminating in a Master's degree from the University of Leicester.
He is, of course, exceptional, but his sharp perception of the way in which teachers orient their expectations of black kids and his response to that perception was by no means out of the ordinary.
It would be ridiculous to suggest that black kids who are constantly being geared up by teachers to thrust themselves into sports, do not, at some stage, recognize that there exists a manipulative element: they feel they are regarded as naturally gifted sportsmen (see Vince Hilaire's opening quotation), but without an abundance of intellectual equipment, who are used for the purposes of bringing prestige to both the individual teacher and the school.
Winston McLeod, who played soccer for his school, district, London, Middlesex and West Ham United before a strangulated hernia sustained in a tackle in 1972 effectively finished his football career, reflected on his and other blacks' experiences with teachers:
Teachers definitely think of you as a good athlete if you're black.
They seem to have this idea about natural talent and any kid who shows the slightest promise is put into sport and made to concentrate on that.
It's as if they're expecting you to fail academically; and, if the teacher expects you to fail, then you begin to believe it yourself and you do.
This, he believed, to be one of the important reasons why black kids are continually underqualified:
You get the impression that teachers do have stereotypes about black kids, about them not being too bright at academic subjects but good at sports.
All the black kids at my school were winners at sport, but not in education.
Like some other promising sportsmen who believe their intellectual powers were not sufficiently energized at school, he went to college, abandoned his sports career and became a solicitor's accountant.
Continental footballer, Sydney Grant, who was born in Jamaica, but spent the majority of his school years in Leeds, concurred, but with a political proviso: ‘Teachers do have these kinds of stereotyped ideas about blacks being good in sports but not intellectually,’ he agreed.
But, I don't accuse them.
They probably don't realize they're doing it.
It's because they're caught up in a system which keeps blacks in positions where they have to play only secondary roles to whites.
It would be unfair to suggest that teachers, consciously or unconsciously, use serviceable but pejorative, inflexible impressions, or stereotypes, about black youth.
And it would be outrageous to impute motives for such  stereotyping .
But black kids do both and it is both their perceptions and experiences which have crucial effects on their overall career developments.
Many black kids who are now involved in sport have, in some way, experienced the encouragement of teachers in getting into sport.
Maybe it was not direct aid and did not have a serious effect, but it seems difficult to imagine any sportsman, black or white, entering sport entirely unassisted.
Even Daley Thompson, who insisted he had very little interference from teachers, said they helped him in a non-involved way: ‘They were all right; they left me alone and let me get on with what suited me.
I did the minimum of work academically and got on with my sport — at first soccer — and they never bothered me.’
The ‘minimum’ yielded nine ‘O’levels and two ‘A's.
With only circumstantial variation, the theme about teachers guiding youths into sport and nourishing interests recurs.
Black kids enter sport usually from school and so the senior figures in this scene play vital parts.
The school is the springboard for sport and, even if commitments are made in later years, early involvement and subsequent progress are important in launching an interest.
One might suppose in reading this chapter that teachers have a lot to answer for; after all, they are the ones who are responsible for accentuating sport by turning a vague, ill-formed image into a seemingly realistic pursuit for sporting excellence.
Black kids who, in retrospect, would blame their lack of success at school on their over-indulgence in sport would point fingers of accusation at the people who encouraged them and helped sustain an interest which was later to prove nullifying in its effects.
But this would be to simplify things for, as I have argued, black kids generally come from the kind of family backgrounds which are not suited for their own educational needs — for reasons which I spelled out in the last chapter, but will summarize as ‘neglect’ or ‘unattainable goals’.
Consequently, black youths in many instances are not keen on formal education in any case.
Mike MacFarlane, the international sprinter from Haringey, looked back on his school years in Hackney: ‘In those days, living was more important than education.’
He got three CSEs before going to college full-time.
Garth Crooks, in a similar way, admitted that he needed no prompting to play competitive soccer four or five times a week when aged 14 and 15.
Along with other footballers, as I mentioned earlier, he felt a kind of mild predestination, believing himself to be a footballer even while at school; though one wonders how many others who thought themselves predestined are now in factories or on milk rounds.
It would be misleading to profile school teachers as only seeking to maximize their own prestige by cultivating exaggerated interests in sport among black schoolkids and thus jeopardizing their chances academically.
Black kids are psyched up for sport anyway.
The other factors account for that: home life, perception of limited opportunities, images of black successes.
But the push of teachers is an intervening force which may take the black youth from the realms of inflated ambitions and outlandish dreams of becoming a world champion, winning an Olympic medal or holding aloft the FA Cup to the sometimes arduous and frequently unrewarding world of practical ambition, gritty perseverance and strengthening resolve.
The teacher supplying the push may be helping to launch the career of a future gold medallist; but equally he may be setting a youth off down a path to nowhere.
But, again, I simplify: the process is two-way and black kids contribute to their own general lack of success at school by manifesting little desire to learn conventional subjects.
Over the past chapters, I have sought to show how the combination of broken homes, disturbed domestic backgrounds and lack of a full understanding of the needs and implications of formal education create a family environment unsuited to the requirements of black youth in British education.
As Winston McLeod expressed it: ‘Black kids have special problems,’ referring precisely to these factors.
These allied to an apprehension of the uselessness of qualifications anyway — blackness being seen as the immovable obstacle to career progress — produce a situation in which black kids are receptive to alternatives, to different life plans.
Enter the teacher: he supplies the means through which black kids can elevate themselves, become fêted at school and, most importantly, achieve.
The cost of sporting involvement may not, in most cases is not, realized during early phases, but, on reflection, many black sportsmen believe their academic results are badly affected by an overconcentration on sport.
Yet, a large number go on and eventually do  reasonably well academically, the implication being that sporting involvement may not be so detrimental to education as it might appear.
A volte-face?
No, I believe the two sets of findings are reconcilable.
Black youths may feel that their participation in sport has a negative effect on their other school pursuits and it may; but this does not mean that their academic lives are burnt out by the fires of sporting commitment.
Sport;, I will argue, can have a most stimulating, uplifting impact on the participant and instil in him a fresh thirst for achievement in sporting and other circles.
Even if, to the youth, ‘living was more important than education’, engaging in competitive sport can bring home the new realization that achieving results in education can be important to living.
Sport is a positive, exhilarating force in the lives of those whose attentions and commitments it commands; but the complexity of the force is sometimes lost on its practitioners and observers.
In the next chapter, I will attempt to sort out the way in which it feeds back positively into education.