

WELSH JENKINS
‘Pwy sy'n fel ni ?’ his father would ask as he squatted outside the Miner's Arms on a summer's evening, nicely, melancholy, drunk.
‘Neb ,’ replied his friends, miners all, like him.
‘Pwy sy'n fel fi?’
‘Neb.’
‘Who is like us?’
‘Nobody.’
‘Who is like me?’
‘Nobody.’
There was nobody like Richard Walter Jenkins.
Not to his eleven children.
Not to his neighbours.
Not to his mates.
Dic, he was called, or Dic Bach y Saer —‘Little Dick the Carpenter’— after his grandfather who made pit-props: ‘Daddy Ni’—‘our Daddy’— to his sons and daughters.
Five feet three, immensely strong —‘could pick up a thirteen-stone man by the seat of his pants’— a craftsman collier —‘he would look at the seam of coal…take a Number Two mandrel [a half-headed pick]and if he hit it just right, something like twenty tons of coal would fall out of the coal face’— and a man with a ‘love of words, the longer the better’.
‘He looked very much like me,’ claimed his most famous son, also named Richard Walter Jenkins, later to be known as Richard Burton.
‘That is, he was pockmarked, devious and smiled a great deal when he was in trouble.’
Most  others insist that the young Richard got his looks from his mother, Edith, a fair-haired girl, taller by far than Dic, a sweet beauty, ‘a very strong woman’, to whom her husband was absolutely faithful and utterly irresponsible: as he was to all his family.
For there was nobody like Daddy Ni as a drinker, heroic, a ‘twelve pints a day man’, often away for nights on end —‘met a friend’— incapable of passing a pub, and a gambler too —‘the dogs’— leaving wife and children short and maybe desperate when times were hard enough already.
Yet his charm always took the curse off it.
‘No nastiness in him.’
However much the family sat and planned and prepared to scold him after a frightening bender, he would soon have them all melted with his gypsy stories.
Snared rabbits: slept in a chicken coop: down in the underworld of docks.
They protected him.
Dic Bach y Saer was put to bed by the older children he so serenely neglected, whispering, ‘I've got children in a thousand, good as gold.’
‘And the whole family, all of them,’ says a neighbour, ‘were lovely, so pleasant, quite outstanding.’
The Jenkins family was one of the clans of Wales.
‘Nobody like us’— he meant the Welsh.
In their grander moments the Welsh would claim most ancient associations — the luminous legendary King Arthur — and boast they had supplied England with its greatest monarchs — out of Owen Tudor — Henry VII, Henry VIII, Elizabeth I. ‘They are an alien race,’ wrote Burton, ‘and nobody knows where they came from or what they are.’
The lost tribe of Israel?
Carthaginians blown north by the Gulf Stream?
Celts, certainly, who had shrugged off the occupation of the Romans.
Or did they come straight down from antique gods?
They needed myths.
For the twentieth-century facts were that they were a small, oppressed, poor and exploited people, in thrall to the then all-mighty English, and their sole singularity was the Welsh language and only a quarter of them spoke that.
Dic's family was of that portion.
In the language they aggrandised their past, they made their history legend, they  cherished themselves — as minorities always have done: the Jews, the American blacks, the Basques, the Sikhs — and looked out for Redeemers, Messiahs or, in the case of the Welsh, Heroes.
Richard Burton, Actor, was and is now a Welsh Hero.
‘There are so few of us,’ he wrote, ‘and God knows we can't afford to give many of us away.’
He was never to give Wales away.
Outside the family, being Welsh was the greatest blessing he had and he held to it.
It was to him first and last a land full of Heroes.
Grim glory, matchless strength, and the wit to confuse, the charms to transform any invader.
Heroes all.
Down the pit, on the rugby football field, in the pub, telling stories, singing anthems as if they were war songs, and finding poetry — Dylan Thomas, Gwyn Thomas, R. S. Thomas — in the country of the Red Dragon.
Every Sunday of his childhood he was at chapel hearing the Bible in Welsh and singing in that intricate melodious tongue.
From the age of awareness he looked out over his Welsh battlements at a foreign culture, for English and the monied English siege were all about him.
He was born a blood member of what then seemed a condemned and irrelevant tribe: he never forgot that.
Revenge and restoration were part of his duty.
as if , in part , to fight back at their crushing fate, the Welsh families in those industrial valleys bred and grew and savoured their own with biblical fruitfulness and devotion.
Dic Jenkins and Edith married on Christmas Eve in 1900, had thirteen children in twenty-six years.
Thomas Henry in 19O1, Cecilia in 1905, Ifor in 1906, two girls — both Margaret Hannah, both died in infancy — William in 1911, David in 1914, Verdun in 1916, Hilda in 1918, Catherine in 1921, Edith in 1922, Richard Walter in 1925, Graham in 1927.
It was a small army as much as a large family.
Edith Thomas was married at seventeen: she had been working as a barmaid at the Miner's Arms and she was married from there.
Her parents disapproved of the match to the twenty-four-year-old miner.
The Jenkinses were supposed to be beneath the Thomases.
Yet both were  the first in either family to sign the marriage register with more than a cross.
Both families had been transformed from what might be called a lumpen peasantry into what Marx did call the lumpen proletariat.
The individuality and richness of their lives — given a glance of a chance — mocked such lumpen labels.
Just as the young Richard — the name means Rule-Hard — saw the Man as Hero in struggle and song, so the child's eye view saw the Woman as Noble, Wonderful and infinitely Capable.
Edith fitted that.
She provided full meals and basic decency for her many children.
She made the clothes, baked, cooked, brewed beer and sold it, made butter and sold it, decorated others' houses, took in others' washing and brought up her remarkable family with little help from her husband, often penniless a few hours after getting his wage packet, a greater child, perhaps, than any of her own.
Richard, as a baby, would never let her out of his sight, cried if she left him.
The men were granite figures, fearless in the primitive and dangerous under-earth world of coal: the women were half way to heaven — and in command.
And all of this world woven into the Welshness because only Welsh men were so hard; only Welsh women so beautiful.
And only the Welsh had such stories.
Nobody like them.
The Jenkins family had their own stories.
Stories which Richard Burton brought out again and again because he was proud to celebrate his past and would not let any bounty or glamour of the present put it in the shade.
And the greater the gap between his colossal global success and the terraced cottages of South Wales, the more determined he was to employ the grappling irons of loyalty and haul his past alongside.
This was where he came from — not in any self-pity —(although there could have been an excuse for that, in the bitter harvest of the coalfields)— nor with any attempt to show off (although the battles he had fought and won to achieve what he did deserved a boast)— those stories were told and retold to keep the faith.
In 1970, being interviewed, with Elizabeth Taylor, by David Frost:
Occasionally my father would take off on what is known as a bat.
I have sufficient intellectual control so that my bats only last about three days — his would last sometimes as long as three weeks.
He took off one Friday, disappeared.
We waited for him all Saturday.
We were very poor.
It was during the Depression, round about 1930, I should think.
And one of the great things Welsh miners have and had is greyhound racing.
The old man didn't turn up for a week, and then two weeks and then three weeks and everybody was fairly in despair.
After all there were, in those days, eleven children.
And suddenly the kitchen door — we all lived in the kitchen — burst open, and standing there was my father with the most effulgent smile on his face.
He stared with his stupendously stoned eyes at the assembled and stricken family.
He had a piece of orange rope: this was the lead for a dog which was a greyhound, which was at least twenty-four years old.
It had no teeth.
And, as one of my brothers said, if you took it for a walk it panted.
He looked at his stricken family and he patted this mangy dog very fondly on the back and said: ‘Boys, our troubles are over!’
Other stories about Dic, Little Dick the Carpenter — how he never got to a rugby match because there were too many pubs on the way, how he was burnt all over in a pit explosion, wrapped in bandages so that only his eyes and nostrils showed through — and bathed slowly back to health by his daughters who poured olive oil over him all the time, how he took his daughter Cecilia (Cis) to eisteddfods because he loved to hear her sing but how she pleaded with him ‘not to stop anywhere and not to leave her in the hall’.
And how he could work up to his thighs in water in a two-foot seam of coal.
The Miner's Arms was the campfire for story-telling: and often the setting.
Richard's grandfather, Tom, who had been crippled in the mines and had a wheelchair, had a  great win on a horse called Black Sambo.
Into the Miner's Arms — drinks all round — and again — and again.
Out, drunk, hoisted into the wheelchair, downhill all the way home, whipping the air and calling out ‘Come on Black Sambo!’, out of control, crashed into a wall: killed instantly.
Always told as a comic story.
The tragic stories — the quiet or violent deaths of the unrecorded poor — were rarely told.
But the place was a battlefield.
Crippled men; worn-out women; tuberculosis in the walls; pneumoconiosis in the lungs; malnutrition, despair, unnecessary death.
One sure and certain way to combat all that was money.
The man who at one stage was thought to be among the top half dozen money earners in the world was born on November 10th, 1925 at 2 Dan-y-Bont, Pontrhydyfen.
His father was forty-nine, his mother forty-two and he weighed twelve pounds — remarkable for that time and place.
Two years later, after the birth of another child, the mother died ‘of puerperal fever’ her son was to say, grimly, ‘which is hygiene neglect’.
Money and the knowledge money can buy would have saved her.
Pontrhydyfen —‘pont’, a bridge; ‘rhyd’, a ford; ‘fen’, a cart — is high in the valley of the River Afan.
Its gentle green bosomy hills were obliterated in the mid-nineteenth century by pit-heads, ironworks and regiments of cheap terraced housing.
The countryside lapped the grimy shore of the town and Richard's father and some of his family had that  Lawrentian link of black industry and green pasture.
Not so Richard.
Wales to him — physical Wales — was the catacombs of coal, the engines and architecture of massive wealth creation, rain-soaked narrow streets, hillsides leaking black, and occasionally a soaring aqueduct such as that in Pontrhydyfen under which still stands the house in which he was born.
They've tried to put a plaque there but it gets stolen.
The place , then, a most unlikely nursery for one who was to play Hamlet at the Old Vic, Arthur in Camelot , both of them a record number of times on Broadway, a man who  was to understand claret and enjoy meetings of several kinds with several princesses.
The time even less welcoming.
He was born heir to the betrayed promise of the Great War, after which another Welshman had assured the returning British soldier of a ‘home fit for heroes to live in’.
Instead, South Wales, like the other furnaces and engine rooms of Britain, was being hammered by a gathering Depression.
In 1926 would be the General Strike when Welsh miners marched the two hundred miles to London, their trail easy to follow by the black-blood spat along the road, while back at home the troops moved in for fear of revolution.
How far such seismic social pressures come through to a child may be impossible to judge.
But the Jenkins family, part of the great mass, were trapped in the middle of it.
Burton's occasional flarings of radicalism, which persisted undiminished throughout his increasingly affluent career, were as tap-rooted in Pontrhydyfen as his love of the subversive language spoken there.
The death of the mother was the test of the family.
Dic, Our Daddy, walked away from it and ended up moving between his daughters —‘You never noticed him if he didn't speak’— putting a shilling on the horses, reading anything that came to hand, off on his benders, neglecting all his children and loved and welcomed by all his daughters, a kind of successful King Lear of the Welsh coalfields.
Fifty years later, a friend of all the children and a neighbour throughout the years still recalls with awe the way they behaved.
‘They were just marvellous,’ she says.
‘Marvellous how well they did it.
The boys went their own way.
The girls brought themselves up.
The little ones were farmed out.
Nothing was lacking.
They were very strong, you see, the Jenkins in Pontrhydyfen.
They kept the chapel going and they cleaned it as well.
They were all very funny, they could all perform, you know, do a turn.
Quite unselfconscious.
Quite outstanding,’ she said, as she had said before.
All Dic's ‘golden children’ stayed true through their great loss.
If parents are your primary role models, then Richard  Jenkins was formed by an alcoholic father and a beloved mother who died and left him when he was two.
They say that in such a case you search for your mother for the rest of your life.
Oddly, though he could never bear to be out of her sight and cried whenever she left him, as soon as his eldest sister, the faithful Cis, got him to her own home he ceased to cry.
To his great sorrow he could never recall his mother.
You can measure the greatness of a life by the length and quality of the journey taken.
The journey Jenkins-Burton took was epic.
The odds against him were all but unimaginable.
How many millions similar to him have given up the ghost of ambition or had it driven out of them?
If you are moulded by a place then for him that place was a bleak black valley in Welsh-speaking South Wales, the trenches of the industrial battleground.
He never lost the pride and pleasure in the tales of his deep, working, glittering-tongued Welsh past.
It was wonderful to him.
It is still wonderful — both how far he moved from it and how he never abandoned it at all.
Richard Walter Jenkins Junior was to dine with the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, yet keep the common touch, be courted by Presidents and praised by the greatest Prime Minister of the century.
He was to be hugely admired on the classical stage by Sir Laurence Olivier, John Neville, Sir John Gielgud and Sir Peter Hall, loved on film by Humphrey Bogart, Clint Eastwood, John Huston, Mike Nichols.
He would outbid Aristotle Onassis for a jewel and marry the highest-paid film star in the world, twice.
He was a famous lover and notorious drinker on several continents.
He was driven by a devil that he never knew but he never stopped fighting, a maker of his own myths, Celtic, Faustian, an Icarus and a Don Juan, coming out from his beloved Wales like a mystical warrior to rove the world for conquests, forever unsettled, forever daring.
But his first recorded journey, crying all the way, aged two, was with his sister Cecilia, on a bus, poor as mice, travelling the four miles from the Welsh heartland of  Pontrhydyfen, with its magical stories, its heroes, its dragons, to Port Talbot, tough steel town, English-speaking, grind and grime.
He stopped crying when they arrived at the house.
Cis's touch.
Nobody like her either.
Neb .
‘A BELL IN EVERY TOOTH’
Richard, or ‘Rich’ as he was called, went to live with Cis in 1927.
He stayed for fifteen years.
He would be grateful and loving to her throughout his life.
In 1965 he published A Christmas Story and wrote:
My sister was no ordinary woman — no woman ever is, but to me, my sister less than any.
When my mother had died she, my sister, had become my mother, and more mother to me than any mother could ever have been.
I was immensely proud of her.
I shone in the reflection of her green-eyed, black-haired, gypsy beauty.
She sang at her work in a voice so pure that the local men said she had a bell in every tooth, and was gifted by God…
She was innocent and guileless and infinitely protectable…
She felt all tragedies except her own.
Later in that passage he wrote: ‘It wasn't until thirty years later when I saw her in another woman [Elizabeth Taylor]that I realised I had been searching for her all my life.’
When you meet Cis now, you can still see her clearly in that eulogy.
‘The thing about Rich,’ she said, the face still lovely, the voice still pure, ‘is I couldn't help myself.
I loved my husband.
And he was a fine man, a good man.
But if it came to an argument — well, I looked at Rich and I couldn't help myself.
There it is.
Nobody knows how much I cried over him.’
‘Cis was so busy,’ said a neighbour, ‘she didn't have time to cough.
There were so many of them.’
She and her husband Elfed James, a miner, after renting a couple of rooms, soon ended up at 73 Caradoc Street, the top end, the scullery butting against a mountain leaking coal juice known as ‘the Side’.
The Side, an unlovely, but beloved spot was where the miners met to squat and smoke and gossip: Burton recollected it warmly as a fraternal masculine club, much cherished.
You had to cherish what was in front of you in Port Talbot, with one of the biggest steel works in Europe belching out smoke and the wind crossing Swansea Bay to bring the remorseless rain.
Taibach, where Cis and Elfed lived, was largely a cluster of small cheap terraced cottages since demolished and unmourned.
The great task, for someone such as Cis, was to make of her own house — a three-bedroom semi-detached in which they were the first occupiers — a place of comfort and gleaming triumph against the odds.
They were high.
She had a ‘very plump’ and soon exceedingly dependent and vigorous two-year-old boy.
Back in Pontrhydyfen she had brothers and sisters she saw it her duty to cook and wash for.
There was Daddy Ni.
The chapel.
Little money.
And Elfed, her new husband, married only a few months and heir to a clan of claimants.
Cis lives now with her two daughters Marian (three years younger than Richard) and Rhianon (six years younger).
Their draughts of memory were clear and generous but the daughters — in truth Richard's nieces but brought up as his sisters — thought there were points with which they did not wish to embarrass their mother and after our talks Rhianon wrote:
It is a pity but my father, Elfed, has been given very little credit in articles and books.
He was a good father, strict at times but also a bit of a softie.
He did have a very hard time which we, as children, could not understand…they took care of Richard as you know but my mother also had to look after the children left in 2 Dan-y-bont, Pontrhydyfen, travelling there at least twice a week on two separate buses with Richard, a two-year-old, in tow.
Many times after cooking and cleaning there, she would have to bring suitcases of washing back to our house in Taibach to get it ready for the next visit.
With all the work she had to do my mother could not do a sloppy job.
Everything in our house was spotlessly clean.
Her brothers' shirts and collars were always starched and ironed to perfection.
I am told that she always looked attractive and very well turned out even at this particular time…
My father had a very hard tough job underground, earning a small wage.
He was probably very frustrated too as his bride, who had little time to be with him, was struggling to keep two homes running.
She was exhausted with work and grief over her mother's early death, a mother she loved very much.
There were financial problems too.
My father could read sol-fa and old notation as could most people in our chapel.
He was conductor in Noddfa Chapel, Taibach, which we all attended.
He had a good tenor voice and he belonged to a male voice glee party.
He was also on the committee of the Taibach Co-operative Society and the local hospital.
He had a sense of humour.
He encouraged the three of us to recite, and sing and play the harmonium.
He was firm with the three of us, but Richard seemed to get into trouble being a strong minded boy and rugby mad.
‘Trouble’ being dirtying or tearing his best clothes, or kicking the soles off his school shoes in the field on the way home.
Whenever my father reprimanded Richard, my mother would defend him there and then, right or wrong.
This must have infuriated my father and undermined his authority.
He never used physical violence on us…
My mother has said many times in our adult life that although she loved our father and should have stood by him, as far as Richard was concerned, ‘she could not help herself’.
That last phrase occurred time and again.
Burton himself often used it of her, proudly.
He had a tendency, even a  compulsion to repeat short phrases which seemed particularly apt: to hammer at them as if something was being shaped on an anvil, or as if each phrase was a key which unlocked whole galleries of memory.
Cis's helpless adoration of her child-brother was fully returned.
There were several who thought that Rich was too much of a burden to expect Elfed to bear.
And the older Richard got, the greater the adolescent turbulence, the fiercer the rebellion, the more he clashed with Elfed and the more he provoked Cis's displays of loyalty.
The cross-complications were dangerous and Elfed's part has suffered.
Rhianon's account, I think, is wholly convincing.
Decent and teetotal, Elfed has been underestimated unjustly and sometimes, in comparisons, by Richard himself.
Partly because he had to take the daily grind and brunt of this hugely assured and powerful boy's pains of growth.
Partly, more simply, more painfully, because he was not a Jenkins.
Not a faded but once, surely, glorious hero like Daddy Ni to whom Elfed would give his best chair in the house: nor Ifor, the new male fixed point in young Rich's universe.
Ifor was the third child, born in 1906, and nineteen years Richard's senior.
When he was a child Ifor became Rich's North Star.
Ifor was a great coal hewer.
A rugby football hero.
The Rock of Jenkins.
Ifor stayed in the family stronghold in Pontrhydyfen.
Ifor was loved and revered by the small brother whom he in turn saw as the family's great hope of true escape, a conqueror, the one who would show them.
Their deep friendship would be lifelong.
So many talked with warmth and unchallengeable admiration about Ifor: Lauren Bacall in Los Angeles, Brook Williams in Switzerland, Emlyn Williams in London, John Neville in Stratford, Ontario, Kate Burton in New York, Robert Hardy in London —‘Ifor,’ they said, ‘Ifor was marvellous.’
It is worth mentioning the spread of opinion — and it would be easy to enlarge it — because his was that rare character which stamped itself effortlessly and in the same way on every sort of company.
And worth spreading  it out geographically too: Ifor was to travel the world with Richard.
To Rich, from earliest childhood, as Cis was ‘more mother to me than any mother could ever have been’ so Ifor was the chieftain brother, indomitable protector in the rough and wreckage of those valleys.
A friend of many years' standing has said that, ‘Ifor would have loved to have stayed on at school.
He was good at school.
But he had to leave when he was thirteen.
He had to go down the mines and he stuck it out.
He was in the strikes of 1921 and 1926 when they were all unemployed.
He left the mines eventually and got a job with a builder — he could turn his hand to anything — one of those men, you know, plumbing, anything.
He learnt how to take a car to pieces.
Always punctual.
Never wasted time.
He was a very very strict person, Ifor.
Very fit.
They were all a bit afraid of what Ifor would say if they did wrong.
When he came back in a temper sometimes, or been drinking, Cis told me they would put Rich on the kitchen table and tell him to dance.
That always made Ifor laugh.
He was very fond of poetry — he could read it as good as Rich and maybe better.
They would have whole nights just reading poetry.
He had a lovely voice.
And he was in the rugby football team — Rich was proud as proud.
Rich was crazy about football.
He idolised Ifor.
He had a bad back as well, you know, just like Rich.
He injured it in the Normandy landings.
Those Jenkins boys all had trouble with their bones.’
These three were the major domestic figures in the dominating childhood of Rich Jenkins.
Cis, who ‘could not help herself’ and was then and forever his perfect woman.
Elfed, a sober and upright man who was to become unfairly the sounding board for Richard's first rebellions.
Ifor, straight from the Welsh mists of mythology, a hero in poetry and war, and everything his father failed to be.
Cis was also his first conquest.
Elfed his rival in love.
Ifor the idol he would one day have to dislodge.
Work was all about those three, the exhaustion and boredom of work, the fear of losing it, the meagreness of its rewards.
But so was joy — in song, sport, and the infinite fictions of the family and neighbours.
Money was the key not to happiness — they were too fine for that — but unashamedly the answer to material necessity.
Chapel filled the spirit but not the belly.
To a romantic affectionate boy such as Rich, watching the wear of work, sensing the tensions of poverty, longing for everything to be given to those who cared for him so much, money could seem the sole solution, the salvation.
He began to make himself a few pence early on — running messages, collecting newspapers for the chip shops and horse dung for fertiliser, finding the pay-penny cracks in life on the narrow streets.
Picked up expensive habits, too.
Started to smoke at eight.
Outside that powerful triangle was a constant swish of family, extended family, neighbours, friends, gangs, dubs.
As a man he became a compulsive house buyer.
As a child, he shuttled between two houses — Port Talbot and, most weekends, back to Pontrhydyfen.
Shared beds.
‘Here's our real little Welshman,’ Daddy Ni would say.
The boy would reply in the language of the country, ‘I am glad to be in your house, Daddy Ni.’
There were all the other brothers and sisters, Edith who was good at arithmetic and sorted things out for all and sundry, David who was to become a police inspector, Hilda and Cassie who delighted in their roguish little brother — threepence here, sixpence there.
They were a remarkable family.
Verdun was to lose half a foot in the pits and use the £300 compensation to buy an upright piano (although he could not play it).
‘This caused great excitement,’ said Cis.
He made Rich a boneshaker which thundered down Caradoc Street.
Noddfa Chapel in Taibach.
Three times on Sundays.
Children not much younger than Rich arriving to be his nephews, nieces, playmates.
There was a cousin Dilwyn from whom he became inseparable (they even shared a pair of roller skates) and to whom he gave the greatest tribute of affection by constantly getting him into trouble.
Various aunts of terrible aspect who would threaten and alarm — tales of scorching with a flat iron for minor mischiefs — and kind uncles who would be a sure bet for a sweet or a copper  or two.
Di Doodle Alley Tap whom the war had made wrong in the head, Tom Franas who kept pigs, lived rough, smoked a cabbage pipe with them.
The boy lived on a roundabout of encircling affections, complex loyalties, quick on the emotional draw, switching from role to role as bolder boys scramble from horse to horse on a carousel: and always, it seemed, outside the house of Elfed, Richard was the bringer of good fortune.
‘Rich was the only one who could get round her ,’ Rhianon said of a particularly fierce aunt.
‘He would stand there, with his Just William cap on and sing — no movements, just natural, and it made you forget the world.’
As he was, in part, to become a ‘man's man’ so he was a boy's boy.
Nobody I have talked to thought he had any ‘side’, or curried any favours.
And although he himself often said he was ‘spoilt’, ‘a little lord’, nobody else accused him of that.
He was was bent in fact on what there was to be done in the village and in the town: didn't stop to cough.
Totally absorbed in the wild delights of the streets, the railway lines, the alleys, the adult, seductive adventure playgrounds of an industrial landscape.
He soaked up the action and tone of what was, looking on it now, and especially given the circumstances, a remarkably fertile culture.
Provided you were not ground down by illness or poverty.
The Jenkinses were not poor.
You would have been a brave man to accuse them of it.
They were respectable, in their own arena of life, as respectable as any and more than most.
Never to be pitied.
But the pressure of surrounding poverty and the fear of it were as inescapable as a shadow.
And there had been very hard times indeed when Daddy Ni was drunk and away for days on end and no one else in the family was earning: except the mother slaving in beatified drudgery.
Richard's brothers and sisters would certainly have passed on tales of quiet desperation: but by the time he was seven or eight, things were easier.
His five older brothers were in work; so, intermittently, was his father; so was Elfed.
The boy found himself in a peculiar position.
The immediate past and the constant threat was poverty.
Not quite the poverty of no shoes, of basic and meagre food, no possessions other than the most rudimentary necessities — but too near that for comfort and he knew plenty who were in that condition.
Poverty was always out there ready to get you.
And yet, as a partial recovery took place in the 1930s and the Jenkins clan bit the bone that was thrown at them, the small boy's world became a wonderland of gifts, large and small, of treats, tips, goodies.
This can be seen quite clearly by looking at a passage in the autobiographical A Christmas Story , and comparing it with an unpublished hand-scrawled manuscript I found in his papers.
In A Christmas Story he writes, wondering about the present he might get:
Pray God it wasn't Tommy Elliot's farm, which I'd played with for two years and which I feared — from glances and whispers that I'd caught between my sister and Mrs Elliot — was going to be cleaned up and bought for me for Christmas.
It would be shameful to have a secondhand present.
Everyone would know.
That had indeed happened to him once: when very young.
In the unpublished manuscript — a cluster of unorganised memories about Christmas (and, incidentally, like most of his private jottings, more vivid than anything he published)— he describes what became more and more the norm.
Then, in bed, fighting to sleep and to forget the miracle of the morning to come.
Saying, if I get a farm with cows and sheep and a five-bar gate and chickens and a coop and a metal stream and a few trees about the place and a green field made of billiard cloth and a dog or two and a cat — never mind the cat — and perhaps a fox on a hill…if I get this, with a pair of ball-bearing roller skates so that I can gleam and flash and go backwards through the heavy Friday traffic and be as glamorous as Boy Davids from the Park…
If I get those things and  a book or two — I will go to Wednesday night chapel for a whole year.
And I got them and I did!
It got even better.
One year I topped everybody.
My brother Ifor gave me a beautiful bicycle — hub-braked and dynamoed, a thing of beauty and a joy for a couple or three years.
I have never ceased to be proud of that winged machine.
I allowed everybody to ride it.
I went to Swansea on it and Newport.
I cycled on it to Aberdare and Mountain Ash.
It was typical of him that he ‘allowed everybody to ride it’.
From the beginning, all the recollections and anecdotes speak of his open-handedness.
Just as he had no ‘side’ so he seemed to have no possessiveness.
Possessions — yes — he had those and he loved them.
But it was always easy come, easy go: easy-going in many ways, it seems — a characteristic which developed into that ‘repose’ and ‘utter confidence in himself’that so many actors and writers remarked on.
‘There was never anything nasty about him,’ said Cis's daughter Marian, who was his niece but, she said, ‘felt like his sister’.
With Rhianon she made up his first fan-club: but even so— as with all the others I talked to who came from Richard's past — there was no ‘soft soap’: sadness because he was gone — much of that — but no false sentiment.
‘I used to have a terribly runny nose,’ said Marian, ‘and I was that much younger than him and he would be landed with me by Mam.
‘Take Marian to the park, Rich,’ she would say and he would grumble but off he'd go.
And then he'd meet the boys and want to play football — he was mad about rugby football, he would play with a tin can if there was nothing else.
And I would be standing there with my runny nose.
So he'd make an effort and play a game.
And then he'd suggest hide-and-seek.
I was to do the counting — up to a hundred (I couldn't count up to a hundred, I had to do it in tens) and when I opened my eyes he'd have disappeared.
Gone to play football in another part of the  park.
But I could always find him.
Even in the streets I could always find him.
And he was never nasty.
He'd just say —‘oh, here she is!’ and take me in.’
‘He used to help us with our homework,’ said Rhianon.
‘He was very quick.
He would say to us —‘I've told you once !’'
There are plenty of stories of his singing.
Very few about his acting until his adolescence.
‘The first time I remember was at home,’ said Marian.
‘Mam had asked him to look after us and there were just the three children in the house.
He told us to sit by the fire.
Then he went out and came back with his eyes all black and slitted, his face streaked with soot, a blanket around him and he shouted, ‘I am Charlie Chan!’ and pulled out the carving knife.
We were nearly hysterical.
He got very worried, had to calm us down before Cis came back.’
The acting he saw as a boy was at the local cinema, popularly known as the ‘Cach’— the ‘Shithouse’.
Cis did her best to call it correctly the Picturedrome, but alas…
From seven or eight onwards he would go with his cousin Dilwyn, spend some of his hard-earned money on a packet of five Woodbines, and hope for action.
Cowboy films were the favourite: love stories despised.
‘Bloody love,’ he would say in disgust when asked why he had not enjoyed the film.
‘Bloody love.’
Burton never — to my knowledge — spoke of the early mass of films he had seen with any of that significant affection other actors give to their earliest influences.
I suspect his own life was more than a match for the movies, although he did like to imitate Hopalong Cassidy.
The camera does not seem to have made the take-over bid for his active imagination that other people record.
But the celluloid dreams filtered through.
Like the politics of the miners which seamed through the talk of his brothers, never as vivid as the ‘stories’ but always there, those early films provided him with examples of acting which he must have absorbed willy-nilly.
When he needed a political opinion he never had to reach far for it — there it was in that treasure trove of a Welsh childhood.
So  perhaps when he needed to fly by instinct in deciding the course of his career, there was the Cach, the action, the absorbed attention of everybody he knew and the glamour of illicit cigarette smoke uncoiling in the beam of the projector.
Sport was his passion.
Girls were all right and, Marian says, he ‘always had a fan-club.
True, you know.
From about twelve, I would say, there would be girls around the house and crying and Cis would say, ‘I've had Phyllis here and you promised to meet her.’
'Sorry, Cis — been playing football.’'
Cricket was greatly loved — and he became captain of cricket; Ifor taught him tennis; at table tennis he had been well coached — locally, of course— and could be fanatical.
But football — Welsh rugby football — the amateur game that put fifteen men in red jerseys to take on England most especially at Cardiff Arms Park and beat the hell out of them !— football was his passion.
‘I would rather have played for Wales at Cardiff Arms Park than Hamlet at the Old Vic,’ he said later.
He just might have done.
As a schoolboy it was thought he would have been in line for an International cap had the war not prevented all that.
In the RAF he played for a representative Welsh side with a famous senior International, Bleddyn Williams.
On page 37 of his volume of reminiscences [Burton was to write in an article on rugby], Mr Williams is kind enough to suggest that I had distinct possibilities as a player were it not for the lure of tinsel and paint and money and fame and so on.
Incidentally, one of the curious phenomena of my library is that when you take out Bleddyn's autobiography from the shelves it automatically opens at the very page mentioned above.
Friends have often remarked on this and wondered afresh at the wizardry of the Welsh.
It is in fact the only notice I cherish.
As a boy he knew the names of the players in all the Welsh teams, the local teams, the world-beating teams.
I come from a fanatically rugby-conscious Welsh miner's family; five of my six brothers played it with some distinction.
I even knew a Welsh woman from Taibach who before a home match at Aberavon would drop goals from around forty yards with either foot to entertain the crowd and her name, I remember, was Annie More…
What's more, I knew people like a one-armed inside half — he'd lost an arm in the First World War — who played with murderous brilliance for Caernarvon for years when I was a boy.
He was particularly adept, this one, at stopping a forward bursting through from the line-out with a startling iron-hard thrust from his stump as he pulled him on to it with the other…
Jimmy-One-Arm…a great many people who played unwarily against him died unexpectedly in their early forties.
He was dismissive about his own ability.
In my teens I had lived precariously on the lip of first class rugby by virtue of knowing every trick in the canon, evil and otherwise, by being a bad bad loser, but chiefly and perhaps only because I was very nippy off the mark.
I was 5′ 10½&in in height in bare feet and weighed soaking wet no more than 12½ stone and since I played in the park, usually at open side wing forward, and since I played against genuinely big men, it therefore followed I had to be galvanically quick.
When faced with bigger and faster forwards I was doomed.
R. T. Evans of Newport, Wales and the Universe, for instance— a rag 14½ stone and 6′ 1½ in was a nightmare to play against and shaming to play with, both of which agonies I suffered a lot, mostly, thank God, the latter, lesser cauchemar.
Genuine class, of course, doesn't need size, though sometimes I forget this.
On the day of his first marriage, his wife went off to perform in a matinée and Burton listened to the International match.
Wales lost.
He was reliably reported to be badly out of sorts for the rest of the evening.
Wherever he was in the world he managed to get hold of all the important rugby  results.
Just as whatever production he worked on, his contract specified that he would never work on St David's Day — the Welsh National Day.
Cliff Morgan, a marvellously tricky Welsh stand-off half, became a pal late in Richard's life and told me ‘there was no doubting his passion for the game.
Or his knowledge.
He loved the complexities of it all.
I asked around about him as a player and they said he was ‘rough and fearless’.’
The consequences of this passion were widespread, comical and partly tragic.
Once when he had to play a matinée at the Old Vic, for instance, in Hamlet , scarcely offstage for a moment, there was a Welsh International match.
Burton had a portable radio in the wings and for some reason Lord Hamlet kept straying across stage to those wings all afternoon.
But that was not enough.
Other actors were instructed to bring on the score.
It was said that Gertrude gave him the final result.
He used to go down to Cardiff from London for big games, rarely missing an International unless someone like Hamlet intervened.
After one such day, on the journey back, he and his brother Ifor ended up in a nasty fight with several English supporters and it was to this that he traced the beginning of his lifelong, terribly painful and ultimately crushing spinal problems.
Neck and back injuries are, in any case, very common among rugby players.
Particularly vulnerable are those — like Richard — who play, as it were, ‘out of their weight’.
He was light for what he did and played in a place and at a time when very heavy tackling was the chief feature of the game.
After all, many of those he was up against would have been miners, like his five brothers, like Ifor who could carry a bag of cement under each arm.
Burton was deep-chested, as strongly built as a Welsh pit-pony, but his very virtues —‘fearless’— and his total commitment probably threw him into impact tackles which, together with the grinding wear and tear of — the game, did his bones no favours.
I was interested in the anonymous neighbour's comment on Ifor that ‘all the Jenkins boys had trouble  with their bones’.
We are talking of a period and of a class in which nutritional deficiencies were commonplace.
Most important of all, though, rugby football gave Burton a real and early taste of fame.
You couldn't fake it out there on a cold bleak field with twenty-nine others and despite his modesty, Burton was among the best.
Several others have testified to his trouble-shooting capacities.
When one friend was being picked on and hacked by a bullying and much bigger opponent, Burton laid the bully out; when the referee was not looking, of course.
To be a hero on the field and to aspire to the red jersey of Wales was far and away the most dashing thing you could do.
Burton put himself alongside that select company.
Rugby sank a deep shaft to masculine and sporting company and he drew on that for pleasure and refreshment throughout his life.
By his mid-teens, just after war broke out, he was a star.
The school magazine put it in writing: ‘R. Jenkins has been a tower of strength in Rugby and under normal circumstances would probably have gained an International cap.
He is without doubt worthy of the honour.’
It was also the cause of much of the trouble with Elfed.
‘Coming home from school he had to cross the park,’ said Cis, ‘and he would always play football without coming home to change his clothes.
Ruin his shoes.
Very expensive to replace.
He always promised to come home first but then, he would say, ‘Sorry, Cis.
I just got carried away.’
Elfed got mad.’
But Cis took his side.
And there was Ifor, part of the greatness of the town team.
And all of the family starting to watch the boy more closely as he sailed or forced himself through one limit after the other — a talent, it was beginning to seem, in every pocket.
Watched over by Cis ‘who couldn't help herself’.
A WORKING-CLASS HERO
He had won first prize at the eisteddfod as a boy soprano.
He was of International standard as a rugby player and captain of cricket.
He had girl friends from the age of twelve and was rumoured to drink beer not long afterwards.
At school he dared answer back to the Headmaster — politely — when he felt he was in the right.
And one way and another he got together, in most weeks, as much spending money as a young working miner.
None of this, though, for Ifor or for Cis or, I presume, for the rest of the family, was to be compared with the fact that Richard Walter Jenkins Junior, aged eleven, passed a scholarship to the Secondary School and went there: the first Jenkins of that line ever to do so.
That was glory.
Throughout his life he was deeply impressed by writers and scholars.
He tried to be the former and his Notebooks show his struggle: the latter he knew he could never be but always revered.
Ifor worked in the mines, played his rugby and read poetry: dangerous work, hard sport and learning; a masculine ideal come down unalloyed from Ancient Greece to Pontrhydyfen.
Burton always had a calm, lofty perspective on his work as an actor.
This came partly from that confidence built up in the wide affection of the large family, partly perhaps from the arrogance of the supreme athlete, mostly, though, from his view that writing and learning were the real thing: acting was fine and dandy but not in the same league.
Burton was always a great reader.
Pride of his house in Switzerland was a library.
It is the lair of a glutton for reading, full of hardbacks and paperbacks bought, read, discussed in his Notebooks and in the case of poetry, often and remarkably remembered in large and eloquent part — from John Donne, Edward Thomas, John Betjeman, Gerard Manley Hopkins, William Dunbar and others including of course Shakespeare and Dylan Thomas.
Dylan, his first independent discovery, later became, wonderfully, a friend.
He was a man brought up a bus ride away from Taibach, a word-clotted surreal dark comedy Welshman whom Burton adored.
It is terrible news for publicists and headline hunters everywhere but the secret has to be revealed.
Even at the perilous height of his Drunk Welsh Star with Mega Diamond Wife Shocks Sin City headline-hugging period, he liked to be in front of a fire with a pile of new paperbacks and maybe, but by no means compulsively, a glass of wine: often undrunk.
Everywhere he went he took a book-bag.
Everyone I have spoken to about him — without exception — brought up his reading, the breadth of it, the compulsion, and the evangelical enjoyment he took in passing on what he had read the night before.
He was a light sleeper, for long periods an insomniac.
Print absorbed many of the hours of solitary darkness.
He went to Eastern Infants School where the playing field was a concrete yard and you trained for football by being slammed against a brick wall.
Classes were about fifty strong but discipline, we are told, was excellent.
If the teacher criticised or even hit you then the last thing to do was complain at home because the certainty was you would be criticised or hit again.
The industrial mass was then a drilled mass and what it also knew was that to survive you had to take no chances: the best thing to say was nothing.
Burton's local fame grew in contradicting this up to a point — but only up to a point.
By later blackboard-jungle classroom-rebel standards he would have appeared as disciplined as a fearful nun.
He read hard from the beginning — everything from the  most popular to the most awesome works.
That was his own drive.
His luck — and he would have a lot of luck (which he acknowledged generously and constantly)— was to meet here the first of many teachers who set him on his way.
Some thought Meredith Jones a rough, bullying master, picking out the brightest boys to train them up for the scholarship class and by their results inflate his own ego.
Burton would have none of that.
Jones was, he wrote, ‘a recognisable spiritual descendant of Geraldus Cambrensis and Shakespeare's Fluellen — passionate, fluent, something of a scholar…of remarkable vitality and afraid of nobody’.
Nor was Burton afraid of him: Jones appreciated that.
To pass the scholarship was to enter a fine world.
You need not then be a miner, a butcher's boy, a shop assistant, go into the steel works, do dirty work.
You were set on a different road: you could even become — who knows?— a schoolteacher.
Jones drummed old-time learning into his chosen corps and, in March 1937, Richard sat the scholarship and passed it.
That autumn, he entered Port Talbot Secondary School.
‘Without Meredith Jones I would never have gone to University,’ he said.
Joy, at 73 Caradoc Street, was unconfined.
Over the next four and a half years Burton, like a young shark eating all before it, devoured the sport, the small-town adventure life, the clubs and choirs and outings available.
He was good enough at the schoolwork but not at all outstanding.
He acted a little, played an American Mr Vanhattan in Shaw's The Apple Cart — but his true worlds were the sports field and the streets.
Out of this time came the first stories of his boldness — answering back to a teacher, taking out girls, and of course the all-dazzling displays at rugby and cricket.
Then in his fifth year at the school, when he ought to have been aiming for his school certificate which was the next and essential passport for that golden educated future, he left abruptly to work as a haberdasher's assistant in the local Co-operative store.
It  was a terrible fall: humiliating and very painful.
It was, in one sense, his first serious test of character.
Everything until then had come easy.
Now he was down and he hated it.
Tennessee Williams has written about several football heroes who suddenly drop through the floor at the height of their prowess.
And there's Biff in Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman .
What those and others have in common— and their authors understood — was the greatness of that adolescent fall, the sheerness of the descent from the podium of acclaim to a life sentence committed to the stock room of a Co-operative store in a provincial town.
In class and cultural terms, it was one of those occupational zones with no way out.
How had his star fallen?
And where were Cis and Ifor?
It is not easy to be precise here as a gentle curtain is drawn.
All that Burton himself would say (much later) was that ‘something of a small family crisis demanded that I should leave school and go to work’.
Elfed, it appears, was ill and-off work.
He had borne the brunt of Rich's upbringing for almost fourteen years and the boy was past ‘normal’ school-leaving age.
He was a difficult boy.
No master pleaded for his future: it seemed that he had traded in his scholarship for that foreign and rather dangerous element-self-expression.
Elfed could and did pull strings on the local Co-operative committee.
At twenty-eight shillings a week, ‘it was considered a good position,’ says Marian, his daughter.
‘It was a collar-and-tie job.
It was a job for life.
It was practically pensionable!’
There is no record of anyone in the family resisting this move.
Perhaps they felt that it had been a dream all along, always doomed, this fantastical idea that their young brother would go on and get himself a serious education, even go to college.
Out of reach, and all of them too busy with their own lives…
But they must have seen how he hated it.
‘I broke my heart over him when he went to the shop,’ said Cis.
‘He hated it.
Oh — he hated it.’
Perhaps the consensus was that as Elfed had borne the burden, he had the right to make the decision.
Older  brothers had offered to help out along the way and — as the Christmas bounty proved — presents had come along and sixpences and treats.
But Elfed had persevered.
However, the boy was hard to handle, smoking, and drinking most likely, out with girls, too grown up for school.
Daddy Ni, as ever, drifted about the edges of the conflict, concentrating on the dogs, the pubs…
There are two versions of Rich's tearaway youth.
One that it is rather a myth.
That won't wash.
At fifteen he was an independent, tough and troublesome man-boy.
Teachers, relatives and friends enough testify to that.
But it has to be in proportion.
Being a rebel in Taibach's mining and chapel community was coming in at 1O.50 when you had promised to be in by 1O.15.
It was taking out a girl with a trail of boasts littering the streets behind you, although you both returned as virginal as you had set off but usually much colder.
‘He had class,’ the girls said.
‘He was never a groper.’
Being a rebel was answering back — often countering idiotic commands with common sense but ‘answering back’ all the same when parade-ground obedience was demanded from all budding industrial soldiers.
It was the threat of disturbing the order — an order hard worked for and not to be upset because surely worse would replace it.
Hold what you had.
Keep ambition low.
Look after your own.
Keep yourself to yourself…
Dour survivalist precepts.
In the chapels the favoured Book of Revelations was interpreted by the Welsh bardic preachers to portend the overthrow of the bosses, the rout of present power, the rise to glory and authority of the congregations of the oppressed.
But that was not allowed to leak out of the chapel.
Rich was a threat.
Most of all to himself.
Put him out to work: that would school him.
And Elfed was right: it did.
In his own way.
He could have stuck in.
It was a decent wage, an easy job, plenty of energy left over for rugby, for girls, for the play-acting in which he was becoming interested.
The haberdashery counter could have been a useful enough base for his operations.
Or he could at least have appeared to  accept it and put on a show: he was already capable enough of that.
But he did neither.
And his reaction was, I think, the first self-defining move of his life — and undoubtedly the most crucial.
First of all he let nothing stand in the way of his true feelings.
He felt humiliated — apart from everything else, the soppiness of being a shop assistant in a family of miners brought out a terrible blush for his masculinity: absurd, you might think, but not so absurd if that was your world.
His brothers came back with stories of heaving and hacking coal: even Daddy Ni still worked at the face: even Elfed, seen as the over-restraining killjoy, worked down there.
And Rich?
Rich delivered boxes of socks and learnt how to fold a suit.
He would linger on those delivery trips and stay for dinner or tea or come back via the Talbot, the pub across the road, although he was under age.
He engineered a reputation for being ‘hopeless’.
He showed his world his contempt for the job by doing it very badly.
He cannot have been unaware of the risk.
‘He hated it,’ repeated Cis, still afflicted by the memory.
He took a much greater and more serious risk, one which his relatives to this day gloss over or fudge.
But the fact is he acted illegally.
Had he been caught or had he panicked he could well have been in very serious trouble: the charming young tearaway could have become a court case.
It was wartime and there were government coupons for almost everything.
Certainly for clothes.
You paid your money but you also paid your coupons — ensuring some stab at equality and some effort or control.
No coupons, no goods.
But not at the Co-op when Rich was alone.
A nod was as good as a wink.
Friends of the family discovered their coupons returned or were relieved of the duty of delivering them.
His fame grew.
Difficult to prove at this stage when so many clam up but I have a distinct feeling that it was not only coupons that were being given away.
What was he up to?
Well, there was the devilment of it, and the showing off and the natural generosity — all mingled together in the mischief and excitement of an act of illegality.
Crime, like boxing, is one of the ways working-class boys get their feet under tables otherwise forbidden to them.
It is also seductive — the achingly boring days in the Co-operative were suddenly spiced by the conspiring behind the haberdashery counter.
Working-class heroes have often flirted with delinquency in adolescence: it is hard to find the right channel for extraordinary energy.
Some would say it was a cry for help.
He was certainly clever enough and wise enough to know the risk he was taking and yet he took it.
Cis, who knew about it, was scared stiff.
I think that he was pulling himself down to touch the pit of his character.
‘He hated that shop, hated it.’
They all tell you that.
Like someone pulling a blanket over his head and defying nature to do its worst, he sank and pushed himself down as far as he could go.
If he was going to be a failure, then let the full extent of his failure be experienced.
It was a way of imposing some sort of initiation ceremony on himself.
Oh — it was high spirits and daft and cocky, of course: but it was also self-abasement.
The sort of abasement novices have to go through before they are admitted to an order.
It was as if he were scouring all the weakness out of himself by an equivalent to giving himself the disease.
Like Thomas Hardy, I think, he held ‘that if way to the Better there be, it exacts a full look at the worst’.
And they did notice him.
He was not much of a prospect.
Suffering badly — as usual— from boils (he gave them all nicknames)—‘it's the badness coming out,’ they would say — disenfranchised in the great educational paperchase, neither a macho miner nor a successful exception, he was a nobody in the middle of nowhere with no prospects.
But having let himself sink as far as he could go, he began to rise and with such gathering force and fury that he not only routed all who had disbelieved in him, he left even the believers agape.
He would miss no more opportunities.
Acting was the escape tunnel.
Meredith Jones had begun a youth centre for boys and girls.
It met in the evenings in the leaking old Eastern Infants School.
This was the site on which Burton regrouped.
He  was a fierce table-tennis player, he boxed, he sang, he larked around and lent a hand and, boils and all, emerged as one of the natural leaders in that competitive group.
That lavish endowment of talent, which had been blotted up in sport and intense boyish preoccupations, was now called up in all its force and it did not let him down.
The club's pivot was the drama: its master was Leo Lloyd — the second of those men who were to promote the career of so many boys and girls from the Afan valley.
Lloyd did not patronise them.
The youth of Port Talbot were broken in on great drama and fired, from the beginning, to reach for the sky.
Perhaps, like Meredith Jones, Lloyd's natural interest and generosity were spurred on both by the obvious scarcity of opportunity for the children in that industrial beehive and by the war which had just broken out.
The peers of these teachers and the relatives of the boys were dying for their country — all the more need to help its future generation.
Burton wrote, with typical flaring generosity (like his fellow Welshman, Henry VII, he never forgot those who had been with him around the campfire when the crown was hardly even a dream in unreal England):
Leo Lloyd was monastically devoted to his job — it is difficult for me to realise it was all done in his spare time —…he persuaded me that acting was infinitely fascinating.
He taught me the fundamentals of the job…unsparingly…he channelled my discontent and made me want to be an actor.
Rich was brilliant as a count in a one-act play based on Les Misérables .
And he appeared in a radio documentary about the Air Training Corps of which he was a member.
But he was still a haberdasher's assistant.
Cis was coming out of the Co-op one day (hoping that Rich had not, yet again, taken some cigarettes and put them on her account), when she met a bristle-moustached  Meredith Jones who demanded, ‘How can you let him do it?’
Even today as she tells the story, she is harassed.
‘I told him — my husband had a hard job, he wasn't working for a time.
I told him…’
‘He could be a good actor,’ said Meredith Jones, confounding Cis utterly.
‘I'll see what I can do.’
It is more than likely that Cis had never seen her young brother/son act in any formal sense at this time.
Hence her bafflement.
But she held her peace and waited for the miracle.
Meredith Jones's decision and subsequent determination are a remarkable tribute to him.
What it says about the young tearaway is even more remarkable.
Not only had he made a unique and convulsing impact on this generous but hard-headed man, he had made it as an actor .
Something he had done rarely and with no great sense that ‘this was it’.
Yet it was as an actor that he was now seen.
Not a footballer — for which there was much more evidence — nor a scholar unfortunately lapsed — for which, judging from his reading alone, there was also much evidence of promise at least.
But as an actor.
Already he was capable, it seemed, of making that impact on the stage which was, in record time, to put him at the top of his treacherous profession and bring on the applause of his finest contemporaries.
In his time of exile, he had found a focus.
The boy of all talents, the hero without a quest, the ‘natural’ who failed had found a purpose.
He would not let go of it.
And meanwhile, Mr Jones told Cis he would see what he could do.
What Meredith Jones did took some months and what he did was unprecedented.
He persuaded the Chairman of the Glamorgan Education Committee, Llewellyn Heycock, to have the boy readmitted to the grammar school.
‘He came home,’ said Cis.
‘I was upstairs.
Cis!
Cis!
Nobody's done this before.
Cis!
Something wonderful has happened!
There's a chance.
They're going to take me back!’
Eighteen months after he had left, he went back to complete unfinished business.
He was a man among children but he swallowed that.
He was there on sufferance  and most likely on trial and he knew that.
His reputation went before him and it was not auspicious.
A teacher, Philip Burton, a friend of Meredith Jones and Richard's commanding officer in the ATC, was asked to keep a special eye on this extremely rough — diamond?
They were taking a chance.
Rich marked his first day back at school by opening the door and wanging a gym shoe violently across the classroom: it broke a window.
He had come out of a nightmare with something of the steel town's steel inside him.
He was back: but, the gym shoe signalled, on his own terms.
THE MAN WHO GAVE HIM HIS NAME
The Jenkins family network had failed.
True, Elfed had swung him a collar-and-tie job that was ‘practically pensionable’: true, Cis was always there and the other brothers and sisters would look out for him.
But sixteen was a man and when he had begun to drown as a man there was nothing they could or did do to step in and help.
Richard would never blame them for that.
But he never forgot that for almost a year he sank like a stone and would have disappeared without trace but for outside intervention.
From now on he would take care of himself and, as time went on, to ensure family solidarity, he would take care of the family.
Indeed much of his life was spent creating and caring for families of one kind or another.
The system would not let him down again.
He would listen to outsiders.
He would go further: he would seek out those who could help.
Philip Burton was to be the most powerful of these.
This is the time when Rich's life was reshaped.
He went back to school a misfit, troublesome, confused, way behind in his studies, far too independent for his own good and on trial.
Less than a year later he was embarked on a career which would take him from the industrial grime of Taibach into films and on to the West End with hardly a pause for breath.
Philip Burton engineered all that.
He could not have done it, of course, without the raw material and that is what he found in Rich and that, at first , is how he treated him.
Until love and then awe came in.
Richard was engaged on what must often have appeared to him to be a bewildering balancing act.
First there was the character he had become.
Everyone who knew him in those schooldays — men and women alike — speak with affection of him: stories tumble out like clothes spilling out of a split suitcase — Richard peeing out of the train window as the engine roared by the station platform, Richard taking a girl up on to a mountain and scaring her to flight at his howl as a passionate hand landed on one of his more angry boils, Rich, reeking of beer, rolling into school and being sent home.
Rich the larrikin, the local hero, star of the rugby field and the club — who did it all out of infinitely pardonable devilment.
And the moody Rich who would take a girl out to sit by a river, leave her as untouched as a Madonna in a Lady Chapel and read poetry aloud.
One of the impressive things about all this is that everyone agrees about his modesty, his lack of show.
Later, at Oxford, Robert ('Tim’) Hardy, who came from an extremely well-connected family, talked, emphatically, about Richard as a ‘natural aristocrat: born to command’.
Grand though this sounds, it seems to be borne out by those who knew him about that time.
One of many seeming contradictions.
This core of his character was formed.
He had ‘found himself’ young and firmly held on to that; as he was to do with remarkable consistency.
Yet he had to bend that independent character of a man to the urgent and cropping world of the educational imperative.
It was up in the morning and back to school.
Grateful though he was — and there are few examples of anyone more grateful and generous than he was to those who had in any way helped him or even just been around in the bad times — he was not going to be craven or knuckle down like a goody-two-shoes.
Anyway he could not.
His character would not let him.
Meredith Jones — who relished his protégé's roughness — was aware of that and told his friend Philip Burton to keep an eye on him, make sure he did not let slip this second and last chance.
He was strung between a character which threatened to spoil his opportunity and an opportunity which threatened to shear away his character.
He had the added confusion of not knowing what he wanted to be and when an ambition did dawn, not knowing how he could possibly achieve it.
On returning to the Secondary School he had told the staff that his ambition was to become a teacher, which was politic.
But after some success at Meredith Jones's youth club and after getting on terms with Philip Burton, the great tide of energy which just wanted release , to get on , to get out , funnelled into the notion that he might be an actor.
For the twelfth child of Daddy Ni, in wartime Wales, with conscription the order of almost everyone's day, it was an audacious ambition.
But not entirely fantastical.
After all, there was Owen Jones.
Jones had won a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London.
Jones had played Laertes to Olivier's Hamlet at the Old Vic.
Other boys from Port Talbot Secondary had been escorted through the mysterious gates into the fabled world of professional acting — the man who had done all that was Philip Burton.
Burton was Richard's opportunity; Richard was Burton's great chance.
It is not too difficult an exercise to set out Philip and Rich as violent opposites — a mismatch made in mischief.
But their need for each other was the basis of Rich's affection for Philip and the source of the older man's power over the boy who would gratefully take his teacher's name and put it up in lights half way around the world.
They were to call each other‘father’ and ‘son’and be friends with one sole interruption until Richard's death.
All they had in common, to begin with, was this terrible need: Rich for a mentor who would make him grow, Philip for a pupil who would take on the weight of unspent devotion.
But that was some way off: at the start and on the surface…chalk and cheese, day and night, sun and moon.
Philip Burton's early life had been calculated to bring him up as ‘a spotless youth’.
His parents were Anglo-Welsh, his father a beer-drinking, musical miner killed in a pit accident  when the boy was fourteen; his mother dogged, the one who bound a steel hoop of gentility around her Philip, the one who somehow saw him to the University of Wales from which he emerged aged twenty with a double honours degree in History and Mathematics.
There was talk of some grandeur in the English past and some evidence of middle-class money which did not come to the aid of Philip.
He had his living to make and he came to Port Talbot to make it as a teacher.
By that time he had been twice smitten.
Firstly by the theatre; secondly by what he called his Pygmalion, even his Svengali, complex.
He wrote plays and sent them off to West End managements and kept writing when they were rejected: he did some work as a freelance writer, producer and actor on BBC Radio which had studios in Cardiff.
And there were the school plays.
As for Svengali, Owen Jones was one of several who had been mesmerised out of Port Talbot by Burton's powers.
He could be very fierce in pursuit of his ideals.
He lived the life ‘of a spotless bachelor’.
Ma Smith took in gentlemen paying guests and for his outlay he had a bedroom, a personal sitting room and the dedicated service of the widowed Mrs Smith and her daughters.
His hours were long and strict.
In addition to his school life and his theatrical life and his special coaching of the boys, he would play the organ in church (not chapel: he was an Anglican) and several times a week work with his boys in the Air Training Corps which he turned into one of the finest in the principality, often called on for show parades.
He read deeply and liked his own company.
He used to tell Mrs Smith that ‘a cultured person is never lonely’.
When Richard returned to school, Philip was thirty-eight, formidable and, locally, not a little feared.
Philip was sternly drilled in his ways.
Richard was like a gusher of newly tapped oil spraying about in all directions.
Philip's emotional background was tight, controlled, everything in its proper place, unhappy and deeply unaffectionate.
Rich roared out of a conflagration of overlapping, overspilling, competing and confusing flailing emotions in  which little was as it seemed.
Philip was austere, Rich profligate, Philip clean and tidy, Rich, at that time, smelly-socked and rough.
Rich was restless, active, an athlete, Philip a man of the desk and the study, interested only in things of the mind.
Philip always very cautious, Richard always extremely careless.
Yet within a few months of Richard's returning to school he had moved in with Philip, leaving his own family to do so.
However much he struggled — which he did — he was lashed into line by Philip and finally took his name.
This man from Mountain Ash pointed him not only towards the theatre but to his own Olympus of ambition — the University of Oxford of which, in those days, a miner's son could not even afford to dream.
The steel in Philip Burton — and it had to be steel for the young Jenkins to take instruction — was his scholarship.
Meredith Jones was a great talker and on the way back home from the youth club he
would talk for instance[Richard later wrote]of the ‘Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock’ and hold us all, a group of young boys, spellbound as he unfolded with conscious looks of wonder the marvellous courage of the man Eliot to write the poem ‘Prufrock’at the time he did.
‘No ‘If I should die think only this of me’ or Sassoon and Owen and Thomas with their beautiful bitterness but ‘I have measured out my life in coffee spoons’.
What a gesture, gentlemen.'
Meredith in the high flow of his talk would describe anybody of whatever age or sex as ‘gentlemen’ as if at a council meeting.
‘What quiet bravery and who's to say, who will argue with me, who will deny that Prufrock's slow death was not the more terrible.’
But Philip Burton was a proven scholar and a writer and an opener of doors thought slammed shut forever in the face of a hungry and rough Welsh Jenkins.
Meredith Jones could shove you out of the Co-op and back to school: Philip Burton might take you to Xanadu.
Philip now lives in Key West.
He became an American citizen many years ago, ran an acting school in New York, wrote books, produced plays, leaving the confined valleys of Wales where superabundant energy and effort were needed to achieve quite ordinary goals, for the land of opportunity and plenty.
He has done well.
Now in his eighties but cracklingly alert, he is happy alike to talk about his view of Hamlet and his literary friends in the town, the work he was doing in the church, the essays he was writing: there is an irresistible donnish delight in his manner and calmness, the repose of the greatly confident — a quality which was later attributed to Richard.
You could see that the ‘rough and fearless’ young rugby player, the suspicious street boy now, despite his pock-fretten skin, coming into a youthful handsomeness which men and women alike would call ‘beauty’, would break like a wave on the serenity of Philip's rock of scholarship.
Scholarship and sport and money and poetry: four of the things that mattered to the young Welshman, and something else he needed more: opportunity.
He had been given and had himself taken an immense amount out of that mining culture.
But his was still a subject class.
He and Philip Burton conducted what could be looked on as some kind of elaborate courtship ritual which would result in his hurtling on to a world stage.
After we had talked, Philip read to me from an unpublished memoir which he had entitled ‘The Two Burtons’.
His voice is well-trained, clear, very ‘English’ it would be thought.
Unlike Richard he was not brought up in Welsh but learnt it as a foreign language.
Richard had the opposite experience: to him English was the foreign language, the tongue of the occupying race, and he conquered it completely.
Philip told what is, in fact, an extraordinary tale beginning as the not uncommon (for those times) attempt to rescue a poor but talented boy from his circumstances and ending as some sort of love story.
A few months later he decided not to publish the book but with tremendous generosity said that I could use whatever I wanted from it.
One day in 1964, while Richard was playing in Hamlet on Broadway, he and I were interviewed jointly in a private corner of an Eighth Avenue bar and restaurant much frequented by theatre people.
We had a live audience of one, Richard's wife, Elizabeth Taylor.
One of the questions aimed at me was, ‘How did you come to adopt him?’
For reasons that will become apparent I hesitated in order to make a true and careful answer, and Richard jumped in with ‘He didn't adopt me; I adopted him.’
There was much truth in that.
He needed me, and, as I realised later, he set out to get me.
Years later he found a diary he had kept as a schoolboy in 1940, two years before I became really aware of him, and he gave it to me.
There are thirteen references to me in it, all of them complimentary; sometimes I appear as ‘Burton’ and at other times as ‘Mr Burton’.
Nearly every Sunday starts with the entry ‘Chapel all day.’
Welsh was the language of the chapel Richard attended, and he and many others found a weekly joy in the singing.
Even after he came to live with me, he still joined the family at chapel every Sunday.
There are frequent references in his diary to air-raids, sometimes two or three in the same day.
Port Talbot had a large and vital steelworks, and moonlit nights almost always brought the Luftwaffe, but they also came in daylight.
The diary records no fear of the bombings.
I remember that, a few years later, when I took Richard to London for the first time, we experienced a very heavy raid.
I thought he was following me and other hotel-guests to the shelter, but he wasn't; he had gone up to the roof ‘to watch it all’.
The diary records that even when the family went to a nearby shelter he would stay in bed.
To Elfed, Richard was a potential wage-earner, and there he was in school, costing money not earning it.
There are several references in the diary to rows with Elfed.
Sometimes the causes were trifling, as when Richard returned some books to the library including one that Elfed had wanted to read.
There's a very revealing entry for Tuesday, May 21st.
Elfed must have got hold of the diary.
I don't know how  much of it he read, but the entry for May 20th must have galled him because it told him that the potential wage-earner had spent much of the day in playing cricket.
In pencil he wrote, ‘At four o'clock Richard Walter shits his pants.’
Since this was written in pencil, why didn't Richard erase it?
It seems he wanted to preserve the evidence of Elfed's attitude to him.
He even added a comment: ‘This was written by Eled in an attempt to spoil the Book, but it will remain if I live to be 100.’
That diary is filled in on every single day throughout that year — 1940.
He was fourteen.
Not a line is wasted.
On May 22nd (the day following his terrible vow against Elfed) he writes up a typical entry: ‘Went to see As You Like It as performed by Form 4.
It was very good.
Trevor George [a close pal]was the star of the evening as Touchstone the clown.
The war has taken a serious turn against us.
The Huns are only fifteen miles from the Channel.
But am confident we'll pull through.’
Shakespeare, stardom, pals and the war — much of his adolescence is there.
Every single Sunday of that year records ‘Chapel all day’.
Fights are chronicled.
Modesty asserted — he is selected to run in several events for his school against Mountain Ash and he writes: ‘I hope there are no crack runners because I am no crack.’
The mischief is there.
‘Bought a pipe for a bit of fun — smoked it for a bet.’
Philip, understandably, selects those passages revealing his uneasy situation in the house of Cis and Elfed.
A poignant reflection on the situation occurs in the entries for Thursday and Friday, October 10th and 11th Thursday: ‘Had a terrible row today; Elfed told me to go back to Pontrhydyfen.
I walked as far as Cwmavon.
I hate the sight of Elfed.
I am going to ask Daddy to take me back home where I can go to work.
I could never stay home now.’
Friday: ‘I intended to go to Ponty but I have cooled off a bit now.
Cis wants me to go if I want to.
But I am sure that wherever I go I will not be wanted, the same as here.’
Richard returned to school a month before his seventeenth birthday.
As a result of his lost schooling he couldn't return to his previous class, and so was at least a year older than the other boys and girls in the class to which he was now assigned.
With his experience of the world he was now a young man among kids.
He took two steps which brought him into contact with me: he joined the ATC Squadron, and he saw to it that he did Fire-Watch duty on my nights.
Every night some of the older boys, under the charge of a master, had to maintain watch at the school because of the air-raids.
In particular they had to deal with a fire-bomb that might get lodged on the roof.
Richard's fire-watching finally resulted in his coming to live with me.
During our fire-watching, Richard seized every opportunity for private talks with me, which were often interrupted by air-raid warnings.
I soon became very interested by his undoubted potential — but for what?
He was developing an acute social and political conscience, and I could see him devoting his life to the Labour Party.
When he told me that he wanted to be an actor like Owen Jones, I was very surprised but instinctively excited and challenged.
I told Richard that, if he wanted to become a professional actor, he first had to change both the quality of his voice and his speech, and that would involve hard and tiresome work.
His response was, ‘All right; change ‘em.’
He began to tell me the difficulties of his life at home, and finally he told me that he had tried more than once to find a home with another brother or sister, but they had persuaded him to return to Cis and Elfed.
I am sure that they had a twofold motivation: reluctance to be burdened with a teenager who wasn't earning a wage, and the consideration of how much he meant to Cis.
One night I was so touched by yet another account of his plight that I said, without realising the full implications of what I was saying, that there was a spare bedroom in Mrs Smith's house.
(The bank clerk who had occupied it had been called up to the army.)
He seized on it and asked when he could move in.
I immediately backtracked, and he said  with a sorrow that made me feel guilty, ‘When push comes to shove, nobody wants me.’
I began to defend my withdrawal.
I said that soon he would be in the Air Force and no longer a financial burden on Elfed, and, even more than that, when the war was over he would be a wage-earner at something or other, and would be able to help Elfed and Cis; what was more, Elfed would be already well aware that the liability he resented would become an asset he welcomed.
I felt sure that Elfed, and still more Cis, would now be unwilling for him to leave.
His reply was, ‘Ask Elfed; that's all; ask ‘im.’
I had to agree to do so, and it was arranged that I would go to the Taibach house the following Sunday afternoon.
I have vivid memories of that Sunday afternoon meeting with Elfed and Cis in the front room of 73 Caradoc Street.
I had gone there determined to use every argument I could muster to retain the situation of Richard's living with the James family.
I had not met Cis or Elfed before.
Richard was not in the room.
My first impression was of the Madonna-like beauty of Cis.
She sat silent while the vigorous Elfed did all the talking with me.
His answer to everything I said was, ‘You take ‘im, Mr Burton, you take ‘im.’
I promised that his further education would be no burden to them, and that after the war, I would see to it that he received a free college education, which should not be denied him, but all I got was ‘You take ‘im, Mr Burton, you take ‘im.’
Finally, in order to have a word with the silent Cis, I asked Elfed to fetch Richard, who had been awaiting in the kitchen the result of the meeting.
Reluctantly Elfed left the room and I said to Cis, ‘Ritchie is your son much more than your brother, and I know how much you love each other.
What do you want me to do?’
Her answer, which changed not only Richard's life but mine too, was, ‘If you take him it would be the answer to my prayers.’
When Elfed returned with Richard, I told them I would do as they all wished, and the room seemed to be filled with the happiness of relief.
He moved into 6 Connaught Street, Port Talbot, on March 1st, 1943, St David's Day.
His landlady was Mrs Smith.
In Philip Burton's version, from then on, all was sweetness; Richard occasionally went back to the house of Cis and Elfed (on Sunday mornings) and the two of them got on with the transformation of the street boy into the stage man.
But it is not the only version.
Even today, Cis's face grows dark at the memory.
‘We could have coped,’ she said.
‘We could've managed.’
It would have been surprising had there not been a ripple of unease running through the Jenkins family.
There was a sort of shame in it: however much you could point to this being done before by dedicated teachers for brilliantly promising pupils — there was still a sort of shame in the boy being farmed out.
And he had been taken from them.
‘Nobody knows how much I cried,’ said Cis, whose mothering of him was now over.
She had given him an ideal; she had given him what appears to have been unfailing and uncritical support: he was never as an adult to be easy without one woman on whom he could totally rely.
Cis had also now given him perfect freedom.
He would come home (to her home) after school for his tea ‘but I would send him off to Mrs Smith's.
I said, ‘Rich, it isn't fair.
If you're going to stay there, you have to stay there properly.
‘He wasn't a happy boy.
Why weren't you happy, Rich?
He would tap his head.
Too much of this, Cis: have to use this a lot now.’
Philip grew fiercely ambitious for the boy.
The moulding was hard and marked him for life.
Contemporaries remember him coming scowling to school after what had clearly been rows with his patron.
Richard has described this period as ‘pure hell’ and ‘the hardest work I ever did in my life’.
Philip was relentless and the boy had no alternative: he obeyed or he would fail.
However much he bucked against it, in the end, if he wanted to survive in this world, let alone succeed, he had to do everything the schoolteacher instructed him to do.
The intellectual domination and the emotional charge which carried it rapidly whipped him out of his old ways.
It is essential to stress that although Philip's dedication to Richard became intense, it was part of a larger compulsion which preceded and succeeded Richard — to help young people get out and get on through education.
Mr G. Dear, who was at school with Richard, told me: ‘We learnt more in class from his talking above and beyond the subject matter than from others who stuck to the syllabuses…it was an honour to be selected for the annual school play…‘
Later on as a teacher Mr Dear was once called on to teach English and, ‘Naturally used Phil's methods.
It so happened that the results were incredibly good — 29 out of 30 pupils passed in the English Language paper, 27 in English Literature…
I feel sure Phil was indirectly responsible!
I want to acknowledge a personal debt to him.
I am only one of the many who owe so much to the man.’
Philip coached Richard in his schoolwork so efficiently that he was to pass the required certificate with ease despite having missed school for eighteen months.
In Philip's two honours subjects, Maths and History, he did particularly well but he also passed in five other subjects including Welsh and his loathed Chemistry.
To achieve that from a standing start in nine months meant application as well as ability.
But in this period, his several talents which had shone so clearly when he was much younger and somehow been lost in the scrum of his long adolescence, began to regroup.
For beside the schoolwork, Philip was as good as his word about turning Richard into an actor.
‘His voice,’ he wrote, ‘was rough to begin with but with constant practice it became memorably beautiful.’
It was the source of his acting genius.
They practised in the living room on psalms and Shakespeare, sometimes the pitch rising so high that the Widow Smith feared her much-favoured gentleman paying guest and that charming but coarse Jenkins boy might be arguing.
(Richard lacked refinement, Mrs Smith thought: his table manners were not as nice as they should have been, he turned the lavatory in the garden into a  smoker's den and he was so spoiled!
Practically his first request to her had been to ask her to clean his shoes!)
But Philip also took Richard out on to the hills and up to the top of Welsh mountains like master and disciple in some biblical parable.
The boy would speak ‘say the Chorus from Henry V and I would go further and further away from him, forcing him not to shout but to make certain I could hear him.
He soon learned that it was distinctness, not volume, that mattered.’
The voice changed: darkened, soared over the valley.
Philip has spoken of Richard's ‘wonderful, curious mind.
I soon discovered he had a natural feeling for poetry.
One Sunday morning after he had gone to his chapel and I to my church, he came back excitedly waving a newspaper and said ‘Listen to this,’ and he read the Dylan Thomas poem ‘The force that through the green fuse drives the flower’.
When he had finished I asked him what it meant.
He replied, ‘I don't know, but isn't it beautiful?’
The poem was published several years before the incident.
He used to collect old newspapers for fish-and-chip shops.
I don't know where he had got it.
All I do know is that it truly happened.’
It began to matter to Philip that Richard was a ‘natural’: just as it mattered to the boy himself.
To have a gift somehow eased the soft and suspect business of being an aspiring actor in a dark and sweaty coal-steel town.
To have a gift was superior, naturally aristocratic, it was to be a chosen one.
When you were born as a scarcely distinguishable blob in the smoked ranks of the industrial army of the poor, when privilege was not only out of sight but in the hands of a foreign country, when you saw the daily cost of a necessary daily grind, then to have a ‘gift’ was perhaps the only sure way to see an escape.
Only through such an accidental, miraculous chance could anyone expect to shake off the yoke of grimly limited prospects.
To Philip the boy's ‘gift’ justified the increasing extravagance of his devotion and the growing bond of his love.
For surely someone as gifted as that deserved all that could be done for him: and ‘the gift’ put it above any gossip about an overkeen  schoolmaster bringing on a bright pupil and overrode any chatter about the besotted nature of his devotion.
Philip would sprinkle sugar on Richard's morning cereal; lend him clothes; buy him an expensive raincoat — although he was a thrifty man.
(Richard lost the expensive raincoat the same night in a snooker hall.)
If the boy had a ‘gift’ then it was everyone's duty to see that it was not wasted.
Because the gifted were rare and no sacrifice was too much.
It cannot have been easy for either of them.
Philip confirms the continuation of Richard's subterranean drag of melancholy: the Welsh word is ‘hiraeth’.
Once, for example, having forgotten his key, he spent the night, he said, at Elis grandmother's grave, on the bank of a stream, the Frwdwyllt, the Wild Stream.
And there was already the fear and the regret at the distance he seemed to be travelling from Ifor; the utter ignorance of what was going to happen when or if he did finally and two years late pass the examination.
There would be active service in the war — without question.
But then what?
And would there be anything at all?
The bombs fell on South Wales and reports came in of young men killed in the air, on land, at sea.
The war inside himself was a small conflagration compared with the bombardments he saw for himself and read about daily.
Turbulence and violent death haunted his adolescence just as repression and hard tack had besieged his childhood.
Rich was now half way through his eighteenth year.
His body was broad, strong, at ease with itself.
The skin was bad and boils would still stalk the neck and shoulders.
His eyes, blue-green, were set widely apart on a face which was defining itself rapidly now as unforgettable.
Although his encounters with girls were way above average for the time and place and company he moved in, they were still sexually unsuccessful.
Yet the charisma was already fuelled in large part by that sexual eagerness and masculine vulnerability which beat across the footlights and through the lens for years to come.
Philip was in his prime.
A chaste bachelor — impropriety unthinkable.
And yet between these two, from what has been said and written and recollected by both, an intense and governing bond grew up unlikely though it had at first seemed.
It was yet another layer in what was to become the bountiful and complex nature of Burton's attitude to sex, to authority, to love and to loyalty.
If there is one word — with hindsight — which describes the young boy throughout this most critical year, it would have to be ‘conqueror’.
There was always that about him — the Welsh chieftain down from the hills on a raid to seize the bounty of the fat rich oppressor and then ride home back into the trackless labyrinths of his past.
As a stage actor his greatness was for Heroes: as a screen actor too — Alexander, Antony, Becket, Trotsky: or Anti-heroes — George in Who's Afraid Of Virginia Woolf ?,
Jimmy Porter, Leamas in The Spy Who Came In From The Cold ; Comic Heroes — Petruchio; Cartoon Heroes —The Wild Geese ; Fallen Heroes — Edwin Booth.
The role began early in life.
Here, he honed it.
He conquered the man who had got Owen Jones to London and to RADA and to the Old Vic.
He conquered him so completely that the man now housed him, clothed, fed and supported him and used every spare minute to coach and prepare him for some as yet unrevealed greatness.
The man rewrote a radio play for him and got him early professional experience.
Rich had conquered his own temper enough to take and not to spoil this rare second shot at school.
He conquered his tongue and — with excellent irony — was directed by Mr Pygmalion Philip Burton to play the long and taxing role of Professor Higgins — expert on English speech — in Pygmalion .
He was accent perfect.
Even a minor incident reveals his desperate determination to overcome, the desperation of the poor.
Philip tells the story:
While he was in school I gave him every chance I could to play before an audience, both in the school and in the local YMCA.
He loved performing.
When he first came to live with me he showed some envy of his young  brother Graham's success as a soprano in the local eisteddfodau, the Welsh competitive festivals.
I pointed out that his voice had certainly ceased to be soprano, but he pestered me to teach him the solo for the next eisteddfod.
It was Sullivan's ‘Orpheus with his lute’.
One evening I reluctantly agreed to go back to school and attempt to teach him the solo.
(I was the pianist for the school assembly which began the morning.)
The piano was on the platform of the assembly hall and parallel to the side walls.
Richard faced the non-existent audience and so couldn't see my reaction as he gave vent to excruciating sounds.
At last I could contain my laughter no longer.
He turned to me in dumbfounded fury.
Then he stalked out angrily, exclaiming, ‘I'll show you.
Someday I'll show you.’
And he did.
On the first night of Camelot on Broadway, on December 3rd, 1960, I went into his crowded dressing room after the performance and he greeted me with: ‘Well, I showed you, didn't I?’
I didn't know what he was talking about.
But Richard had not forgotten and seventeen years later he wanted it remembered — however lightheartedly — that he had conquered there, too.
With all this he retained his poise, his special modest confident quality, concealing the melancholy and resisting any temptation to swank.
His eyes were peeled for the main chance — but where was it?
And what was it?
And would it ever come?
Philip Burton's manuscript takes his disciple through the golden gates:
My Squadron 499 of the Air Training Corps became very successful, so much so that I was awarded a national honour, a Member of the British Empire, MBE (Military).
I mention this because it brought me into favoured touch with the Commanding Officer for Wales, and through him I was able to gain admittance for Richard to Exeter College, Oxford, for six months prior to his joining the Royal Air Force, a privilege granted to very few cadets.
If they made a good impression during that brief stay at the University, they would be given priority of  consideration for becoming undergraduates when they were demobilised.
But my Commanding Officer brought up an important issue: the question-raising ambiguity of my relationship to Richard: he had another home and his father was still alive; it would be better and easier all round if I adopted him.
When I raised the question with Richard he readily agreed to become my adopted son.
I put the matter in the hands of a local lawyer, and he took it up with the magistrates.
I was well-known locally and they found no objection to the adoption.
But when it was found that I was twenty days short of being twenty-one years older than Richard, legal adoption was ruled out.
The alternative was that Richard become my legal ward, and for that his father's signed agreement was necessary.
David Jenkins, a brother of Richard and a police officer, undertook to secure this and did so with no difficulty.
Then Richard's name was legally changed by deed-poll to Burton.
The document states that Richard Walter Jenkins shall ‘absolutely renounce and abandon the use of the surname of the parent and shall bear the surname of the adopter and shall be held out to the world and in all respects treated as if he were in fact the child of the adopter’.
‘In later years,’ Philip wrote, ‘he always referred to me as his father.
He told me that, when he heard in 1957 that his father was dead, his immediate reaction was ‘Which?’'
SETTLING FOR ACTING
If Richard Burton was lucky in his background it was because he made his luck.
Hundreds of thousands the industrialised world over barely rose above the daily survival — hard enough in many cases.
To get out was a considerable achievement: to go on to etch his own personality on the world was so rare as to be wonderful: but to do it on his own terms, in his own way and to do exactly as he wanted was astounding.
No surprise that every single person who met him wanted to turn that meeting into an incident, an anecdote, an event.
His genius was above all in what he was.
Burton soared: he made it look effortless, and he put no one down in the process.
And few cared to try to put him down.
Out of his family's travails he helped to make a fastness of domestic security — Cis, Ifor and the barricades of brothers, sisters, cousins, aunts, ever-open houses…out of the outwardly unpromising landscape of a war-battered, low-waged steel, coal and chapel culture he took a fine voice, musical knowledge, a skill in many sports, a love for learning: and he never forgot that a few shillings would and did make the difference between dignity and pity, poverty and decent comfort.
He impressed Meredith Jones as he impressed Philip Burton — both to an extent that they had never been impressed before, driving them to help him help himself.
He was a memorable mixture of inner repose and  outer restlessness, of calculation, even shrewdness, and a princely carelessness, of something certain, never to be shaken, only perhaps tested and eroded as the years went by, and something uncertain, game for everything and willing to push himself to the point of self-destruction.
Life was for the living and Rich seized it.
If we live out much of our developing years in imitation — especially of those most close to us — then Burton very soon outstripped guiding example.
The tenacity of his loyalty brought him back again and again to the perfect womanliness of Cis and the unmatchable maleness of Ifor, but in his wider field of operation they were no more than a couple of reference points: the rest of the map had to be filled in — by Philip, by Meredith, by rugby heroes, by the poets, but most of all, and as he went along, by himself.
One thing is clear.
He went at it very hard: punishingly, perhaps even at that stage, dangerously hard.
Though physically a lightly built rugby player, he never hesitated to go for the top league and would be bounced and shaken regularly.
He drank when young and while still young drank a lot, challenging himself to knock off all comers, but most of all to align himself with the legendary drinking miners who could and did sweat it off down the pit while Richard had to force it off in games.
And perhaps through the drinking he sought to meet his father of whom he spoke so little and to whom it seemed, the older he grew, he meant so little.
He smoked a lot which hit the hard-worked lungs while the boils surged up out of a weakness in nutrition which, together with the ill-starred Jenkins bones, augured ill for long life and clean living.
Neither seemed to interest him much.
That outer evidence of strain and clash was balanced by the hugely admired stillness, the self-possession.
That came most from his wide-apart blue-green eyes, the sculptured bones covered with wasted skin, the rare smile.
The finest expression of himself lay in his love for language.
In one respect, it was a particular and technical interest.
He was a crossword fiend, an acrostic fanatic, an inveterate  Amateur etymologist and a Berlitz blitzer on new tongues.
The constant book-bag was a working kit.
Even for a short weekend trip, Sally, his widow, wrote there would be ‘a dictionary, the complete works of Shakespeare, the Oxford Book of English Verse , the Koran, a Larousse, an atlas, together with paperback copies of the Oxford Book of Quotations , a reader's encyclopaedia…’ and then there were the new novels and biographies and history bought in paperback raids.
In his heyday he had a memory like a clamp.
Put to it, he could recite some of Shakespeare's sonnets backwards: that was one of his party tricks.
Tumultuous chunks of the Bible in English and then in Welsh, the great monologues of Shakespeare, Manley Hopkins, Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Donne, Dylan Thomas — those could all be turned to account and were.
But the passion was no party show.
If he had one talent above all — Alec Guinness has singled it out as his greatest gift — it was for reading verse with intelligence and passion.
He did it because he was intoxicated by it: and he had found it for himself.
It was the force that through the green fuse…drove him.
‘The only thing in life is language,’ he said — with Elizabeth Taylor in tears beside him.
‘Not love.
Not anything else.’
The acting was almost a by-product of that and had it not been for a fortuitous advertisement in Cardiff's Western Mail , it might have remained just that.
Oxford, the scholarship, would then have been the defining influence, become the place in which he could have planted his flag and redrawn himself.
As it was, another Welsh wizard was to pipe him away.
The announcement proclaimed that Welsh actors and actresses were needed by the eminent playwright, director and actor Emlyn Williams, to fill ‘small parts in his new play which will open in London in the autumn’.
In particular, he wanted a ‘Welsh boy actor’.
Philip Burton sent off Richard's name immediately.
His boy was in good shape.
Anxious — waiting for the results of his examination — with varied experience in school plays.
Mime (in Les Misérables), a big leading role  (Professor Higgins), a virtuoso turn (as an American businessman in Youth At The Helm , he had impressed everyone by talking into five telephones at once— everybody in Taibach talked about it: Cis heard accounts ‘up and down the street’), work on the radio and, above all, those scrupulous sessions in Ma Smith's front room and on the high hills, schoolteacher and pupil, two sons of miners in Wales, striving to speak the language of Shakespeare faultlessly.
He walked it.
Also, all of seventeen, he made a pass at the attractive, sophisticated casting director, Daphne Rye — the most influential casting director in Great Britain.
Three years later it was she who gave him his passport, from the limbo of a long RAF demobilisation process, to the West End.
But it was Emlyn Williams he conquered at that stage and Emlyn Williams mattered.
He was to give him a part which would take him into the West End a few months after leaving school, write a special role for him in what would be his first film, introduce him to his future wife and, through one of his sons, Brook, provide him with a lifelong younger ‘brother’.
More than all that, though, he showed Richard the way.
By some terrific fluke Richard came face to face with his future at the precise time he most needed to see it.
For Emlyn Williams had walked where Richard began to realise he now wanted to tread.
Williams pointed in a direction and Richard followed it.
Williams himself — a miner's son — had found his way out of Wales and out of the pits via a schoolteacher, a woman, on whom he had based his hit play,The Corn Is Green .
In the play a boy from the pits is discovered by the schoolteacher and after furious efforts, gets into Oxford University.
And in Oxford, the Welsh boy had launched himself as a nationally acclaimed actor and playwright.
Emlyn Williams was precisely the right man to be the next guru.
But once again Burton had to win and hold his luck.
Williams recalled that first audition vividly.
‘He was a most spectacular-looking boy.
Marvellous  green-blue eyes and he had Repose.
Nothing precocious.
Nothing smart-alec.
Almost shy but sure of himself, you know.’
It was Williams's perceptive and remarkable schoolteacher, Sarah Grace Cooke, who met him and said to Emlyn, ‘He's like you: but he has the devil in him.
You haven't.’
It was a devil longing to get out and Emlyn's gentle comedy,The Druid's Rest , gave the devil its chance.
The boy saw what fun and mischief was to be had.
The devil grabbed it and was on the loose for ever after.
Burton's devil was a terrible and limitless sense of driving pleasure: it was fuelled by awesome capacity and the hunger of those who cannot believe that such fortune will not vanish before their appetite is appeased.
He was barely eighteen, he was to go on a tour of the fabled cities of England; he was to be thrown in with chorus girls, drink with vagabonds of the stage, have the money for  floozies and low bars, time to read and time to talk and be praised for doing this stage work which was not work at all.
Acting was Open Sesame.
And he had a friend in this Celtic lust for life: Stanley Baker, his understudy, another son of a miner, much poorer than Richard's family, and again someone plucked from that army of industrialised subjects by a schoolteacher.
A couple of years younger, Baker looked older, and had already appeared in a film.
The two boys from the puritan villages of Wales set themselves up as hell-raisers to the world.
Windows were smashed clean out in fourth-floor dressing rooms as actor and understudy flared up into a fight.
Dreadful punishments were promised by Emlyn.
Next night the same.
Dock pubs in Liverpool in wartime full of enthralling and wicked characters.
Train journeys to cold suburbs and the first recorded attempt at love-making — ending in fear of eternal damnation as he dozed off in front of the fire afterwards and his socks began to smoulder.
So sex sent you straight to hell!
Torn between a huge urge to do everything and a huge ignorance about how to go about it.
Leaning through their window to sting the breasts of the  sunning chorus girls with ammo from their pea-shooters in the morning: in the evening beer all round and trying to coax them up an alley.
Quite dizzy with the glamour of it all.
Philip came up to keep an eye on him for a week or so.
So did Ifor.
But he was out on his own now.
‘He was the most beautiful boy I'd ever seen,’ said Gladys Henson, who played his stage mother.
‘He was always lolling about, always so calm.
He took everything in his stride…the theatre was quite secondary to his interest in rugby; he never stopped talking about the game!…
I said to him: don't go to sleep in the middle of rehearsals!
And he said: ‘Oh you know me, Glad.
I go my own way.’'
Burton was living off the land and he loved it.
An almighty cloudburst of possibilities had cascaded over his head and he loved that too.
Emlyn Williams might have pointed his finger to Art, to the Theatre, to Magic and Burton had time for all three: but later.
What hit him most was what hit him first.
What a life , what fun , what pickings were there here!
Perhaps it did not in truth add up to very much.
A few smashed windows, drink, a fight or two, umpteen girls almost ‘conquered’, long tall stories almost believed — but compared with what he had been used to it was the lure of the Orient, freedom, the cry of the Sirens.
And all he had to do was be this other person and convince everybody.
Which he did.
‘In a wretched part [he played Glan, the elder son of publicans]Richard Burton showed exceptional ability,’ wrote the New Statesman .
He would claim that it was the sentence which changed his life, convinced him that acting was worth doing.
All that and an accolade from the intellectual socialist weekly!
If only he could keep in touch with that centre of himself, which somehow, mysteriously, enabled him to do this acting business — then all the rest would be his.
Far from arriving at Exeter College, Oxford, in April 1944 as a grateful Jude the Obscure, he roared into the University apparently ready for anybody.
The RAF training was no sweat, thanks to Philip's crack preparation in the  ATC.
The University work was not difficult — English and Italian.
It was out of season for rugby and so he had plenty of roving time and the nights were growing longer.
And yet he has confessed to feeling ‘terror’.
This cannot be doubted — even though he soon overcame it.
Oxford University, home of scholars since the day of Alfred the Great, was an all but religious ideal for generation on generation of humble schoolmasters and their pupils: Thomas Hardy's tragedy of Jude is based on that assumption — to enter Oxford was to enter the Golden Kingdom.
But here he was, son of Dic Bach y Saer and a barmaid, nervous of a fish knife and coal Welsh from Taibach — in a city of colleges, quadrangles, domes, spires, towers, Big Tom, All Souls, the Radcliffe Camera, the Bodleian Library, the Parks, Punts, the Union, the seeding ground of Prime Ministers and Viceroys, the growing place for Bishops, the earthly centre of scholarship.
And though the place was leavened by servicemen on short courses and all the liveliness of that well-reported wartime gaiety, it was still dominated by public-school men with backgrounds of privilege and wealth quite foreign to Burton and smacking too sharply of the oppressor, with accents of command and futures of rule.
The people against whom his brothers and their friends had struck in the Twenties, the people who had stood by the Army in the Valleys, the people who had let his people go to hell in war and in peace.
These thoughts could always be called up, as they were many years later in his attack on Churchill.
But Burton's radicalism was soon overtaken by the inevitable favours bought him by his talents.
Yet for a short time his arrival at Oxford threw him back on the hunkers of his class and family.
It was his strength that he was never to lose that capacity to measure everything against his past — however much others might sneer at it.
He always needed that: without it he could not feel easy in himself.
And if that went — as, later, it threatened to do — then his access to that gift, that way with speaking, with ‘being’ another person and totally convincing an audience — that would be  in danger.
Pontrhydyfen was tap root and talisman.
In the end, Oxford was just another obstacle in the path: he took it, as always, by a full frontal attack.
Through beer, talk and that danger referred to by Robert Hardy ('he breathed the very air of danger’), he became a man to reckon with.
Having to absorb this phenomenon — for such the eighteen-and-a-half-year-old became within a month or two, despite all the swirl of competition (from local airfields and ancient academies)— the Oxford undergraduates graciously invented a school and background which made it easier for them to justify taking him on board.
‘Burton of Blundles’ they called him rather sportingly.
His time for revenge and the peculiarly genuine appearance of it would come eventually.
Meanwhile he got on with what he found inside the citadel.
He found of course that not all undergraduates were of a kind.
There was one, Robert Hardy, for instance, rumoured to be twelfth or was it twentieth in line to the throne?
Anyway, indisputably well-connected and a ‘toff’ and after an initial spat (very common with Burton, the initial spat with those who later became good pals), they became and remained fast friends.
To this day, Hardy, himself having achieved the double of classical and popular success as an actor, speaks of him at that time with unaffected adulation.
‘I had never met anyone like him before nor have I since.
He was, genuinely, a great man, a leader, he had so much size .
Put half a dozen hell-raisers in a room with him and he would be their chief in ten minutes.
Have your best conversationalists around to tea or dinner and Richard would wipe the floor with them.
And there was so much danger about him — on stage and off stage — it was intoxicating.
We all went after girls: Richard always got them.
We all drank: Richard out-drank us.
You may think I am exaggerating but I am telling you the truth as clearly as I remember it and I remember it very clearly.
He had more ‘size’, more originality than anyone I had ever encountered.’
Hardy is generous to the memory of his friend but he is no sentimentalist.
There are areas and times of Burton's life which he doesn't think much of and he says so.
If there was a certain element of the Prince and the Pauper in all this, it worked both ways.
You cannot be aware of class without being aware of snobbery and the young Burton could be temporarily affected by that.
On the other hand he made his position clear and crude — as he always did later in similar situations — by making it plain that he was the control, he was the paymaster.
It was he who lent Hardy the money to go to Paris: he who decided to take Hardy's hopeful acting career under his wing and get him an audition with ‘my father’ down at the Cardiff studios, where Philip's radio play gave him an entree.
Interestingly, Hardy thinks this may have been a set-up by a protective Burton to put his new posh friend off acting altogether: for Philip discouraged Hardy.
By chance another producer was there who encouraged him.
‘When he discovered I wanted to be an actor he felt deeply responsible and thought I must be stopped.’
Hardy is amused that Richard did not see the steel beneath the silk.
I think the odds are that Rich was showing off his new toff as a pal to Philip and throwing in the favour of an audition along the way.
What held the two men together — apart from that click of friendship — was an unaffected and deeply worked love for Henry IV , Parts I and II and Henry V .
They had arrived independently at a similar view on the character of Prince Hal and the way in which that should be developed through the three plays.
Both were to exercise their joint theory in memorable performances.
Meanwhile excited discussion — which was to go on, intermittently, over three or four years — cemented the high-minded low fun of their close friendship.
Indeed, they could have been Hal and his rascally crew.
There is no shortage of anecdote or incident at Oxford.
Burton's reputation as a drinker is deceitfully challenged by some idiot who spikes his beer with wood alcohol: he crashes down a flight of stairs and hurts his back.
‘His  back problem was already very much in evidence then,’ recalls Hardy.
He holds pubs in thrall to his Welsh past — the stories which would be told afresh for a lifetime now emerge in their first edition — and his childhood, far from seeming a ball and chain in this airy court of privilege, glowed into a magic kingdom to match any of them.
Grandfathers and coal-hewing cousins, brothers and the front row of Neath, Homeric schoolteachers and sopranos whose voices had a bell in every tooth made their entrance on to the Oxford stage, mixed in with chorus girls from Cardiff, waterfront villains from Liverpool and the twenty-two-carat glitz of the West End, where he had opened in The Druid's Rest in January 1944 with fires in the sky at night, bombs falling from the Luftwaffe and pubs and clubs burning excitement under the blackout.
Ygarth the wild cat which savaged sheep and escaped drowning made its entrance as did the Burton trick of sinking a sconce (two pints) of college beer in ten seconds ('never been beaten’).
Deprived — fortunately as it turned out, for otherwise he would have had no spare time at all— of the pleasures of the rugby field, he played a little squash and tennis (developing his ‘cannonball serve: that's all you need, see: they never get it back’) and ‘chatting up’.
It was at Oxford, he said later, that he met an older woman who ‘sorted him out about all that.
No trouble ever since.’
We only have Burton's spoken word for this and the obliging older woman is untraceable.
It is not uncommon in life: it is not uncommon in fiction.
What is interesting is that Burton was prepared to talk about it publicly in a way which implied that he had sexual problems before this date.
It is that which inclines us to believe him.
And he loved simple and dramatic solutions to everything: especially if they could be retailed in conversation.
Just as he had had the nerve to try to pick up the casting director at his first audition, so he had the taste and — in sociological terms — the cheek to seek out the stylish and lovely Nina Bawden, later the novelist.
He hinted at a weekend in London at Emlyn Williams's.
She gave him the  gentle brush-off: how could this boil-necked boyo know Emlyn Williams?
But what did you believe?
It was not that he boasted — or not very much.
But what he did do was to embroider, I fantasise.
‘He loved to change direction,’ said Hardy, ‘he loved to test people, to see where their pretensions were — it was all terrific fun to him, serious and not-serious both the same time, the way very very good comics are.
He should have played more comedy.’
(Emlyn Williams confirmed that: ‘He had the timing, the perfect timing that comedy needs: and dead-pan, classic dead-pan.’)
His comedy went into those Welsh and newly minted theatrical stories at Oxford where he had the time of his life.
‘Drinking produced a vein of brilliance in him,’ Hardy said.
Burton was in his Valhalla: a company largely of men, a chosen few, who could endure ancient and god-like debauches, sing old songs, recite the enduring poetry of the race spin yarns which threaded together truth and fiction in a seamless flow of talk — while outside there was world war and the danger of war to which they were all headed and of which they were all unafraid.
Oxford remained a beacon throughout his life.
‘This boy is a genius and will be a great actor.
He is outstandingly handsome and robust, very masculine and with deep inward fire, and extremely reserved.’
That was the judgment of the scholar Nevill Coghill, Fellow in English Literature and director of the Friends of the Oxford University Dramatic Society, which, in effect, put on the most lavish undergraduate productions — a tradition which had sent out many actors on to the London stage.
Coghill was to do Measure For Measure .
Burton asked for an audition and did one despite being told that all the parts were taken.
He recited ‘To be or not to be’.
‘Out came the most perfect rendering I had ever heard,’ said Coghill, ‘except that given a short while before by John Gielgud in his Haymarket Hamlet .
But it was not just an imitation of Gielgud.’
Coghill allowed him to understudy the leading part, ‘the  complicated sex-driven Puritan’, Angelo.
The young man who was to have done it was called back to active service in the RAF and Burton stepped forward.
He had sent for Philip who had raced up from Wales to coach and instruct this miraculous son in a great Shakespearian role to be performed in an Oxford college before an audience of West End luminaries (Gielgud, Terence Rattigan): ‘We worked on it line by line, hour after hour, into the early morning…
I never ceased to be astounded by how quickly and thoroughly he absorbed the notes I gave him.’
Many thought his Angelo a triumph.
‘There were moments when he totally commanded the audience,’ Hardy recalls, ‘by this stillness.
And the voice which would sing like a violin and with a bass which could shake the floor.’
At the party afterwards Binkie Beaumont, far and away London's biggest impresario (he had put on The Druid's Rest ), asked the boy if he wanted to be a professional actor.
Burton was unsure and non-committal.
‘If you've made up your mind by the end of the war,’ said Binkie, ‘look me up.’
Philip went back to Richard's rooms in college to wait for him on this night of undreamt-of triumph, to enjoy it with him, to talk it through.
Richard did not turn up until dawn, the first birds chirping over the lush, dewy college lawns.
His trousers were ripped, his leg bleeding, he had spiked himself sliding over the college railings.
He had gone on to a party at a rich woman's house, he explained, and seen a display of drinks such as he had never seen on earth before.
Compelled to try them all, he had then passed out.
‘Sorry, Phil,’ he said.
Philip forgave him.
He had been repaid in plenty.
What a year!
The West End, the school certificate, Oxford, Angelo, Gielgud applauding, Coghill calling him a ‘genius’ and Binkie Beaumont making an offer.
All this for an eighteen-year-old who, just over a year before, had been feared — in the context of the time — unmanageable and a little while before that had been sunk down without trace behind the haberdashery counter in Port Talbot's  Co-operative shop.
Philip had a great deal to be pleased about.
But Richard had still not settled for being an actor.
The foreground of Burton's life is so vivid that it is easy to forget the dramatic and hugely influential background against which it is being played out.
As a boy he lived through a Depression inside an industrial monster clanking and heaving its passage through an increasingly ungrateful century.
As a young man the context was war.
His time in the ATC meant that he was targeted for the Air Force.
His inclination meant that he would aim to be a pilot.
The area around Oxford was buzzing with trainee pilots and tales of bombing raids and the relentless statistics of casualties, young men in their late teens, budding twenties.
The thought of risk and high danger was exciting but it must also have been distorting.
Burton's Welsh and hungry and visceral sense that everything had to be grabbed or it would be lost forever would be reinforced at this critical stage in his life by the fatalistically hedonistic mood which infected so many.
He left Oxford in autumn 1944 to do his training at Torquay.
His eyesight was below par which disqualified him from being a pilot — and annoyed him a lot— but he passed out as a navigator.
(He had left Oxford, incidentally, as one of the twelve prize-winning cadets.)
The mysterious pattern of war decreed that he sail to Canada on the Aquitania .
Soon after he got there the atom bomb all but ended the issue and certainly ended all active prospects for the latest intake of air crew.
They were not even given their wings and for the next two years, on the ‘last in last out’ principle, they had to endure the insufferable tedium of waiting for demobilisation.
These years, like the first few years at the Secondary School, see Burton relapsing quite cheerfully into that boyo-larrikin-rugby-skiving coast through life: not a care, it appeared, in the world — Tom Jones at large.
Before Richard had left for Canada, Philip had secured a pass for him to come to Cardiff to star in a radio  production of The Corn Is Green .
He could scarcely have given him a firmer hint if he had hit him over the head with a mallet.
There was both their backgrounds — a boy taken from a bleak past into a glorious future by a dedicated schoolteacher — and furthermore this acting business got him off duty, paid him as much cash as a miner's weekly wage for a few hours' easy work and had a satisfying tint of glamour…
Burton filed it away.
He was still not committing himself.
There was a war to be fought; and after that possibility evaporated, there was fun to be pirated wherever it showed its flag.
From Winnipeg — where he had to work a bootlegging ruse to get a drink — he hitched to New York to stay with some friends of Philip: they were in Vermont and so he busked a few days in Manhattan, perhaps even sang for his supper in Greenwich Village.
It would not be the first or the last time.
He had no nerves and no shame about singing or performing when ‘the necessary’ was in short supply.
His voice was now re-forming into a pleasant tenor and his clamp of a memory could breeze him through Welsh songs and hymns, music-hall ditties and comic specialities half the night.
He also did imitations — Churchill a pièce de résistance.
One of the best authorities for the next couple of years of Burton's life — back in the UK, waiting for the demob in various rural localities — is the actor Warren Mitchell.
He too had been at Oxford, studying Science, and he was another of the twelve prize recruits who marched away from the City of Dreaming Spires.
He was then known as Mick Misell, came from the East End, and bristled when an officer, asking Burton if he was going to be an actor, was rebuffed by the reply, ‘Probably not, sir.
The trouble is the whole theatre's controlled by the Jews.’
Mitchell remembers-this affectionately and wisely.
‘It was probably something he'd heard an old actor say,’ he said.
‘There wasn't a ha'porth of prejudice in him — except that the Welsh were marvellous and especially the Welsh-speaking Welsh and most particularly those from Pontrhydyfen  and most of all the Jenkins family.
That apart, he ended up with a black dresser, Irish drinking pals, Jewish bosom friends (he once introduced Elizabeth Taylor to my father —‘Have you met my little Jewish girl friend, Mr Misell?’) and so it went on.
He couldn't give a damn about anybody — that was one of the things that was so attractive about him.
Not about anybody .
It could be frightening.
But anyway I flared up and said that sort of remark was what we were supposed to be fighting the war about and I went for him.
And he backed down.
In public, there and then — shook hands, apologised, excused his stupidity and we were friends.’
Like Robert Hardy — and like Hardy, Mitchell is an intelligent, thoughtful and trustworthy man — he has few qualifications about Burton at this stage: Burton would be nineteen, twenty, twenty-one.
‘There was a sense of wonderment about the man,’ he says.
‘Whether he knew it or not, he was one of those people you can't help looking at.
One Air Force Day we were putting up stands for a show and he leapt up and did about half a dozen speeches from Henry IV and Henry V .
I couldn't believe it.
And I looked at all the rest of them — a tough lot, I can tell you —they couldn't believe it either.
They were intoxicated .’
The basic passions were still unrestrained.
‘It was rugby, rugby and rugby with all those fellas.
He played in a team with ten Internationals.
Then they'd go drinking.
Then they'd come back and talk about rugby half the night and all you heard was ‘came around the bloody blind side and bang!’'
Now that there would be no war, he seems to have lost interest in navigation (if he ever had much).
‘I heard him over the intercom once — we were on an exercise — up in the clouds — saying, ‘sorry, Oggy, forgot my ruler!’
Forgets his bloody ruler and he's the navigator!
And there was this aircraft recognition test.
Maximum score 1OO — lose six points if you shot a friend, lose eight if you failed to shoot an enemy.
‘Burton!’ 'Yes, sir.’
'Your score, Burton.’
'Minus two hundred and fifty-four, sir!’'
There was also the curious incident where Burton defended  an Italian POW.
The man had been accused of raping a local girl and was in very serious trouble.
Burton, who had studied Italian at Oxford, undertook to defend him.
Either because of the man's dialect or Burton's patchy command of the language, detailed communication was not possible.
However, Burton discovered he knew the lady in question.
So did most of the camp.
He persuaded the court that she must have raped him .
The case was dismissed.
Burton then asked the defendant, whom he had nick-named the SOB (Son of the Barber), to sing an aria.
Which he did.
Burton replied with a song in Welsh.
Burton started a Welsh male voice choir —‘although at one time there were only two Welshmen in the camp’— and at one stage, up at Docking in Norfolk, he seems to have done everything but declare the place an independent colony.
Robert Hardy — who had arranged a nifty transfer to London — confirms this.
‘I went down to see him.
It was like visiting a Tartar camp!
And this terrible boy at the centre of it all!
They went to the pub with Air Marshal's ranking chalked on their uniforms, windows were smashed to prove that broken glass need not draw blood, there were tremendous fights, he lived at the local hall, there was game, there were bounties we never saw in London — he sailed very very close to the law during that period.’
‘He was in residence at the local hall,’ confirms Mitchell, ‘because he was in bed with the cook.’
‘I tried to get him to come to London,’ said Hardy, ‘but he wouldn't.
He had all the rugby he wanted, he said.
And he was translating a novel into Welsh, producing one of Phil's plays with that shambolic crew up there — reading first editions borrowed from the Hall.’
‘He passed on one of his girl friends to me,’ Mitchell said.
‘He'd got too many as usual.
I had to pretend I was him!
Put on the Welsh, spout a bit of Shakespeare —‘You're a bit small to be a skipper,’ she said.
‘It's not size, it's the way you hit them,’ I said.
A hairdresser she was, very classy, lots of money.
‘Hullo, Mick,’ the lads would say.
‘Mick?
Mick?’ 'They mean Dick.
It's a way they have.
We all get nicknames.’
Kept it up for three weeks.
I was Richard Burton.
I thought, if you could be Welsh and a Jew, you'd have everything going for you!’
The bottom line was that there was nothing for them to do and those thoroughbred young men were too bright and too vigorous to put up with endless bull.
They were given an inch or two.
Burton by all accounts took several miles.
‘He had this feeling of danger,’ said Hardy more than once, ‘on and off the stage.
And most people were willing to accept his leadership because the rewards were so great: it was exciting: it was the size of the thing, the scale he brought to it.’
Aircraftman First Class Burton got away with it even — it was said — when caught undisguised in flagrante with a leading officer's wife.
There was, in this period, a time of steady courtship.
The girl — a few years older than him — was the actress Eleanor Summerfield.
He would take frustrating and puzzling journeys on the serpentine British railways to see her for a snatched fraction of a weekend in a provincial rep.
She took him to her home in a middle-class London suburb and her mother disapproved.
Nevertheless they regarded themselves as unofficially engaged.
It did not last but the parting seems to have been no terrible pain, the memory very fond.
Meanwhile back in Wales, Philip Burton had taken the plunge, moved to Cardiff and gone to work full-time at the BBC as a producer.
But he let nothing get in the way of his chief purpose.
Richard was taken to Stratford-upon-Avon for a week where they saw Marlowe's Dr Faustus and the ex-schoolteacher had his ward up in the morning in the hotel gardens to study and learn by heart the great speeches.
The Corn Is Green was to be done on the new medium of television in 1946 and somehow Philip wangled leave of absence from the RAF for Richard who yet again played Morgan Evans and yet again was pulled back from the gypsy snares of freewheeling pleasure to the source and the purpose of it all.
In 1947 he was staying with his ‘father’ when, by chance, a new play by P. H. Burton called The  Rescuers was being produced.
The story was obliquely based on the death of Philip's father and told of miners digging their way to their trapped workmates.
Still, though, the young man hovered.
Should he get back into Oxford and try for a First and a Rugby Blue?
(The trouble with that was that so many All Blacks and Springboks and older British Internationals were at the University he would be better advised to wait a year or two.)
Or should he write?
He already had the entry ticket of a couple of rejection slips — one from the BBC.
He kept Philip's intense pressure at bay.
What he was to do next was always to be a serious problem for Burton.
His nose was pressed to the pane of his present blinding experience.
His mind and spirit wandered far from the crowd of contemporary detail.
This split made him simultaneously very alert and extremely absent-minded, now on the ball, now off in a world of his own.
The future was always a foreign country, always took him by surprise and was always challenged and met with a charge.
Perhaps one of the reasons for his impact — as a man — on so many varied people was this great and lordly carelessness about where he was ‘going’: as if a mapped-out course was just a waste of precious time.
The time to be and the time to brood: that is what he wanted.
What he was to become — that was a chore.
Yet it was around this time that he settled for being an actor.
‘He had a lack of esteem for actors and an actor's life,’ said Robert Hardy, ‘but he liked the parts .’
What might well have fixed it was a radio play,In Parenthesis , by David Jones, produced for the BBC Third Programme by Douglas Cleverdon in 9948.
It is so good.
The play is based on David Jones's book — an epic poem centred on the First World War but bringing in Welsh military history and mythological references from Roman times.
It is a complex and profound tour de force which carried much of its weight over to radio in Cleverdon's adaptation and production.
Burton always thought it the finest thing he ever did.
And to hear him now, that  biting, intelligent, comprehending and passionate voice — he was right.
It had everything he loved — the Welshness, wonderful poetry, drama on the heroic scale and a sure unflinching sense of literature.
Philip Burton was also in it (no doubt he got his ward the part) and so was Dylan Thomas.
And this, I think, was the final clincher.
The great poet became his friend.
Though from a much more comfortable background than Burton, Dylan Thomas had been brought up just the other side of Swansea Bay, a few years older than the man who would become his greatest reader.
Burton discovered Dylan Thomas for himself.
He startled Philip with him, so impressed Emlyn Williams with a recitation on a London street in a blackout that Williams could recall it precisely forty years later, and introduced anybody he thought would appreciate it to the dark-vowelled, consonant-cracking language of the man whose most famous work would be Under Milk Wood , whose first performance — on radio and stage — would star Richard Burton.
Dylan Thomas was a real poet — in direct line from John Donne; he was Welsh; he drank; and he became a friend.
Burton was deeply proud of that.
Dylan Thomas would act now and then to pay the bills.
He was in this production of In Parenthesis and Burton has described a highlight from Thomas's performance.
‘Dylan as an actor and as an explosive performing force was a dangerous rival for other actors, as I know, for I worked with him a few times or several, and once for instance a director [Douglas Cleverdon]said to him — we were rehearsing a radio play at the time — Dylan, will you take the words ‘Mam!
Mam!’ and scream them for me.
You understand that you are dying in no man's land, and when you hear the Royal Welch sing, I will give you a cue light and then scream for me, woodjew, there's a good chap.
And the Royal Welch did sing in the rehearsal, it was a record of course, and they sang of what you could see from the hills above Jerusalem, and it was in the minor key and sad as the devil or death, and the green light flickered, and Dylan, short, bandy, prime, obese, and famous among the bars, screamed as I have never heard, but sometimes imagined a scream, and we were all appalled, our pencils silent above the crossword puzzles, and invisible centuries-gone atavistic hair rose on our backs.
And there was a funny silence and Dylan said that he'd bet I couldn't do that scream like that with a cigarette in my mouth and I shook off the centuries, stopped staring, smiled a little, noted that he had indeed monumentally screamed with a cigarette in his mouth and went stunned back to my crossword.’
So.
If acting was good enough for Dylan Thomas, who was probably his lifetime's hero, if it was the world of words of David Jones and the wish of dear old Phil — then all in all he might as well give it a try.
And another thing.
Binkie Beaumont, good as his word, saw that he had a contract a few weeks after he was finally demobbed in 1947.
Burton met Warren Mitchell in the street very soon after.
£500 a year,’ he exulted — it was more than any of his family had ever made in their lives.
‘Can't believe it.
£500 a year — whether I work or not!’
That settled it.
SYBIL AMONG THE WOMEN
‘And where were you last night?’
Emlyn Williams asked.
‘Out drinking.’
Richard was never afraid to tell Emlyn the truth.
‘And with some  floozies .’
‘Why don't you find a nice girl?’
‘Dunno.’
‘There are plenty all around you.
Over there.
Sybil Williams she's called — go and introduce yourself to her.’
He did so.
They were married a few months later.
Sybil was nineteen.
Burton was twenty-three.
This happened on the film set of The Last Days of Dolwyn — Burton's celluloid debut in a part written especially for him.
He had been taken up by and was much impressed and influenced by Emlyn Williams — working-class Welshman become writer/actor/director/Oxford University graduate — but Williams's guidance was not always so effective.
‘People have been coming to me and saying ‘He's drinking, you know.’'
‘Have they, Emlyn?’
‘Yes.
Oh, I say, what is he drinking?
‘Beer,’ they say.
‘But a lot of beer.’'
‘That's true, Emlyn.’
‘Well.
I like a drink myself but we have to watch it.
People will be jealous of you.
People will not miss anything that gives you an Achilles’ heel.
Do you understand?’
‘Yes.’
‘Watch it then, won't you?’
‘Yes.
I will, Emlyn.’
‘And he just stood there,’ Emlyn concluded, ‘looking so desperate that I gave us both an enormous gin and tonic!’
The one problem appeared to be solved.
The other did not seem to be a real problem at all.
Alcoholism was then barely acknowledged and certainly not a widespread and alarming medical issue.
It was not the harm he might do himself but the slips he might make along the way which alerted Emlyn.
Sybil Williams, though, seemed indeed a solution.
And for many years of their marriage it seemed that she was.
Burton had once again followed the directive of an older man.
For much of his life Burton had an unslakeable appetite for sex, a great talent for affection, and a genius to arouse.
Since coming back to London on his £10 a week contract he had teamed up again with Stanley Baker and they had gone on the rampage.
Star studs at the Streatham Palais de Danse, hawks in the dovecots of Irish nurses, pickers-up of usherettes, shopgirls, actresses, chorus girls…how far they ‘went’, how much they ‘did’ lies mercifully buried under the silt of time — but boyos they were.
It was expected.
That they were having more than their fair share — that at the very least, seems beyond all possible doubt.
But the imperative was common at that time, for some years beyond and in some quarters still today.
Crudely put, it directed the young male of the species to ‘get as much as he could’ before marriage cut off every tap but one.
And if you came from a chapel and puritanical background of dark and moral mills where the only promised warmth was hell-fire, then — given the opportunity — you skidded all over the field like a jackpot rabbit.
And if you found that you had entered the company of players, of actors, of those descended from strolling vagabonds and historically always noted and envied for the looseness of  their morals, then all your Christmases came at once.
It should need no stressing that even today, when more and more actors (those in work) are aiming at the regular working-day/mortgage belt, affairs, amours and just plain sex inside a company is not unknown.
The brief encounter often comes with the brief stopover in the oasis of a job.
More so at that time when companies were culled from post-war part-blackout part-music hall Britain to cling together for a while on what usually became the wreckage of a production.
Perhaps an analyst might say that the casual sexual connection in this context was the only thing that kept the group going.
Another view would be that it was a hail and farewell community, and while it was together it was open all hours.
And because it is the tradition, it all seems at once brisker and more tender, easier and less crucial than in the outside world: though this may be an error; the easiness might be an art too.
But the central and critical point is that the sexual gavotte tended to go with the theatre like pinstripes and a bowler (then) went with the City.
Burton's sexuality, which many have pointed to as the source of his power on stage and, at his best, on screen, became notorious in its more scandalous manifestation in his love for women.
This was apparent from quite early on.
Even now his contemporaries raise their eyes and murmur ‘Ssshh’ because there are still alive those whose feelings might be hurt and the extent of it all is better buried under the marriages and the more undeniable liaisons.
Don Juan today has lost whatever sympathetic press the years of male domination gave him.
Feminism and a greater acknowledged (though not necessarily practised) awareness of the equality and independence of sexual rights have becalmed the Don as a fool of time.
Psychology has dissected him to death.
AIDS has ousted him out of history.
But there is little point, for instance, in turning on an artistic, enlightened medieval king because he also enjoyed slaughtering hundreds of deer in a day's hunt and daubing the fresh blood on his own face and those of his friends.
Examples can be multiplied.
To yank someone entirely out of their time and smack them around for not being of our time is perhaps a salutary but only a limited exercise.
Yet the times have indeed changed: and Burton's early sexual insatiability, his later infidelities, his many women and his concurrent devotion to monogamy all need some explaining.
Not, though, apologising for.
To begin with the obvious, there is no record that he forced a woman to bed against her will — none; there is no rumble of the stain of real deceit — it seems he always made the rules of the arrangement clear.
Self-delusion was something else.
As his reputation went before him like a brass band in front of a carnival, from the age of twenty no woman he met could possibly have been unaware of it.
There is a more speculative, perhaps deeper point.
Burton had grown up surrounded by multiple tensions, multiple obligations, multiple loyalties.
Cis, as he sadly said, ‘was wonderful, but she was not my mother’.
His father had first been replaced by an elder brother, then by one teacher, then another dominating man…his younger sisters were his nieces, his older sisters more like aunts, the brothers like uncles, the cousins like brothers, the real aunts like mothers…he had many alternative worlds.
This was not insecurity, it was a world of pleasing affectionate options.
Singularity, like, later, monogamy, was a difficult thing, a strain, almost an oddity: perhaps that was its appeal for him, but why did it have to be so?
Complexity, elaboration, alternatives, parallel lives, that was the way it had always been; that was his ‘norm’.
Did Sybil realise this?
I think so.
And she saw there was good in it — if it could be kept away from conflagration.
Perhaps she saw something else.
That in all this — in the maelstrom which he had managed to turn into a benevolent vortex — his real preoccupation at that time was to be a man.
Men, essentially, were miners.
They could be steel workers.
They were always sportsmen.
As children they were spoiled — how can a five, seven, eleven year old be  blamed for the lifelong influence of having his shoes cleaned, his tea-cup passed across a table, his hair combed, his every want anticipated by the mother he ached for because she was already so worn out and was not, in the end, his mother?
Men were the providers.
They were not to be questioned: what they did was supply the pillars for the system.
And if they dillied, or dallied, and if they tarried a little— then blame, surely, and shame, if caught out, but it was all trivial and irrelevant compared with the necessity to be a man.
Sybil knew where all that came from.
There has been the usual talk of ‘insecurity’ and maybe so, although this fashionable ‘insecurity’is a very glib key which seems to fit every known lock.
More interestingly, those who knew him well speak of his outstanding security.
‘He was not insecure at all ,’ said Emlyn Williams.
‘He was very very strong.’
He knew who he was and what he wanted to do way before most people.
What he wanted to be , what the answer was to his particular puzzlement and pain — that was different.
But his steely sense of his outward self was his most envied quality.
It is also true that he was lost without a woman around him.
He could neither cook nor sew.
In the tribal fashion of her place and times, giving the best cuts to the master, serving the young lord, Cis had spoiled him.
Burton was very secure — over-confident perhaps — in his body and its appetites.
He believed that his body was a good guide to his character and he punished it and indulged it by turns.
Sport, little sleep (never a good sleeper), drink (though he thought of this as a treat for the machine), cigarettes (heavy) and general hooliganism was punishment.
Sex was one of the pleasures.
Like money, it was the ‘real thing’.
He seems to have been a great romancer.
‘He laughed them into bed,’ Warren Mitchell said.
‘There was the poetry, the stories, the fun of him,’ said Robert Hardy.
And he was a hunter.
But he was never a man intent on building up a score.
He was, it appears, neither rapacious nor peremptory, no ‘for kicks’, no ‘wham bam, thank  you, mam!’— he tried to make sure both of them enjoyed the time; and he was fun.
Most of all, perhaps, as the woman behind these anonymous observations concludes, ‘When you were with him, you were all he was ever interested in, even though you knew that a week or two later it would be somebody else.
His concentration on you was a charge in itself.’
He could also, like anyone else, behave very badly.
Curiously enough, though — and most curious of all, given the world of intense cohabitation in which he grew up — Burton hated to be touched.
He was no hugger, no fondler, no arms around the lads or groping the girls.
His physical aloofness made him ‘nerve-racked’ and ‘full of the horrors’on stage when he had to kiss someone.
He hated changing in front of others — and this from a man who played rugby with fourteen other men week in week out for years and must have huddled with them in the cramped and corrugated spaces of dressing rooms up and down the country.
That aversion to touch was coupled with the distance he could put between himself and others, the withdrawal.
Perhaps the centre of it was indeed some intimation of doom: his mother dead so soon after his birth, his father indifferent, best joked about, his context a wasteland of the Western world.
Was that branding so early and deep that nothing would heal over it?
In which case, what better, what other remedy than to push yourself as hard as you could towards all extremes to feel alive, but keep the centre inviolate?
Daphne Rye, the top casting director, looked after him following his demob and in 1948 ushered him into the West End in a literary play — from a book by Elizabeth Bowen —Castle Anna , which Daphne herself directed.
Burton had a small part, did it competently, met Richard Leech, a young Irish doctor, who had taken to the boards.
Leech, who had expected a generous-minded rival, was amazed at Burton's blunt declaration that if he could not make the acting game pay well and soon, he would be off.
And he was missing his rugby.
Warren Mitchell went around to see him after a  performance and was amused — following Burton's initial reaction to the money — when he grumbled, ‘You won't believe all they give me for this?
A miserable £500 a year!’
Stories told about Burton at this time are necessarily retrospective and tend to suffer from retrospective grandeur and glamour.
The other side of the roaring boy, the young Hal and poetry-loving bruiser, the devil in bed and pub, was a young man who felt alone in London, knowing that he had to look out for himself and look out sharply.
London was full of young men from the war with connections new and old, quicker at the game, civilian spivs, career barrow-boys; to get what you wanted you had to be hard and fast: no lingering.
He had no time to stand about in the theatre if it did not deliver.
He had to make his own terms.
Ten years later Burton would have been as happy as Larry.
In the late Fifties, early Sixties, following Look Back In Anger, Roots, A Taste Of Honey, Saturday Night And Sunday Morning, Lucky Jim, Room At The Top , a young Burton would have been a dream ticket.
Provincial accents were then acceptable, even for a brief moment preferred; writers were making memorable works out of a background much nearer that of Burton.
Most importantly, there was a cluster of writers, directors, actors and critics who gathered around an idea of a realistic, passionate, intellectual theatre which would have been a most fertile ground for Burton.
There is a study to be made of men and women born ‘out of their time’.
It is a recurring phenomenon and perhaps when you miss that particular notch you have to adopt original even eccentric strategies to bring the times and yourself together in the big bang of true fame and real success.
Bryan Forbes, the writer and director, came into the London theatre at the same time as Burton and knew him then.
He describes the West End theatre which he and Burton were heir to as ‘Binkie's.
Binkie Beaumont was H. M. Tennent and directly and indirectly he controlled about a dozen theatres.
He had good taste.
He paid about  fourpence if he could get away with it.
And you had to be with them.
The prevailing tone was homosexual — there was no doubt about that.
You did not have to be one — but it helped.
Richard, of course, never deferential, never awed, totally fearless, just played the other way flat out!
Went his own way.
There was nothing they could do about him.
And they were not fools: they could spot talent.
But it was a very distinctive and pervasive tone: the Hollywood casting couch was for starlets in the States and stud boys in London.
Thank God for Daphne Rye: she saved us.’
As Burton loved to live in opposition — it made him feel most alive and it could be argued that he lived in serious opposition to his own body for long stretches of his life — it is interesting to speculate whether the homosexual network gave yet another spin to his heterosexuality.
More importantly, it was a network.
Burton knew about networks.
Networks, he was beginning to see, were what made the world go round.
Meredith Jones had worked the educational network; Philip had engineered the ATC cadet to Oxford on another network; Emlyn Williams was the centre of a growing Welsh network, the ‘Tafia’; Binkie Beaumont (who had started work in a theatre in Cardiff — the Welsh connection may have helped Burton once again) was the unlikely Godfather of the London network: Burton himself was to become a Godfather and enjoy it enormously.
This was the way the world as he saw it worked.
He accepted that and worked it.
Daphne Rye was his way through.
Burton used to make up affectionate calypsos about Daphne Rye.
He was one of what were known as ‘Daphne's hoofers’.
Richard Leech and Bryan Forbes were also part of the club.
‘Daphne protected us,’ says Forbes, ‘those of us who needed it.’
She prised Burton out of digs in Streatham to install him on the top floor of her house in Pelham Crescent — just a few doors down from Emlyn Williams.
Daphne was his sort: she was interested in quality production and worked with the artistic ‘Company of Four’ which did Castle Anna by Elizabeth Bowen and John Perry which opened in February 1948 and Dark Summer by Wynyard Brown.
Burton got good parts.
She was interested in promoting the careers of young stars.
And she was Rabelaisian, rather surprising, liberated fun.
Almost immediately, it seemed, Burton got his first film break — still only a few months out of the RAF.
‘Came out on a Monday, in a play on a Tuesday, star on a Wednesday: never looked back,’ he would say, later, when he enjoyed teasing around with his reputation and idly sowing mischief.
He had some way to go but Emlyn Williams was determined to help him.
The part of the young boy in the film The Last Days of Dolwyn was written especially for him.
Emlyn had some difficulty in persuading Rank and the producers, Alexander Korda and Anatole de Grunwald, to take on this new boy.
He arranged for Burton to have a screen test.
‘I prepared it very carefully.
Korda and de Grunwald were startled.
I sent Richard a telegram, ‘You have won the scholarship’— it's a line from The Corn Is Green .
You know, he didn't even bother to reply!’
Those who were with him on the tour of Dark Summer at the time were equally astounded.
Not even to reply !
He drop-kicked the telegram away, went out for a drink and turned up months later on the first day of filming amiable as an old soldier.
‘I'd almost given you up,’ said Emlyn, half nettled, half intrigued.
Careless, confident, his own man even then.
‘He was a natural,’ says Williams, continuing in the long line of those men and women of experience and the most foxy intelligence, who could not analyse Burton's gift any more clearly than that.
‘The only thing he couldn't do was to look longingly innocent.
He didn't have it in him.
He couldn't be vulnerable.
He had to look through a window and see the girl dancing — but he could only look ‘fierce’.’
Maybe he had never been innocent.
Sly cigarettes from the age of eight.
‘And that was another thing,’ said Williams.
‘His smoking.
We were shooting the film in North Wales in a terrible wet month in a tiny village and he smoked and read and did his crosswords and smoked.
I said, ‘Richard — you have  a good voice — you really should stop smoking.
If you stop for three months, I'll give you £100’— a lot of money in those days, 1948 — £1,000 now? £2,500?— anyway.
His face lit up.
After two months he gave in.
Came and told me — no cheating.
Self-indulgence overcame greed!’
Sybil Williams had been born in Wales.
Her father, an official in a coalmine, had died when she was young and she was brought up and well educated by ‘academic’ sisters.
Her background was a few rungs up from the Jenkinses and that elementary social fact helped to give her a poise in the face of his ever-increasing sureness.
Many found her consistent equilibrium the most surprising of her many qualities.
She came to England to stay with a sister, went to acting school in London and through a teacher who knew how to persuade Emlyn Williams, was all but smuggled into The Last Days of Dolwyn as the sixth girl extra ‘when only five had been budgeted for.
But then I thought — Alexander Korda can afford six,’ said Emlyn, doing a favour for the female line of the Tafia.
She was petite, going silver-haired, vivacious, bright, and willing to take Richard on trust.
After the first date he said he would phone her: she waited by the telephone until after midnight.
No call.
Next day.
Where were you?
Phoned all day, he said, you'd better get the engineers to look at that telephone of yours.
She accepted that.
They began to go out together.
It is not only that no one on the planet has a bad word to say about Sybil: people trip over their superlatives.
Her life and career after she and Burton split up confirms the opinion of her energy and flair — and her directness.
She took on Richard Burton and it is impossible that she did not know — quite soon — that there were flaws: she knew about theatrical affairs and knew that most of them were no more than vessels bumping in the night or for the run of the play.
And he would mostly take very good care not to be found out.
‘Mustn't hurt Sybil.’
There were rules when she did find out.
‘The first week I say don't hurt her: the second, don't hurt me,’ she is reported to have said.
But all that is way below the surface when people talk about her.
The family liked her — Cis and Hilda, Ifor and David, Pontrhydyfen and Port Talbot: she was Welsh and so pleasant and easy, lovely personality, beautiful voice, could make you laugh, just what Rich needed, just right for him.
A great woman, says Lauren Bacall, she had balls, she still has.
She was too good for him.
My mother is a very nurturing woman, says Kate Burton, their elder daughter, I know that they just suited each other perfectly at that time.
‘Marvellous,’ says Robert Hardy, and the word rings like an echo around every friend you meet.
On and on it goes and goes on still.
He had met a jewel and he snapped her up.
She was soon to give up her own acting career — which she never took seriously — to — spoil him?
Support him?
Manage him?
More mundanely, most likely, prepare to have the family for which they had to wait many wearing years.
I don't know how she coped, they say — Rich telling her he'd be back for lunch and not turning up till dinner and then with Stanley or some other pals.
He took such chances, they say, but Syb never seemed to bother.
They would sing Welsh songs together, she would take up the descant, he would make up verses with just a little edge to them.
Photographs show them beaming at the camera, oddly alike, almost a brother and sister likeness.
Nobody ever got through Sybil's guard.
Syb was ‘wonderful’, he told his friends.
‘I've met this marvellous girl.’
Activity on all other fronts was called off immediately.
He wooed her and wed her within a few months.
And yet the night before the wedding his detachment or his melancholy reasserted itself when he told Stanley Baker that he was marrying her only ‘because she expected it’.
She was a nice girl and she expected the ring.
But he wanted a nice girl who expected the ring.
When told to settle down — and Emlyn Williams, who had to a large extent taken over the parental role from Philip Burton at this stage,did instruct him to do that — it clicked with  something and he thought — well, why not?
And the girl turned out to be ‘wonderful’.
Interesting that he had married precisely the sort of girl he would have married had he stayed at home.
For surely back in Port Talbot a smart young man would have looked a notch or two up the ring-ridden ladder of class and hauled himself up — in his pride — one or two places.
That was the way of it.
And that was the beauty of it.
She was home but, like him, an exile: together they made up a little principality but it was inside the great metropolis.
He knew her every move and she had seen and heard of his like since childhood.
They were married in February 1949 and Daphne Rye, who had given them the reception, encouraged Sybil to move into Pelham Crescent.
Early in the following year, with Daphne's help, they bought a house, 24 Lyndhurst Road in Hampstead, North London, an area which attracted writers, painters, actors, a taste of bohemia and, most importantly, immigrants, especially from Eastern Europe, but still with its own Cockney Pearly King and Queen.
Just the melting pot for the young Welsh couple.
The Burtons let off part of the house and lived in the rest.
It was all very sensible and creditable.
Hampstead was a dashing address.
Sybil was ‘like Cis’.
In Sybil he had rejoined his past but he transplanted it to an artistic suburb of London which had been the haunt of legendary highwaymen, was now the roost of exiles and writers and only fifteen minutes from the West End theatre.
Sybil was home.
MAKING IT
In less than three years after his demob from the self-indulgent pastures of the peacetime RAF, Richard Burton turned himself into a great young classical actor —the heir and very apparent to Gielgud and Olivier;and Hollywood was on the line, fishing for a new star.
It was another violent shift in a life and a career which never had an even, an easy or predictable pattern.
And it was done with an extraordinary vault of achievement.
He had appeared in only five stage plays as a professional adult when he was called to Stratford-upon-Avon to play a full season of major Shakespearian roles.
Most important of all, he did them so well that those who saw him then still today, thirty-seven years on, speak of him with awe.
‘He was just astounding, miraculous,’ says Peter Hall.
‘He was Prince Hal.’
Son of drunken Dic, son again of stern Philip the teacher, he transformed himself into an heroic king of England, and the theatrical court bowed the knee.
He played Henry V in February 1949 on his beloved BBC radio, the home of the Word and poetry and all that mattered.
Alec Guinness, who first met him at this time, considers that reading poetry on radio was the best thing he did.
The play was directed by a fellow Welshman, Frank Hauser, a young intellectual and committed man of the theatre.
‘It was interesting because he arrived for the audition clearly drunk,’ said Hauser.
‘He was pockmarked, gleaming with nerves and drunk.
He did a poor audition.
Robert Hardy had recommended him.
We gave him the part in the end and I think it was a great boost for him.
There'd been the Scofield incident you see.
I think Rich had lost his nerve — probably for the first time in his life.’
‘The Scofield incident’ referred to — and never yet totally explained — was a play,Adventure Story , by Terence Rattigan, as bankable then as Tom Stoppard is today.
The subject was Alexander the Great, and Paul Scofield was to have the leading part.
Burton was given the considerable role of Alexander's friend, Hephaestion.
Daphne Rye once again had pointed him in the right direction.
It was everything that Burton could have hoped for in the West End at that time.
But Peter Glenville — a noted, respected director — fired him.
His explanation was very simple: Burton was too short, he said, when Scofield spoke of him as ‘'my rock, on which I lean’…he went to lean and went down about two feet.’
Burton himself had several versions: ‘I was supposed to play Paul Scofield's older friend,’ he said, ‘but how can anyone…he looks a hundred and eight to begin with.’
At other times he said that Glenville needed a more mature and a wiser actor.
At the time he was badly thrown.
But he could always get work in good old BBC radio: that was his stamping ground.
Hauser's offer was balm.
‘He had the essential selfishness of a star actor,’ says Hauser.
‘But then he had a very attractive self.
He had to have space around him — and he could create his own space — and then he could work.
At that time he didn't have the guns to storm the big parts.
Henry V was about right for him.’
What shook Burton was not that he would appear to ‘the World’, i.e. the metropolitan thespians, as someone who had failed in a straight contest with another rising young actor, Scofield — although that made him angry and inflamed his competitive instincts — what shook him was that he had no real idea why it had happened.
He had early and with total certainty come to the conclusion that  whatever he had as an actor was beyond his comprehension.
Superstitiously, perhaps, protectively more like, he did not care to explain it or examine it much and he would not interfere with it at all.
Nor would he allow anyone else to do so.
It was a gift.
As mysterious and as simple as that.
And if the pieces were in place — the right words, above all, and then the right part — he could make it work.
But to be told that he could not make it was to be told that this gift could disappear as unpredictably as it had arrived.
That shook him.
Daphne Rye bailed him out again.
The Lady's Not For Burning by Christopher Fry was to be directed by John Gielgud at the Globe in May 1949 and Richard auditioned for the ‘orphaned clerk’.
Written in verse, the play was set in the Middle Ages and told of a soldier back from seven years in the wars who wanted to die and a beautiful witch who wanted to live.
The audition was held at the end of an afternoon and Burton discovered that he was not alone: a very young actress, Claire Bloom, was auditioning for another of the minor roles.
She recalled Burton trying to tell a few ‘feeble jokes’, but his hands were shaking.
Adventure Story was still taking its toll.
And he may have taken a drink or two to steady his nerves.
He would mysteriously shake so badly sometimes that old-timers recommended a large brandy.
The audition went badly.
Pamela Brown, who was to co-star with Gielgud, remembered saying ‘the girl but not the boy’.
Gielgud gave him another chance, asked him to come back the next day and do it again.
Fry himself intervened, struck by the boy's intelligence and independence.
Gielgud took him on.
Whether Gielgud was persuaded by Fry or Daphne Rye or Binkie Beaumont — whose production it was — or whether he saw talent obscured by nerves, he does not remember.
It was a small part, he was in a hurry, the boy was very striking to look at, quite ‘a dream Prince’, says Gielgud.
That may have been enough.
It was certainly enough to change utterly Burton's fortunes on the stage.
For despite empty houses on its provincial tour, this  wordy, intelligent, seemingly uncommercial verse drama was a success in London, ran for a year and then went over to Broadway.
Burton was in a hit — and a classy hit — and in the tonnage of reviews he rarely failed to be mentioned, often praised.
Moreover for a year he shared a stage with one of the greatest and the best-loved English stage actors of the century.
This was his acting university.
Gielgud was his tutor and forever after, his idol.
It was after this that Vere Barker, his rather grand agent, helped him to get the house in Hampstead and began to up his fees even for radio — for which he continued to work — poems, plays, schools radio, £10, £12, £20 sometimes: it all totted up.
In the increasingly middle-class and English world in which he was moving, the notion of earned money, cash for work, was thought vulgar.
To want to be a millionaire was coarse, even ridiculous; money somehow floated down from Daddy or was waiting in a will at the end of an estate — that, though rarely the reality, was a prevailing view, and rather attractive in its unworldly dimension.
Another, more understandable, view was that there was not a lot of it about and the trick was to get your hands on it.
This was still the post-war England of austerity and ration books — full of those coupons that young Jenkins of the Port Talbot Co-op had treated in such a cavalier manner.
Burton had no middle-class expectations, and certainly no desire to ape aristocratic ways he was not heir to.
But he had a keen interest in a deal.
This, too, set him apart.
When he landed the part with Gielgud, for instance, Binkie Beaumont offered him £10 a week.
Burton asked for £20.
It was a prestige production aimed at the West End.
And, after all,The Last Days of Dolwyn had made him something of a film star.
£I7.10&shilling was finally agreed.
Burton was so elated at his tough bargaining that he took a rare taxi back to Pelham Crescent, where he met his neighbour, Emlyn Williams, who winkled the details out of him and sent him back for £30.
Burton describes being ‘between the two men I most feared’ but nevertheless, and with all that was hanging on the part, he went back for  more.
Eventually he got £30 and as he left the room, Binkie said, ‘I know: that old Welsh pit-pony has just been at you.’
In one short lesson, then, Burton found that he could turn a decent offer of £10 into a ‘fortune’ of £30 a week.
So he was right to drive a hard bargain.
Even the genial Binkie Beaumont was prepared to pay him a third of what the experienced Emlyn Williams knew he was worth and could get.
The theatre and film world was mined with rip-off merchants, however nice they seemed.
Burton accepted that and learnt from it.
And in those early days he was careful with money.
Except in pubs.
The purchase of his house was a purchase on security.
He could never believe his luck, just as he could never explain his talent.
He was to be at the mercy of both and early on he knew it.
At that stage he seems to have cut his natural philosophy from the worsted cliches of a poor childhood: ‘never rely on anybody else’, ‘make yourself independent as soon as you can’, ‘put a bit by for a rainy day’, ‘don't let the good times run away with you’.
There was fantastical talk (in 1949!) of being a millionaire.
He would say that his driving demon was ‘the poverty of Wales’— grandiose but no less true for that.
Money mattered.
‘Making it’ also meant making money.
There was that black future to fend off: there was the endless black past to staunch and help.
Now as then, Gielgud is acute, highly intelligent and concerned to help draw a full portrait.
He was a friend of Burton's throughout his life, directed his record-breaking Hamlet on Broadway, appeared with him in Wagner , met and studied him.
As a snapshot of the young Burton, aged twenty-four, Gielgud's account is valuable.
‘He was marvellous at rehearsals.
There was the true theatrical instinct.
You only had to indicate — scarcely even that.
He would get it and he never changed it.
There was this rather famous instance where he had to scrub the floor while Pamela and I were having a long and involved discussion, but I was told that people couldn't take their eyes off him .
Alec Guinness told me that.
Many other actors did.
It comes along very rarely, that particular unmistakable talent.
And of course it can be very dangerous because it's so difficult to control.’
Of his character: ‘He was very sunny, no vanity, so confident.
He boasted now and then, but in a pub way, you know, a Welsh way, for fun.
He was a real pub boy.
Loved to talk: never boring.
Highly intelligent — read a great deal.
Had a great stable of ladies.
Always very respectful to me.’
One further observation: ‘He was always careless.
At the first morning of rehearsal he began yawning and looking at his watch, wanting to be off for a drink.
It was a marvellous opportunity for him but he was careless.’
And bored.
‘He was already a star,’ says Claire Bloom.
‘A fact he didn't question.’
He was to go to Brighton for a fortnight in another play, in 1950,A Phoenix Too Frequent by Christopher Fry, whose well-wrought and ‘difficult’ verse dramas had so unexpectedly caught the taste of the public.
He did films — at this time, 1949 to 51 —Now Barabbas Was A Robber, Waterfront, Green Grow The Rushes and The Woman With No Name .
Like Olivier before him, he took more or less whatever came his way.
He had to.
Korda signed him to a seven-year contract, after the very encouraging reviews of Dolwyn and he was put to work.
What comes out of those films is his willingness to do films.
The British film industry was in a melting-pot — thrashing about, often vigorously.
But curious growths appeared:Green Grow The Rushes (1951) was the film technicians' union's attempt to make a go of it.
Burton joined in what was a disaster.
Waterfront (1950) had a certain social realist clout and his reviews were not bad.
The fact was that there was no place in British films for an actor of Burton's particular quality and no director to take him up.
The quality of passionate and intelligent realism he could bring to a part was not in demand until many years later.
Kind hearts and coronets ruled and that was fine, but to Burton it was a closed shop.
One film, however,Now Barabbas Was A Robber , directed by Gordon Parry from the play by William Douglas Home, brought him his best review yet from the finest film critic of her day, C. A. Lejeune, in The Observer .
‘To my mind,’ she wrote, ‘he has all the qualities of a leading man that the British film industry badly needs at this juncture: youth, good looks, a photogenic face, obviously alert intelligence and a trick of getting the maximum effect with the minimum of fuss.’
On its American release, the New York Times also picked out Burton.
Films, in London at the time, for theatrical types, were considered as little more than perks.
You were paid the money and you ran with the game.
You joked about it.
You affected to look down on it.
You were secretly terrified of it but you kept that very secret .
Films did not count.
The Theatre mattered.
Burton may well have been stained by those prejudices — it would have been hard not to be: and once again it is important to understand the circumstances in which he found himself.
As a boy in Taibach he had gone to the Cach to see his screen heroes.
Movies were magic.
To be in them — unbelievable!
And yet there was no school of thought which cultivated and refined that enthusiasm, no influential and witty group of young film makers who could draw him in and use him as C. A. Lejeune perceptively realised he could be used.
And whereas on the stage he had the words of Christopher Fry or the presence of John Gielgud — both of which drew out his respect and so his best shots — in films generally he would have a leaky script and brief takes — neither giving him the chance to wind up and deliver.
He did not complain.
It was a start.
He was well noticed, he had the beginnings of a fan-club, and back home the Welsh papers gave him full-page spreads.
Ifor came up now and then to keep an eye on him.
The films were shot during the day.
The theatre played in the evenings, the nights were for drinking.
Life was scythed down relentlessly.
Sybil, up in Hampstead or with one of her many friends, kept the home fire burning and  joined the gang when they had a special bash.
She was deciding to devote herself to supporting him as he leapt from one peak to another.
One after the other the towers of prestige and glamour were falling to him.
Yet it was a most unlikely vehicle which took him to his first truly national conquest: a cart.
A wheelbarrow, to be exact, which carried an old woman backwards and forwards across a bare stage — pushed by Richard Burton, her son, in search of a sign from God.
The one-acter —The Boy With A Cart in January 1950 by Christopher Fry — was chosen by Gielgud to feed the Fry boom.
Burton was the Boy.
‘He was simply splendid at it,’ says Gielgud.
‘Absolutely no question.
It was a wonderful succès d'estime for him and his miming — he had to mime building a cathedral — was spell-binding.’
Burton has declared that it was when he was performing that scene on the stage that he felt the hairs on his neck stand on end and knew for the first time the power he could have over an audience.
Anthony Quayle — on the hunt for a young lead to star in his Festival of Britain Shakespeare season — came to see it and was conquered.
‘There he was.
Bang off.
Prince Hal.’
Quayle was already well established as an actor of considerable stature, a director of intelligence and an unusually good administrator.
The Festival of Britain, 1951, was designed to tell the world that we were back in business, full of vim and zip, bursting with new ideas, new teeth in the new bulldog, through another war with honour and into the second half of the twentieth century with eagerness and confidence.
Shakespeare was called in to play his part:
Quayle was commissioned to serve up Shakespeare in Stratford: Burton was discovered to complement Quayle.
Quayle was Falstaff — the most loved, the richest comic part in Shakespeare.
In Henry IV , Parts I and II he has the time of his life.
Alongside rich, corrupt and irresistible Sir Jack Falstaff is the young Prince Hal, wandering far from his true royal path, mixing with thieves and wastrels when he ought to have been studying to be a king.
In most productions, young Hal is the disciple and accomplice of  Falstaff, a broth of a boy, a young man who has turned his back on respectability and on his destiny.
Again Philip Burton came up from Cardiff to spend time with Richard on the part.
Robert Hardy was there to re-rehearse the discussions they had held on desolate airfields during the war.
Burton dug into himself and, as he always did with work he reverenced, laid all he had at the service of the part.
His Hal would be no rollicking dropout.
His Hal would be a truant Prince, perhaps, a man disobedient to his father and contemptuous of the popular expectation, but no less a Prince for that, always watching, always using the lines to cut out a space for himself.
Burton arrived at the first rehearsal word-perfect and with the part already sewn on him like a skin.
There were reports — denied by Quayle but confirmed by Richard Burton and, in his book, by Philip Burton — that Quayle and Burton quarrelled over the interpretation.
It is only fair, I think, to hand over to Philip Burton's unpublished memoir here.
This was the part he had dreamt of night after night in that living room and now — astoundingly — it was to come true in the birthplace of Shakespeare with a great company all around his son.
This was Philip's reward.
He wrote:
My conception of the part, especially since we were seeing its full development in the three plays, was that even in his wild days the Prince must sometimes be aware of the burden of kingship which lay ahead.
There was one moment of which I was particularly proud, and Richard made it a magic one.
It occurs in Henry IV, Part I. Falstaff and the Prince are having a high old time by pretending in turn to be the King chastising Hal for his association with Falstaff.
At the end Falstaff pleads with Hal as the King never to banish Falstaff: ‘Banish plump Jack, and banish all the world!’
I wanted Richard to take a moment to let the words have their full impact on the Prince, and then to say to himself, ‘I do, I will.’
And inevitably he does when he becomes King.
Richard told me that his interpretation of Prince Hal  caused some trouble with the director who was himself playing Falstaff and consequently wanted no serious note to disturb the comedy of the tavern scenes.
Some entries in my small diary express my joy at Richard's success in that 1951 Stratford season:
Sunday, April 8th .
(In London.)
A quiet day at home, luxuriating in Rich's Stratford notices; they are miraculous.
Friday, May 11th .
Saw Henry IV , Part I. Rich was magnificent and Sybil delightful.
(Sybil had the small part of Lady Mortimer who speaks only in Welsh.
Shakespeare doesn't even give her speeches in an English translation.)
This is bliss indeed.
Monday, May 14th .
A doleful day.
I had very reluctantly to leave Stratford after an idyllic weekend.
I don't want a bit to go to America now.
But I did go to America and so I didn't see the climax of the series,Henry V , until…
Saturday, September 22nd .
Up early to go to Stratford.
Rich and Syb met me at the station.
Saw Part 2 at the matinee; it is much better; ‘Oh, polished perturbation’ soliloquy particularly impressive.
Very moved in the evening by Henry V : there's no doubt about R.'s greatness.
I feel proud, humble, and awed by God's mysterious ways.
It would have been puzzling had Anthony Quayle not been disturbed.
Falstaff's laughs, his command, were undercut by Burton's proud Prince.
The established actor whose plays they ought to have been was out-manoeuvred.
Quayle recognised Burton's immovability.
Once the younger man had decided on the part he would not — because he could not — change it.
And once he was on stage, no one could make him do what he did not want to do.
Again and again Burton spoke of ‘being on your own out there’, ‘fighting for your life’, ‘it's you against them’.
Although a pleasant and a modest man, he was also a compulsive competitor — in pints, in sex, in stories, in sport, on the stage.
Quayle, who was director, star and patron, had every reason to feel dismayed: Burton got in his light.
Yet he recognised the depths that Burton was drawing on —‘the Welshness’— and he was one of the first to spot and to note the uncanny, superstitious, even mystical relationship he had with his talent.
‘I don't know where it comes from.
I don't know what it is.
Just a knack,’ Burton told him.
And it might go away if he didn't listen keenly, feed it perhaps with the energy of his life, stoke it up with risks to his health and even to his sanity.
The Welshness was another key to what Sybil called ‘that wonderful summer’.
‘There were nightingales,’ says Robert Hardy, who was also so infected by the prevailing Welshness that his own Archbishop Scrope had a coal valley lilt, ‘there was laughter.’
It was here that Richard bought his first car — a Flying Standard.
Robert Hardy taught him to drive and that produced enough stories for half a night's drinking in Stratford's actors' pub, the Dirty Duck.
Richard at that time was openly delighted at the prospect of posh motors.
A year later he bought a Lea-Francis — the Flying Standard had collapsed — then a Mark 1O Jaguar, then a Cadillac, then the red MG which he never sold and took to Switzerland.
That summer in Stratford was a Welsh heaven.
Hugh Griffiths, an outsize and very grand Welsh actor with eyebrows like handlebar grips, was there in full bucolic magnificence: there was a Welsh harpist who pretended to be a ghost, Rachel Roberts teamed up with Sybil as ‘Lady Something or other’ and they gossiped, knitted the acting village together, went on stage wearing wristwatches and nail varnish.
It was here that Sybil decided to give up acting altogether and dedicate herself to Richard's career and the eagerly expected family.
There was naked bathing on a hot summer's night after a stirring performance, there were wondering Welsh friends and neighbours up to see this phenomenon and afraid that his Welshness might be too loud: ‘The English are afraid of us,’ said Burton and brawled, now and then, to prove it.
The merry scoundrel  pleasure-court of Sir John Falstaff was mirrored in the company of Hugh Griffith and the Welsh contingent, with Burton playing the key figure in both.
Wonder accelerated to amazement when Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall turned up, saw the plays, and fell for Burton.
‘He was just marvellous,’ Lauren Bacall says.
‘Marvellous.
But even then he was trouble, you know.
He'd only met Bogie and I — over in the pub, the Dirty Duck, for about half an hour when he insisted on taking me round to Shakespeare's birthplace.
Recited great lines on the spot of course.
It wasn't exactly a pass, but what the hell was Bogie to make of it?
But Bogie loved him.
We all did.
You had no alternative.’
Some of the critics were a little cool.
Some disparaging.
He was too wooden, too overt.
But there was one critic, Kenneth Tynan, to be the defining critic of British theatre in the Fifties and Sixties, who took his wife Elaine Dundy up to Stratford and went backstage to congratulate, to talk, later to drink.
Then came a review which made a bonfire of all the others and lit up Burton's name in flames in the English theatre of the day.
His playing of Prince Hal…turned interested speculation to awe as soon as he started to speak: in the first intermission the local critics stood agape in the lobbies.
Burton is a still brimming pool, running disturbingly deep; at twenty-five he commands a repose and can make silence garrulous.
His Prince Hal is never a roaring boy: he sits hunched or sprawled, with dark unwinking eyes: he hopes to be amused by his bully companions, but the eyes constantly muse beyond them into the time when he must steady himself for the crown.
‘He brings his cathedral with him,’ said one dazed member of the company.
For all his bold chivalry this watchful Celt seems surely to have strayed from a wayside pulpit.
Fluent and sparing of gesture, compact and spruce of build, Burton smiles where other Hals have guffawed, relaxes where they have strained, and Falstaff (played with affectionate obesity by Anthony Quayle) must work hard to divert him.
In battle, Burton's voice cuts urgent and keen — always likeable, always amiable.
His gifts were now in place.
His public role and character were now fully marked out.
The presence: the ‘magnificent head and shoulders’ noticed by the alchemist of shrewdness, Alec Guinness: ‘the cathedral’he brought with him, as a fellow cast member observed.
The Voice.
The stillness, the sexual aura, that high-definition presence which is found in men and women heterosexual and homosexual and recognised equally by all: at its rawest and most baffling —'star; quality’.
So there he stood in the Dirty Duck, opposite Shakespeare's Memorial Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon, 1951, Prince of the heap.
‘He came from nowhere,’ says Gielgud.
‘Very rare.’
Dreams of Hollywood stardom — which would come: of more great roles on the stage — which would come: of more glorious drunken evenings in great company — which would come, and women and money and fame — all would be given to this pockmarked child of a miner from Welsh-speaking Wales, born with ‘the devil in him’ as Emlyn Williams's tutelary genius Sarah Grace Cooke observed.
Now the devil was out; and at large.
HOT FOR HOLLYWOOD
‘I didn't want him to be an actor,’ said Cis.
‘I thought it was too hard.
I was frightened for him.’
She had every reason to be frightened.
She could see into him.
Burton was hurling himself on the course most likely to tempt and test him to the limit.
He was going to play tricks and take risks with his life and personality and do so in an increasingly wilful and dangerous way.
To some extent we all do: to a greater extent, perhaps, all actors do this.
The difference with Burton came from the scale on which he did it, the talents he gambled, the colossal winnings, the rupturing losses, the public glare in which increasingly it took place and the undeniable fact that in the middle of this maelstrom was always a quiet, reading man whom Cis would have recognised with relief as the boy sitting beside the fire, buried in a book.
‘I can be loud or soft,’ he said of his voice at this time.
‘I have no middle range.’
That had been rather pointedly obvious when he played Ferdinand in The Tempest at Stratford in the glorious summer of 1951: a lightweight romantic figure with no menace or drama about him — Burton was not good.
Even his devoted admirer and friend Robert Hardy was reduced to praising the ruff he wore!
Nor had the more mature, quiet paragon of Henry V escaped from censure.
As Prince Hal — wonderful, but as the tempered King —‘he lacked inches,’ said one reviewer.
The wound was salved a little when Olivier sent word that he too had been accused of ‘lacking inches’ in the same role and by the same critic!
Gielgud, too, through the agency of his mother, produced reviews to prove that the golden oldies of the classic past with whom Burton was being compared to his disadvantage had been just as slammed in their time.
The middle range, perhaps, was where a comfortable, accomplished actor could exist and grow.
Burton was neither.
He made it seem easy — that was different: that was the pride of the macho Valley rugby player.
He had class: but that too was neither comfortable nor craftsmanly accomplished.
The actor William Squire, who worked with him often in films and on the stage, speaks of his ‘lack of craft, his lack of tricks and knowledge of the trade.
He was what he was and that was it.
When it worked of course— and it did, many times — he was marvellous.
But although he talked of acting as a craft, he took no trouble over it.’
It is essential at this point to try to understand what is happening to Burton since so much of his public life flows from the tensions between Hollywood and the English stage, between money and art, as it was thought, between philandering and fidelity, between a public and a private life.
Very soon he will be known as one of the greatest seducers of our times and in a town — Los Angeles — not known for the lack of competition.
Very soon he will be outfacing the all-powerful Darryl Zanuck and spurning a millionaire's bribe while privately scheming to join that six-zero club.
Very soon he will be up for Oscars and head over heels in the switchback strip of movies.
On the London stage, the great roles will be plucked like plums, in the Welsh valleys his fame will swell like the fortissimo of a chapel organ and his acts of generosity, recklessness, coarseness and excellent manners tossed on to the fiery legend like dry logs.
It is quite remarkable that from so early an age with so short a track record he should have inspired such an industry of interest.
What he relied on, I think, and what he always came  back to was that ‘natural’ self which he did not understand nor at this stage want to understand, but which gave him his power.
It was like an Aladdin's lamp.
A gift.
Somehow he had acquired it and when the need arose he would use it.
The genie would appear: and all would be solved.
In this sense, Burton was drawing on something profound and perhaps dangerous in himself.
He was, perhaps unwisely, fearless about using — and abusing — this gift.
Somewhere in that unknown territory where acts of will, instinct and habit mingle with inheritance, chemistry, biology, is the struggle — if it is a struggle: many can't or won't or don't — to ‘make something’ of yourself.
The battle is like the tragic acts in a Greek drama — always vital, always offstage.
It is there that the most ordinary-seeming ingredients can be re-ordered and re-energised into extraordinary explosions of personality.
Burton pulled the struggle out into the open and made this ‘thing’ that was himself stand up to as many trials as he could imagine.
It was like the course of trials which underline so many of the great myths and fairy stories and narratives.
He saw his life as a succession of tests, mostly invented by himself.
One way to get out of your past is to invent a future you aim for.
Burton's was based on the Celtic hero.
The hero must be challenged and tormented, he must be bamboozled and tried up to breaking point before he is permitted to claim the prize, before, in fact, he is able properly to call himself a hero.
Burton put himself on trial, later on public trial, either because he was driven to it by a daemon he could not command or because he willed the daemon to come out and fight.
Now one, now the other, I suspect.
And so he always laid himself on the line.
Film directors were even to complain — as stage directors complained — that Burton had no ‘tricks’, that he played no games.
He sank into the part with total conviction or — just the opposite — he put it on with open contempt and boredom.
It worked or it did not work.
Somehow it was not his business and certainly it was not his business to pander to it.
He dared  life to deliver its best and to do its worst.
It was this rawness, though, which was at the root of his appeal and of his greatness as an actor, his power as a man.
He was aware of the courage he needed.
Although he had the pride and the carriage to make it look easy, he was often terrified.
He described himself being ‘scared witless’ when he went to Oxford, for example.
Yet he conquered it.
He was shaking with nerves when he did the most critical audition of his career — for John Gielgud and The Lady's Not For Burning — and yet he forced himself through it.
None of this is all that unusual.
What distinguishes Burton was the formidable nature of the obstacles he set himself and the growing weaknesses of body which he ignored.
He was forever daring himself to succeed in ‘the big league’ and, almost equally, prepared to throw it all away.
He was a conqueror who loved conquest but soon became bored with the spoils.
From the first, he used himself as an open laboratory.
The experiments became increasingly harmful.
He was Jekyll and Hyde to himself, swallowing the compounds and mixtures of his own fantasies and terrors and watching what happened.
He was quite prepared to go wild.
In drink he could be aggressive and thoroughly nasty.
Satan could capture his tongue.
Some of the interviews he began to give to journalists are the equivalent of psychoanalysis — in which, of course, he expressed no confidence.
But to a passing journalist he would free-associate in a way which would have held Freud entranced.
His childhood, for instance, became an infinitely fictitious country, now like Gorki's Lower Depths , now like the Chicago stockyard slums, now like an occupied country burgeoning with guerilla units, now a place of giants, spotless princesses, poetry and song.
His drinking became vengeful.
And there was always the shadow of illness, the occasional disturbing blankness, the spasms of physical distress.
One course above all he set himself: or perhaps he could not help it.
There was to be no hypocrisy, no pussyfooting around, no pretence at all— not with himself.
If he were to  discover the nature and the limits of this person he was — and, as time went by, stave off the timor mortis — fear of death — then he would go for the nerve and the bone, draw blood.
Small wonder that Cis was ‘frightened for him’.
He was taking himself to the limit and then pushing on from there.
He had been across to New York with The Lady's Not For Burning , just before the Stratford season.
The play had done quite well and he was noticed in the small part.
To a post-war austerity-rationed Welshman, America was lush Eden and the fleshpots of Egypt combined.
He loved it and although he was obedient to his great theatrical challenge and returned to Stratford, he was happy to go back after Stratford to star in Legend Of Lovers , a play by Jean Anouilh which had begun life as Eurydice .
It was the sort of part which would often come his way.
Wordy and intellectual, with only a small chance of success: the sort of play a cynic would say that producers put on so that they can feel good.
The public gave it early notice: the critics were again kind to Burton.
At that stage in his career no one was looking for a hit-machine: the longer heads realised that it was a difficult job to scale the face of Broadway — as it was in the West End — with so few footholds and even fewer helping ropes dangling down to give you a lift.
Back in London he starred in another prestige production —Montserrat , adapted by Lillian Hellman.
Daphne Rye got him the part, Binkie Beaumont was the producer, the play opened at the Lyric, Hammersmith, on April 8th, 1957.
Burton played the anguished but heroic young captain who would not betray the revolutionary leader despite the systematic slaughter of six hostages.
It had a limited run of six weeks.
Once again the reviews for Burton were excellent.
Those who saw the performance thought it memorable — Burton alone against the Establishment, the powerful or the oppressor: his most convincing role.
But not many people did see it and he was left with a clutch of good notices, a prospect of the West End which would say no, most times, to the sort of plays he was right for and a generous offer from Anthony Quayle to come back to Shakespeare in Stratford and tackle the next range of roles.
Burton declined for two reasons.
The first was that he said he wanted an interval before he ‘took on’ Shakespeare again.
This was surely sensible.
The 1951 Stratford season had been such a success, it would have been foolish to have followed it with any lesser thing.
He needed to regroup.
But there was a simpler reason than that: his hunch told him he was not in the mood for it.
The instinct said no.
So there was no argument.
Korda told him he was ready for a first crack at Hollywood.
The money, at that time, was tremendous.
Korda let him out on a three-picture deal with Fox, continued to pay him $15,000 a year but would take a large slice of what Fox paid him: from the three pictures Richard would earn about £80,000.
In 1952 you might have bought Buckingham Palace for £80,000.
‘He just couldn't believe there was that much money in the world and it was coming to him,’ said Sybil at the time.
He totted up the figures night after night, and ‘he would take that piece of paper out of his pocket and look at it again and again’.
This was not only copper-bottomed security, it was a chance to play with the big numbers and see what happened.
Korda gave him a leaving party which left everyone paralytic.
Poured on to the plane, alone, Burton was humped for thirteen hours across the Atlantic, assuaged by alcohol; stopped over for a few drinks in New York and then taken on an eleven-hour trip to Los Angeles which was made tolerable by more alcohol.
He sank into the waiting limo unshaven, crumpled, white-faced, nervous, shattered and by the time he got to the posh Beverly Hills Hotel, in need of the complimentary bottle of Scotch a thoughtful management had left in his room.
A few hours later he was at a mega Hollywood party, the Welsh wonder from Stratford-upon-Avon, declaiming Shakespeare, drinking soundly, reciting Dylan Thomas, singing, story-telling, perhaps a little over the top, one or two thought, but to the  majority a marvellous new whirlwind of talent and animal energy.
Those forty-eight hours were a small opening shot in the game of chance and challenge he played with his stamina over the next thirty years.
‘My liver is to be buried separately from the rest of me, with full honours,’ he was to say in a later film.
Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart were his welcoming party and he was immediately at the centre of the fastest set in town.
‘He was great fun,’ says Lauren Bacall, ‘the stories, the energy, the poetry.
He was different.
Bogie just adored him.’
So who would say him nay?
Certainly not a considerable number of ladies, according to hot gossip and well informed rumour.
On the other hand, Burton stoutly denied that he had broken up nine marriages: why, he did not even know three of the couples aforementioned.
Sybil papered the loo with that article and others.
The little hard evidence we have of Sybil at this time points to a tough and cheerful woman who had made her deal and stood by it.
Despite his lone pursuits of happiness, the greater impression is that they worked the Hollywood field together, for Burton's material rewards, seeing it as a treasure trove best plundered before it disappeared.
She remained the faithful wife but Richard certainly appears to have had the licence to rove.
The laws of libel and courtesy to the living provide that a decorous Fifties-style Hollywood curtain be drawn over some of these matters.
It was a time when a bare ankle could not be shot stepping out of a robe for the implication would be ‘nakedness’, the consequence ‘sex’ and the inevitable result — the destruction of the nation.
Burton's amours were widely touted ‘with this guy you bring your own mattress’, a well-used crack but at Burton, well aimed.
There was a relationship between Jean Simmons (then married to Stewart Granger) and Burton which was so close that he continued embracing her, publicly, after the stroke of midnight one New Year's Eve, only to look up to a slap in the face from Sybil, who instantly left the party — for New York.
A few days later he joined her.
When they  returned, the Burtons, who had been sharing the Simmons — Granger household, moved out to a minute bungalow which they rented from the James Masons.
There were those who thought that Burton was a shit.
Lauren Bacall, looking back, speaks of a ‘big pro-Sybil lobby’.
‘People didn't like his going around town with one after the other.’
Lauren Bacall cannot be doubted.
On the other hand her present emphasis may be retrospectively the harder because she was so emphatic in the Sixties when Burton ‘crucified Sybil’ by leaving her for Elizabeth Taylor.
She is unequivocally pro-Sybil.
Nevertheless it is not difficult to imagine that there was a Burton-is-an-expletive-deleted faction among the Hollywood wives, mistresses, starlets and full supporting cast.
Burton expected — and usually got —‘cover’ from his friends and complicity in the cover-up from the women.
He said persistently, ‘I'll never hurt Syb.
I'll never leave Syb.’
This was repeated endlessly, a vow, a charm, a prayer?
But as time went on he seemed not to mind who saw him, who heard about his infidelities.
That was life as he lived it and that was that.
Setting out his own terms was a constant provocation.
At this time, he said, ‘All I wanted to do was to live, pick up a new Jag, and act at the Old Vic.’
The British theatrical Establishment who thought he aspired to be their new idol would be puzzled over ‘All I wanted to do was to live’— but they would have let it pass as a Welsh eccentricity; ‘to act at the Old Vic’ would have drawn beams of approval.
But ‘pick up a new Jag’— that would not do.
No matter they had, or aspired to, Bentleys and Rolls and MGs and Rovers — no matter they somehow winkled out the wherewithal to obtain the vehicles — Burton's saying it was somehow too vulgar.
It is likely that he knew that and said it with all the more relish.
Like the Hollywood Establishment — though for different reasons — they too had their doubts about this bold new boy.
Burton loved women.
‘You must first love, or think you love the woman,’ he said.
‘When you are with the only  woman — the only one you think there is for that moment — you must love her and know her body as you would think a great musician would orchestrate a divine theme.
You must use everything you possess — your hands, your fingers, your speech: seductively, poetically, sometimes brutally, but always with a demoniacal passion.’
This is the testament of an erotic fundamentalist.
Love was one of the realities in life and he went for it.
‘All I wanted to do was to live…‘
Sybil's reaction has to be assumed: she has said very little.
She seems to have dealt with it in a remarkably successful manner.
They were invited to Hollywood parties together and they left together: when one broke into song, the other took up the harmonising line.
Their calypsos were enjoyed and their company was sought.
Emlyn Williams, who stayed with them in this period while he was on a tour with his Charles Dickens readings, describes scenes of domestic industry and felicity.
Richard swore by Sybil: ‘She'll never leave me.’
Sybil's very few utterances seem fatalistic.
Her actions — as with Jean Simmons — could be dramatic: her forgivingness, though, seemed to be infinite.
The further assumption must be that they gave each other a great deal that was worth having and keeping.
They called each other‘Boot’, short for the comic Welsh pronunciation of Beautiful — Bootiful!
But he was already pushing it and Lauren Bacall saw that and did not like it.
‘I'll never divorce Sybil,’ he said, ‘and she'll never divorce me…she thinks I'm a genius.’
His nerve was in excellent shape.
He went to one party where Cole Porter played the piano, Judy Garland sang and, invited to follow that , the young Welsh unknown blenched not, stood forward and slammed the room silent with ‘To be or not to be’ spoken in Welsh.
He exchanged jokes with Greta Garbo, whom he did not recognise, and put his hand on the goddess's knee.
He wore the battered corduroy trousers and old tweed jacket of the skint London actor, not for effect but because buying clothes was a waste of money.
He was prepared to be known as a ‘tight-wad’.
He and Sybil lived carefully, borrowed cars to save renting them, accepted hospitality, incurred and endured some cutting remarks of the wealthy but kept steadfast to their aim to make some money and run back to London to act and feed the security bank.
You never knew when your luck would turn — another mean Taibach slogan to see him through these dazzling fields of honey and clover.
Money mattered: those who had never had any know the value.
The bleak wisdom of bare and poor streets were still his commandments.
You had to go for it.
Poverty was still a dread.
One of his compulsive gambits was to challenge everyone at the first meeting.
He made a few gamey remarks to his first Hollywood leading lady, Olivia de Havilland, and she announced to the world that he was ‘a coarse-grained man with a coarse-grained charm and a talent not completely developed’.
He would have agreed with that.
Indeed at one stage he banged his head against the studio wall in frustration.
The camera then as always gave him a major problem.
He could photograph marvellously and at times the camera ‘loved’ him.
Arthur Ibbetson, the English cameraman who worked with him on several occasions, first notes how alarmed he was to discover what a bad skin Richard had and then enthuses without pause about the shape of his face, his professionalism, his patience.
Yet others — Burton included — thought that he never ‘came over’ on the camera as he did on stage.
That is as may be.
He certainly ‘came over’ with considerable force on several occasions —Virginia Woolf, The Night Of The Iguana, The Spy Who Came In From The Cold, Look Back In Anger .
He found it very easy to be ‘professional’ in the sense of doing the job competently while being totally uninvolved, and often the lack of involvement showed.
In his way — at times — he was directing us to his distance from the script, the movie, the work —‘Look!
I hate this rubbish,’ he was saying, but that was not much help to the performance.
He performed best when he had well-written lines and was acting with  someone he respected.
And even then he could appear awkward.
Those ingratiating nudges to the audience, all those lovable, identifiable tricks and traits, the camera-wise knowingness — he never learned.
Either he could not — which, given his wit and his intelligence and, above all, perhaps, his shrewdness — is unlikely; or he would not — which, given the obstinacy and tenacity with which he stuck to his own version of himself, is much more likely.
Once again, he was his own man, went his own way which meant he often lacked utterly the pleasing, the plasticine complicity a great screen actor needs.
The camera wanted everything: Burton wasn't having that.
If the camera is a lie detector — and it can be — then it told the truth about Burton's essential reserve.
That secret self which he drew on, and which he would draw out and test as time went on, was not for public display unless Burton willed it .
Then, fine.
It is useful, I think, to point out again how much he disliked being touched.
His first girl friend said he was ‘not a groper: too much class’.
Kissing women on stage or on screen — with very very few exceptions — Claire Bloom one, Elizabeth Taylor another —‘gives me the horrors’.
It seems odd that a man with so much of a reputation for sexual encounters should cringe from public contact, but it was all part of his reserve.
Just as his repeated and heartfelt defences of monogamy are all part of the complex and muddled or profound idea he had of the division of responsibility and territory between different degrees of love, different qualities of sexual encounter.
Similarly, directors have noted how rare it was for him to bring his natural rage into play on screen.
Anger could sweep across him like a storm cloud in fast motion and burst all about him in a fury of violently well-picked epithets.
And he was a fist-fighting man in his twenties and thirties.
But he was most sparing with the anger on celluloid: would rather fake it than summon it up.
Partly out of shyness, partly because he kept to himself what he felt he most needed, he would not let it out and some performances  suffered.
It was yet another indication of where his deepest interest lay: in his life, not in his career.
In being who he was: that was his vocation, and discovering how far he could go and even, fatally, what he could get away with.
Burton was goose meat for the publicity machine.
The stories of poverty and struggle got wilder and ever wilder in the publicity office until his family came crawling out of the Middle Ages on all fours!
He had an irrepressible tendency to send up his interviewers: if they were daft enough to believe it — so much the worse for them.
He kept forgetting they would write it down: he seems to have thought — most of the time — that they had just turned up for a friendly drink.
He ignored the great truth — jokes don't cross frontiers.
He often came out as a bit of a bighead and, accused of this at the time, took a tape-measure and agreed that his head had indeed expanded by one-eighth of an inch since leaving Wales.
At one stage his entire family of fourteen were reported as having lived on a dollar a week!
Hollywood was the biggest carnival he had ever seen and he was like a box of fireworks set off all at once.
And the films?
Three.
My Cousin Rachel (1952.),
Desert Rats (1953)and The Robe (1953).
My Cousin Rachel , from a Daphne du Maurier novel, was a vehicle for Olivia de Havilland.
Burton climbed on board and, even in a rather clumsy performance, made enough of a mark to be nominated for an Oscar.
They dressed and lit him against his character — softening where they ought to have emphasised the toughness — and they gave him a part with no verbal bite and no guts but even so it was not a bad first break for the boy from the snooker halls of Port Talbot.
In The Desert Rats as the young English captain who put paid to that upstart Rommel by turning him back at a crucial moment in the whole North African Campaign (set in Palm Springs), he was fine.
He was always fine as a soldier or a man of action.
There were no frills and producers regretted that: they yearned for the signature of a Wayne and, later, an Eastwood, a Marvin.
Burton did the  job on screen as efficiently, one felt, as he would have done it in real life.
There was an admirable lack of bullshit in Burton's performances.
In action he was excellent.
He played that aspect of himself which could well have been in a war — after all he had trained long enough for it — and the result was the sort of performance he was to deliver several times in his film career and none the worse for that: professional, convincing.
He loved being in the same film as James Mason.
Robert Wise, the director of The Desert Rats , found Burton as agreeable and hard-working and as reliable, as had Henry Koster in Rachel .
He was a good soldier.
The third film in this three-picture deal which was to bring him ‘more money than he thought there was in the world’ was The Robe .
This was the Big One.
Hollywood's many attempts to grapple with God would make a well-judged study of the interaction between America's dream world and its view of authority and the Promised Land.
The Robe was intended to be the boldest and grandest yet — as epic as de Mille but with a serious and intelligent slant on the story of Christ.
Of course it was also intended to make a fortune, and win awards for integrity and holiness.
It is always easy to be sceptical about Hollywood and God and it is right to be so.
There is no doubt, though, that inside the declaration to make a blockbuster was the whisper of an ideal.
The pre-filming budget had gone up to the then astronomical sixteen million dollars with Tyrone Power cast in the lead.
Koster came in to direct, cut the budget to six million dollars, and either passed over Olivier for Burton (whom he admired) or went for Burton after Olivier turned it down.
Burton certainly saw the part as a ‘catch’ in the competitive stakes.
He wanted it.
A great deal was riding on it: some said the Fox studio was at stake.
Burton appreciated that.
It was to be a spiritual Ben Hur , Christianity on the new Cinemascope and for adults.
He played the part of Marcellus, a noble Roman who is converted to Christianity and chooses to die for his new  religion.
Jean Simmons plays the woman who first misunderstands and finally adores him.
Victor Mature it was, no less, who led him to the Lord.
It is important to hold on to our hats and remember that it was quite well reviewed at the time.
The religious community sent its messengers on to the set and Burton obliged with such whoppers ('playing Marcellus is like playing Hamlet’) that his reputation as an honest interviewee ought to have ended there and then.
He was told not to smoke on set because it spoiled the image: he smoked.
There was little he could do about the image.
Much of the time on the screen he wanders around helplessly in a freshly starched little Dior number looking for a line worth saying.
Of Jesus Christ, someone says: ‘We gotta find out where he holes up at night.’
Marcellus starts off the film as a drunk, a womaniser, a detached outsider amid the (very decorous) antics of Ancient corrupt Rome — but alas he is converted.
Victor Mature, who has given so much pleasure in his day that nothing must be said against him, is, however, not wholly convincing sitting in a cell wearing a leather mini-skirt, reading Pythagoras.
At other times he looks at the sky, his jaw clenching and unclenching as if working a particularly stubborn wad of chewing gum while the Kansas City Glee Club harmonises solemn music: perhaps he wants to turn it off — but they are unstoppable.
Burton at one stage goes quite powerfully mad and no wonder.
He became friends with Mature: they played craps on the set.
There is an awed and yet a sickly innocence, a pasteboard period falseness about the whole enterprise, and lines like lead which today make The Robe seem older, more quaint than silent movies.
Insofar as the film was held together, Burton held it together: was it worth holding?
Well, that was what they made, then.
Back in England, although his friends might snicker, they were still impressed: he was up there, a Hollywood star in a big Hollywood epic.
Many of his fellow British actors — throughout the years — only affected to despise the movies: they themselves were not asked to do them or, if asked, played minor roles or  did not get the hang of it at all.
Envy and sour grapes had their customary party.
It was unfortunate, in a way, that Burton did hold it together.
Just as Rachel gave Hollywood an inkling of his class, and Desert Rats reassured them as to his reliability,The Robe showed that he could almost carry what were really the worn-out carcases of a clapped-out era.
The Robe had been shot in Cinemascope in order to tempt the new television viewers back into the cinemas.
The studios were rocking from an earthquake none of them believed was happening.
The old studio system which had produced good writers, good directors, good stars, good movies, was breaking up and bits of it were sliding all over the ancient and sacred lots.
At first television did for celluloid what the San Francisco earthquake had done for property.
It was obviously time for a change.
Television was beginning a thirty-year triumphant march.
The artistic initiative in cinema was about to shift to Europe.
The later young saving brats of the American film industry had not arrived.
One of Hollywood's major strategies in the face of all this was to recreate the hits of the past in larger-than-life packs and Burton was useful for that.
His moment came at a time when shoring up the old seemed all that mattered or all that anyone could think of.
His potential for convincing, intense, even poetic realism was not to be conveyed for some time.
Pageants were to be the salvation of the studios.
So they hoped.
It is a touch unfair to use hindsight to criticise what faced an eager hungry young Welsh unknown in the piranha-filled goldfish bowl of Hollywood in the early Fifties.
The remarkable thing is that with such thin material and from such a long way back, he came through so quickly.
But there is a sense in which he complied with what was being asked of him.
After all, the local cinema, the Cach, had been his dream world and here he was in the biggest Cach in the world doing more or less what he had seen ‘the greats’ doing in the Thirties.
His background, too, reached out for the security of tradition.
New moves tend to come from  middle-class artists who have had the opportunity to absorb a great deal early and feel sufficiently confident in an educational and financially secure context to move it along.
Working-class artists are brought up with the traditional — at best, and if they can get it.
And they always know it can disappear overnight.
On the whole, in that first year in Hollywood, Burton made a fair shot at it.
His feet were on the ladder; he had gatecrashed at the top.
They would ask him back.
He did one thing in Hollywood for which he has not been given anything like sufficient credit.
He turned down flat the king's ransom, the pot of gold, the answer to his poverty-prayers he had always dreamt of.
And in the process he showed his steel of independence.
Fox, through Darryl Zanuck — one of Hollywood's few surviving super barons, head of Fox, a star-maker — offered him a seven-picture deal (at the time of The Desert Rats ).
This was to cover a seven-year period.
He would have some time to slip over to London to act.
The fee was a million dollars: there could also be percentages.
True, he still had the Korda minimum deal to fall back on, but this new offer was in a wildly different category.
This was 1953.
In order to put that offer in perspective we have to imagine a young unknown with rumours of a short classical stage success to his credit, no films worth mentioning and no bankability whatsoever, being offered, in 1988, about twelve to fifteen million dollars.
Yet the offer seems to have given Burton no pause.
Fifteen million dollars.
Burton said that he had promised to go back to the Old Vic for £45 a week to do Hamlet , and he was sticking to it.
It was a big decision.
Burton never disguised his respect for what money would bring.
Let all the well-heeled English pooh-pooh it as they may, he knew that pounds, shillings and pence bought warmth, desirable goods and security and he wanted that for himself, for his family and, as time went on, for an ever-increasing host of dependants.
This offer was a real and unarguable fortune.
In one bound he would be free of  all financial worries.
And all he had to do was to stay in the sun and turn up on the lot when a suitable — or unsuitable (he was used to taking the rough with the smooth)— script came up.
It was a tremendous act of strength to — refuse that and a real financial sacrifice and gamble.
None of those who sniped at his film career were ever to be so lasciviously tempted.
The great imperial Zanuck was not amused at Boyo Burton's refusal and tried to force his hand.
On occasions like these, friends of Burton reported, he would counter-attack by releasing his temper, tearing up the room and making it quite clear and genuinely credible that whatever they did, said or tried on he would do just whatever he wanted.
‘He never backed down,’ Emlyn's son, Brook Williams, said, ‘not in front of anybody.’
Burton's' own version is milder:
On one side of the courtroom was Darryl Zanuck and half the corporation boys in America.
On the other side was me, alone; I didn't have a lawyer.
I played it very English, very Ronald Colman.
At one point one of the lawyers jumped up and shook his fist at me and said, ‘You shook hands with Mr Zanuck on this agreement.
You shook hands wish Mr Zanuck in his own office.’
And I said, ‘I don't believe Mr Zanuck said that because he's an honourable man.
But if he did say it, then he's a fucking liar.’
The place broke up in complete confusion.
Strong men fainted and were carried off by weak men…
The story rocketed around Hollywood and outgunned all the gossip of crawling up drainpipes, being visited in his dressing room by naked ladies, drinking day and night, smashing his head against a wall.
He had integrity!
Back to the Old Vic.
A felicitous footnote to that incident is that he got his cake after all.
He did go back to London; he did defy the might of Zanuck, but the canny Alex Korda in London  stitched up the contract later which, yes, was to give him a million dollars, but also tie him to some terrible films.
This was the rule of the day.
If you worked in movies in America you worked in the studios and you were their property.
Attempts to buck that system would end in the courtrooms or, as likely, unemployment.
It was star-slave labour.
But at the crucial moment, Burton had bucked the system.
There were powerful men in Hollywood who never forgave him and exercised their revenge for years.
Filming of The Robe was arduous and he was exhausted towards the end of it.
He and Sybil took off for a few weeks' holiday before going back to London.
When all the shouting died down, it was always — back to Syb.
It had been a hell of a year.
Three big movies; drinking with Bogie; flirting with Garbo; taken up by Hedda Hopper, ‘the most exciting success story since Gregory Peck's contracts of ten years back’; liked by directors; known as his own man and a tough one; married to a charmer and, now at peace with Olivia de Havilland, sitting on the floor at a last party telling her that he was ‘terrified’ of going back to play Hamlet, would wake up in the middle of the night sweating and shaking at the thought, unable to go back to sleep.
The terror of the live theatre, and all those powerful professionals waiting for him: it was all that concerned, even consumed him.
There is no reason to believe he was other than sincere.
He had fixed his star on the great Shakespearian roles — that, in his professional life, was what he lived by, that was how he tested himself to the limit.
One of the biggest of all was about to challenge him and he knew what it would take.
About twelve years after this first Hollywood year, he wrote about it.
He described a party.
The house in California — it was in the Bel Air district of Los Angeles, I think — looked as if it had been flung by a giant hand against the side of a hill and had stuck.
From the main living room, master bedroom, guest bedrooms, dining room, kitchen level, the house jutted and dropped one floor to a ‘playroom’.
The ‘playroom’ was not for children.
It was complete with bar and barman, hot-dog simmerer, king-sized double-doored two-tone refrigerator, drugstore hotplates, big-game trophies on the walls (the host was a big-game hunter who acted in his spare time), and huge, deep, low divans and easy chairs — villainously uncomfortable for men, but marvellously made for cute little women who could tuck their cute little legs away and blazingly efface their cute little pretty little pouting little personalities in niches of the vast furniture and make like cute little pussycats.
Below the ‘playroom’ the house again jutted and dropped to the swimming pool, the showers and the changing rooms.
It was my first time in California and my first visit to a swank house.
There were quite a lot of people in and around the pool, all suntanned and all drinking the Sunday morning liveners — Bloody Marys, boilermakers, highballs, iced beer.
I knew some of the people and was introduced to the others.
Wet brown arms reached out of the pool and shook my hand.
The people were all friendly, and they called me Dick immediately.
I asked if they would please call me Richard — Dick, I said, made me feel like a symbol of some kind.
They laughed, some of them.
It was, of course, Sunday morning and I was nervous.
I was enjoying this small social triumph, but then a girl sitting on the other side of the pool lowered her book, took off her sunglasses and looked at me.
She was so extraordinarily beautiful that I nearly laughed out loud…
She sipped some beer and went back to her book.
I affected to become social with the others but out of the corner of my mind — while I played for the others the part of a poor miner's son who was puzzled, but delighted by the attention these lovely people paid to him — I had her under close observation…
She was unquestionably gorgeous…
She was lavish.
She was a dark unyielding largesse.
She was, in short, too bloody much, and not only that, she was totally ignoring me.
I became frustrated almost to screaming when I  had finished a well-received and humorous story about the death of my grandfather and found that she was turned away in deep conversation with another woman.
Elizabeth Taylor remembers that brief encounter too.
‘My first impression was that he was rather full of himself,’ she says.
‘I seem to remember that he never stopped talking and I had given him the cold fish eye.’
He left alone as he had arrived.
Sybil had gone on ahead to London a week or so before.
The Hampstead house needed to be opened up.
Burton was heading back for base.