

Another milestone in the life of our Diocese
The Rite of Election
THE First Sunday of Lent marked another step forward for our Diocese this year.
For the first time a very important ceremony, the Rite of Election, took place at the Cathedral, led by Bishop Brewer.
Over the last year many people around the diocese have been exploring the Catholic faith, with a view to becoming Catholics themselves.
Some of these people have not been baptized yet, others have, and some of them are already Catholics who are seeking full union with the Church through the sacrament of Confirmation.
For all these people the first Sunday of Lent marked the time when Bishop Brewer, in the name of the Church, called them to journey with the Church towards Easter when they will be baptised, or received into full communion with the Church.
This was an occasion when not just the local churches but the whole Church recognised the growth in faith of the ‘Catechumens’ and ‘Candidates’and accepted them as members of the family.
The catechumens and candidates have been going through the process known as the Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults (R.C.I.A.) and in his sermon Bishop Brewer gave an outline of the R.C.I.A.'s activities from its foundation after the Second Vatican Council in 1972 to the present.
Members
It was one of those days when snow fell all day without sticking and the cold seemed to penetrate right to the bone.
It must have been even worse outside!
The Bishop thanked everyone for travelling all the way from St Columba's on Walney Island, St Wilfrid's, Preston and many other parishes on such an inhospitable day and reminded the packed Cathedral that ‘They choose to throw in their lot with us, it's as simple as that.
‘To become not just members of their parish families but also of the Church of Lancaster.
All of us who bear the name of Catholic join you at the outset of Lent, we say ‘we're with you’.
No-one gets to heaven alone, we're the ‘family of God’’.
In concelebrating the Mass, Canon Mulvany, Father Walsh, Father Callaghan, Rev. Paul Wawsczcyk and Rev Paul Marley from the Cathedral were joined by Monsignor Turner (from Our Lady's, Carlisle), Father Blackledge (St Wilfrid's, Preston), Father Flynn (St Joseph's, Preston) and Father Caldwell (Our Lady's, Workington).
At the end of Mass Canon Mulvany invited everyone to ‘thaw out’ with a warm drink in the Cathedral Social Centre.
That gave us an opportunity to meet people from other parts of the diocese and actually to find out that we really are one family!
Here is what some of the catechumens had to say about why they were becoming Catholics:
Surprised
‘I married a Catholic but I didn't see any reason to go to church.
I stayed at home on Sunday while my wife and son went to church.
One day my son said he wanted to stay at home with me.
I decided I'd better go to stop him going on about it.
‘I was surprised to find I enjoyed it.
I wanted to know more about what was going on.
I've been going to the Enquirer's Course for months now!’
‘It felt a bit strange really.
We'd leave home together and them we'd part and go to different churches.
I started going to Mass so that I could be with my wife.
After that it was a gradual thing.
I began to talk with the priest.
I've been going to meetings for a while now’.
Ivor Moore, a Barbadian, with his RCIA group from St Wilfrid's, Preston.
In the annals of history, Ivor's name will be first in the Book of the Elect at the Cathedral, as he has first to be called during the ceremony.
Third world group hits its £1,000 target
THE Thor World Group of St Clare's Church, Fulwood, Preston, set a target of £1,000 during Advent.
Thanks to the generosity of the parishioners this target was achieved.
It truly was a parochial effort as children from the age of six up to the oldest members took part.
Paper links were sold after each Mass at 20p each which were then hung around the inside of the Church.
£500 of this was sent to Cafod for the ‘Street Children of Brazil’ which has been our main recipient during the last two years.
The remaining £500 was also sent to Cafod for children in Somalia.
Since the group was formed £17,000 has been donated to the Third World causes mainly through Cafod.
Among other beneficiaries apart from those mentioned have been Africa, Ethiopia, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Romania and the Kurd refugees.
The group is only too well aware of the value of prayer, as well as its social functions.
Its last prayerful action was a service during the Advent period.
May God continue to bless our efforts.
Responding to peace appeal
THE theme of this year's message from Pope John Paul II for Peace Sunday was: ‘If you want peace, reach out to the poor’.
The Diocesan Faith and Justice Commission is responding to this appeal with action!
Commission members and Brendan McKeague, the Development Worker, have recently journeyed around the diocese to meet with groups and individuals who are currently working with poverty and the poor in their own areas or further afield.
As a result of these meeting it is hoped that Catholics around the regions can link with each other, and with other Christians, to support the enormous amount of work already taking place.
It is also hoped that other urgent areas of need can be identified and people can be put in touch with appropriate resources or agencies to address these.
The Holy Father emphasises that it is through addressing the concerns of the poor…responding at a human level to the results of poverty and questioning, at many levels, the causes of poverty…that peace, with justice, can be achieved.
The Faith and Justice Commission, together with Cafod (North West), are organising two special days on the theme of: ‘Partnership with the Poor’.
The purpose of these days will be to join with others who are interested in finding out about the work of Cafod or Faith and Justice and to support and encourage those working with poverty both in our own diocese and in other parts of the world.
The new Cafod worker, who will be based in the Dioceses of Lancaster and Salford, will attend both days.
The first Diocesan Day will be held at St Catherine's School Hall, in Penrith, on Saturday, April 17th and the second will be at Canterbury Hall, Preston, on Saturday, May 1st, both from 10am until 4pm (a creche will be made available if notification is given a week in advance).
If you are interested in attending one of these days or wish to find our more about Faith and Justice in our Diocese, please contact Brendan at ,.
Worship for all seasons invitation
AFTER three successful years, we are now planning our next Summer School, which will be at Ushaw, from July 20th to 25th.
This year the summer school takes as its theme a topic which I am sure will be of interest to all parish musicians and liturgists in general.
We all know the main parts of the Church's year: Advent, Christmas, Lent, Easter, Pentecost and what is called the ‘ordinary time’, but how are these various seasons presented in the liturgy, and how can we reflect the seasons of the year in our prayer, worship and music?
Our young musicians who are on the Scholarship Scheme will be there, of course, but we are opening the summer school to anyone who is interested in spending several days in the beautiful atmosphere of Ushaw College, learning about the Church's prayer and worship, and having some relaxing fun along the way.
This invitation is also open to former members of the Scholarship Scheme, several of whom have found the Summer School an excellent ‘refresher course’, and a way to catch up with the progress of their colleagues.
Details are available from the Liturgy Centre (), including reduced rates for students and parish groups..
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Commitment to social education
Dear Sir,
As a consequence of the tragic circumstances of the death of baby James Bulger much debate has evolved as to the moral state of our nation and of our young people in particular.
Social workers have been spotlighted as having a difficult job in dealing with young offenders and those who require counselling after such events.
As vital as the social services are, and always will be, for ‘first aid’ and rehabilitation for injured in society, putting such extra pressure on them seems akin to ‘closing the barn door after the horse has bolted’.
Surely, as a society, we need to begin by looking into the social training of our young people.
The question is not one of ‘condemnation vs understanding’ but simply of a society's concern for the good education and training of its younger members.
Whatever the ultimate effects of the present move to academic excellence and competition in our schools I would point people in the diocese to notice the serious cuts which are being made within other areas of education in both Cumbria and Lancashire — and especially, in this time of discussion about juvenile crime, in the County Youth Services.
At the present time the Youth Service in Cumbria seems to have all but disappeared.
That of Lancashire, which has supported much diocesan work in the past, is facing very serious cuts.
Could I ask readers to be aware of the need for on-going social education amongst our young people by encouraging discussion not simply about ‘schooling’(though this is important too).
If there is a serious malaise in society it will need growth in ‘social education’ opportunities as well as‘social work’aftercare.
Climate
Current concerns regarding the moral state of the nation and high levels of crime will, I have no doubt, set up targets for blame and cause resources to be put into headline catching projects to ‘deal’ with offenders — in the meantime monies and effort put into the social education of our ordinary young people are diminishing.
As the level of county commitment to social education lessens it would seem to be a time for us as members of local parish, town and diocesan communities to look at the priority given to such work with our own young people.
Certainly some would question whether, in the present academic climate, Catholic schools can realistically be expected to concentrate on the personal, social and spiritual development of their pupils.
If they cannot, then who can?
Someone once said that a sign of how civilized a society was is shown in how they treated their old people.
Perhaps another sign could be how much education is given to its young people to be a real part of this society.
Why the Dalai Lama?
Dear Sir,
I was concerned to read in the ‘Catholic Voice’ recently an article entitled ‘Dalai Lama's Inter-Faith Address’.
According to the article he ‘will offer the heart of the ancient Buddhist wisdom of Tibet directly and in everyday language to the widest possible audience.’
Surely Jesus is the way the Truth and the Life, and the validity of his message is compromised and attacked too much already in our nation today?
Many people who go to hear the Dalai Lama speak will be influenced and drawn away from Christianity.
So why is a Catholic newspaper publicising someone who does not believe in a divine Christ?
REPLY:Your point is well taken Mrs Butterworth.
The reason that the Dalai Lama was included is that it will be an Inter-faith meeting.
I am sure that he will not be preaching an anti-Christian message.
However, the Lancaster Diocesan Catholic Voice should really be carrying news about the Catholic Church in our own diocese.
Unfortunately we do not always have enough stories from the diocese to fill the space available and so have to use material from other sources.
PHG.
Any news?
Then tell us
You will seen in my reply to Mrs Butterworth of Ambleside that I mention the fact that the Catholic Voice is often short of material for publication.
This month is no exception.
Perhaps it is time for a reminder of our purpose.
Primarily the Catholic Voice exists as a means of communication within the Diocese of Lancaster.
The geographical area covered by the Diocese is considerable and often events take place in one part which will be of interest to people elsewhere.
It is up to you, if you are having an event, or have had one, to let everyone else know about it.
Many of you are at the moment taking part in discussion groups about ‘Our Decade of Evangelisation’.
Hopefully you will have discovered by now that Evangelisation is largely about Communication.
The main message to be communicated is the Good News of Jesus Christ.
This obviously reflected in the activity of the living Church which has its being in Him.
YOUR event, whatever it is, is of interest to the rest of the Diocese either as a source of information or as an inspiration to others to organise something similar.
We want to hear your news, which shows that the Church is alive and active in the Diocese.
Articles
When you send your contribution it should be more or less ready for publication.
Say what you have to say.
I am afraid that due to limited time available I do not have time to write your articles for you.
I am also unable to accept articles from local papers because of copyright reasons, unless you have the paper's permission in writing.
Again, due to limitations of time I am unable to attend many of the events which you are kind enough to notify me about in advance, so as part of your planning why not appoint someone to write an article and take a photograph for the Catholic Voice.
Your article should reach me by the first Friday of the month.
Events can also be advertised in the paper.
I am sure that you are aware that the paper is financed entirely by advertising.
To advertise you should contact Mary Goodwin on  who will be very helpful.
Your article should be sent to Fr Peter Groody, or fax .
I should like to thank everyone who has contributed articles, our advertisers and the Knights of St Columba who are very helpful in the distribution of the Catholic Voice to the parishes.
Decade of Evangelisation
WHAT have eight 14 year olds, eleven 69–77 year olds, the U.C.M., seven 28–36 olds, a group of students at St. Martin's College and Carmelite Sisters all got in common?
Along with many others they have all been doing their bit for our Decade of Evangelisation.
Discussion groups are meeting each week during Lent in parishes throughout the diocese.
We are delighted at the uptake of the discussion documents and although only mid-way through the programme, we have already received some very positive feedback.
Written reports from each of these groups will be collated and used in the planning of our Diocesan Assembly to be held on 12th June, form which a strategy for evangelisation in this  diocese will emerge.
Become involved
It is not too late for you to get involved.
If you belong to one of the few parishes who have not yet started a discussion group then why not start now.
There is no reason why groups cannot meet after Lent!
It is never too late.
If you are not part of a discussion group you can still represent your parish at the Diocesan Assembly and become involved in local and Diocesan events that develop from there.
We would like to ask that all members of our Diocese pray for this important venture, perhaps by using our Diocesan prayer (right).
Lancaster Diocesan Decade of Evangelisation Team
GO IN MY NAME
I open myself to you, Christ Jesus, and with joy I recognise your presence in my life.
I know that you are living among us, help me to always see you in all people.
Knowing you, Jesus, brings so much joy and hope into my life that I want to share you with everyone I meet,
in the way I treat others,
in the way I speak with others,
in the way I see others,
Since only in the way I live can I spread your word
Send me, through your Holy Spirit, the strength and courage I need to live out your Gospel each day.
Amen.
Take part in The Great Week…
THE GREAT WEEK is the title chosen for a unique presentation for parishes and other communities.
It is an enabling bill of fare for the rites and the prayer in which the Church urges us all to take our part.
The collection of texts, songs, refrains and acclamations brings Holy Week and Easter vividly and fruitfully into ordinary lives.
Every Sunday Mass is the community's Thanksgiving, its Eucharist in celebration of our Lord's risen life.
For those present their Mass is their one opportunity and they will benefit from any resource and talent which can be gathered and encouraged.
Even the single voice and any true accompaniment can life up hearts and voices in the congregation.
Palm Sunday
It is for such lowly celebrations as well as the grander and better resources that THE GREAT WEEK is a heartening support.
Over 100 compositions include the simply, the solemn and the setting for choirs.
Many of them will be already known as are almost all texts.
Selection is inevitable and flexibility is the name of the game.
It can be a joy and even fun to serve the Lord in our worship.
Passion Sunday can have its Entrance rite at every Mass with a simple responsorial Hosanna.
A processional hymn is available to all.
The key texts can be sung was easily as are less important hymns, if the desire is there to raise hearts, minds and spirits at the Psalm, the Gospel and the Prayer of Eucharist with its acclamations for all.
THE GREAT WEEK helps the rescue of a special Sunday from ordinariness.
The Easter Triduum is set out as will be expected for celebrating the mystery of salvation.
The low through each event and day is here clearly expressed as the texts are given settings for the people as well as choirs.
The Washing of Feet can be thought out well in advance by the parish aware of Our Lord's priorities.
This book offers further sharing through song.
The Watching after Mass is given a corporate dimension which can guide later private prayer.
On Good Friday the people's Veneration of the Cross has settings in which all can share through refrains or hymns.
The mind of the Church has prompted choices through this book.
The victory of Christ at the cost of his life is faithfully expressed where sorrow and joy are mingled.
Vigil
The Easter Vigil is well served in all its variety by reception of the Readings in simple refrains, by acclaiming the risen Christ In Light, sharing in Easter Praise and truly greeting the dawn of the first Easter.
Easter Day is saved from anticlimax not least through its measure of sung praise at the Sequence and at the Gospel.
A hymn and acclamations known to everyone are open here to all, even on Easter Sunday evening.
It is certainly not too late to buy this splendid resource for this Holy Week and Easter.
It can also stir the imagination for every parish Sunday and solemnity and right through Eastertide.
A neighbouring parish may have its last year's experience to report.
You may have the earlier edition yourself.
This new edition is even more helpful.
Order now.
THE GREAT WEEK is available through your usual bookseller and is published by McCrimmons at £6.95, ISBN 0 85597 492 3.
It comes complete with a straightforward Liturgy Planner and full information on copyright.
A new edition of the Farnworth booklets is coordinated with The Great Week..
Parish Walsingham Association's annual pilgrimage Twenty five parishioners of St John The Evangelist Walsingham Association, Poulton.
recently made their annual pilgrimage to Walsingham, accompanied by the Parish Priest, Fr Muir.
They stayed in Walsingham for five days.
Their busy programme included a look around the sights of Norfolk.
The pilgrims found their journey a highly rewarding experience.
Trio's anti-abortion stance
PETER Hunter, Damien Sarsfield and John Smethurst are seeking election to the National Executive Council of the National and Local Government's Officers' Association on a platform of total opposition to the union's present disgraceful policy on abortion.
The existing policy is one of seeking abortion on demand, up to the point of birth and without legal or medical restriction.
Peter Hunter, secretary of the NALGO Pro-Life Group, at a recent meeting of NALGO supporters told of the disgraceful waste of union resources which are used to prop up the national Abortion Campaign, to which NALGO is affiliated.
Rank and file members have never been consulted on support for this organisation, maintained Mr Hunter and recent research amongst the membership showed a substantial hostility to NALGO's continued affiliation to the NAC, which among its disgraceful policies, calls for the destruction of the disabled by resort to eugenic abortion.
Unfortunately, the union is currently controlled by minority, unrepresentative, self interest groups who have little concern for the views of ordinary members and their feelings.
Mr Hunter went on to reveal the findings of a recent opinion poll he had conducted amongst NALGO's membership in the North Western and North Wales region.
Out of 2,158 members polled (fairly evenly divided by gender and age), 63 per cent expressed alarm at NALGO's affiliation to the NAC.
The message
Among female members this figure was an encouraging 67 per cent and even more encouraging was the figures for women under 30 who were polled.
This group produced a figure of 59 per cent expressing concern at NALGO's affiliation to the NAC.
Mr Hunter and the other candidates will therefore be taking their election bandwagon and Pro-Life message to council offices and other workplaces throughout the region where NALGO members organise over the next five weeks.
In addition to neutrality on abortion all three candidates stand firmly for a fully democratic and accountable leadership free of  political extremities and minority self interest groups.
For further information contact .
(evening),(daytime).
Mass in honour of Our Lady of Lourdes
On February 11th, the Diocesan Shrine of Our Lady of Lourdes, Blackpool, was filled to capacity, when Bishop Foley, in the absence of Bishop Brewer, offered the annual Mass in honour of Our Lady of Lourdes, patroness of the Diocese and of the Shrine.
Fifteen priests of the Diocese concelebrated Mass with Bishop Foley, who was also assisted by Fr.
Paul Cuff as M.C. and by the Rev. Terry Fagan, Permanent Deacon.
Mr Tom Bland who is training  for the Diaconate also assisted.
The altar boys of the Diocese were represented by Robert Billing from St John Vianney's parish.
Statue
Four of the Diocesan Brancardiers carried the statue of Our Lady of Lourdes, and the torchlight procession round the church after Mass, to the fervent singing of the Lourdes hymn, was a very moving experience.
The Sisters of Marie Répatrice who look after the Shrine, were helped as usual in the organisation of the celebration, and in serving refreshments afterwards, by the ‘Friends of the Shrine’ who do so much, in so many ways, to support it.
The Interior of the Shrine
Liturgical perspective on…
Women priests
ONE hears repeatedly: ‘There is no theological objection to the ordination of women’.
How long is a piece of string?
How broad is your theology.
Liturgy is a locus.
Priesthood is a liturgical reality.
Liturgy deals with symbols.
Let's begin with an analogy.
There has been for some time in Africa debate concerning the suitability for the Eucharist of wheat bread and grape wine.
A prime argument has been based on the culture of Africa to which wheat and grape are foreign.
Jesus's words to the Samaritan woman about worship in spirit and in truth seem to cut the Christian free from historical roots.
The traditional elements are not recognisable in Africa as ‘the work of human hands’ and because magic uses the exotic the bread and wine of the Eucharist tend to be viewed as magical.
Answer
African theologians have denied the material importance of the elements.
‘The sign is not in the bread and wine which, of themselves, have no privileged signification; it is not in the fact of eating bread and drinking it; it is not to be found in sitting at table together; it is in the gesture of sharing bread and wine.
Does it necessarily have to be the sharing of bread and wine?
Is it not the very catholicity of the Church which is in question?
Some Africans have suggested that the Church would cease to be truly catholic, universal, from the moment when, for disciplinary reasons only, she would refuse to acknowledge the realities which constitute the life-style of non-mediterranean people.
The answer lies in the fact that liturgical signs are not simply natural indicators: they are also literary symbols.
Within Christianity bread and wine are sacramental not because they just happened to be on the table for a Jewish meal but because they were signs of the covenant.
A priest is the sign of the relationship between Christ and the Church against the background of a covenant expressed in terms of bridegroom and bride.
Some writers oversimplified.
For any anonymous author of the 2nd century man is Christ, woman the Church.
AT the other end of the spectrum there is further oversimplification.
Galatians 3, 28 is quoted: ‘There is neither male nor female for you are all one in Christ Jesus’ as though sexual differences were subsumed in a common humanity which alone counts in the scheme of redemption.
Pope John II strongly analyses the bridegroom/bride motif.
It expresses the masculine initiative of Christ's saving, self-giving love and the need for the response in love of the Church/bride.
Men and women are all one in being the bride.
When we celebrate the covenant the bride does not need to be represented sacramentally — the assembly is there in reality — but Christ as bridegroom, Christ ‘for us’, is represented by a man’.
Bride
In actions which demand the character of ordination and in which Christ himself, the author of the covenant, the bridegroom and head of the church, is represented, exercising his ministry of salvation — which is in the highest degree the case of the Eucharist — his role (this is the original sense of the work persona) must be taken by a man’(Inter Insignores art.5).
‘It is the Eucharist above all that expresses the redemptive act of Christ the Bridegroom towards the Church the Bride’.
(Mulieris Dignitatem art.26).
This is not to offer proof that a priest must be a male.
It expresses the intuition that sexual differences, made for the loving communion of persons, mirror God and image the relationship of Christ and the Church.
What Pope John Paul II calls the nuptial meaning of the body is part of the poetry of creation.
Close your eyes to that and you bar a means of communication.
Liturgical symbolism was not invented: it was inspired.
(The second part of this paper is based on an excellent article by Sara Butler, The Priest as Sacrament of Christ the Bridegroom in WORSHIP, November 1992, p.498).
Peru — six years on!
Bishop looks back on his recent visit
THIS is a short account of my recent visit to Peru.
Since I was there six years ago some things have changed and others have remained pretty much the same.
Fr.
Butler came with me.
In Lima the community I had visited and who had no water, electricity or sewerage six years ago have now made great improvements in their shanty town.
Two women catechists said the progress was a bi-product of the catechetical courses which they and others organised — a two year long preparation of parents before the baptism of their children, two years before first Holy Communion and two years before Confirmation.
It bonded people together with food being the first evidence.
The families involved cook all their meals together — seven days a week, using one another 's kitchens.
Others keep pouring into Lima from the rest of the country seeking a better life.
These get together claiming some land.
AT first they build temporary shelters by weaving a kind of palm branch into matting from which they make little houses.
After a while they make adobe bricks and build their houses by stages, one room followed by another.
Water is not easy to come by and is very expensive in these areas.
Yet there is a great faith and joy in life among these people.
Proud people
From Lima we went an hour's aeroplane journey up into the mountains into another world.
We landed at Andahaylas 10,000 feet above sea level and from there we took the mountain track in a Land Rover to Fr.
Horn's parish in Ocobamba.
The journey is long and very bumpy.
It is not possible to make much speed in such conditions.
Half way along we had to stop for a couple of hours because the ‘road’ had been washed away and the people who were travelling had to clear it.
Ocobamba is a little village with a church, barracks and a village square.
The people are obviously Inca: we mannered, proud and hard working.
They live in adobe houses which they build and keep animals and grow mostly their own food.
Time has little meaning there — Mass can begin an hour and a half later than scheduled without any kind of fuss!
The parish covers a huge area with some communities two or three days' journey away and seeing a priest only three or four times a year.
Between visits the catechist is the focal point.
Fr.
Horn is well and happy.
He sends his best wishes to everybody at home.
He is with a priest from Canada and doing great work.
He speaks Spanish and Qetchua fluently and is greatly appreciated by the people.
Although he has completed five years, he will continue for another couple of years until the parish is ready to be handed over to the local clergy.
Skills to offer?
The Society of St James the Apostle, founded by Cardinal Cushing of Boston, is an impressive organisation and looks after all the needs of the priests most generously and professionally.
Although they have managed without financial support from us in the past, things are getting progressively difficult and it may be that should we help them financially as well as with manpower.
I would be happy to hear from any priest who feels he would like to volunteer for five years or from suitably qualified people who might have some skill to offer.
There is much work to be done.
Those who do no speak Spanish at the moment need not feel put off — it is surprising how quickly a language can be learned.
There are excellent courses available for home study and the Society has it own Language School which it makes available for people who need help.
One project which Fr.
Edmund Gornall helped to found and which we have had an appeal to support is a small pharmacy in  Andahuaylas which provides free medicine to those who have no money to pay.
We brought some supplies over with us when we went, but money is needed.
If any groups within your parish could raise some money to help this project it would be most gratefully received.
Medical attention is not easy to come by in Peru for those who do not have the money to pay for it.
John, Bishop of Lancaster 
Bishop Brewer and Fr.
Horn in Peru
Consultation paper for the 1994 Synod
THE Synod of Bishops which takes place next year in Rome will take as its theme ‘The consecrated life and its role in the Church and in the world.’
Although it particularly concerns members of religious orders and communities, and others who live a consecrated life, it is of interest to the whole church.
All members of the church have a contribution to make to the preparation, especially in the light of our growing awareness of how different vocations within the church are complementary.
In this way the Synod will help develop closer collaboration between religious, lay people and priests.
The consultation document for the Synod, called the Lineaments, points out the link between this Synod and the previous two Synods.
The 1987 Synod explored the vocation and mission of the lay faithful, and the 1990 Synod discussed the formation of priests.
This Synod will complete a renewed vision of these three major vocations in the church's life.
All three Synods have some common features, a desire to be attentive to the circumstances of today's world, a desire to deepen our mutual understanding of what it means to be the church, following our different callings and collaborating in our common mission, and a call to renew our sense of being an evangelising church.
The particular purpose of this Synod is to see how the consecrated life can ‘shine forth’ more fully in the church's life and mission.
The following paper presents some of the themes and questions from the Lineaments which are most likely to be of interest to all members of the church.
They are intended to assist groups at local level who wish to make some contribution but do not have time to study the Lineaments and respond to all its questions.
In particular, they may be useful for parish groups, pastoral councils and members of lay organisations.
Members of religious orders and congregations will wish to respond more fully considering all the questions and themes covered in the Lineamenta.
They may also wish to use this paper to invite discussion and reflection among themselves and those with whom they work at local level.
The themes which are highlighted in this paper follow the same order as the full text of the Lineamenta, and are covered under the headings of the three main parts.
The Consecrated Life and its Role in the Church and in the World
Direct references to the paragraph numbers are sometimes given, and the questions are all based on questions from the full text.
The full text and complete set of questions were published in Briefing , on 28th January.
Bishop John Crowley writing to the priests and religious in the diocese, says: ‘The next Synod of Bishops concerns itself with the Consecrated Life in the Church and the World.
‘Consequently, there will be a period of consultation throughout the World to examine this very important part of the life of the Church.
‘Middlesbrough is richly endowed with religious communities and during the coming months we will need to give some careful thought as to how our own diocese can benefit from this moment of Grace for the whole church.’
Responses to the Lineaments
The Bishops' Conferences of England and Wales, and of Scotland are asked to draw together a response to the Lineamenta after consultation with the Catholic community.
Any groups or individuals who would like to make a contribution to the consultation are asked to follow, as far as possible, the order and formal of the questions in the Lineamenta .
Briefing : The documentation and news service of the Bishops' Conferences of England and Wales and of Scotland.
Requests for subscriptions and extra copies can be sent to:,,.
Individual copies of Briefing can be ordered at £1.10 per copy inclusive of p&p.
A Mission statement for a Catholic Education Service
FROM early history to the present day the Catholic Church has established a rightful place in the educational work of society and has based its mission upon three claims:
(i)
Jesus himself was a teacher and His teaching ministry embraced the whole of the person and the whole of society.
(ii)
His mandate requires the Church to serve both the person and community, Education is an integral part of that mission.
(iii)
The Church has to be active in the public educational process and concerned with the view of humankind which stimulates a national policy for education.
For Christians, Jesus Christ is both the model and example on whom Christians shape their lives.
The beliefs and values which are established in this discipleship provide a governing spirit which helps to shape our personal response to the whole of life in a relationship with others.
This embraces all aspects of the educational task and the way these are accepted and fulfilled.
We are an Easter people redeemed and made whole by the life and death of Jesus Christ working through all our learning and all our experiences in the search for a kingdom of love and salvation.
This faith in Jesus Christ provides the Christian with a context, an educational creed which produces a secure educational philosophy within which to work.
We believe that human beings have a divine origin and an eternal destiny.
All are created in the image of God.
We believe that each individual is both unique and equal to others regardless of sex, nationality, colour, creed, class, intellectual ability or emotional, social, physical handicap.
We believe that the whole person includes the dimensions of body mind and spirit, and that all dimension of human responsibility are fully realised in community and not in isolation.
We believe that all people are formed, sustained and affirmed through a process of love and relationship with others.
That if we are to be individuals there is no escape from our interdependence.
We believe that education is a moral transaction between one generation and the next.
It takes place in communities, the home, the school, the parish and the locality.
Working together
WOMEN play a large part in the life of the Church, but there is always more to be done.
Following the publication by the National Board of ‘Do Not Be Afraid,’ in 1991, a Joint Dialogue Group was established by the Bishops' Conference and the NBCW.
The task given to this group is to discover what is  happening already to involve women more fully in the life and mission of the Church and to draw up some possible and practical steps by which the participation of women in the life of the Church can be developed.
One of the agreed starting points for this undertaking is the vision of the role to be played by women given in paragraph 178 of the ‘Easter People.’
This paragraph speaks of the ‘many distinctive gifts and talents that women offer to the Church;’ in it the bishops state: ‘We believe the time if overdue for more positive attitudes about your participation in the life of the Church and we recognise with regret that you have often been permitted to play mainly a limited and often inferior part in the Church.
Our appeal, then, is that each of you individually will feel able to use to the full your gifts, your skills and your knowledge in the life and service of the Church.
Traditional and unquestioned attitudes towards women and your role may have to be changed…
You must not be excluded from the process of pastoral planning and decision making’.
Our first task is to gather information of the ‘best practice’ of this vision from the parishes and diocese of England and Wales.
In addition we invite you to note your perception of the frustrations you find in your life in the Church and to offer suggestions of changes you would like to see.
Some members of the Dialogue Group are doing this by contacting and listening to their own particular networks and groups.
But there are many women who do not belong to any groups or organisations.
The Dialogue Group particularly wants to listen to these.
Leaflet
A leaflet prepared by the National Board of Catholic Women — NBCW, was available early in March.
Distribution will be through parishes and Women's Organisations.
The NBCW writes: ‘We invite you to read and reply to as many of the questions as you possibly can.
They do not cover everything, so please feel free to add any points which you think we have left out’.
Eucharistic Congress
THE Holy Father has expressed the wish that the Eucharistic Congress (Seville, 7th–13th June)‘should involve every particular church, every parish, every religious community…by means of a more intense catechesis on the Eucharist, a more knowledgeable and active participation in the liturgy and a sense of adoration capable of interiorising the celebration of the Paschal Mystery…‘
The National Director, Father Anthony Conlon, has asked that this Congress be remembered in our prayers.
A Congress Prayer Card is available from Father Conlon, St Joseph's Presbytery,.
Congress Prayer
We give you thanks, almighty Father, for revealing to us in Christ, the light of nations, the mystery of our salvation.
True paschal lamb, dying he destroyed our death, rising he restored our life.
As a memorial of his sacrifice for us he gave us the sacrament of the Eucharist to be the food by which we share here on earth in the blessings of the world to come.
Pour out your Spirit, Lord, upon us as we proclaim and adore the presence of your Son in the mystery of faith so that we may spend our lives in generous solidarity with everyone.
Thus, being worshippers in spirit and in truth, we may be witnesses to the Gospel and imitators of Mary, mother of Jesus and servant in the work of salvation.
Through Christ Our Lord.
Words of Life
Reflections on Gospel readings of Sundays in April by Fr.
Paul Billington CMS.
Palm Sunday (April 4th)
Today begins the Holy Week, the time of Jesus’ suffering.
On many occasions Jesus has relieved the sufferings of others, curing them of their sickness, freeing them from the hold of spirits.
Now he must face his own suffering
Jesus makes a humble, though triumphal, entry into Jerusalem.
His procession is greeted by throngs laying down palm leaves in his way.
But ‘the people were in turmoil’, bewildered, unsure, their enthusiasm short-lived.
Maundy Thursday (April 8th)
The Last Supper is knitted into the tradition of the Old Covenant and the passover meal of Moses and Aaron.
It is both a celebration of salvation and also a proclamation of God's continuing gift of saving grace for his faithful people.
Good Friday (April 9th)
John of the Cross, the Spanish mystic, wrote ‘I looked at the Cross and there I saw the song of love’.
Jesus is untouched by insult.
His face is set like flint against the threats and swipes of guards and the rabble.
He is pierced through for our faults.
He is our Saviour.
He is obedient through suffering.
He is God's song of saving love for his simple, sinful trying people.
Holy Saturday (April 10th)
The stories of Creation, the rescue of the Hebrews from Egypt, the escaping journey, dry-shod through the Sea, the years of desert purification and then the gift of a rich and fertile homeland, exiles, prophets and wise people instructing and drawing people back to the faithful track, these start our Easter Feast.
Then, we are told that this constant presence of God guiding and helping his people has been completed.
We are now renewed, saved forever by Jesus Christ.
Grace has been unleashed.
Easter Sunday (April 11th)
The sighting of Mary Magdalene is affirmed by Peter and John discovering the Empty Tomb, the burial cloths neatly set to one side.
The Lord has Appeared.
Peter announces the Resurrection at the house of Cornelius who had earlier said to Jesus ‘Lord I am not worthy that you should enter under my roof’.
Now every place where the Meal of the Lord is celebrated is made holy by this divine presence.
No place is too humble for the Lord.
Though he descended, was made low, now He has been raised up high.
In his resurrection we are raised with Christ.
All sin is driven by self-doubt, self-depreciation.
Grace sets us free to be sons and daughters of the Father.
Second Sunday of Easter (April 18th)
The groups of early believers were filled with zeal and faith.
The Appearances of the Lord turned their hearts, they saw everything through the eyes of their cherished experience of love revealed in Christ Jesus.
The readings tell us that the first communities of Christians were united heart and soul in the Lord.
Third Sunday of Easter (April 25th)
It was impossible to hold back the enthusiasm of the church in its infancy.
The apostles and the communities of the faithful were driven by the Spirit, faith and the knowledge of the Risen Lord.
The Emmaus story reflects the awakening of recognition among the followers within days of Jesus' death to the Risen Lord.
He appeared to his followers.
He was present in the bread and wine they shared in memory of him.
He was present in the message.
He is the Word of Easter — Rejoice, Life is given to us.
Alleluia!
Diamond Jubilee celebration of CWL section
ST Cuthbert's, Blackpool, section of the C.W.L. recently celebrated the diamond jubilee of their inauguration.
Ten months preparation culminated on February 19th, 1933, with a Mass of Thanksgiving.
Nine priests concelebrated with Canon Mulvaney as the chief celebrant.
At the end of Mass, Canon Mulvaney presented the Papal Blessing to Mrs Pat Nicholls, chairman, who received it on behalf of the section.
Ninety three members and friends then went on to the Headlands Hotel for a celebration dinner where all the ladies received a white carnation.
Day of Divine Mercy
MRS Krysia Clews, a parishioner of St John the Evangelist, Poulton, is organising a special day in honour of the Divine Mercy on Sunday, 18th April — the day on which Sister Faustyna is beatified in Rome.
The event will include a film about the life of Sr. Faustyna at 1pm, a Holy Hour from 2.0–3.0pm and the Chaplet of Mercy.
The day will conclude with the Celebration of Mass.
The Padre Pio evening which was held in Poulton on 12th February was very well supported.
After the excellent talk there was an occasion to renew old friendships in the parish hall and £196.52 was raised towards the hall restoration.
Cardinal and Bishop call for N test ban
Cardinal Basil Hume and Bishop  Patrick Kelly have both called for a ban on nuclear weapons testing in the past few days.
The church leaders' letters aim to encourage the British Government to return to its former policy of supporting the nuclear non-proliferation treaty by calling a moratorium on weapons testing, as the French, US and Russian governments have done.
In a letter published in ‘The Times’ on 2 March the Cardinal said, ‘Whatever stance individuals make take over the morality of the nuclear deterrent, there must be general agreement on the aim of preventing the spread of nuclear weapons to non-nuclear states.
It is also clear that the renewal and extension of the non-proliferation treaty, hopefully leading in due course to a comprehensive test-ban treaty, depends crucially on the actions of the existing nuclear weapons states.’
Bishop Patrick Kelly wrote to the Foreign Secretary, Mr. Douglas Hurd, on 26 February, also urging the government to revive its former policy of actively promoting a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty.
Contribution
Commenting on the letter, Bishop Kelly said that now was the time for Britain to act in support of a world free from the threat of nuclear weapons.
‘Times have changed,’ he said, ‘There is no longer a superpower threat but there is a danger of nuclear proliferation.
It is vital the that non-Proliferation treaty, which lapses in 1995, is renewed, and the nuclear weapons states such as Britain must play their part.
The vital contribution is to progress towards a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty, and a moratorium on British tests would be a significant sign of commitment to that.’
Bishop Kelly wrote in his capacity as chair of the Bishops' Conference Committee for International Justice and Peace.
Bishop Kelly's letter said:
Dear Mr Hurd:
I am writing to you in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee for International Justice and Peace of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales, to express our concern about the danger of nuclear proliferation.
We are anxious to express our wholehearted support for the renewal, on a permanent basis, of the Nuclear-Non Proliferation Treaty — an objective which we know is shared by HMG.
The matter is made the more urgent by the collapse of central control of nuclear weapons and materials in the former USSR and the consequent need to ensure that the relevant republics accede to the NPT as non-nuclear weapons states.
However, we hare unhappy that HMG has recently felt unable to support the early conclusion of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, since we believe — as does the Vatican's representative at the United Nations — that a halt to nuclear testing is essential to the successful prolongation of the NPT and thus to progress in preventing nuclear proliferation.
We are pleased to note that both France and the United States have joined Russia in adopting temporary moratoria on testing, and the US is now committed to achieving a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty at the latest by 1996, and to resuming talks with Russia to that end.
Until the early 1980's HMG was an active participant in negotiations for the conclusion of a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty at the earliest practicable time.
We are therefore now asking HMG, through you, to revive Britain's traditional policy of active support for the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban.
In furtherance of this objective we ask you to announce immediately Britain's own temporary moratorium on all nuclear testing.
The Committee for International Justice and Peace wishes to make this letter public so its text will be released to the press after you have received it.
It's ‘carry on building’ in Cleator
THE various parish schools of St Mary's Cleator, have a long history of promises, delays, cancellations, fresh starts and demolitions.
Another chapter was added recently when work on the long awaited new St Patrick's Junior School was suddenly halted when the main contractor went into receivership at the beginning of this year.
It took more than a month to find and sign a contract with another company to complete the remaining work.
Eden Construction, now part of the Kier Group, started work on site again on 15th February.
They hope to finish work on the school building before Easter and to complete the remainder of the project including demolition of the old school in June.
The original date for the official opening by Bishop Brewer was — not surprisingly!— St Patrick's Day!
This has had to be postponed.
No new date has been set, but it will be some months after the children have moved into the new school.
In the meantime the children and staff of St Patrick's continue to face considerable problems and inconvenience.
Through the worst of the winter they have had no proper play area; the old school building is deteriorating at a rapid rate and they have also had to find room to store the furniture for the new school which has already been delivered.
Fr.
Sullivan, the parish priest says: ‘It will be worth it in the end, though I hope there will be an end before too long’.
The parish of course has to find its 15 per cent share of this £1 million project and is busy fundraising.
Most homes in the parish have taken a ‘Parish Debt Box’ through which they make contributions.
The boxes are emptied three times a year by 40 collectors.
To date parishioners have been extremely generous in their giving and the scheme has proved a great success.
The new school was designed by Roy Nicholson Becker and Day, Whitehaven.
It will accommodate 200 pupils.
Applause greets Fr.
Bernard's Silver Jubilee
A BURST of applause from a crowded congregation showed the affection felt for Fr.
Bernard Woods at the conclusion of the concelebrated Mass to mark the silver jubilee of his ordination.
The concelebrated Mass was at Our Lady and St Edward's Church, Fulwood, Preston, where Fr.
Bernard as been parish priest since 1988.
Six priests took part in the Mass all of whom had had close links with him during his ministry.
They were Mgr.
Patrick O'Dea, Canon Michael Taylor, and Frs.
Francis Worden, Peter Hart, Kenneth Hodson and John Watson.
The deacons were the Revs.
Peter Williams and Bernard Fitzgerald.
Among the congregation were Fr.
Bernard's mother and members of his family.
His sister, Mary, performed the scripture reading.
The Very Rev. Canon Stanley Finch, vicar of Broughton Church represented the covenanted churches.
Presentation
Fr.
Bernard was ordained in Carlisle in 1968 and later served at Keswick Youth Centre and then at Barrow and Whitehaven.
After the Mass he was presented with a cheque and gifts on behalf of parishioners by Mr Bill Noblett, chairman of the parish council.
This was followed by a concert during which Fr.
Bernard (a Cumbrian), presented a bouquet to ex-Cumbrian parishioners Peter and Susan Simons, whose silver wedding coincided with his jubilee.
Later in the week Fr.
Bernard also celebrated an anniversary Mass in his home church of St Bede's.
Carlisle, where he was ordained.
In addition to being a parish priest Fr.
Bernard has a full-time post as director of the Diocesan Caring Services.
Joan of Arc in Preston for a day!
JOAN of Arc in Preston for a day!
No, you're not seeing things.
But it's a one-woman play performed by solo artiste Peri Aston on Tuesday 27th April at 7.30 pm in St Wilfrid's Church, Chapel Street, Preston.
Entitled ‘Dance of a Warrior Woman’ the play is a powerful portrayal of the turbulent life and death of St Joan of Arc.
It's a feast for the eyes, mind and heart.
And it's the only performance in the area.
Just part of the Bicentenary celebrations of St Wilfrid's Preston.
Further information and tickets from Sanctuary Bookshop in St Wilfrid's Parish Centre .