

ISSUE No. 148
A NEW LOOK AT THE RELIGIOUS LIFE
Bishop Konstant wants your response
BRITAIN'S best-known monk presented a TV show this month.
In a programme he wrote himself, Cardinal Basil Hume, former Abbot of Ampleforth, returned to the North East, where he was born.
Cardinal Hume
He told of the saints who established Christianity, and who were really responsible for stability and civilisation in northern Britain.
They helped to make the 7th and 8th Centuries a time when Jarrow was the largest centre of civilisation west of Rome.
Yes, the Jarrow on the banks of the River Tyne.
These days it boasts Europe's biggest shopping centre!
Cardinal Hume visited Holy Island, off the Northumberland coast, where Celtic monks from Iona founded a monastery.
He talked about St. Paulinus and St. Aidan and visited Whitby where — all those years ago — St. Hilda presided over a double monastery of men and women.
Her role as spiritual adviser, teacher and leader typifies the value of women in the Church.
Looking at Durham Cathedral, the Cardinal pointed out that the Church is not just concerned with beautiful buildings but also the dignity of the individual —‘I think we ought to be inspired by those saints of Anglo-Saxon England, to do in our day what they did in theirs.
Perhaps we might be able to build a new Golden Age.’
Cardinal Hume is 70 years old, but in that programme he looked at the vocation to the religious life with all the zest of youth.
Now we are all invited to take a look at the same subject.
Pope John Paul II has chosen the topic ‘The Religious Life and its role in the Church and the World’ for the Synod of Bishops in Rome in 1994.
In preparation he is consulting the whole Church — including you and me.
First phase of the consultation process began with the publication of the text of the ‘Lineamenta’.
This document, published in ‘Briefing’ in January, is quite long and a simplified text is being published in ‘Briefing’in February.
Now Bishop David wants the fullest participation in formulating the Leeds diocesan response.
All religious in the diocese are already involved in a programme of prayer, study and reflection, as they formulate their response based on their own experience.
The secular clergy and the laity in the diocese are now being asked to take part in the consultation through the Senate of Priests, the Diocesan Pastoral Council and the ‘Catholic Voice’.
The full Leeds Diocese consultation paper is available from the RE Centre.
You may find the following points helpful in your personal or group reflection and response:
A:
RELIGIOUS LIFE, VOCATION AND CONSECRATION
Do you understand why women and men become Religious?
Why do they stay as Religious?
What motivates them?
Do the vows of chastity, poverty and obedience make sense in the world of today?
Are they relevant?
Religious life has changed since Vatican II: Name positive developments: Name negative aspects.
Remember that when we talk about Religious we mean:
a)
Contemplative women and men: Enclosed nuns and monks, eg Carmelites, Poor Clares, Cistercians.
b)
Apostolic women and men: Active in the Church's life, eg Sisters of Mercy, Sisters of the Cross and Passion, O.M.I. brothers and religious priests, John of God brothers.
There are many more apostolic religious priests, sisters and brothers than contemplative nuns and monks.
Do you understand the distinctive calling of a sister, brother, religious priest?
There are other forms of Religious Life such as secular institutes, societies of apostolic life, eg Focolare, and other new forms of evangelical life.
Do you know anything about these?
Have you come into contact with any of them?
B:
RELIGIOUS LIFE: IN THE CHURCH AND IN THE WORLD
In what way do you see Religious Life responding to the needs of the Church and of society facing a new millennium?
Will Religious Life need to be lived out in a new form?
Religious Life for women is affected today by the attention given to the subject of woman, her vocation and role in the Church and in society.
What opportunities and problems are being surfaced regarding this subject?
Every Religious Congregation has its own charism, out of which they have written their own Mission Statement.
In this way each congregation is trying to be faithful, authentic and dynamic in following the spirit of their Founder/Foundress in the service of the Church in today's society.
Are you aware of the particular charism of any Religious community in your area?
Today, one of the fundamental Church requirements of the Religious Life is the call to continual spiritual renewal.
Have Religious taken this call seriously? eg. retreats, personal growth workshops, sabbaticals, study leave, changes in lifestyle and accommodation?
Many Religious belong to international congregations and can be asked to work at home or abroad.
Do you know of any Congregational missionary outreach?
What support does your parish community give them?
What problems and solutions exist for the promotion of vocations to the Religious Life?
Would you encourage your son/daughter or a member of your parish community to become a brother, sister or religious priest?
If not, why not?
The number of Religious in this country is falling.
The average age of Religious is rising.
This inevitably means a reduction in the institutional care and education offered by them and the formation of new apostolates.
Some religious have moved into smaller communities whilst carrying the responsibility for caring for their own elderly and sick brothers and sisters.
Are there any lessons to be learnt from this?
C:
RELIGIOUS LIFE AND MISSION
To be effective witnesses of God's love society today the tasks facing Religious are enormous.
What expectations do laity and priests have of Religious regarding: Young people?
Collaboration with the clergy?
Encouraging and enabling the laity to take their proper place in the Church?
The case of people with disabilities?
Ecumenical and inter-faith dialogue?
Evangelisation…?
Are there any other important aspects concerning Religious Life which should receive attention during the Synod?
Individual or group responses should be sent to the Rev Andrew Summersgill, no later than May 1, 1993.
Please mark the envelope ‘SYNOD’.
What do you think about nuns and monks?
Sixth formers at Leeds Notre Dame College reply:
Marcus, aged 16:‘I think they do a good job!
I'm not a church-goer. but I think they help solve people's problems.
They held you spiritually and mentally.’
Damien, 18:‘My first memory of nuns is getting lines at school for making scones instead of buns in cookery!
But I think they are doing a good job.
It's just I don't really know much about them because they live quietly.’
Mark, 19:‘In our parish, Corpus Christi, the OMI priest doesn't wear a collar, he wears a shirt and jumper, and you can approach them more easily.’
Katie, 16:‘Some nuns dress really smartly.’
Sean, 16:‘Yes, but I can't understand why they don't get married and have children.’
Marie, 18:‘But, if you have a family, you couldn't give yourself totally, and they do that — give themselves totally.
I have got a lot of time for them.
I know two nuns, from our parish.
One of them goes abroad all the time and she comes back with some great stories!
I think she does a lot and helps a lot of people.’
Marcia, 16:‘I like nuns!
They are still down to earth but holy as well.
But I think they take things too far, giving up everything — it is silly, there is no need for it.
They could still live their lives for Christ without sacrificing everything.’
Steven, 18:‘It's difficult to know why people become monks, I guess I'd have to try it first!
They do useful things like making wine and cheese.
But I suppose it's just a different vocation.
And I think nuns made good teachers.’
WHAT IS MOST USEFUL IN THEIR LIVES?
The answers: praying…teaching…community service…as parish priests…offering an ear to people who need it.
WHAT IS MOST IMPORTANT IN YOUR LIFE?
The unanimous reply: Enjoying ourselves.
Churches' concern over cuts
Bishop Konstant and other West Yorkshire church leaders have told the Government of their ‘deep concern’ over cuts in the Urban Programme.
A letter has gone from members of the West Yorkshire Ecumenical Council — a body in which Christian leaders co-operate in dealing with matters of common interest — to Mr Robin Squire MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for the Environment.
The letter points ‘the way in which urban resources have recently been refocused and the consequent cuts in the Urban Programme.
‘This is a matter of considerable significance to us as three of the five districts in West Yorkshire (Bradford, Kirklees and Leeds Metropolitan Districts) have between them received an annual average of about £10 million over the last five years — a substantial figure.
‘There are four points we should like to make.
Firstly, the loss of this source of revenue is a major blow to the many individuals and groups working to improve the quality of life in urban priority areas.
It has particular significance for those churches who over the last decade, aided by the enthusiasm which stemmed from the Archbishop of  Canterbury's report ‘Faith in the City’(December, 1985) and the subsequently established Church Urban Fund, have tried to put their buildings, their membership and above all their local networks at the service of the wider community.
‘In this they have been greatly helped by grants received through the Urban Programme, especially under its social heading.
The list of recipient church projects is very long, ranging from refurbishment of church buildings to small revenue grants to enable the establishment of local good neighbour (community care) schemes.
As examples of such projects in our three districts we would draw to your attention:
BRADFORD
£18,000 capital grant to the Hutson Street Project which provides literacy classes, mother and toddler groups, community art and community health projects for local people (1988).
The Mother's Union has funded some of the associated revenue costs.
£22,000 revenue grant to Bradford 7 UP Consortium (which includes St Columba's CE Church, Tetley Street Baptists) to fund the teaching of English as a second language in a predominantly Asian area.
KIRKLEES
£13,000 for the stone-cleaning of Dewsbury Minster (1992) as part of its re-ordering for community use (overnight places for homeless people, facilities for older people).
LEEDS
£158,000 capital grant to the Church of  Go of Prophecy in Chapeltown (1990) which constituted a major  contribution towards the construction costs of the Austin Burke Memorial Centre.
This is a new community facility which, whilst serving as a church, also offers a purpose built nursery and a training room.
£15,000 per annum revenue grant to each of two church-based furniture stores — Leeds and Moortown (Baptist) and St Jude SVP (RC)— over a three-year period, enabling essential items such as beds, cookers, tables etc to be collected from donors and delivered to those needing them.
Both stores also received £10,000 for the purchase of a new van.
‘Without Urban Programme funding it is unlikely that these schemes would have been undertaken in their present form, especially those requiring capital funding.
Schemes such as the furniture stores would have operated at a much more modest level whereas now they are the main providers of this service in the city.
It is tragic that such developments will not be able to take place in future.
‘Secondly, we appreciate that this refocusing of urban programme resources will contain some new elements.
However, as far as churches and some other faith communities are concerned, City Challenge and the new Urban Partnership Fund are of limited significance; the former because it is geographically limited to small areas of Bradford and Kirklees, and the latter because it is so meagre; its national total of £20 million equals only twice the annual Urban Programme receipts in our three districts (£10.8 million in 1992/3).
In addition, it necessitates the involvements of capital receipts and private finance — neither very likely to be accessible to church and church-related community groups.
We are also extremely pessimistic that local authorities will receive substantial receipts in the current depressed economic climate.
‘Thirdly, we do not understand the timing of this cancellation of the Urban Programme.
Not only does it discredit the emphasis on ‘partnership’ between Central Government and the faith communities which has been highlighted by the recent establishment of the Inner Cities Religious Council (and re-emphasised at the meetings which you attended in Bradford on May 21st and  Kirklees on October 27th) but it also means that church and other faith communities will be less likely to play their full part in the implementation of other aspects of Government policy such as the forthcoming Community Care changes which will require the use of local premises, volunteers etc.
We await your explanation.
‘Finally, we would urge that this decision should not be seen as immutable.
Reconsideration should ensure that the needs of people living in urban priority areas are properly recognised.
As churches we feel an obligation to speak up for the least privileged in our society, for those who live in the areas of highest unemployment, poorest housing and social disintegration.
Consequently we urge strongly that these cuts be reversed and that the level of urban funding, especially under its social heading, be restored without delay’.
The West Yorkshire Ecumenical Council consists of leaders of Christian churches who co-operate wherever possible and speak as one on subjects of common interest and concern.
PAGE ONE COMMENT
More questions than answers
NOW that Tony Bland has died, we pray that he may rest in peace, and that his parents and family may be able to grieve in private for him.
We pray, too, that they may learn to live with the loss, and recover from the emotional and physical effects of this most harrowing, prolonged experience.
The case  itself raises serious questions for those with the competence to judge, as Bishop Konstant suggested in an interview on Radio 4 the morning after Mr Bland's death.
Describing himself as ‘instinctively uneasy’, he went on to say that this case could not be used as a precedent by people who want to push the boundaries of life and death still further in the direction of euthanasia.
The fact is, however, that the debate has been moved on.
‘Quality of life’ was at stake, and the courts concluded that Mr. Bland's life was not worth preserving.
Consequently, it was decided that he should no longer be fed, thus ensuring that he would die.
The decision to withdraw Mr. Bland's food and drink could not be made without a court ruling.
(Decisions in future cases will also have to be referred to the courts).
John Keown, MA (Cantab) DPhil (Oxon), Lecturer in Law, University of Cambridge, described the decision as ‘seriously flawed’.
‘Is artificial feeding (nutrition and hydration) medical treatment?’ he asks.
One may also ask ‘What precisely is the AILMENT for which food is regarded as ‘treatment’?’
The case hinges on that question and on the subsequent one: ‘Can such treatment be withdrawn’.
The answer given by the courts in this instance is ‘yes’ to both questions, but the reasons given for these conclusions are less than satisfactory.
Where human life is at stake, a much greater degree of certainty is required.
Such judgements should not be based on opinions about the ‘quality of life’ as in this case.
EDITOR
Ceremony to mark new catechism
THE Diocesan Pastoral Council was told this month, of a plan for a special ceremony in each diocese to mark the appearance of the new Catechism of the Catholic Church.
Such a ceremony would be particularly for clergy, teachers and catechists, Bishop Konstant told the Council at Trinity and All Saints College, Horsforth, on Saturday, March 6th.
The Bishop, a member of the international team which produced the Catechism, said the original test of this ‘most important document’ was written in French.
The French version was therefore ready for publication first.
Translations in ‘latin’ languages like Spanish and Italian were completed in time for the promulgation of the test by the Holy Father on December 7th last year.
Other translations (English and German in particular, also Portuguese) were not ready.
It had been hoped to have the English version ready for publication by Easter this year but it had been delayed principally because of objections to the use ‘inclusive language’.
The Bishop said the translator had attended very carefully to all the criticisms and it now seemed likely that we would have to wait until at least the end of the summer before the English edition appears.
The date of the meeting was after the copy deadline for this edition of the Catholic Voice.
Other subjects discussed by the Council will be reported next month.
Attack on ‘planned neglect’ of babies
A REPORT urging that premature babies should be allowed to die by neglect has been attacked by the society for the Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC).
Attack on ‘planned neglect’ of babies
A REPORT urging that premature babies should be allowed to die by neglect has been attacked by the society for the Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC).
‘The report ‘Born Too Soon’ was published by the Office of Health Economics a body financed by the pharmaceutical industry,’said Phyllis Bowman, National Director of SPUC.
‘It claims that the provision of life-saving care to premature infants is too expensive and that resources could be better deployed elsewhere.
An Early Day Motion has now been tabled in the House of Commons attacking the report and calling the Department of Health to distance itself from the recommendations.
If the pharmaceutical industry is really concerned about the economics of health care they would be better to curb the profits that they make through drugs sold to the NHS for which the charges are not infrequently excessive.
‘We are calling on Members of Parliament to support the Parliamentary campaign ensuring that the policy of ‘Born Too Soon’ is not adopted and that every individual is provided with the proper medical care regardless of age, size, race or gender.
‘The report shows a callous and discriminatory attitude towards the handicapped and smacks of Nazi Germany.
It states that it is not ‘cost effective’ to care for premature babies as there is a high incidence of disabilities amongst them and stresses that the government could save between £70 million and £200 million (if one includes their education) by allowing them to die.
‘Many parents of premature babies and people with disabilities must be horrified at this report which seeks to cheapen their lives by measuring their value solely in terms of the money it costs to provide for even the most basic human rights such as education.’
School donates over £6,000 to charities
IN the three weeks before Christmas, pupils, students and staff at St Mary's School, Guiseley, were engaged in numerous and fund-raising activities.
Activities included a sponsored walk, a balloon race and a basketball shoot against the clock, but numerous smaller events took place.
For almost 20 years St Mary's has supported the work of St Gemma's Hospice in Moortown, Leeds and recently Miss Anne Murray, the Assistant Head of Sixth Form and three senior students presented a cheque for £2,750 to the Hospice (see photo above).
In addition, the school is donating £900 to CAFOD for relief work in Ethiopia and Somalia and £450 to the Sylvia Wright Trust.
Over £800 has been donated to ALERT which supports the Bosnian refugees at present in Horsforth.
The Catholic Diocesan Social Welfare fund will receive at least £1,100.
This represents a great achievement in the middle of a recession and says much for the hard work of everyone involved.
PEW VIEW
Briefing the Commission
Cardinal Hume's call for a Royal Commission to find ‘where we are at’ is timely.
What will history make of us?
‘The period towards the end of the Century was marked by a centralisation of power.
This produced a sense of helplessness in many people.
Sometimes they felt that they had no worth or purpose.
The need for short-term profits caused the run-down of many manufacturing industries around which communities and lives revolved and when this raw profit-standard was applied to power and energy industries, they followed suit.
Consuming or just shopping became the remedy for both economic and personal problems.
People were encouraged to purchase furnishings, appliances, clothes, videos and entertainment systems and prepared food: this provided jobs in retailing, distribution and transport, and in assembly of imported components.
Much of this was funded by personal borrowing, providing jobs in Credit and Banking; the security for lending often coming from people's own homes, as the desire to own and furnish better homes set off a spiral of house-price inflation.
This and the building of shopping centres and roads for larger numbers of cars created jobs in construction and materials.
Consumer demand led to higher imports of manufactured goods and the inflationary pressures were checked by a credit-squeeze: the bubble of the housing market burst and jobs were lost in construction, banking and shopping.
This economic downturn put a strain on low-tax policies and free-market standards were applied to health and social services, with hospitals and other facilities being closed.
People found escape in home-entertainment, including violent videos and games, and in fictional and celebrity dramas enacted in Press and TV.
Competitive consumption had led to me-first attitudes and the breakdown in community caused by constant reorganization of familiar structures was not generally understood.
It was at this time that the Churches at last made common cause and risked calling for Prayer, the acceptance of Gospel values and the application of the Beatitudes to modern life.
The response could only be described as a God-send to a nation that had lost its way.
Pope discusses unity with Methodist leader
THE Rev. Mrs Kathleen Richardson, first woman President of the Methodist Conference, has spoken to ‘Leeds Catholic Voice’ following her audience with Pope John Paul II.
Apart from her post as national president, which ends three months from now, Mrs Richardson has links with our Diocese as chairman of the West Yorkshire District of her Church.
She told ‘Catholic Voice:’ I went to Rome on the 15th–19th December.
The purpose of the visit was to have a private audience with the Pope and also to visit the departments in the Vatican that I had particular interest in.
They included Christian Unity, the Department of Peace and Justice and the Secretariat that deals with dialogue with other faiths.
‘The Secretary of the Methodist Conference accompanied me, the Rev. Brian Beck.
I had never been to Rome or indeed to Italy before.
‘It is part of the expectation of the President that I should be available to represent the Church, so I have been to Strasbourg to the European Parliament and also on visits to the churches in Nigeria and Kenya.
‘Within this country we have had discussion with the leaders of the Church of England and also with other denominations.
‘The conversation with the Pope included discussion of unity.
He said that our unity was based on the foundation of Christ.
The unity was in the past and resided in the present and our devotion to Jesus.
‘I also tried to say that our unity was in the future when we believe that all things will be gathered together and completed in Christ and that therefore our policies of today have to reflect our longings for the future.
‘He spoke about how he had appreciated the colleagueship of the Methodist pastor in Crackow and I was then able to say that there were indeed Methodists in Italy and the Protestant Church, although small in number is quite significant, particularly in its work among refugees and migrant workers.
‘We spoke about the very good relationships between our Churches in Britain and I spoke about our foundation under John Wesley, with the links between personal piety and the search for righteousness in social justice We spoke about these things linking our two Churches together at quite a deep level.
‘The audience lasted about 20 minutes and the meeting took place in his study in the Vatican.
The question of women priests was not discussed between us.
I was very conscious that in my presence there it couldn't be avoided, though, of course, the Methodist Church does not make any claims to priesthood for its ministry.
Our doctrine is of the priesthood of all believers.
I was therefore seen as a representative person of the Methodist people.
The Rev. Kathleen Richardson
Courtesy and respect
‘I had rather expected before I went that I might not be taken seriously as a woman.
That simply did not happen and I was treated with the utmost courtesy and respect as a representative of a significant Church.
‘Part of the purpose of going was to remind the people in the Vatican how much we value and treasure ecumenical relationships in Great Britain.
I hope that point will have been made and certainly in future appointments, whenever they occur, some consideration will be given towards people who will be sympathetic to the ecumenical scene.
‘I am in covenant with other church leaders in Yorkshire and this, I think has a great significance — the way that we work together and the personal friendships that are growing between us.
‘In Britain there is a great willingness to work ecumenically and a longing to find ways that we can actually share in the tasks that there are within the country.
‘I think in order to improve relationships, an awareness that the task before us in the Kingdom of God is greater than anything that divides us as denominations, is helpful.
‘Personal contacts and friendships, I believe, are the way that we actually get to respect each other and therefore find that the differences between us are not quite as great as we had thought.
‘We should all be regarded as people of faith who are pilgrims together and as we seek to understand and appreciate each others traditions and values then we shall be gaining rather than losing.’
Bishop calls for justice
JUSTICE for all and a fair sharing of resources were called for by Bishop Konstant when he welcomed candidates who will become Catholics at Easter.
At a special ceremony at Leeds Cathedral on the first Sunday of Lent, the Bishop said the candidates were making an important statement.
Theirs was a witnessed to faith in ‘the importance of the spiritual, the sanctity of marriage, respect for human life, appreciation of each person's dignity, justice for all, fair sharing of resources, and the need to think of others.
He said such practical statements were ‘disturbing to a society whose values appear to be dangerously selfish, namely economic success at the expense of our neighbours and a morality largely based on what the individual wants’.
More than two thousand adults throughout England and Wales — including 125 in Leeds — took part in similar services.
Ceremonies to welcome them — known as the Rite of Election and Affirmation — were held in 18 of the 22 Catholic cathedrals in England and Wales on the same day.
The Catholic Media Office said 2,094 made the formal request to be received into the Church at the cathedral services.
Others took part in similar ceremonies in their local churches.
Bishop Konstant said: ‘After much thought, study and prayer, they will join the four million Catholics in England.
We pray for them and wish them well in their journey of faith.’
Those taking part come from a variety of backgrounds and have spent several months or in some cases years receiving instruction in the faith, usually as part of a parish group.
It is unlikely that any of this weekend's candidates will have been motivated by recent events in the Church of England since their initial enquiry and preparation will have begun long before the Church of England Synod vote of November 1992.
Prayers for Tony Bland
PRAYERS were requested by Bishop Konstant for Tony Bland and everyone hurt by the Hillsborough disaster.
The Bishop told clergy late last month and before Tony's death, that it seemed likely that permission given by the Law Lords to stop feeding Tony would soon be acted upon:
‘I would be grateful if you would ask your parishioners to remember both him and his family in their prayers.
For Tony, that he may rest in peace, and for his family for their strengthening and peace.
At the same time we should also keep in our prayers all those who died, were injured or bereaved in the Hillsborough disaster.
‘There has been much grievous suffering for everyone involved in this case.
It is not for us to judge the personal morality of the decisions individuals have taken.
‘While on the face of it seems a very simple matter to decide on, I am reminded of the complexities not so very long ago surrounding the understanding of so-called ‘brain-death’.
As you may know the Cardinal has already taken steps to set in train a thorough investigation into the moral implications of the Law Lords' decision.
‘Some argue that what is happening is a form of direct killing.
Others argue that what is taking place is the withdrawal of ‘extraordinary means for survival’.
While holding fast to clear moral principles about the sanctity of life we must be equally clear about principles concerning the means to be taken to protect life.
‘The Catechism makes a brief comment about this: ‘No one is obliged to continue medical procedures that are unnecessarily burdensome, dangerous, extraordinary or disproportionate to the hoped-for results; such treatments may be considered excessive'’.
Bishop Konstant says: ‘On the larger issue we will need time, information and guidance to come to a clear understanding of the morality of such situations.
It is a far more complex matter than I had first thought’.
Bishop Konstant's mention of Cardinal Basil Hume, chairman of the conference of bishops who lead England's four million Roman Catholics, refers to a statement the Cardinal issued on February 8th:
‘All who have become aware of the plight of Tony Bland and the anguish of his parents will have been moved by the agony of their dilemma and the acute difficulty of coming to the right decision.
This case raises serious and complex moral issues and I have asked for a detailed study of the House of Lords judgement in the light of Catholic moral teaching.
I am very concerned about the implications of this judgement if the effect is to sanction death by starvation which cannot be morally right.’
Neither the Cardinal nor Bishop Konstant has mentioned the ‘Pro-Life’ demonstrators at Airedale General Hospital, Steeton, near Keighley, but a spokesman for the Diocese said:
‘These people have the same rights as any private citizen but the demonstrations by Fr.
Morrow and his followers at the hospital has no connection with the Diocese of Leeds and is not supported by the Church in West Yorkshire.
‘We must not now add to the burden facing the medical staff and the Bland family by taking part in emotional or noisy demonstrations’.
Open your heart to find room for these children
JAMIE AND ALAN, aged 10 and 6 years, urgently need a permanent family together and Teresa, aged 11 years, would like a family of her own.
They would like to keep in touch with each other and with their older sister who wants to stay in the children's home.
Jamie and Alan have a strong, close relationship and Jamie has in the past quietly taken a lot of responsibility for Alan.
Alan is a healthy, lively six-year-old.
He had made remarkable progress since coming into care.
Although his speech is a little delayed, he is a skilled communicator and mixes well with children and adults.
Alan has little experience of family life and is inquisitive about what it means to have a mummy and daddy.
He is a popular affectionate boy with a good sense of humour.
Jamie is a friendly bright boy who gets on well with adults and children.
He has found it difficult to talk about his feelings, sometime appearing withdrawn and sad, at other times displaying challenging behaviours.
He is doing well at school, has friends and is well liked.
Teresa, aged 11, is the second youngest of four children who came into care three years ago.
She has a strong, engaging personality and is in many ways a resilient, but sensitive child who thrives on adult attention and who can communicate her feelings and needs effectively.
Although at times her behaviour can be challenging, she is growing in confidence and is lively and chatty, with a great sense of humour and imagination.
She needs reassurance from adults and can take on the worries of the world, having a strong sense of justice and fairness.
She longs to be wanted and loved, and can share affection.
She is particularly fond of animals.
Teresa may benefit most from being an only child.
If Teresa or the boys could possibly join your family please contact:,,.
Lourdes' dance
The Leeds-Lourdes Association will hold its annual dance on Easter Monday, 12th April, at the Irish Centre, Leeds.
All profits go to the Sick Fund.
Last year £2,555 was raised.
Donations/gifts for the raffle and tombola stall please contact:,, any member of the Lourdes Association or leave with Tommy McLoughlin at the Irish Centre.
EAST LEEDS — THE REAL STORY
OUR BISHOP and the head of a Catholic School took pains to tell the real story when juvenile crime in East Leeds hit the headlines.
Police went public after police cars were rammed and officers injured.
So media men were invited to visit a Catholic school  where Bishop Konstant and headmaster Mr Gerry O'Kane were able to tell the other side of the story of life in the Gipton area.
Crime, vandalism and delinquency are confined to a minority, handful they said, in a district where the majority of folk want to lead decent lives in peace and quiet.
Corpus Christi Primary School head Mr O'Kane told YTV Calendar reporter ‘I am very concerned about the publicity the area has had, on the whole it is not reflected within this school or within many of the schools in the area.
‘We here have tremendous support from our parents.
For example, last year they collected over £2,500 for a variety of charities.
At a recent consultation evening where the teachers met the parents, we had a 97 per cent turn-out.
I think that really speaks volumes in terms of the support we get within the school and within the community’.
He said the area had ‘an extremely unfair image because the majority of people on this estate want the best housing facilities and the best education for the children and that is certainly my view in the year and a half that I've been at the school’.
Great needs
Bishop Konstant told the TV reporter: ‘It is an area where there are great needs, as there are in many parts of Leeds, great social needs — but I think the publicity it has been getting recently is quite unbalanced and it is a good thing to see another side to it.
‘There are ordinary people who live here who have ordinary needs and live perfectly ordinary lives.’
As far as the school was concerned, the fact that so many parents attended a parents' evening was ‘an indication of the kind of area we are dealing with…where parents are interested in their children's education and want to play as full a part as possible.’
The area had been given an unfair image by ‘so far as I can make out a group of tearaways who are, at the moment, completely uncontrollable.
It is outrageous that they should be able to give a flavour to the district that it by no means deserves.’
Real interest
Asked what the Church could do to help, the Bishop said:
‘First of all, simply by being around.
That's important, to show that there is a real interest in what is happening.
I think that so far as possible we need to be able to encourage the civic authorities to take whatever is the appropriate interest.
I am not suggesting for a moment that this kind of problem can be resolved merely by putting more resources in, but at the same time there is need to spend more money, perhaps.
‘Secondly, let's just take the educational side of things.
The churches need to be able to play a part in the moral education of people, in so far as it is possible, and one way is through schools.
Another way is through being in contact with parents of young people to try to help them.
Parents really do want to know how they can bring their children up to understand, very simply, what is right and what is wrong.
So I think we have a role to play in moral education.
‘I think, more than that, we have a responsibility to try to help youngsters themselves feel that they are valued.
I don't know any of these fellow who are tearing around the place but the odds are first of all that they are unemployed, secondly that they feel that nobody really cares about them, thirdly that the only way to get any sort of excitement out of life is to charge around the way they do.
‘These are not easy questions to resolve but I think that if it is possible, actually to speak to these characters in such a way that they feel that they are valued and that they do have a part to play in the community, then we are on the way to resolving questions of this sort.
So it is resources and personal support that is needed both for the individuals themselves, for their parents and for schools.’
Leeds Diocese has to find more than £1 million a year towards the cost of Catholic schools.
Meanwhile, police of the Gipton Urban Crime Unit, whose job is to improve the quality of life in an area where as many as 60 per cent of families are on income support, are concerned that special Government funding for the unit will stop on March 31st.
College invests £1.2m in new hall
BISHOP KONSTANT donned a hard hat on a building site to cut the first turf for a new £1.2 million hall of residence at Trinity and All Saints, Horsforth, a College of the University of Leeds.
He is Chairman of the College Board of Governors.
The new hall will provide residential accommodation for an extra 100 students on the campus in study bedrooms with en suite facilities, a warden's flat and facilities for the disabled.
A four-storey L-shaped building, it will be ready for occupation when students arrive at the beginning of the new academic year in October.
Dr. Gerard Turnbull, College Principal said: ‘The new hall is both an act of confidence in our future and a step along the road to improve even further the quality of life for our students.
‘Too often we hear at the beginning of each academic year how new students cannot find accommodation.
This new hall will mean that we can meet the challenge of our growing student numbers’.
Part of the cost of the new block will be paid for from income resulting from the College's growing reputation as a conference centre during vacations.
The 18–30 group of single Catholics
ON Sunday, February 23rd, 1992, a group of young, single Catholics met at the RE Centre in Headingley, Leeds to form the 18–30 group of the Association of Single Catholics.
Now, one year on, the group is a smallish but committed one with a full list of activities.
These have included meals out (we are working our way through the international cuisine), theatre visits (in both Leeds and Bradford), sporting events (dry slope skiing last month), talks (something we would like to develop more), and walks (both long and short).
The Association meets regularly on the first Friday of each month, at the RE Centre, when mass is said by our chaplain, Fr.
Eugene McGillicuddy.
The aim of the group is to enable single Catholics in the 18–30 age range (though we are not strict about these limits) to come together from around the diocese and meet each other in a social context.
Members come for all walks of life.
We hope to provide support for those with the common ground of being single, young and Catholic in today's Church and society.
We are still developing as a group and learning as we go along.
Some who came at the outset no longer come to events, but others have joined since.
As such, we cannot claim to cater for everyone, but there are plenty of ideas in the group (including plans for a retreat in the autumn) which we hope to put into practise and hopefully cater for more as a result.
A year, a month, and a day on from our first meeting, the 18–30 group is holding a welcome event for all those who would like to come and meet us and find out more about the group, and maybe throw your ideas into the pool.
This is being held in at the Irish Centre on York Road in Leeds and is an informal chance to chat with current members of that group.
Please see the calendar of events for more details.
If you cannot make it on that night, come to one of our First Friday meetings.
If you would like to know more about the group before coming along, please contact myself ..
We look forward to meeting you..
Housing lobby ‘great success’
OVER 3,000 church members from all denominations and all parts of the country went to Westminster in December to lobby their MPs.
The organisers of the day (the Churches of National Housing Coalition) have hailed it as one of the most effective political campaigns ever to have been undertaken by the churches.
The lobby received widespread support from both churches and secular organisations, with messages of support for CNHC being received from amongst others the CBI, House Builders Federation and the National Federation of Housing Associations.
A party from the Diocese were amongst the 3,000 present.
A coach departed from Leeds at 8.15pm with parties representing all the constituencies in Leeds plus a party from Shipley and another from Bradford.
In addition a party went by car from Keighley and another by minibus from the Kirklees area.
Most of the parties saw their MPs and felt they had received positive support for the objectives of the Lobby.
The night before the Lobby a service was held in Westminster Abbey and the Archbishop of Canterbury preached on the need to deal with the housing crisis as a ‘moral crusade.’
At the same time as this service was held similar services were held in Holy Trinity Church, Leeds, and St Ann's RC Church, Bradford.
These were both well attended given the bleakness of the evening and participants gained encouragement from them.
90% of the 300 MPs lobbied promised to take positive action including asking Parliamentary Questions, writing to Sir George Young, the Housing Minister and visiting local housing projects within their constituencies.
Niall Cooper, CNHC's national organiser said that ‘all those attending the lobby have expressed their outrage at the deepening crisis in housing and many MPs were surprised by the level of concern and involvement of church groups.’
Plans are now being made by the local branches of CNHC to organise a day of reflection for people working in housing organisations.
If you would like any further information please contact the Diocesan Social Responsibility Officer Helen Connell on Leeds .
Our picture shows pupils from St John the Evangelist, Bradford, receiving a cheque for £100 from the Yorkshire Bank in association with the British Trust for Conservation.
The money will be used to purchase hawthorn whips to replenish damaged stock.
‘Partnership in Care’
CARE IN the Community Legislation will come into effect on April 1st.
With that in mind the Social and Pastoral Action Committee in conjunction with Catholic Social Welfare Society at the RE Centre Leeds on February 17th with the title ‘Partnership in Care’.
John England the Group Manager for Leeds Social Services with special responsibility for Leeds Social Services with special responsibility for Care in the Community, pointed out that residential care will now be paid for by local authority social services departments rather than by the Government direct.
The changes mean that most of the care provided will be given by independently owned nursing and residential care homes.
He indicated that discussion with the privately-run homes have gone very well and warned that there is a danger that homes in the voluntary sector may be left behind in negotiations.
The speaker in the afternoon was Sue Beardon, of Voluntary Action-Leeds, and she helped delegates understand what they must do to prepare themselves for the new ways of working.
The ‘Partnership in Care’ team hope that the participants left with a better understanding of the jargon now being used.
That they will also feel more confident of making contracts with local authorities and that any fears they may have might be allayed.
One of the major tasks as the Social Responsibility Officer, is to work on issues surrounding the Care in the Community regulations.
I will be happy to advise anyone on these issues and can be contacted at  or by telephone .
MYDDELTON LODGE
The Diocese of Leeds is in the process of acquiring Myddelton Lodge, Langbar Road, Ilkley, from the religious Order of the Cross and Passion.
The Diocese already occupies the premises as tenant, and no change of use is contemplated.
For some years, Myddelton Lodge has been used as the Leeds Diocesan Pastoral and Ecumenical Centre.
The centre complements the work of parishes and schools by providing residential and day courses and religious retreats.
It is also available for use by other Christian groups and ecumenical gatherings.
Background: The original building was a Benedictine mission from about 1650.
The present chapel was built by William Middleton in 1825 and opened by Bishop Peter Baines on May 18th. 1825.
In 1879 the parish was transferred to the Sacred Heart church in Ilkley.
Talks on the Faith
Talks aimed at deepening knowledge of the Faith, for both Catholics and non-Catholics, are to be held on five Tuesday evenings at St Mary's Church hall, East Parade, Bradford, at 7.30:
March 16th: The Teaching Church — Mgr Billy Steele on How the Church hands on its traditions to succeeding generations.
March 23rd: The Unchanging Church — Mgr Steele on what is essential to the marks and nature of the Catholic Church.
March 30th: The Changing Church — Fr Bernard Bickers explains how the Church keeps its essence but needs to change its style to meet the needs of changing historical circumstances.
April 20th: The Unchanging Nature of the Mass — Fr P. Clarke on the essential meaning of the Mass.
April 27th: The Changing Style of the Mass — Fr John Carter explains how the celebration of the Mass changes through succeeding generations.
The talks have been arranged by the Bradford Area Pastoral Council in response to a need expressed in parishes in the area.
A lot of work has gone into arranging them and now publicity is vital in order to reach as many people as possibly.
Please spread the word.
Travel subsidy cuts abandoned
Leeds Education Authority has abandoned plans for ‘drastic’ cuts in travel subsidies for some Catholic students.
Last month's ‘Voice’ reported the proposal and the reaction of Catholic and Anglican schools' executives.
Their opposition was publicised at a news conference.
Mr Peter Neafsey, Director of Schools for the Diocese of Leeds, said the proposals involved withdrawal of concessionary transport arrangements for students over 16 attending Catholic schools and the Notre Dame Sixth Form College.
He said: ‘As a result of the many representations received, the Council has now resolved to continue its traditional transport arrangements.
This is good news indeed and the students and families concerned are most grateful for all the support which helped bring about such a satisfactory outcome.
OBITUARY 
died on the evening of February 14th, just as he had completed an act for a private party.
He had been a parishioner of the Immaculate Heart of Mary, Leeds, for many years and had been involved in the Annual Strawberry Fayre, organised cabaret nights, casino nights, race nights etc.
In October 1992 he and  raised almost £1,000 at a Cabaret Evening in the parish for Somalia.
They share the essential goal of Christian unity
They share the essential goal of Christian unity.
When Wakefield played a full part in the International Week of Prayer for Christian Unity 350 people of various denominations gathered for the main service of the week at the new church of St Peter and St Paul.
The singing nearly raised the roof.
The address was by Mgr Bill Steele, Ecumenical Officer for the Diocese, who was welcomed back also as former parish priest.
Despite sometimes experiencing frustration at the slow progress towards Christian Unity, he said, we should try very hard to understand and overcome the difficulties congregations of different faiths have in getting to know each other and working together.
All Christian churches agree that Christian Unity is an essential goal for them, he added.
On the altar with Mgr Steele and parish priest Mgr Philip Holroyd were representatives of the different congregations, and a procession of gifts symbolising unity was made by children from St. Austin's school.
A collection totalling £375 was taken for the work of Christian Aid and CAFOD, and refreshments were served afterwards in the new parish hall.
Throughout the week, Christians also gathered at lunchtime at St. Austin's church in the city, with the service led by a different denomination each day.
Other churches around the city held their own prayer vigils, to which everyone was invited.
Prison visitors’ Mass
Twenty-one West Yorkshire prison visitors met at St Gregory's, Leeds, for Mass and an informal get-together on February 21st.
Fr Richard Aladics, a prison chaplain and chaplain to the East Leeds District Council of the SVP, said they were members of the SVP, the National Association of Prison Visitors and the Bourne Trust, the Catholic body concerned with the welfare of prisoners and their families.
He said: ‘The value of communication between the three organisations was much appreciated.’
The SVP was acknowledged for having supplied many visitors from its ranks in the recent past.
‘If anyone would like to be put in contact with the Bourne Trust or the National Association, write to me at St Gregory the Great,.’
£350 raised for parish roof
A full house in the parish hall of the new church of St Peter and St Paul, Wakefield raised £375 to provide further facilities and activities for the youth of the parish.
Entertainment was provided by the Wakefield Crew.
All but one member of this versatile group are from the parish, helped along by Matt Harpham of Sheffield with an impressive performance as lead vocalist and on keyboard.
Other members are: Phil Jennings, lead guitar; John Mortimer, bass guitar; Kieron Flood, drums and vocals; and Jonathon Dore, guitar and vocals.
Dan Jennings, Mari-Ann Dore and Rebecca Grisewood make up the backing group, and the girls also performed a duet.
Stations of the Cross Procession
Readers are invited to join an annual Good Friday Stations of the Cross Procession, held in Allerton Park, Chapel Allerton, Leeds (where the largest private abortion premises in Leeds are situated).
It is a prayerful and meaningful service which usually last about half an hour.
‘We hope to Witness to the Good News of Jesus’ love for us all, and the hope and joy of his resurrection.
We would be most encouraged by your efforts to join us this year — whether in wheelchair, pushchair or on foot!
Families and disable people very welcome,’ said a spokesman.
The service starts at 11.00 a.m.
Further details .
Good Friday Procession
The Good Friday Walk of Witness will take place again this year in Wakefield, starting at 9:30 a.m. at Westgate End Methodist Church, Lawefield Lane, silently following the Cross to a United Service at the Cathedral.
‘Sing Along’
A special ‘sing along’ Mass will be held at St Nicholas church, Oakwood Lane, Gipton, Leeds, at 6.30 p.m. on March 20th.
Rehearsal starts at 5 p.m.
The idea is that those wishing to learn a little more about music in the Mass can ‘sing along’ with the Cathedral Choir.
St Anthony's, Clayton
Focus on Eucharist
From Mass in a variety of village premises and a hayloft up a precarious flight of steps the Parish of St. Anthony, Clayton, is now housed in a modern church opened in 1961, and parish life is based round the school, the hall and the Convent of the Franciscan sisters.
The people of the parish remain as close-knit as they were in those early days.
The children of the school regularly prepare and sing the Sunday Mass; parents and school unite in preparing children for First Communion; the Mothers and the Men have a variety of fund-raising and other tasks not least supporting each other; the S.V.P. look after the elderly, and the senior citizens, particularly those who are housebound, pray for us all.
An unique feature of our Parish life is perpetual exposition of the Blessed Sacrament.
This was introduced nearly three years' ago when Fr.
McGrath, the present Parish Priest, visited an American Parish which had Perpetual Exposition and decided to introduce it here.
The Blessed Sacrament Chapel is in a small room just inside the Presbytery door and to it come over a hundred people who give an hour of their time a week to ‘watch’ but there are countless others who come in just for a minute or two and there find a few minutes of silence and prayer.
We know that many blessings have come to individuals and the whole parish through this devotion.
Action is rooted in prayer.
From small beginnings the Credit Union has grown and flourished and offers advice and a means of saving for anyone in the parish.
Most months the elderly and housebound have a Mass and the Sacrament of the Sick in the Hall.
A band of volunteer drivers provides transport to and from home, volunteers and the Mothers provide the refreshments and everyone enjoys a trip out each year.
The opportunity for Mass and the chance to meet friends and catch up on the news is much appreciated.
Rex, Fr.
McGrath's inseparable companion is also a welcome guest and sits on a chair to the manner born with a serviette tucked into his collar.
The Sisters also visit the elderly and provide a place of quiet for numerous people inside and outside the Parish.
Each month the Convent is the meeting place for the Secular Franciscan Order and each week the Journey in Faith group meets there to find out more about the Faith and exchange views and ideas.
In Lent this year, from 28th March to 3rd April, the healing power of the Eucharist is the theme for a Parish Mission conducted by Fr.
Peter Byrne CSsR.
There will be Mass each day at 7 a.m. and 10 a.m. and an Evening Service each day at 7 p.m. with opportunities for Confession.
To all who wish to join us we extend a warm invitation and welcome.
‘Lack of singing strategy at Mass’
After attending Sunday Mass in several parishes in recent years I have experienced attempts in some churches to get the people singing.
No parish seems to have achieved a full choral response.
There is goodwill by organists and instrumentalists, and increasing numbers in the pews seem willing to have a good sing along quietly.
It is the wish of the ‘official’ Church for us to sing joyfully at Sunday Mass, but there seems to be a lack of ‘singing strategy’.
People need to be ‘in the mood’ and familiar with chants and hymns to sing out loud.
They, also, need the support of their pew neighbours, and leadership from some quarter.
The following suggestions may be helpful:
Music needs to be played as a mood dispenser as parishioners come into church.
Familiar and new hymns need to be carefully combined.
Quickie learning sessions before Mass are not a success for most people since we have all developed a very skilful last minute arrival!
Hymns, chants etc. should be sung through fully and appreciated as prayer in themselves.
Any choir should scatter itself strategically in different parts of the congregation so that there are ‘singing booster area’.
Ideally the whole congregation is the choir.
The priest and all on the altar need to be seen singing otherwise it gives the impression that singing does not matter.
Liturgical song does matter and has done so down the centuries since the early days of the Church.
‘Rejoice in the Lord always’(Phil.
4:4)‘When you come together each one has a hymn’(1 Cor. 14:26).
READERS VOICE
Catholic Women of the Year luncheon
I write to ask your readers for nominations for the Catholic Women of the Year.
The Committee who represent or who are affiliated to 15 Catholic Societies, would like names of women who have distinguished themselves in public life or who quietly give great service to their local.
Catholic community.
We are hoping for a wide variety of candidates so that all Catholic life can be represented.
The luncheon, now in its 25th year, will be on Thursday, June 10th, at the Hotel Russell, Russell Square, WC1.
It has become a happy annual event where Catholic women can meet and discuss subjects of interest and honour the chosen women of the year.
We are fortunate in having HRH Princess Margareta of the Luxembourg family to be our speaker.
We would be most grateful to receive nominations before the closing date, March 31st.,.
Most ‘adoption’ children over five years old
By STUART HANLON, Director, Catholic Social Welfare Society
THERE IS quite a lot happening in the adoption scene at the moment, with the Adoption Law Review recommending certain changes to practice.
If you are interested do let us know so we can keep you up to date with developments.
The number of very young babies available has decreased and for the moment the Society has reluctantly decided to close its list to applicants seeking straightforward babies under one year.
This will come as a disappointment to some couples, but it would be unfair to raise expectations when our list of approved couples is currently more than sufficient to meet the demand.
The majority of children referred are over five years, and the Society is actively seeking families who can meet the needs of these children.
Information meetings are held regularly.
Details and information pack can be obtained by telephoning  or writing to the Catholic Social Welfare Society .
OBITUARY


died on February 24th at St Gabriel's Home, Horsforth, Leeds.
He was 73.
served the Catholic community of West and South Yorkshire for 46 years.
He retired at Christmas, 1990, as parish priest of St Ignatius, Ossett, suffering from a chronic chest complaint.
He  was cared for by the Sisters of Mercy at the Horsforth home for retired clergy.
Born in Galway, studied at Mungret College, Limerick, where he developed a taste for rugby football, and All Hallows College, Dublin, where he was ordained to the priesthood on June 24th, 1944.
He was curate at Kendray, Barnsley (1944–1949), at Bramley, Leeds (Sept. 1949–1951), at Bingley (1951-Jan. 1953), at St William, Bradford (Jan. 1953–Sept. 1960), and Maltby (Sept. 1960–Sept. 1961).
first appointment as parish priest was to Wickersley, Rotherham (Aug. 1961–Feb. 1966).
He also served as parish priest at St Gerard's, Featherstone (Feb. 1966–Aug. 1976), and at St Ignatius, Ossett, from August 1976, until his retirement.
Charity runs IN October, four High Schools took part in ‘Sporting Yorkshire’ charity runs.
Representatives of St Wilfrid's, Featherstone; St John Fisher, Harrogate; Yorkshire Martyrs, Bradford and Cardinal Heenan, Leeds are also presenting a cheque for £6,887 to Fr.
Donal Lucey of the House of Light Trust.
Also in the picture is Wally Blackburn (extreme left) the principal organiser of the event.
This magnificent fund-raising effort will go towards the purchase of the Trust's House at 13 Allerton Park, Leeds which is the permanent home for adults with learning disabilities.
In acknowledging this splendid sum the Trust thanks all those who participated or supported the event in any way.
The Trust also benefited from the Charity Run organised by Mount St Mary's High School, Leeds, who very generously donated £1,000.
Grateful thanks also go to them.
Our Churches No: 41
St Cuthbert's Bradford
IN 1891, St Cuthbert's became the third new church to be opened in Bradford in the space of four years.
It had begun in 1878 as a school chapel built on a narrow restricted site in Beamsley Street, Manningham, by Canon Scruton of St Patrick's, to serve the workers at Manningham Mills, the largest silk spinning and weaving mill in Europe.
By 1882 St Cuthbert's had become a separate parish and in 1885 Fr.
John Slattery, then the parish priest, began plans for a new church in Wilmer Road.
He chose W.H. and J.E.
Marten, a firm of fashionable Bradford architects to design the church and the foundation stone was laid on 14th June, 1890.
It was opened just over twelve months later by Bishop Gordon on 19th August 1891.
The architects were exponents of what was known as Arts and Crafts Gothic and they produced a graceful stone-built church with a nave, 105 feet long, side aisles and a hexagonal chancel with five lancet windows.
There was also a chapel on either side of the chancel.
The entrance was by a narthex, unusually for the time, stretching across the full width of the west end of the church.
The nave pillars were of green marble.
Perhaps the most famous feature of the church are the Stations of the Cross by Eric Gill which were put there when Monsignor John O'Connor was parish priest.
In 1975, a new sanctuary was designed by Messrs Langtry-Langton of Bradford, and finally in 1991, to mark the centenary of the opening, a stained glass window depicting the life of St Cuthbert was placed in the church.
Test ban call
CARDINAL Basil Hume and Bishop Patrick Kelly have both called for a ban on nuclear weapons testing in the past few days.
The church leaders' letters aim to encourage the British government to return to its former policy of supporting the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, as the French, US and Russian governments have done.
In a letter published in The Times on March 2nd, the Cardinal said: ‘Whatever stance individuals may take over the morality of the nuclear deterrent, there must be general agreement on the aim of preventing the spread of weapons to non-nuclear states.’
Bishop Patrick Kelly wrote to the Foreign Secretary, Mr Douglas Hurd, also urging the government to revive its former policy of actively promoting a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty.