

MULTIMEDIA: DEC ENABLES CABLE FIRMS TO OFFER DATA NETWORKING…
The surge of multimedia developments continues apace, and yesterday, Digital Equipment Corp joined forces with start-up LANCity Corp, Andover, Massachusetts to announce a system for enabling high-speed multimedia data networking over ordinary cable television lines, putting implementers in direct competition with local phone companies.
The system is based on Ethernet and enables multimedia data to be transmitted at 10Mbps over television operators' coaxial cable channels, providing up to seven times the capacity of T-1 lines.
Cable operators are expected to charge less than $500 a month for the lines, after installation charges, which compares favourably to the $500 to $700 cost of typical T-1 lines that provide far less capacity, the Wall Street Journal notes.
DEC will offer services using the technology in partnership with cable companies, and will go after business, universities, local governments and hospitals that need to send data between computers at different sites within a city or town.
The technology can connect sites up to 70 miles apart, DEC commented.
…
AS US WEST COMMITS $2,500m TO TIME WARNER VENTURE
US West Inc, which last week was talking about the multimedia database system it is developing with Oracle Corp (CI No 2,166), is stepping up its commitment to infotainment by agreeing to pay $2,500m for a 25% stake in Time Warner Inc's Time Warner Entertainment affiliate — in which Toshiba Corp and Japanese trader Itochu Corp each has a stake — to seal a deal under which the two companies will collaborate to develop electronic superhighways — full-service cable networks offering interactive programming, entertainment and information.
Some $1,000m of the US West investment will be invested to accelerate the building of the full-service network.
The partners expect to complete networks for the vast majority of Time Warner's clustered cable systems by 1998 and will share equally in the design, implementation and direction of the full-service networks.
Time Warner will be diluted to a 63.27% stake, US West will have 25.51% and Itochu and Toshiba 5.61% each.
US West will finance the transaction with a combination of debt and equity, paying $1,500m on closing and the balance via a note over four years.
Itochu and Toshiba have rights to restore their original equity percentages without diluting US West's interests, and US West also gets an incentive-based option to up its stake by another 8.5 percentage points.
TWE Japan, created to distribute Time Warner  Entertainment's products will be held 25% by Itochu, 25% by Toshiba, 37.25% by Time Warner and 12.75% by US West.
FAX: PHOENIX BUYS ECLIPSE
Norwood, Massachusetts-based Phoenix Technologies Ltd bought Eclipse Systems Inc, Chicago publisher of the Eclipse Fax facsimile software on undisclosed terms.
It plans an MS-DOS version this summer and Eclipse Find text retrieval program.
MOTOROLA ADDS CHIPS FOR PORTABLES, MULTIMEDIA…
No doubt hoping to steal a little of Intel Corp's Pentium thunder — Pentium news is splattered all over pages two and three inside — Motorola Inc yesterday launched three new 32-bit microprocessors for notebook computers, communications devices and home entertainment systems.
Hottest is the Dragon — or 68349, specifically designed for use with handheld communicators running the software being developed by General Magic Inc, and claimed to be 25% more powerful than AT&T Co's Hobbit, which also runs the General Magic software, and other devices being built into communicators.
Motorola will be building its own line of handheld devices around the chip, which costs $28.20 when you order 10,000 or more of the 16MHz version.
The second part is a V version of the 68040 for laptop computers: it adds power-saving circuitry designed to double battery life.
It is set for volume in second quarter 1994 and is not yet priced.
The third part is the 68341, which comes out of Motorola's alliance with Philips Electronics NV on chips for use in multimedia Compact Disk Interactive systems.
Philips currently uses the 68070 chip in its CD-I systems, but the 68341 part is thought to add compression and other features.
It is expected to be available in volume in the fourth quarter at $21.65 for 10,000-up.
…
AS NEC ANNOUNCES LOW-POWER VR4200 R-SERIES RISC
Also out to do a bit of Pentium party-pooping were NEC Corp and MIPS Technologies Inc, with launch of the low-power 64-bit VR4200 RISC, which dissipates less than 1.5W, making it suitable for battery-powered portables capable of running Windows NT.
NEC said it plans volume production of about 10,000 units a month in the spring of 1994, increasing to about 30,000 a month by early 1995.
Samples are set for late this year, and the thing will cost about $720.
HEWLETT-PACKARD ENTERS iAPX-86-BASED SERVER MARKET
Hewlett-Packard Co moved in on Compaq Computer Corp yesterday, making its entry into the iAPX-86-based server business.
It launched the NetServer LM and LE Series, with a base model in the 80486-based LE selling for just $2,100.
At the other end, the HP NetServer LM P/60 is based on the Pentium chip.
The servers are optimised to support NetWare 4.0 and Windows NT, and are due to start shipping June 1.
Pentium round-up — pages 2 and 3.
APPLE, FRANCE TELECOM TEAM ON POWERBOOK FOR TELEPOINT
Apple Computer Inc yesterday announced that it had linked up with France Telecom to offer a version of the Macintosh PowerBook 180 portable to be called the PowerBop, Reuter reports from Paris.
The machine adds the capability to communicate on the Bi-Bop Telepoint network to the basic PowerBook, with the Bi-Bop modem supplied to Apple by the state phone company.
The Bi-Bop system was launched last month in Paris and Strasbourg and users need to be within 600 feet of a Telepoint; about 12,000 people have signed up so far; from September Bi-Bop and PowerBop will be able to receive calls too, getting round the big drawback of Telepoint.
PENTIUM ROUND-UP
Intel Corp let manufacturers off the leash yesterday and freed them to announce officially that they had Pentium-based machines.
Or at least machines with Pentium-shaped holes in them since there aren't many of the processors around.
As one commentator noted wryly, there are more companies announcing Pentium-based machines then there are actual processors: a couple of dozen manufacturers spread their wares and Intel topped the whole thing off by announcing prices for the first time, and they are not cheap — 60MHz Pentiums cost $878, while the 66MHz chip is $965 in quantities of 1,000.
It said it expects initial products to be high-end servers and so it turned out in most cases.
One notable absentee at the party was IBM Corp, but the company insisted that it had put out a release — it simply failed to get to us by close of page.
COMPAQ DIRECTS ITS FIRST PRECIOUS PARTS TO THE DESKTOP, ANNOUNCES SERVER PRODUCTS TOO
Compaq Computer Corp announced both desktop machines and servers and is actually placing most of its valuable early Pentiums into the desktop products so that the new Deskpro 60/M and 66/M machines will debut first.
This is the first time that Compaq has bought its Triflex Architecture (launched last October in the SystemPro/XL server) onto the desktop.
Triflex uses a 64-bit processor bus and 128-bit memory bus together with the 32-bit EISA input-output bus and reckons that this will be key to getting full performance out of the new processor.
So, in the same vein, fast base memory is built onto the motherboard; the 66/M uses  60ns access memory chips and a cache as standard, the 60MHz machine gets  70ns memory and the cache is optional.
The result is, says Compaq, that the processor can use the bus's 267Mbps burst mode 75% of the time.
The faster machine is expandable up to 144Mb of RAM, and the slower copes with up to 136Mb.
A moderately configured Deskpro 60/M costs around £4,200 with the 66/M costing £1,000 more.
Alternatively, for around £2,000, existing Deskpro/M users will be able to upgrade to Pentium.
That is a full Pentium machine, it should be noted — not the forthcoming ‘Overdrive’ P24T chip that will provide many, but not all, Pentium capabilities.
Compaq is eschewing the Overdrive approach for its desktop machines in favour of supplying a whole new processor board that includes the Triflex bus and new base memory.
As for Pentium's infamous heat output, Compaq reckons that the original Deskpro/M boxes were designed with Pentium in mind and that the airflow will cope.
The other big performance improver that the company introduced yesterday was the QVision 1280 video controller, which it says is 60% faster than its existing QVision 1024 board.
It has all sorts of graphics engines built in, including one for line drawing and a fast bit-blitter for quick block moves and 2Mb of video RAM.
In fact, a graph briefly shown at the announcement implied that Windows benchmark performance could be improved more substantially by slotting in the £385 video adaptor than a Pentium board.
On the thorny problem of availability, Walter Puschener, European PC business manager says that shipments will not start before end-June — and even then only in limited quantities and primarily the 60/M, with shipments of the 66MHz machine remaining ‘very restricted’.
Even in the third quarter, he says things will be pretty tight and a number of accounts will have to wait before they get them on their desk tops.
The situation for the server products is worse if anything.
Compaq announced new members of both its Prosignia and its top of the range SystemPro/XL machines, but they will not even begin to ship until the third quarter.
The Prosignia range is only going at 60MHz at the moment, while the SystemPro/XL 5/66 can take two of the things once they arrive.
Both processors must be the same.
As with the DeskPros, a full Pentium upgrade is available for existing SystemPro/XL users, but old Prosignias must put up with Overdrive.
The ProSignia 5/60 starts at £3,920 and the SystemPro/XL 5/66 £14,862.
And Compaq cut prices on existing servers by 2% to 7%.
ICL PITCHES IN WITH TEAMSERVER F5
ICL Plc weighed in with the TeamServer F5, boasting a dual-bus architecture, specifically designed to loose the full processor capacity and high-speed caching architecture.
The company is positioning the box as a local network or Unix application server, but it chose to announce its ‘strategic support’ for Windows NT at the same time.
ICL is only announcing shipments of the 60MHz processor to start with — a pragmatic response to the shortage of the high speed parts.
Indeed, on the slower systems, John Arnell, business manager with the company's Personal Systems division admits ‘we could not meet demand of any substance in the next month’.
Bulk ships will begin around the third quarter, he says, with an entry level server price of below $10,000.
At around the same time, the first 66MHz versions should begin to trickle out and the company says that we should also expect a Pentium-based desktop machine in the ErgoPro range.
Newer members of the existing FX server range are Overdrive upgradable.
ADVANCED LOGIC TAKES PRICE LEAD
Given the price of the chips, audacious launch of the day went to Advanced Logic Research Inc which claims to have desktop, Pentium-based machines starting at $2,500.
The Evolution V PC is one of a pair of Pentium products that the company unveiled, the other being the Evolution V-Q server, which starts at under $5,000.
The common thread running among many of the announcements was that companies were sprucing up their bus architectures in order to keep up with the faster processor and memory: Advanced Logic's server features a new ‘Quadflex’ architecture using a 128-bit ASIC chip set and dual 64-bit buses.
The Evolution V PC is targeted at system integrators and resellers and uses the 60MHz processor but only a 32-bit bus.
The company claims all kinds of tricks are used in the Evolution V-Q's innards to increase performance, including secondary cache, and the ASIC which provides a wide data path between memory cache and processor.
The machine can also address up to 1Gb main memory and includes 13 drive bays and 10 EISA slots.
AST RESEARCH HAS A FULL HOUSE
Not many details from AST Research Inc, but the company has reportedly announced the Premium SE P/60 server, Manhattan SMP multiprocessor and Premmia P/60 desktop.
Premium SE P/60 estimated retail prices will go between $7,500 and $9,500.
Manhattan SMP prices will range from $32,000 to $36,000, and Premmia P/60 retail prices will go from $5,500 to $8,000, with first ships in July.
DELL OFFERS IMMEDIATE UPGRADES
Dell Computer Corp's new 4560/XE server is built around the company's new XE-server chassis and the 60MHz Pentium processor.
AST also said it will immediately offer Pentium upgrade boards for existing PowerLine 486/SE servers and 486/DE desktops.
UNISYS IS JUST SO HAPPY THAT IT SETTLED FOR INTEL's $5,000m CHIP RATHER THAN FOLLOWING THE HERD TO RISC…
The unavailability of Intel Corp's promised Pentium chip is forcing hardware vendors like Unisys Corp, much of whose product line is iAPX-86-based, to scramble.
This week Unisys previews a far-flung range of ‘Pentium-ready’ machines, currently using 80486s but designed to be seamlessly upgraded to 60MHz Pentiums in the third quarter.
The boxes include Windows and NetWare personal computers and two new U6000 Unix System V.4-based departmental uniprocessor servers, the 100 and the 300, 8-slot EISA systems with 192Mb memory capacity and a maximum 2.1Gb disk.
The model 100, confusingly divided into the two-slot DT1 and three-slot DT2, will use an 80486DX2 and be upgradeable to a 300 in the fall.
The 300 will be Pentium-only.
The company says these boxes incorporate advanced video, SCSI and cache technologies.
The DT should be formally announced next month.
Unisys will also make note of the fact that its anticipated PCI-based multiprocessing Unix Server Design Center, due in the fourth quarter, will house Pentiums and later P6s and that the high-end U6000/75 and U6000/85 that it buys OEM from Sequent Computer Systems Inc will be field-upgradable to Pentium in the fourth quarter.
Its 113-TPS U6000/65 multiprocessor will be upgraded to an enhanced 100MHz 80486 chip in the fourth quarter that should triple its speed while memory is expanded from 256Mb to 512Mb.
Pricing will not be available until a month or two before first customer ships.
Unisys has created the marketing rationale of the customer selecting the timing of its jump to the next generation rather than being forced to it by the vendor's phasing out existing technology.
Intel's difficulties getting yields on 66MHz Pentiums leave Unisys, who has had a close collaborative alliance on chip design with Intel for the past two years, unable to say exactly when it go to the 66MHz parts.
It guesses it will be in the  fourth quarter.
It estimates that the 60MHz chips are 10% less powerful than the 66MHzs, at least on integer performance which measures 64.5 Specint92 and 56.9 Specfp92.
Despite these setbacks, which essentially put Intel back on the delivery schedule it first mapped out for Pentium, Unisys is quick to say how delighted it is it chose Intel's part over any of the RISC technologies.
It is impressed with the amount of investment Intel proposes putting into Pentium, saying that when the chip reaches the height of its production Intel will have spent $5,000m on it compared with $100m on the 80386 and $1,000m on the 80486.
It's half way through that figure now.
Unisys uses this never-before-released measure to express the technological leap it believes Pentium represents.
Overlapping
It's also a way of saying that Pentiums will be with us for a while, overlapping the life cycles of both the 80486 and P6, and that it will be some time yet before they reach a competitive price-performance curve.
The follow-on P6 will represent an even greater though unstated amount of investment.
Unisys basically feels however that with its price-performance and coming enhancements there is a lot of life left in the 80486 and that it will not be replaced immediately by Pentium, more the meat of early adopters, than the usual customer.
The bulk of its business, it thinks, will be in 80486 machines possibly through 1994.
Making 80486 boxes Pentium-ready is tricky enough, making Pentium machines ready for the coming P6s which break iAPX-86 compatibility is harder.
Unisys is involved in P6 design considerations and needs to insure there is balance among the processor power, input-output and video system.
It is also involved in P7's definition.
Unisys says it also intends to offer CTOS networked workstations and servers built around the Pentium in the fourth quarter.
Its new A7 entry-level mainframe is also Pentium-ready, with availability for it to be announced.
NCR LAUNCHES MAINFRAME-CLASS PENTIUM BOX…
NCR Corp claims to have the first mainframe-class system using Intel Corp's Pentium chip with the launch of its System 3555 symmetrical multiprocessor, announced yesterday.
According to NCR, the two- to 16- processor 3555 will deliver up to 1,440 VAX MIPS and comes with up to 8Mb cache, 2Gb RAM and 112Gb of internal disk storage, increased to 2Tb with external disks.
Other new systems in NCR's 3000 Series include the 3360 single or dual processor workstation — the dual processor rated at 224 VAX MIPS — the single or dual processor 3430 workgroup server, and the six processor 3455 and eight processor 3525 departmental servers.
All run Unix System V.4 MP, while the 3360, 3430 and 3455 are also available running Microsoft Windows NT.
Existing NCR 3450 and 3550 server users will be able to upgrade from the 80486 via a board swap.
The company hopes the workstation model will sell to both traditional RISC workstation customers, to Windows NT developers and as a customer service workstation.
It includes a video co-processor with 2Mb of memory to boost graphics performance, and (along with the 3430 server) comes with up to 512Mb RAM, 6.3Gb internal storage and support for up to 41 SCSI devices.
All the systems include SuperVGA, SCSI peripherals, dual-ported memory, two-way interleaving and cache memory.
NCR expects general availability by June for the workstation, third quarter for the servers, and ‘1994’ for the 16 processor 3555.
No prices revealed.
…
AND INTEL RESORTS TO COURTESY PARKING OF PENTIUM
Last month, our sister paper Unigram.X hears, Intel Corp was still sending out Pentiums in quantities of one via a car delivery service — and demanding the things back again once they'd been installed and tested in the prototype boxes of less favoured customers.
Intel's problem now appears to be finding a way of getting enough good Pentium parts off the large die to be able to make any money out of the chip.
SOME MACHINES WITH PENTIUM UPGRADE SOCKETS ‘MAY FRY CHIP’
Users planning to use the Pentium OverDrive upgrade socket on 80486-based machines should beware, says US PC Week (but apart from individual users with only one machine, who actually wants to upgrade rather than bequeath and buy new?): some machines with the P24T socket do not meet Intel Corp's requirements for cooling, and if upgraded could overheat and fail, says Intel.
Dell Computer Corp, Digital Equipment Corp, AST Research Inc and Advanced Logic Research Inc say they do meet the specs.
DUN & BRADSTREET SOFTWARE MAKES ITS SMARTSTREAM WINDOWS NT MOVE
As expected, Dun & Bradstreet Software Inc and Microsoft Corp last week signed a joint development and marketing agreement to move SmartStream, Dun's account and decision support client-server software, to Windows NT and SQL Server, NT's desktop database front-end from Sybase Inc.
SmartStream provides data access, distribution, presentation and development functions for managing purchasing, asset management and manufacturing systems.
It includes the SmartStream core decision support software, Financial Stream, HR Stream, Distribution Stream and Manufacturing Stream.
SmartStream for NT is expected to ship in the autumn.
In addition, Dun will resell Microsoft's Access database as an embedded SmartStream application while Microsoft will license a beta NT version of SmartStream for  worldwide internal use.
Dun launched Unix versions of the software for Hewlett-Packard Co's HP-UX and Data General Corp's DG/UX in February, and is currently developing application programming interfaces for Unix and Windows NT to ensure user access between both environments.
ADDAMAX EMPLOYEES FORM SEPARATE FIRM AS SOFTWARE FOUNDATION SUIT HITS BUSINESS
All the employees of Champaign, Illinois-based Addamax Corp except for president Peter Alsberg have left the firm to form a new wholly independent company as a result of the fallout from Addamax's on-going $100m anti-trust litigation against the Open Software Foundation and Foundation sponsors Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp.
Randy Sandone, formerly executive vice-president of Addamax and now president of the new 16-man firm, Argus Systems Group Inc, said that Addamax was finding it impossible to do business because of the lawsuit.
The secure software company lost out on the US Navy's Super Mini AFKAC 300 contract a few months ago after Planning Research Corp, the integrator and lead contractor, ‘disinvited’ it from its bid after teaming with Hewlett-Packard for the hardware, Sandone said.
Up until then the beleaguered Addamax stood to win no matter how the government decided since it was being bid by both Planning Research Corp and its rival Control Data Systems Inc.
Sandone said that there were other instances of lost business directly traceable to the suit.
The suit also poisoned potential investors against Addamax which needed more money to exploit its technology, he said.
Argus, which is employee-owned and unaffiliated in any way to Addamax, has taken a royalty-based licence to Addamax's Compartmented Mode Workstation technology and will develop, market and support it along with all of Addamax's existing customers.
Addamax, now not much more than a shell, will be left to wage the suit and complete the government's Orange Book evaluation of the Compartmented Mode Workstation.
Sandone denied any suggestions that the move was in any way a legal ploy.
Argus will be taking on other people's technology as well and is currently in negotiations with several firms, he insisted.
SIEMENS NIXDORF BRINGS ONE-STOP-SHOP CONCEPT TO UK WITH SAP's R/3
Siemens Nixdorf Information Systems Ltd is extending its ‘one stop shop’ fixed price hardware-software-services resource  planning system, R/3 Live, to the UK.
R/3 Live, which was first implemented in Germany last year, combines Siemens own hardware and services with the modular SAP R/3 system software from SAP AG of Walldorf, with which Siemens has a European agreement.
According to the Gartner Group, the SAP R/3 system is destined to become the industry standard enterprise resource management system.
It is suitably complex to have taken 600 people five years to develop and succeeds its 10-year-old predecessor, R2 which has been installed in some 1,500 worldwide sites.
R/3 is a Unix-based client-server system that comprises components for handling general ledger, accounts receivable, accounts payable, consolidation, personnel management, sales and distribution, production  and materials control.
It runs under Sinix, BS2000, Ultrix, VMS, HP-UX, MPE/XL, AIX, OS/400, VSE/ESA and MVS and supports the Oracle, Informix, DB2 and SQL/400 databases.
X/Open specifications are used for low-level interfaces and communications standards include EDI, SNA-LU6.2, CPI-C and future OSF/DCE/DME elements.
It conforms to the Common User Access standard and Motif and fully supports Windows.
As part of Siemens' R/3 Live package, clients are offered a full business analysis and feasibility study on the basis of which a fixed fee is then agreed for system implementation.
It is hoped this will attract customers wanting to avoid the costs and anxiety of development.
The company is also setting up a dedicated R/3 Live ‘Centre of Expertise’ in Manchester as part of a planned network of some 20 international support centres.
It is anticipating that the majority of customers will not require a full hardware-software combination but will likely need R/3 Live built round their existing systems.
Typical projects are expected to be split fairly evenly between hardware, software and services.
Siemens is planning to extend the service to the Benelux countries and Scandinavia by the end of the year.
UNIX LABS PLANS YET ANOTHER UNIX EVENT — ENTERPRISE SOLUTIONS SHOW IN NOVEMBER
Now here's something the world really needs — another Unix show.
What with Windows World upon us, Unix System Laboratories Inc, possibly a victim of show envy, is branching off into show business.
It's planning to sponsor the three-day Unix Perspectives: The Conference for Enterprise Solutions in the first week of November.
It has been in the pipeline for a while, and Unix Labs now hopes to embrace the Common Open Software Environment's planned developers' conference.
In a letter sent out the last few weeks over the signature of Unix Labs president Roel Pieper, who also sits on the UniForum board, Unix Labs is promising ‘no other industry event will attract such a prominent collection of information system executives, developers, end users, industry analysts and key members of trade media.’
The show has an extensive national advertising campaign and 500,000-piece direct-mail shot.
Possible venues include Dallas.
The big Comdex show in Las Vegas is two weeks later.
AFTER TWO DECADES, NCR LOSES SUMITOMO BANK TO NEC AND GRACEFULLY EXITS THE MAINFRAME BUSINESS
NCR Corp has finally abandoned the traditional mainframe business, driven out of it by another company that is hanging on in there by its fingernails.
NEC Corp has ousted NCR Japan in a battle to win an order from Sumitomo bank for 24 large mainframes to become the base part — the Accounting system — of its Fourth Online System.
Sumitomo Bank has stuck with NCR equipment for every generation of its banking systems since the implementation of the First Online system in the 1970s, and the defeat means that NCR now loses its last big customer account and one for which it maintained considerable investment in mainframes — even developing the 9800XL series, last of its mainframes — especially for Sumitomo.
For NEC, the order means an increase by one third on the current installed base of top end ACOS 3800 mainframes, bringing the total installed to 126 units, and making the ACOS 3800 much more successful than the previous top-end ACOS generation, of which only 46 were sold.
Sumitomo Bank is the bank affiliated with the Sumitomo keiretsu or extended company family, with which NEC is also associated.
NCR lost because it was not prepared to develop yet another generation of the 9800 — derived from the company's Criterion line, which dates back to 1976.
Instead it bid its large parallel System 3600 machine running Unix, which meant that the bank faced a big conversion whatever it did.
But the Nikkei Industrial Daily sounds a note of warning for NEC: there are two pitfalls for the company with the current order, it says: the sheer difficulty of running a development project to create the mainframe software that makes up the ‘Fourth Online System’— people involved with the development of Third Online Systems predicted the end of such enormous projects; and the danger of overlooking the trend towards downsizing because it devotes too much time and too many resources on the project.
The paper concludes that NCR may yet be a winner from its loss of the Sumitomo Bank account since it can now focus entirely on its Open Systems strategy in Japan.
NIPPON DEC TEAMS WITH ASCII ON INFORMIX SOFTWARE
Nippon Digital Equipment Corp has teamed with the Japan distributor for Informix Software Inc, ASCII Corp, to sell Informix relational database software and the Wingz spreadsheet on its Ultrix and Alpha systems.
New versions Informix 5.0 and Wingz 1.2J are to be converted for the Alpha AXP systems and will be announced this summer.
Sales and technical support for these two products will be done by Nippon DEC, which hopes to make 200 sales of each product in the first year.
YOKOGAWA HEWLETT-PACKARD WINS MITSUI FOR MARKETING OF SOFTBENCH
The traditional Japanese trading companies constantly flirt with the computer industry, and trading giant Mitsui & Co has signed up with Yokogawa Hewlett-Packard Co to market Hewlett-Packard Co's HP SoftBench software engineering system for integrating development tools.
With the agreement Mitsui becomes the largest distributor of SoftBench in Japan.
Mitsui already sells the language development environment from Xerox Corp spin-out ParcPlace Systems Inc.
Mitsui will sell and support SoftBench in co-operation with OGIS Systems Inc, an information systems subsidiary of Osaka Gas Co.
The price in Japan for SoftBench is $5,400, and the two companies hope to be able to sell over 2,000 copies a year.
VISITING FIREMAN WALLY RHINES GIVES THE TEXAS INSTRUMENTS VIEW OF THE JAPANESE MARKET
Texas Instruments Inc executive vice-president of the Semiconductor Group, Wally Rhines, is currently in Tokyo as part of the company's ‘Globalisation of management’ efforts which involve a three-month rotation of executives through major markets to increase awareness of customer needs.
Texas Instruments has been in Japan 25 years, has around $1,000m in Japan-based revenues and — in direct contrast to Intel Corp — is a significant manufacturing presence, with four plants employing 3,500 in manufacturing plus another 2,000 in sales and administrative jobs.
Rhines sees the current semiconductor industry as being in turmoil, as the impetus in the industry moves from the vertically-integrated companies to functionally-defined companies — Japan being an exception to the rule however; and the purchasing power of vendors such as Compaq Computer Corp, Dell Computer Corp and Apple Computer Inc for example, causing major growth in the merchant market.
Another trend is the move from custom chips to standard chips: Texas focuses on getting its standard chip designs into ASIC libraries which are then available for derivatives.
He also sees the growth of digital signal processor market with increased demand for modems, disk drives, speech-driven devices and portable phones as well as in other telecommunications products such as switches.
A particular attraction in Japan for Texas Instruments is the use of signal processors in large-volume products such as karaoke players.
Texas is doing increasing and profitable business where it keeps a certain percentage of its dynamic memory chip production uncommitted until the last 90 days prior to release in order to fulfill the requirements of customers that are ‘sole source’ commitments and ‘fab-less IC companies’.
Rhines expects the Japanese consumer market to strengthen later this year, thus  benefiting Texas, and he also expects more political pressure for increased market access.
Regarding the possible replacement of Texas by Fujitsu Ltd as Sun Microsystems Inc's manufacturing partner for the MicroSparc, Rhines said ‘Fujitsu (a good customer of Texas's) also need their place in the Sun’.
He predicted that the Sparc market could only benefit from the presence of a set of viable suppliers of Sparc chips — LSI Logic Corp and Cypress Semiconductor Corp having demonstrated ‘less of a clear roadmap for the future’.
Expressing an opinion about the coming Windows NT-on-Pentium versus Unix-on-RISC war, Rhines thought that the Pentium, coming in with lower performance, still in pre-production volumes two years later than RISC processors, could never hope to catch up with RISC.
It was remarkable that ‘the engineering and scientific market always got their way’ he said — the split between RISC for engineering and Intel Corp iAPX-86 for business applications would continue in the 1990s.
GL SOFTWARE HAS WINDOWS VERSION OF ITS MULTI-FEED FINANCIAL NEWS SOFTWARE
Wandsworth, South London-based GL Software Ltd now has a Windows version of its Updata price quotation and analysis software which transforms personal computers into a Reuters style dealing desk — for around a tenth of the cost.
Demand for the new product, which has been available for around a year under MS-DOS, is apparently spiralling with orders received so far from British Telecommunications Plc, Sun Alliance, Citibank and retailer The Body Shop.
Updata presents, in multi-windows and graphs, on-line information from Teletext and from other sources regarding currencies; the FT-SE Index; shares; commodities, gilts, interest rates; national, international and City news headlines; and prices from the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange and BT Citiservice.
It serves as an ever-expanding database that continuously scans Teletext City pages and stores the information on the user's personal computer.
It provides over 2,000 files of price histories, dating from 10 years back, and with price changes updated immediately on screen.
The display shows price rises in blue, falls in red and no changes in green.
Analytical facilities include percentage changes, trends, cycles, overlays, moving averages, short term indicators, targets and volumes and there is a ‘zoom’ facility for users wishing to look at graphs in more detail.
Live Direct Data Exchange links are also available to other Windows applications like spreadsheets.
Updata is aimed primarily at users in the financial world ranging from business executives and private investors at home, to large trading organisations wishing to use it as a back up system.
Portfolio managers
It can be used by portfolio managers wishing to create displays for individual clients, including the percentage changes between specific dates and graphs of each price history and has already proven popular with City stockbrokers who prefer to scan graphs rather than lists of prices.
Minimum Windows system requirements are an 80486 personal computer with 8Mb of RAM — Updata grows at around 1Mb a year.
A BBC-approved Teletext circuit board — which can be supplied by GL Software if the customer prefers — a television aerial and colour television licence are also needed.
The MS-DOS version can be run on an 80386.
Users can then opt for a modem connection and subscription to other information services as they wish.
The MS-DOS version costs £500, the Windows version £600 and the Teletext board £200.
Teletext itself is free.
Since GL Software has recently become a Dell reseller — a deal was struck in March — a ‘one stop shop’ hardware and software option is also available.
Future developments include access to more information sources — GL is currently talking to a further four names — new cable and satellite links and, eventually, a Windows NT version.
Another possibility is an add-on scanner to enable users to read printed information into their systems quickly and talks are underway with Logitech Inc to this end.
Database development and a news archiving feature which may well appear as a separate product are also in the pipeline.
Updata is the sole product offering from GL Software, which is just three years old and has 25 staff.
The UK is its major market though sales have also been made to customers in Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Australia.
INTUITIVE OFFERS CHANNEL MANAGER FOR FINANCIAL SALES MANAGERS ON THE MOVE
Stevenage, Hertfordshire-based Windows application developer Intuitive Systems Ltd has announced its Channel Management Workbench, an integrated marketing support system for financial sales managers.
The system enables users to collate information downloaded to them from point-of-sale laptop systems and also to act as a point of information transfer between staff in the field and the head office.
The information is presented, in various degrees of detail, by ‘drilling down’ through the database.
It provides managers with policy data; a multi-user diary; graphical sales analysis; performance analysis and competency records of sales personnel in the field; multi-user event management; the allocation of clients to sales personnel — or ‘orphan management’; electronic mail; management information and data exchange-transfer.
A so-called data integrity module governs access and amendments to the system to ensure security and to avoid the database being amended in error.
The system is based on Intuitive's IS/2 development tools, which can be used for customising and tailoring the system to client needs.
The system runs on personal computers, with at least 4Mb of RAM, under Windows 3.1, OS/2 and Windows NT and it supports SQL databases such as Oracle and Sybase.
Sample price for a typical implementation in around 15 branches is £6,000.
Future developments include a wireless version, which is already being piloted; Open Data Base Connectivity for the IS/2 tool set; and a head office system to connect to the Channel Management Workbench.
Intuitive reckons sales of the Workbench could generate around £500,000 this year.
MICROMUSE TO MARKET ECOSPHERE IN UK
London-based Micromuse Ltd is to distribute Cupertino, California-based EcoSystems Software Inc's EcoSphere system management products in the UK.
EcoTools/Oracle for managing distributed Oracle-based client-server systems runs on Hewlett-Packard Co, Sun Microsystems Inc and Sequent Computer Systems Inc hardware and supports Oracle 6.0, Open Windows and TCP/IP.
Micromuse claims similar system management products like Hewlett-Packard's OpenView and SunConnect's SunNet Manager tackle hardware and networking issues, while EcoSystems includes integrated applications management.
EcoTools support for Oracle 7.0, Sybase, Informix, NetWare and other Unix hardware systems is planned.
BT NORTH AMERICA GIVES 99 MORE US CITIES ACCESS AT 9.6Kbps
British Telecommunications Plc's BT North America has announced deployment of 9.6Kbps local dial capabilities in 99 new US cities, meaning that during the last six months it has more than doubled its coverage.
9.6Kbps local dial access of all its 520 points of presence is expected to be completed by June 1994.
The UK phone company reports that it has also successfully tested wireless access to its messaging service via RAM Mobile Data's national network.
It says it expects to offer a wireless electronic messaging service by the end of the year, and that it is aiming for beta testing during the summer.
Pricing has yet to be decided, but BT is aiming for the look and feel of the service to be the same as for its existing messaging services.
—World Finance & Businessgram—
OLIVETTI's DE BENEDETTI FINDS THAT CONFESSION IS GOOD FOR THE SOUL
‘I'm choosing to assume completely my responsibility,’ declared Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA chief Carlo De Benedetti, after delivering a 20-page document, detailing bribes paid by Olivetti over the last 15 years as political favours to the Mani Pulite — Clean Hands — investigating judges in Milan on Sunday.
In a one-hour face-to-face meeting with three judges and his lawyer Marco Deluca, which De Benedetti requested, the Italian industrialist made a 360-degree turn, recounting the bribes and illicit political connections Olivetti has supported since May 1978.
‘I am assuming the responsibility for all of my co-workers, both for those things I was aware of and for those things that I discovered in the last few days since the name of Olivetti began circulating.
After that, I decided without hesitation to present myself,’ he said.
As recently as April 29 at Olivetti's annual meeting, De Benedetti said, ‘Olivetti has never provided financing to political parties or associated entities.
And not a single functionary, manager or administrator has ever been involved in proceedings of this nature.’
De Benedetti explained his prevarication yesterday, saying: ‘It did not seem to be the appropriate moment to clarify the position of the company on arguments that must first, by their nature, be illuminated and discussed in front of judicial authorities.’
It is not yet known exactly how much Olivetti paid out.
De Benedetti cited a payment of approximately $7m to Giuseppe Lo Moro for a contract to equip the Italian state Postal Service.
‘The ambiguous reference to contributions Olivetti paid to ASST (one of the state-owned telephone companies) has been clarified, confirming that Olivetti did not ever work with ASST, but paid Mr Giuseppe Lo Moro, who acted as collector for the political parties for equipping the Post.
Olivetti paid, not the $6.3m indicated by Mr Moro, but $6.8m in four years,’ said the chairman in a two-page communique.
Mani Pulite
A report in the Italian journal La Stampa says sources close to the Mani Pulite investigators believe the Ivrea-based computer company paid a total of approximately $13m.
Said the communique De Benedetti sent out by facsimile about an hour after his meeting with the judges, which the paper said seemed to be written in his own hand: ‘Several times, I resisted the vexations of the regime, in some occasions I resigned myself to accept them, but only when I found myself faced with the necessity of defending the survival of the company and the thousands of dependents and shareholders toward whom I felt a massive responsibility.
‘Now, thanks to the clean-up work finally undertaken by the guardians of the legal system, it has become possible to overcome the arrogance of the dominant infrastructure of bribery without compromising further the activities of the company.
I believe it is my obligation and duty to contribute fully to the work of justice.’
The confessions add considerably to de Benedetti's embarrassments, because he is already relying on the labyrinthine Italian judicial system of appeals, and the country's statute of limitations to avoid the possibility of a jail sentence over his -fairly tenuous — involvement in the Banco Ambrosiano collapse.
Observers are encouraged by the thoroughness with which the Italian judiciary is now pursuing corruption charges.
SHARE & BOND ISSUES
AT&T Capital Corp, the indirectly-owned leasing subsidiary of AT&T Co based in Morristown, New Jersey has filed with the Securities & Exchange Commission for its initial public offering of up to 5.0m shares, 4.0m to be offered in the US, the rest abroad.
Net proceeds will be used as working capital and to pay American Capital's outstanding medium-term notes and loans.
The offering also include 875,000 shares that will be offered to the company's senior management executives.
No target price was given.
The underwriters are Lehman Brothers, Goldman Sachs & Co and Merrill Lynch & Co.
COMPANY RESULTS
Cheyenne Software Inc saw third quarter net up 133.3% at $5.6m, after $689,000 tax credits last time, on turnover up 192.1% at $14.1m; net profit for the nine months was up 178.1% at $13.3m, after $1.4m tax credits last time, on turnover that rose 210.9% to $33m.
Net earnings per share, adjusted to reflect a two-for-one stock split, rose 120% to $0.22 in the quarter, 160% to $0.52 in the nine months.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
Coherent Inc has reported second quarter net profits up 67.3% at $2.3m, on turnover down 0.8% at $55m; mid-term net rose 61.9% to $3.8m, on turnover up 4.4% at $105.3m.
Net per share rose 64.3% to $0.23 in the quarter, 56% to $0.39 in the half.
Cohu Inc has turned in first quarter net profit up 566.2% at $1.3m, after $410,000 charges due to the cumulative effect of an accounting change last time, on turnover that rose by 41% to $17.3m.
Net earnings per share rose by 540% to $0.64.
Computer Products Inc has reported first quarter net profit of $2.8m, after $2.3m gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change, against losses of $439,000 last time, on turnover up 8.3% to $28.7m.
Net earnings per share were $0.13.
Electronic Information Systems Inc has turned in first quarter net profit up by 61.9% to $871,000, on turnover that rose by 31.3% to $7.3m.
Net earnings per share were up by 27.3% to $0.14.
Ikos Systems Inc has reported second quarter net losses of $552,000 down from losses of $1.3m last time, on turnover that rose 61.7% at $4.9m; mid-term net losses stood at $2.1m up from losses of 41.8m last time, on turnover that rose 26.9% at $8.1m.
The 1992 figures were reported at 13 and 26 weeks and the 1993 figures at 14 and 27 weeks.
Intercim Corp saw third quarter net profits of $13,974 against losses of $715,797 last time, on turnover up 47% at $1.7m; net losses for the nine months stood at $274,754 this time down from losses of $764,818 last time, on sales down 5.4% to $4.7m.
Jostens Inc saw third quarter net down 45.6% at $5.5m, on turnover up 5% at $185m; net profit for the nine months was down 43.8% at $16.2m, on sales down 2.6% to $561.1m.
Net per share fell 45.5% to $0.12 in the quarter, 43.8% to $0.36 in the nine months.
Comparisons are with restated figures.
MTS Systems Corp has reported second quarter net profits up 52.8% at $2.2m, on turnover up 8.3% at $43.2m; mid-term net rose 73.4% to $3.9m, on sales up 15.1% at $83.2m.
Net per share rose 54.8% to $0.48 in the quarter, 77.1% to $0.85 in the half.
Protocol Systems Inc saw first quarter net profit up 55.2% at $799,066, after $100,000 gains from the cumulative effect of an accounting change this time and $8,000 tax credits last time, on turnover up 24% to $8m.
Net per share rose by 22.2% to $0.11.
MINIGRAMS
Digital Equipment Corp now says it does not expect any ‘significant’ revenues from its new Alpha-based systems until the 1994 financial year which starts in July: the rather disconcerting message comes from Bradley Allen, director of investor relations, in London yesterday to brief investors about the company's efforts to return to profitability through restructuring, cost-cutting and changes in technology; he declined to make projections about fourth quarter earnings.
but noted that the US investment community ‘expects us to be profitable in the fourth quarter;’ he also said that customers were enthusiastic about the new Alpha-based systems, adding that five major database vendors had committed to supporting the RISC chip.
IBM Corp chairman Louis Gerstner has called a halt to plans to break up the company, the Financial Times claimed yesterday: the paper said Gerstner told a group of executives, ‘The whole of IBM is greater than the sum of its parts,’ and put the strategy into reverse; John Akers had planned to bring outside investors into some of the decentralised IBM units such as AdStar and Pennant Systems, and was planning to sell some of them outright.
British Telecommunications Plc said yesterday it plans to start selling satellite dishes and receivers by Christmas, making the move since it is one of the few activities it is allowed to pursue in the entertainment arena: ‘We see it as a very important part of our wish to be part of the converging area of telephony, entertainment and computers,’ the company told Reuter; the company will reportedly source the equipment from two unidentified UK companies, in a move that is a significant threat to Amstrad Plc, whose shares fell tuppence to 31p.
Headline of the week so far comes from Reuter, which says MICROSOFT SHIPS WIDOWS IN JAPANESE, but the truth is that Microsoft Corp said the Japanese-language edition of the Windows operating system version 3.1 is now being shipped, adding that it is the first retail version for personal computers to be introduced in Japan, and that 24 of the OEM customers supporting Windows in Japan are offering it pre-installed and preconfigured on their machines as part of Microsoft's Windows Ready-to-Run programme; Microsoft is also set with Windows 3.1 in Korean and Chinese.
Xerox Corp announced yesterday that it had developed an advanced ink-jet technology that uses a 128-nozzle print head for desktop computer printers, and that it has retained Tokyo Electric Co Ltd to assemble the printers; Xerox is manufacturing the printers' ink-jet cartridges at its Canandaigua, New York plant; it notes that the 128 nozzles enable faster print speeds than competing printers; the printer will ship later this year.
Texas Instruments Inc, Dallas yesterday introduced a new notebook computer and an inkjet printer: the 400E WinDX2/50, at $5,000, uses a 50MHz 80486DX2 processor and has a 256-colour VGA screen with high-speed video for graphics reproduction, a 200Mb disk, runs three hours between battery charges, and bounces like a ball — well it has ‘higher’ operating shock tolerance.
Mitel Corp created a separate business unit, Mitel (Far East) Ltd, for Asian and Pacific Rim markets.
Milpitas, California-based Adaptec Inc says it has no immediate response to reports that competitor Distributed Processing Technology Inc, Maitland, Florida has slashed prices on its AT amd EISA disk controller boards: fear of a price war put Adaptec's share price under pressure last week; the company told Reuter ‘Competitive pressure has always been there and we'll respond as we always have’ to it; Adaptec's manufacturing organisation could cut costs and pass the benefits onto its customers; Distributed Processing is discounting its AT adaptors to $285 from $655.
Waltham, Massachusetts-based Kronos Inc agreed in principle to acquire the technology and some assets of Computer Recovery Inc, an AS/400 software development company based in Alvarado, Texas, on undisclosed terms: it specialises in providing AS/400 time accounting software.
Following on from the spread on pages two and three, IBM Corp did announce its first Pentium-based machine yesterday, the PS/2 Server 95 560, which has a 60MHz processor, and support for 128Mb of main memory — the processor board can also be used to give existing PS/2 Model 90 and 95 machines a full Pentium upgrade; the company also announced a 1Gb SCSI-2 disk which expands internal storage to 9Gb.
Hewlett-Packard Co has had to delay shipment of its new LaserJet 4L printer because of a defective part, US PC Week reports: the printer, originally set for general release May 3, has been delayed until at least the end of this month, and possibly until mid-June, because of a flaw in the paper sensor, the company said; the faulty sensor, which sits under the paper tray, causes the printer to communicate a ‘paper out’ message and stop printing, even though the tray has paper in it the firm said.
Milwaukee, Wisconsin-based Fiserv Inc is to acquire Data Line Service Co, a Covina, California-based computer services company serving more than 40 financial institutions in the state; terms of the proposed transaction were not disclosed; Data Line provides services to savings and loan institutions, savings banks and mortgage companies and has 250 employees with locations in Phoenix, Arizona and Dallas, Texas as well as the one in Covina.
MCI Communications Corp says it has opened an MCI representative office in Peking: the new office will support a wide range of voice and data transmission services in China.
Jackson, Mississippi-based LDDS Communications Inc has now signed a definitive merger agreement with Resurgens Communications Corp and Metromedia Communications Corp, so that the merger of the three companies can go ahead: shareholders of LDDS end up with about 68.5% and the shareholders of the other two share about 31.5% of the fully diluted equity of the new company.
Xerox Corp chairman Paul Allaire said yesterday that profit in the second quarter from its document processing business ‘could be somewhat below’ the $1.12 per share the unit earned in the year-ago period: Xerox said nine-tenths of its total business is in document processing, and the remainder is in insurance and financial services, and that it is in the midst of realigning its US sales force for document processing, which along with continued weak economic conditions, are affecting its results; it expects sales momentum to increase as it realises benefits of the sales reorganisation and still expects profit growth in document processing.
The Mani Pulite — clean hands — investigation in Italy that has now snared Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA (see page seven) has won universal admiration for its thoroughness and determination not to pull punches; our only concern is that if you simply put the two words Mani and Pulite together, the thing doesn't sound nearly so squeaky clean…
FIVE YEARS AGO…
On May 17 1988, Computergram Number 930 reported that DEC would give IBM OEM pact for 3480s * * * Siemens and Nixdorf backed IBM-DEC-Hewlett-Packard alternative Unix plan * * * Network Equipment was in dispute with Excelan over acquisition * * * Wang would unbundle VS operating system.