

INTRODUCTION: COMPARATIVE APPROACHES
The academic field of industrial relations is typically defined as being the study of the various aspects of job regulation (Bain and Clegg, 1974), with a consequent attendant focus on rule-making in the employment relationship.
Alternatively, for those who regard this definition as too restrictive — particularly in its implicit overtones of stability, regularity and mutual accommodation between the parties — the central core of the subject is the ‘study of the process of control over work relations’(Hyman, 1975, p. 12).
This latter emphasis is intended to highlight the underlying but centrally important issues of control, power and interests together with the generation of conflict, rather than with mechanisms and techniques for its resolution.
Such a definition considerably broadens the scope of the subject away from a traditional institutional orientation, towards an examination of wider societal influences which affect the character of relations between workers, employers and their respective collective organisations.
The primacy of the power relationship has been stressed by Korpi (1981, p. 190), who maintains that
of basic importance for understanding the functioning of the industrial relations system is the distribution of power resources between sellers and buyers of manpower and changes in this distribution.
The power resources…are, on the one hand, the pattern of ownership of capital and of organisation among employers, and on the other hand, union organisation and political power.
Frames of Reference in Industrial Relations
A recent survey of industrial relations research traditions viewed from an international standpoint suggests that studies tend to cluster around two underlying assumptions: first, the ‘pluralist-institutionalist’ approach, which is especially predominant in Anglo-Saxon countries.
Here the discipline is regarded as being of an applied and pragmatic nature and research is empirically oriented, usually with an emphasis on procedural and institutional concerns, towards policy relevance and problem-solving.
Second, in contrast in a country, such as Italy, the system of stratification and class structure in society forms an important part of the analysis, which is as much concerned with workers and the working class as with unions and collective bargaining.
In class-oriented studies ‘politics, political action and the tensions between employers and employees are prominent…and less attention is devoted to the actual procedures and practice of industrial relations’(Doeringer, 1981, pp. 10–11).
These two assumptions are not mutually exclusive, however, and research formulations in France, Japan and Sweden, for instance, have utilised both.
Closely related to these contrasting emphases regarding the nature and parameters of the subject is the question of devising an appropriate, conceptual framework of analysis in industrial relations, as well as the extent to which this is explicitly grounded in theory.
Doeringer distinguishes between three major divisions: a pragmatic approach in which theory plays little or no role although, as Eldridge (1975, p. 7) has reminded us ‘the pragmatists in emphasising the need for realistic solutions often carry a good deal of conceptual and theoretical baggage around with them’; secondly, a Marxist approach, stressing class relations and conflict irreconcilability; and, following Dunlop's (1958) seminal work, the highly influential ‘systems’ model focusing on the rules of industrial relations and their determinants.
In Dunlop's conception of an interdependent industrial relations system three principal actors, namely workers, managers — as well as their representative organisations — together with certain state agencies, all interact to establish a network of rules governing their relationship in the workplace, the rules being the output of the system.
The actors, however, are subject to pressures and constraints arising from the environmental setting in which they operate, assumed to be given and exogenously determined.
This background context within which the rules (both substantive and procedural) are developed impinges upon the relationship between the actors and the nature of the rules which they establish.
It consists of technological factors, product and labour market determinants, social influences affecting the ideology of the actors, as well as the political environment which, for Dunlop, consists of power relations in the larger society.
Moreover, a basic premise of Dunlop's prescription for the advancement of knowledge in industrial relations is the need to break away from the restrictive and myopic confines of problem-solving, institutional studies within individual countries — what has been termed an ‘ethno-centric’ bias — in favour of broader comparisons over the course of time and across countries.
He suggests that the systems model is  applicable to the study of comparative industrial relations since, although every county displays special or particularistic industrial relations characteristics because of differences in the environmental settings in which they operate, ‘the attention to rule-making in industrial relations systems provides a common denominator for the comparative analysis of different forms’(p. 27).
It is probably more valid, however, to argue that the main use of his model is as a means of identifying the relevant, strategic variables and ordering empirical data.
It gives little guidance as to the individual weightings to be attached to explanatory variables for evaluating between them, or the precise ways in which they interact, and lacks predictive power (Gill, 1969).
Comparative Industrial Relations
As regards the nature of comparative investigation itself within the subject, Sturmthal (1958, p. 77) defines it as ‘research dealing with the same (or similar or related) phenomena in different countries’.
A further conceptual distinction may be drawn between ‘comparative’ industrial relations, and ‘international’and ‘foreign’studies within the field.
International, or transnational, studies deal with those institutions and phenomena which cross national boundaries, such as the industrial relations aspects of multinational companies or the international labour movement.
In studies of ‘foreign’ labour movements in countries other than one's own, the selected countries are usually treated separately and comparisons between them are rarely made (Meyers, 1967).
This latter category may form the raw material or foundation for comparisons, but such studies are to be regarded as preparatory, rather than being fully comparative, since the questions asked of the data are at best implicit and few analytical statements are drawn from them.
Essentially, then, comparative industrial relations is a systematic method of investigation relating to two or more countries which has analytic rather than descriptive implications.
In addition to the need for identifying appropriate bench-marks and a suitable framework of analysis, we may also ask about the rationale for engaging in work within the field of comparative industrial relations.
What can be learned by comparing one system with another?
Should comparison be undertaken for its own sake simply out of intrinsic interest or intellectual challenge, or should it be directed towards some more closely-defined objective?
Comparative studies  can lead to a greater understanding of the factors and processes which determine industrial relations phenomena since ‘the comparative method leads to questions regarding the reasons for the observed comparisons and contrasts’(Dunlop, 1958, p. vi).
The studies can be illuminating largely because, as Banks (1974) puts it, of the way in which they reveal differences between systems which in many other respects are similar, and similarities in systems which otherwise are different.
Hence they throw into relief and bring out the significant aspects of the phenomenon in question.
As an illustration, he notes that despite the many differences between industrial relations under communist systems in certain countries such as the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia, and those under the capitalist system in Britain, the emergence of the shopfloor representative in the workplace as a crucial role-player is common to all, albeit making representations about different issues.
Used in this way the comparative approach can afford a perspective and lead to greater insight into domestic issues by sharpening understanding of the same phenomena in one's own country.
There may also be a desire to utilise comparative studies for practical policy considerations by attempting to derive ‘lessons’ from overseas experience.
Comparative findings might be used for normative, or even polemical, purposes in order to support or oppose certain aspects of a country's domestic industrial relations policy.
Recently, for instance, West German trade unions undertook a campaign to secure the legal prohibition of the lockout during industrial disputes.
For this they prepared a comparative study to show that the lockout was far more extensively used by German employers than by employers elsewhere (Schregle, 1981).
Sometimes a case will be made on the basis of what is known to happen abroad for the actual transfer or importation into a country of particular industrial relations methods or techniques.
Efforts were once made to export American-type trade unions and collective bargaining to occupied countries such as Japan in the early post-World War II period.
Yet a regression from those principles soon occurred after it became apparent that the orderly industrial relations which were sought were not being achieved (Levine, 1958; Barkin, 1980).
The hazardous nature of any such attempts at interchangeability or piecemeal transplant forms a recurrent theme in the literature, and has become something of a commonplace.
Comparative industrial relations is not an ‘export-import exercise’(Schregle, 1981) since industrial relations phenomena reflect the characteristic features of the  society in which they operate.
It follows that because a practice may work well in one country, there is no guarantee that it will continue to do so should it be transferred elsewhere, especially if it conflicts with indigenous traditions and social values.
More generally, it has been contended that international comparisons can be a trap:
‘Look how much better the Lilliputians do it’, is a tempting cry, but the more one looks into it the more one finds that the Lilliputians aren't a fair comparison with us: they haven't got our antiquated industries…our legal system; and they are less than six inches tall.
(Kahn-Freund and Hepple, 1972, p. 1)
There is a need to proceed cautiously regarding the possibility of making out-of-context transfers to different social and economic milieus.
As Kahn-Freund (1974) has shown, although transplantation of labour relations rules relating to individual workers — such as legislative protection against unfair dismissal — is relatively straightforward, this is not the case with provisions of a collective nature.
Collective bargaining institutions and rules cannot be expected to function adequately when wrenched out of their original context and implanted elsewhere, since they are closely linked with the structure and organisation of political and social power in their own environment or habitat.
Numerous studies attest to the validity of this insight within the industrial relations field.
In the case of Britain, Wedderburn (1974, p. 31) notes that the failure of the 1971 Industrial Relations Act, many of whose legalistic provisions had US antecedents, ‘might serve as a warning against over simple enthusiasm for the translation of developments from other countries into the British framework’.
Similarly, for those who are impressed with the low level of industrial conflict characteristic of the Swedish industrial relations system as it traditionally operated, she points to the significance of broader influences.
Swedish society has experienced a wide measure of consensus about priorities in respect of general social goals, not only within the industrial relations sphere.
As a result,
this Swedish consensus is a precedent to the development of certain institutional forms rather than a result of them, and it would be useless for Britain to look to the forms rather than to the antecedent substance.
(ibid., p. 38)
As well as the case of Sweden, a good deal of interest has also been  shown in recent years in certain features of industrial relations in West Germany and Yugoslavia.
In regard to the co-determination system in Germany, it is quite possible that the institutional arrangements which appertain under that system may be a model for other countries.
In Europe the EEC has already been strongly influenced,inter alia , by German and Dutch experience in its attempts to devise a common statute for employee participation within European companies.
But it should be remembered that more than institutional factors are involved, since the co-determination system is also ‘an expression of specific social and attitudinal characteristics which are not exportable’(Schregle, 1978, p. 97).
In the case of the Yugoslavian system of self-management, any notions of possible imitation would need to take account of the specific ideological and socio-political context in which the Yugoslav experiment took place because
it is extremely doubtful that the overall system…can ever be made to work without the kind of total ideological commitment and radical transformation which underlie its operation in socialist Yugoslavia.
(Miller, 1978, p. 285)
All this is not to deny the possible relevance of the results of comparative experience as an aid to practitioners and policy-makers who may hope to utilise ideas, approaches or techniques adopted in other countries.
But it is necessary to take into account not only the specific features of given industrial relations arrangements but also the environmental context which impinges upon them, and therefore the appropriateness of any transfer to a different context.
It is not necessary to adopt a ‘systems’ theory approach, interrelating the background conditions within a social system, in order to recognise that when some particular aspect of another country's industrial relations is removed from its social, political and cultural surroundings it may then lose its validity and rationale.
In the Japanese setting, for example, it would be wholly inappropriate to conclude that a particular element such as seniority-based wage payments would be desirable as a policy prescription elsewhere, without a prior understanding of how that wage system relates both to the general security of employment in large Japanese firms and, possibly, the cultural assumptions concerning the importance of age in other parts of Japanese society (Dore, 1973).
It may also be noted that some US multinational companies attempted, quite unsuccessfully, to introduce into Japan (and other Asian countries) wage systems based  on job evaluation and merit rating, as opposed to the more usual Japanese system of seniority and educational qualifications (ILO, 1973)
In the case of many of the former British territories in Africa they had something of a common industrial relations heritage built around an institutional framework in the British mould which was fostered by colonial administrations.
Yet here too, it was ultimately found to be totally inadequate for the needs of the countries concerned (Kilby, 1973; Gladstone, 1980).
Theoretical Considerations
In fact, as we have already indicated, there can be little doubt that the most important and overriding purpose of comparative studies is not for any practical policy implications which may be derived.
Rather, by exploring the determinants of similarities and differences found between national systems, they can help promote the development of industrial relations as an academic discipline.
Investigation which is directed towards international comparisons should prove more illuminating as an aid to systematic explanation than confining observations to a single national system.
Does a certain relationship retain its explanatory power for a number of countries rather than just for one — can it stand up to a comparative analysis?
Findings which are replicated throughout a number of countries, or which can be shown to vary under specified conditions, become much more powerful since ‘an explanatory theory of industrial relations cannot be based upon the narrow range of industrial relations processes observable in one, or even a few, countries’(Walker, 1967, p. 108).
Findings based on very limited evidence cannot be regarded as being firmly established and need to be verified by means of additional observations and cases.
By means of a comparative approach, as Galenson (1952, p. v) expresses it, ‘hypotheses that grew out of peculiar conditions in one country can…be tested against other bodies of experience, and reconciliation sought in differences among the determining factors.’
Thus the aim of comparative analysis is to promote wider understanding of, and foster new insights into, industrial relations, either by showing what is unique about any one set of national arrangements or, equally well, reducing what might appear to be acutely specific and distinctive national characteristics by demonstrating their recurrence elsewhere (Rose, 1983).
However, in order to make meaningful comparisons more is needed than merely comparative information, since within any field of study theory is necessary both to provide a framework for the systematic analysis and accumulation of the existing stock of knowledge and to serve as a guide for the selection of research problems.
Theoretical studies in this sense might adopt an approach which utilises the findings from a variety of national contexts in order to produce generalisations that attempt ‘to distinguish the invariant from the variant, the stable and continuing from the fluctuating and transitory’(Schollhammer, 1973, p. 24).
Alternatively, the studies could begin explicitly with a priori hypotheses about the relationships between environmental variables and industrial relations arrangements and proceed to test their validity — corroborating, relativising, refining or rejecting them — via an examination of the experience of a number of different countries.
With this latter approach there is a measure of agreement, however, that industrial relations theories themselves need to be built up from observed facts rather than from abstract speculation and require to be tested (and possibly modified) in the light of new information.
There is thus a reciprocal, feedback relationship between theorising and observation (Clegg and Bain, 1974; Hill and Thurley, 1974).
Whatever the ultimate objectives, the fact remains that a good deal of the existing work within the comparative industrial relations field, although often rich and insightful, has not so far been explicitly theoretical in either its purpose or method (Shalev, 1980a).
With notable exceptions such as Clegg (1976), many studies present empirically derived information arising from cross-national investigations, often relating to institutions and practices, which is then analysed and interpreted with no direct orientation towards theoretical considerations.
Yet, as we shall see, the last few years have witnessed a remarkable upsurge in research in those areas where quantification is possible, such as strike activity and its determinants (see Chapter 6).
In comparison with institutionally-oriented studies this kind of work is much more directed towards the specific testing of hypotheses via the use of multivariate, statistical techniques and it can utilise variables from a number of relevant disciplines.
Although the quantitative approach raises its own problems of methodology and measurement in attempting to model complex behaviour, it can be useful in sharpening concepts, providing some common ground between different disciplines and isolating the effects of one particular variable whilst allowing for the influence of the others.
Another strategy which has been suggested is to attempt at the  outset to ground comparative analysis firmly within the context of explicit and already well-formulated theoretical debate, such as‘convergence’ theory (Shalev, 1980a).
This particular perspective is based on one of the most influential studies in the comparative labour field in the last two decades, Kerr et al .,
Industrialism and Industrial Man (1962).
In this book the integrating strand in the analysis of industrial relations within developed and developing countries is the universal drive towards industrialisation.
Their thesis maintains that as technology — seen as the driving-force of change — and industrialisation become more uniformly applied the countries involved will tend, over an extended period, to develop more similar industrial features, including their industrial relations arrangements, practices and ‘web of rules’.
Nevertheless, it is recognised that industrial relations will continue to reflect elements of diversity as well as uniformity.
Significant national differences will reflect, for instance, the nature of the pre-industrial economic and political order whose lingering effects will continue to influence the newly industrialising society, as well as the particular historical periods at which countries began to industrialise.
A national industrial relations system which had its formative stages during the past 20 years is more likely to accord a greater role to the state, for instance, than those developed in earlier periods when the government's role as employer and regulator was less pervasive.
In a subsequent postscript (Kerr et al .,
1971), the original convergence thesis itself has become somewhat modified away from an emphasis on a trend towards uniformity.
The restatement holds that no identical systems will emerge, and that the convergence of industrial societies is towards a range of alternatives rather than to a particular point.
It is now recognised that the industrialisation process is complex and that
there are several marked differences in the way that industrialisation has proceeded country-by-country; that there is no single logic of industrialisation, though there may only be a few paths.
(Hill and Thurley, 1974, p. 154)
Comparative studies by Sorge and Warner (1980) in Britain and West Germany also suggest that although factories in different countries may be very similar in terms of their size, technology and products they can, nevertheless, bring forth distinctly dissimilar forms of organisation and industrial relations.
Yet notwithstanding these specific criticisms the notion that one  source of difference within cross-national industrial relations may reflect the different stage of development that societies have reached, along some continuum — that the stage of industrialisation affects the character of industrial relations — this provides one possible focus for inter-country studies.
It suggests ideas and implications which can be tested by further research.
Dore (1973) used this framework in a comparison of the contrasting employment systems in British and Japanese industry; and Kobrin (1976) empirically tested the convergence thesis itself using cross-national research for more than 90 countries and found some support for it.
He was able to show a reduction in the variance of some selected indicators of convergence (as measured by the standard deviation) at higher levels of industrialisation.
Historical and Cultural Factors
The exposition of the convergence thesis also points to the fact that countries which are alike in other respects would be expected to develop significant differences in their industrial relations if they had industrialised at different historical periods.
In fact, it is clear that the main characteristics of national industrial relations, their dominant and distinctive features, seem to be established at a fairly early stage in the industrial development of a country.
Subsequently, in the absence of major dislocations such as war or revolution, the provisions appear to show a good deal of tenacity, retaining many of their early characteristics despite subsequent evolution.
Thus the central and distinctive features of ‘voluntarism’ in Britain, arbitration courts in Australia and Denmark, and the concept of ‘exclusive’bargaining representation in the United States emerged early in the formation of those countries' industrial relations (Kerr et al .,
1962).
Britain, as the first industrialised nation, pioneered the development of many industrial relations institutions and arrangements.
In consequence, its contemporary industrial relations scene has been markedly conditioned by values, conventions and traditions that were established in the past.
Hyman (1982b, p. 108) reiterates the general point that in industrial relations ‘the present must be viewed as historically conditioned and historically contingent, and as incomprehensible except by means of historical understanding.’
In the case of developing countries, different dates of origin may in themselves be expected to lead to quite different features in their industrial relations despite the attainment of a similar stage of economic  development.
Dunlop has explained that
A national industrial relations system formulated with labour organisations which are an adjunct to a successful nationalist movement, which has secured independence, may be expected to show some characteristics different from [one]in which national independence antedated the union movements or in which the union movements played a minor role in the nationalist movement.
The relations between the labour organisation and the government or the party of independence, and hence the status of these actors…may be expected to be quite different in these two types of situations.
(Dunlop, 1958, p. 308)
The consequence of all this for a study of comparative industrial relations is that international differences cannot be understood solely in terms of cross-sectional analysis at any one point in time.
Instead, longitudinal studies incorporating a time dimension are also required for supplying historical perspective, together with a sharper appreciation of change through time and the conditions which generate it.
Employment relationships have been influenced, not only by the environmental or contextual variables already discussed, but also in some societies by distinctive cultural features.
An understanding of industrial relations in the Netherlands, for instance, requires an appreciation of the vertical segregation (or ‘pillarised’ structure) between religiously defined groupings and non-denominational organisations which for long characterised Dutch society and affected not only unions but also employers.
In that country for many years organisation at the social, cultural and political level was founded upon a system of ideological blocs.
More generally, Blum (1981) concluded from an examination of 27 countries that the form which industrial relations takes in any one nation does markedly reflect the culture of which it is a part.
From a methodological standpoint, however, one problem is that without some analysis of the cultural determinants themselves, and their influence on other variables, this is something of a non-explanation.
‘Culture’ can be defined in a myriad of ways and often appears to be used not as an independent, or explanatory, variable but as a residual one representing a variety of unspecified influences.
Nevertheless, a recent study (Ahiauzu, 1982) emphasises that culture is an important environmental factor which cannot be ignored in cross-national studies of industrial relations.
It views the connection between culture and job regulation as occurring through the shaping influence of  culture upon the attitudinal characteristics of the actors and, therefore, on their behaviour.
Thus, in societies with different cultures objective situations may be interpreted in markedly different ways.
Methodology
In the light of the preceding discussion it is necessary to consider the methodology of comparative industrial relations more fully since it is clear that to be of value the studies need to be appropriately designed and the cases to be compared require careful selection.
In terms of the question of what might usefully be compared,typologies are very important in comparative analysis.
They are a classificatory device in the form of a limited number of recognisable patterns into which industrial relations arrangements can be grouped according to their common elements.
Since careful attention needs to be given to the economic, political and social setting when analysing industrial relations in various countries, it is useful to compare countries with broadly similar characteristics in these respects: ‘By looking at industrial relations problems within a given grouping one achieves an ‘automatic’, major reduction in the number of background…variables' (Kassalow, 1968, p. 103).
Broad groupings of this kind are typically based upon the nature of the political system and the stage of economic development of the countries included, such as the threefold distinction between western market-industrialised societies, communist states and developing Third World countries.
In some cases we may wish to compare the categories themselves such as the advanced/underdeveloped dichotomy, in order to illuminate any evolutionary aspects of industrial relations.
For other purposes narrower groupings within the market-industrialised category may be more appropriate.
For instance, some years ago among writers in the United States an evolutionist theory of trade union development was popular.
It was claimed that unions set out by being radical and militant in their outlook, but then went through a ‘maturation’ process, ultimately becoming pragmatic and less militant.
This type of generalisation, however, was based on the assumption that US union development was the norm, and only British, Swedish and German unions were included in the comparison.
Other European countries, such as France and Italy, were excluded because no such uniform pattern could be found there (von Beyme, 1980).
Therefore, rather than attempting to generate theories which hold good for all countries, generalisations  may only be possible if ‘types’ can be established.
Yet it remains true that unless the typologies are elaborated beyond a mere classificatory and descriptive labelling of different situations — that is, by attempting to specify the conditions under which each type develops — they remain at only a very preliminary stage of theorising.
Within any given grouping there is a further need to determine the number of countries to be investigated and also the level at which the comparison should proceed.
There are strong grounds for limiting the sample size of the investigation because it is not the number of countries per se which is usually important, but rather the range of variation which they provide (Walker, 1967).
Similarly, a very restricted comparison — perhaps of only two or three cases — permits a more intensive analysis than may be possible with multi-country studies and if the cases are dealt with in a consistent and systematic way minimises ‘the danger of lapsing into either vacuous description or superficial comparison’(Shalev, 1980a, p. 40).
However, a possible limitation of this approach is that industrial relations variables are themselves frequently clustered into national contexts.
Consequently, when the number of countries is small and each very similar, the clustering becomes particularly tight, thereby making it a matter of arbitrary choice to select any one variable for explanatory purposes.
In such cases there may be a need to take account of a somewhat larger number of markedly different national contexts in order to make possible a more precise isolation of explanatory variables (Sorge, 1976).
Once the countries to be compared have been selected, much of the analysis often focuses on the national level, in the form of comparative macro studies, which are sometimes extended to include industry-level comparisons.
In contrast, relatively few investigations centre on the workplace — although there are exceptions such as Dore (1973), Gallie (1978), Jacobs et al .
(1978) and Marsh et al .
(1981).
Marsh's study of the engineering industry in Britain and West Germany adopts the standpoint that, whatever the form which industrial relations takes, similar topics for regulation will appear, thus providing a basis for comparison.
The structures and activities involved in regulating relations at workplace level, such as wage payment systems, employee hiring and work discipline are then compared, subject-by-subject, for five engineering plants in each country.
It has long been recognised, however, that international comparisons of industrial relations which are confined to the national level may produce misleading results because of the possible dominance of one or more particular industries within a given country.
Since there are  substantial differences between industrial relations across industries, which may be unrelated to the national context in which they operate, what is really an ‘industry’ effect could be misinterpreted as being a ‘national’effect in a comparative study confined solely to the national level.
To overcome this problem and allow for differences in the industry-mix between different countries industrial relations at industry level also need to be taken into account.
That is to say, it is useful to examine the double variation of both national and industry factors.
By comparing similar industries across countries the more industry-specific forces of technical and market contexts are held fairly constant.
It is then possible to test for any separate impact of environmental forces appertaining to the national level, in terms of broader social and political influences.
Such an approach was originally utilised by Dunlop (1958) in his examination of available evidence from the coal mining and building industries across a number of countries.
He showed the predominant influence in coal mining of the industry factors of a common technology and similar market or budgetary constraints in shaping certain rules in that industry, including those concerned with safety, lay-off procedures and wage structures.
The building industry was also found to display common features in many countries.
These included highly competitive product markets, with many small-sized enterprises, ease of entry and subcontracting, together with an unstructured labour market typified by short job duration at variable work sites, as well as much self-employment.
The special characteristics of the industry itself led to an emphasis on rules designed to regulate the forms of product and labour market competition.
However, in both industries other rules, relating to the status of the actors and their organisations, bargaining representation and union security (closed shop) arrangements, were largely influenced by features of the national industrial relations environment within each country.
A similar strategy integrating the national and industry levels has also been adopted by the Geneva-based International Institute for Labour Studies (IILS).
Its comparative research programme has been designed so that variations between industries in the crucial determinants of industrial relations, and in the relative strength of such determining factors, can be studied against the range of variation provided by international differences.
(IILS, 1969)
The differential impact of national and industry environmental forces upon the structure, process and outcomes of industrial relations have been examined empirically for the important metalworking industry across five countries.
The findings suggest that, although there is an interacting effect between the two, many of the fundamental characteristics which are shared by all the cross-national systems investigated for that industry are the result of a common response to modern technological development and mechanised factory production.
In contrast, it appears that most of the distinguishing features are the result of differences in the national, rather than in the industry, environments (Derber, 1976).
Problems in Comparative Studies
It is apparent from the foregoing discussion that comparative industrial relations is by no means an easy field of study and has considerable inherent problems.
It is not only that, as with industrial relations generally, it is multidisciplinary in its dimensions but it reaches across cultures — thereby exacerbating the difficulties of finding appropriate bases for making inter-country comparisons.
There can also be problems in ensuring a measure of concept-equivalence across societies, since what are nominally identical practices or institutions may perform varying functions, or have a very different significance.
The French use ‘participation’, for instance, in one sense to mean ‘profit sharing’, whereas the term is more usually understood in the sense of participation by workers in the management of enterprises (Blanpain, 1974).
We also know that in a number of countries labour disputes are brought before so called‘Labour Courts’ for resolution.
But in any attempt to compare these institutions on an international basis there are immediate difficulties of terminology in that bodies with the same name may perform different functions.
The West German Labour Court, for instance, is empowered to settle labour disputes by means of statutory binding decisions whereas the Irish Labour Court acts only as a conciliation body.
In some other countries Labour Court functions are performed by bodies with different names such as Labour or Industrial Tribunals.
Schregle's (1981) approach to this basic problem of what is comparable in cross-national studies is to compare the methods and ways in which particular industrial relations functions are carried out in various countries, rather than simply comparing institutions and procedures carrying the same designation.
Consequently, a comparative  study of the settlement of labour disputes through statutory binding decisions would have to omit the Irish Labour Court (despite its name), but include other bodies such as Industrial Tribunals in Britain, Conciliation and Arbitration Boards in Mexico and Labour Tribunals in India.
As well as difficulties arising from terminological variations, Henley (1978) also points to other fundamental issues in this respect.
He notes the erroneous conclusions which have been drawn from comparing the functioning of the Kenyan Industrial Court with apparently functionally similar wage-regulating institutions in New Zealand and Australia, in the absence of any consideration of the vast differences in the nature and basis of trade union power as between African countries and industrialised economies.
As we have indicated, there can be problems in attempting to extract a single institution or rule from a national industrial relations system in order to compare it with what happens elsewhere since
Institutions must be considered within the general context of the industrial relations system of which they are an integral part…[given that]the point of departure of international comparison cannot be an institution as such but must be the function it carries out.
And functions are a reflection of the operation of the industrial relations system in its entirety.
(Schregle, 1981, p. 22)
It is also important to try to avoid the tunnel-vision whereby industrial relations arrangements elsewhere are viewed from the particular perspectives and orientations of, say, Anglo-Saxon countries.
Despite the inherent difficulties in comparative work it has been argued that an international perspective has always been implicit to some extent in the study of industrial relations.
For many years this was confined mainly to comparative considerations embracing strong ideological overtones, such as factors which have engendered ‘the labour problem’(Weber, 1974).
Yet, as we have noted, more recent work has adopted a wider focus and a more analytical approach to the subject.
It provides a way of helping to dismantle and correct oversimplified explanations where generalisations have been made from particular cases — or even on the basis of a single example — which clearly will not stand up to broader comparative investigation.
For instance, one important factor put forward to explain the growth of trade union membership among white collar workers in Britain has been government policy which created a favourable climate for such union  expansion.
The more general international implications of this thesis, however, may require modification since in a country like Sweden, which has a very high level of white-collar union density, government action was apparently not a necessary condition for the growth of such unions (Adams, 1974).
The method of enquiry employed in much of the work within the comparative field proceeds at the empirical level and arrives at more general conclusions through a process of inductive reasoning, or more ad hoc interpretive insights.
Relatively few studies begin with an explicit (ex-ante ) theory which is then rigorously tested against the data.
In large part this is a reflection of the underdeveloped state of industrial relations theory itself to whose improvement, by way of helping more general theory construction, well-designed comparative studies may be expected to contribute.
It is thus a field of considerable potential.
As Shalev (1981) points out, comparative analysis not only raises substantively interesting and important questions but it also offers a natural and fruitful avenue for the advance of the discipline as a whole.
Plan of the Book
In the remainder of the book we survey and discuss the findings of the literature relating to the comparison of national industrial relations systems and their particular aspects in terms of an analysis of the major actors and their organisations together with their activities and interactions.
Chapters 2–4 concern workers' trade unions, employers and managements as well as collective bargaining — in most western countries the most important mechanism for determining wages and employment conditions.
There follows in Chapter 5 an examination of the increasing role of the state and its agencies as a regulator within the industrial relations field.
Chapter 6 deals with strikes and industrial conflict, an area where more specific hypothesis-testing via quantitative methods is possible.
As a result, there has been a recent proliferation of studies seeking to explain international differences in strike activity.
Similarly, a good deal of attention has been directed to the important and topical issues of workers' participation in enterprise decision-making, along with‘international’ studies concerned with the operation and labour relations implications of multinational corporations.
These matters are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8.
The first eight chapters principally concern comparative aspects of  industrial relations in advanced, market-type economies in Western Europe, the USA, Japan and Australia although there is some discussion of the role of trade unions in communist countries and of the Yugoslav self-management system.
Industrialised countries with a market economy possess at least some basic similarities and common elements of importance which allow comparative examination.
Chapter 9, however, relates to the special features within a markedly different environment of industrial relations in Third World, developing countries, where not only is the state the largest single employer and the number of wage-earners a small part of the economically active population, but in addition the trade unions perform a dual role.
As well as the traditional function of protecting and furthering their members' interests, they are also expected to play a role in the country's development effort towards economic growth.
This duality presents certain inconsistencies which, as we shall see, are not easily reconcilable.
A brief overview of comparative industrial relations in Chapter 10 completes the book.
We begin, however, with a discussion of the role and functions of trade unions in comparative perspective, primarily within western industrialised economies.
Notes
Further Reading
Two major, recent articles on comparative approaches to industrial relations are Shalev (1980a) and Schregle (1981), although the earlier articles by Walker (1967) and Kassalow (1968) for the International Institute for Labour Studies are well worth reading.
There is also a useful introduction in the symposium edited by Blanpain (1982b).
For a good discussion of the possibility of ‘exporting’ the industrial relations models of particular countries, see Kassalow (1983).
TRADE UNIONS
Trade unions are institutional representatives of worker interests both within the labour market and in the wider society, and they accentuate the collective rather than the individual power-resources of employees.
However, as well as basic similarities there are also major differences as between trade union movements in advanced industrialised countries, not only in the extent of their membership density but also in their role and objectives and the structural divisions that characterise them, which require investigation.
In some unions the emphasis is more upon representing aspirations of the working class as a whole rather than functioning as collective bargaining agencies merely for their own members.
In the case of France, it has been said (Kendall, 1975) that in the past a worker's decision to join a union represented as much a reflex of class consciousness as any intention to organise practically on his own behalf for enhanced conditions and improved job control.
Thus,
it would be a commonplace to historians that the union movements in the United States or in Britain are very different in character from the union movements in France or in Italy, each conditioned by its own historical experience, and each with a distinctive conception of its role within the wider society.
(Gallie, 1978, p. 33)
In much of Western Europe a predominant characteristic has been trade union pluralism (and sometimes reluctance to engage in continuous relationships with employers) promoted by ideological, philosophical and religious differences, although in recent years there has been rather less emphasis upon the importance of religious affinity.
As a result, the major dividing lines have been less between the craft and industrial unionism dimensions than between, on the one hand, secular and confessional (generally Catholic) unionism, and reform-oriented (mainly socialist) or revolutionary (communist or syndicalist) unionism on the other (Windmüller, 1974).
In Italy, for instance, a unique aspect of the trade union movement has been its formal close ties to various political parties (although somewhat weakened in recent years) whereby there were as many union confederations as political persuasions.
Also in that country the unions have been financially  supported by the political parties (a reversal of the typical relationship found in, say, Britain or Australia) and the normative stance of the Italian movement is that its role is far more comprehensive than simply bargaining for improved wages and work conditions (Guigni, 1981).
Similarly in France, a notable feature is the unions' political pluralism, offering a trinity of communist, socialist and radical Catholic organisations in comparison with the relatively unified movements of West Germany and Britain which are not structurally divided on the basis of religion or politics and have only one coordinating organisational centre (the DGB and TUC, respectively).
In fact, trade unions may seek to achieve their objectives not only by collective bargaining but also by lobbying the legislature, or by a more fundamental form of political action aimed at transforming society.
Moreover, union objectives and orientations are themselves of an extremely diverse nature between different countries and they require further elucidation.
Trade Union Objectives and Methods
In his comparative examination of industrial relations in French and British oil refineries, Gallie (1978) noted the strikingly dissimilar conceptions of the role of unionism and its typical mode of action at plant level.
Broadly, the French unions as class-oriented organisations viewing contemporary western society in predominantly Marxist terms, aspired to promote overall, long-term worker interests rather than defend particular and narrow craft or job interests.
They interpreted their role as being one of heightening the consciousness and awareness of the workforce, seeking to mould perceptions and mobilise workers ideologically towards a far-reaching structural transformation of what was seen as an exploitative and alienating society.
Their strategy for the achievement of this objective ‘was essentially one of sustained ideological warfare in the context of steadily escalating action over concrete disputes with management’(ibid., p. 313).
Conversely, the British unions conceived their role within the factory as being basically one of continuing representation of workforce interests on narrow bargaining issues, pressing for objectives which were consciously and explicitly desired by the workers themselves.
These aims were to be accomplished by means of negotiation backed up by ‘a powerful, well-disciplined and cohesive organisation that would represent such a potential threat in the event of conflict that management was unlikely to risk being unduly unreasonable in negotiation’(ibid., p. 313).
In the USA, the particularly distinctive features of unionism which distinguish it from that found in most continental European countries include ‘job consciousness and job control, business unionism, an overwhelming emphasis upon economic struggle and collective bargaining, as opposed to broad political reform of the society and the economy’(Kassalow, 1969, p. 6).
The important concept of ‘business unionism’ relates to the securing of pragmatic, job-related goals in the form of improvements in the economic and social conditions of members, rather than concern with social reorganisation.
The classic statement of its main features is that of Hoxie (1920, p. 45) who characterised it as being
essentially trade-conscious, rather than class-conscious…
It aims chiefly at more, here and now, for the organised workers of the craft or industry [and]accepts as inevitable, if not as just, the existing capitalistic organisation and the wage system…
It regards unionism mainly as a bargaining institution and seeks its ends chiefly through collective bargaining.
Unlike most European countries where a close association between unions and political parties has been a longstanding phenomenon, US unions have little close and direct connection with political parties and have relied very heavily on collective bargaining rather than political activity as the means of achieving their ends.
(The position in Canada, however, is somewhat different since the union movement there — probably because of the different system of government — has developed a broader view of political ideology and has close ties with the New Democratic Party.)
In West Germany, on the other hand, there has been greater emphasis by unions upon legislative enactment to further their general objectives since, historically, the unions accepted the republic created after World War I as being ‘their’ state and consequently pressed for government legislation in the social and labour field (Günter and Leminsky, 1978).
And in Sweden, although in the 1930s unions and managements found common ground in their efforts to increase efficiency under capitalism and avoid state intervention in their relationship, since the 1970s the unions have been promoting new socio-political goals.
These include successful pressure for the introduction of new co-determination laws limiting employer prerogative, together with measures to socialise the economy by the statutory provision of collectively-owned investment capital, or ‘wage-earner funds’(introduced in 1984).
It can be argued, however, that the dichotomy often noted between the more restrictive business union orientation in the United States and European ‘welfare’ unionism concerned with wider social objectives as well as the terms and conditions of employment of union members, is somewhat overdrawn.
In recent years US unions have not been inactive in the political sphere and have actually had a large degree of impact on influencing legislation concerned with broader social and economic issues (Lewin, 1978).
Also, although in European countries some union leaders undoubtedly regard trade unions as having a mainly political role to help change the social and economic order, many rank-and-file members appear to view unions differently — as instrumental agencies concerned with matters arising in the employment relationship.
Van de Vall (1970) showed that among Dutch unionists the most prevalent motive for taking up membership was to secure individual ‘conflict insurance’(i.e. the provision of legal and material assistance in possible disputes with the employer and protection against arbitrary management decisions).
Similarly, despite the incessant advocation of the abolition of the private enterprise system by two of the major French unions, a majority of French workers seemed unconvinced, and rejected the legitimacy of the unions' attempt to relate ‘industrial’ and ‘political’issues in shopfloor agitation (Gallie, 1978).
Form's (1973) study of car workers at various skill levels across four countries (USA, Italy, Argentina and India) showed that they all rejected political unionism in favour of job-related unionism concerned with raising wages and improving working conditions.
Unlike their western counterparts, trade unions in Soviet bloc Eastern European countries are markedly different kinds of organisation and, although there is some diversity along national lines, they are essentially variants of a single type.
In the Soviet-type Communist system…theoretically the trade unions are an independent organisation, not a Party or state organisation, and no one is allowed to interfere in their activities and to impose decisions upon them…
Actually, the trade unions are subordinate to the Party and have to ensure the execution of assigned tasks.
Consequently, their autonomy is low or, at best, moderate.
(Porket, 1978, p. 72)
Although unions sign ‘collective agreements’ at factory or establishment level, the content is very different from those in western countries, embracing matters such as the fulfilment of state economic plans, the  growth of labour productivity, work organisation and the administration of state social insurance and pensions.
Trade unions do not have the right to strike nor negotiate wage levels, which are determined by the administrative centre.
But they are required to defend their members from management abuses and bureaucratic excess (including dismissal) as well as from infringements of labour laws.
(There is evidence, however, of periodic worker revolts directed partly against alleged union ineffectiveness and conniving in management abuses.)
At the same time, unions bear responsibility for labour discipline, particularly in preventing labour turnover and encouraging the attainment of production targets and work norms.
In short, they have a dual role to perform (Ruble, 1979) in mobilising workers behind production goals, whilst defending those same workers in job-related grievances against unscrupulous administrators and illegitimate managerial practices.
Nevertheless, their interest articulation role is very much qualified in practice in the sense that ‘unions are asked to act as filters rather than as mouthpieces’(Pravda, 1983), passing on shopfloor grievances to management or higher union bodies.
Soviet experience has also helped to shape the role of labour unions in socialist states elsewhere.
Thus in China (despite some important differences) trade unions act as ‘transmission belts’ to put the Party's view to workers, and encourage production and engage in political and ideological education.
Additionally, they oversee safety and sanitation, take part in grievance-handling and execute numerous welfare and cultural responsibilities (Hotiman, 1981; Littler and Lockett, 1983).
Since trade unions reflect features of the society in which they have developed, it is scarcely surprising to find sharp contrasts between their role and orientation within the Soviet type communist system compared to that in western countries.
In the former the interests of workpeople are to be protected not only by the unions but also by the state and the Party.
Official ideology proclaims the unity of individual, group and societal interests and ‘Soviet trade union leaders perceive the interests of the assembly-line worker and that of the Soviet state (and through that state, factory management) as identical’(Ruble, 1981, p.9).
What also requires explanation, however, are the marked variations in union role and purpose (despite common impulses towards unionism) found between trade unions within some western capitalist countries.
Although all modem workers' movements have developed strategies comprising both labour market and political components how can we explain within the European context the greater emphasis upon  the achievement of radical change in the structure of society by French and Italian unions, whose thrust (certainly up to the late 1960s) has been at least as much ideological and political as industrial, in comparison with West German or British unions?
Also, at the other end of the scale, why has US unionism traditionally shown a more restricted interest in the political sphere, regarding collective bargaining as being overwhelmingly its major business?
Explaining Cross-national Differences in Union Character
Kendall (1975) draws a contrast between continental European unions and those not only in the United States but also in Britain, unlike many observers who regard the latter two countries as displaying important similarities.
He sees Anglo-American unions as being set apart by an emphasis on wage bargaining, together with their greater organisational unity and financial resources.
These differences are in turn related to variations in economic and socio-political conditions which existed during the unions' formative period and in their subsequent historical development.
Kendall's explanation concerns the earlier and more vigorous industrialisation process which occurred in Britain and the USA, in comparison with continental Europe, favouring greater popular support for the laissez-faire economy and the values which supported it, with a correspondingly reduced role for the state and politics.
Equally important, he notes that within these two countries industrialisation proceeded within a context relatively free from the ‘trammels of a precapitalist past’.
In this latter respect other authors (e.g. Bok and Dunlop, 1970) have pointed out that labour movements in continental Europe developed against the backdrop and carry-over of a feudalistic tradition of an earlier age that denied workers access to economic opportunity or political power, and which engendered a feeling of isolation and oppression.
Throughout the nineteenth century, Europe remained predominantly a rural society, particularly in southern and central Europe (including France, Italy, Spain, Belgium and Austria) where great importance attached to the Catholic Church.
In feudal conditions, where workers lack citizenship rights and where class privileges and distinctions are deeply entrenched, labour movements tend to be highly politicised in order to help effect a radical change in the social order (Kassalow, 1969; Shalev and Korpi, 1980).
Whereas in Britain (and Sweden), the state controlled the Church, feudalism had ended well  before it generally disappeared elsewhere in Europe, and manhood suffrage had been extended to large sections of the population — unlike most continental countries where it was attained only at a later date, sometimes not until the early part of the present century.
(The demand for universal male suffrage had always been high on the agenda of all the continental labour movements.)
Thus in the second half of the nineteenth century the British labour movement, in contrast to its continental counterparts, was an industrial movement without, at that time, the establishment of a political wing.
Conversely, ‘the simultaneous and combined economic and political struggle of European workers…helps account for the more articulated class character of [their]labour movements’(Kassalow, 1982, p. 210) directed against a very visible and expanding bourgeoisie and, in part, a response to a more repressive state apparatus (Geary, 1981).
As for the United States, there was an absence of a feudal past (except in the South) as well as an early attainment of the franchise for white males prior to the rise of the modem labour movement, together with free public education.
As Lorwin has observed,
American unionism has had the inestimable advantage of being born in a land whose social landscape was not cluttered up with the debris of a feudal age.
It was easier for workers and their organisations to accept private property and industrial capitalism where economic inequity was not compounded by apparently hopeless social stratification.
(Lorwin, 1957, p. 31)
This absence of feudal social and political structure prior to the onset of industrialisation has been held to help account for US ‘exceptionalism’, in the form of a weakened socialist consciousness and the lack of strong political Party-union ties, although there are undoubtedly other important factors as well, including the scarcity of manpower and ample employment opportunities for skilled workers, which militated against challenge along political and ideological lines; a complex ethnic (immigrant) labour force composition and racial cleavage, which impeded collective action on a class basis; and a political and constitutional structure that discouraged the setting up of third parties (Lipset, 1977).
Although one limitation of Kendall's explanation of European and Anglo-American distinctions is that it takes no account of the substantial differences which exist within his two comparison groups (especially those between Britain and the USA) nevertheless it is, as  Shalev (1980a) has shown, a useful approach in linking contextual structure to behaviour as a means of explaining the broad contrasts between the greater economism and internal unity of British and US unionism as compared with politicisation and (outside Britain and Scandinavia) religious/ideological divisions in Western Europe.
The political character of much of the union movement on the European continent also provoked a counter-response by the non-socialist forces in society, particularly the Catholic Church, which proceeded to establish rival workers' organisations.
In a religiously-divided country such as the Netherlands, trade unions had been formed in a period of strong Protestant and Catholic religious revival when a socialist trade union movement was regarded as implying a secular view of society.
Therefore, new Protestant and Catholic trade unions were organised which rejected both the class war concepts and the optimistic socialist utopianism of the secular unions, with the result that three rival trade union centres were created (Albeda, 1977).
In Germany a division into socialist, Liberal and Christian unions remained until the end of the Weimar Republic in 1933.
Even outside Europe, in Canada, Catholic unions were set up at the beginning of the twentieth century in order to ‘protect’ French-Canadian workers from the more suspect ideological influences of American ‘international’(actually bi-national) unions which were organising there.
In addition to broad European-American comparisons which have been considered, it is also necessary to explain some of the major variations and country-by-country differences in the characteristics of unionism which exist within the European context itself.
In particular, the French union movement differs in a number of important respects from other union movements in Western Europe.
In that country membership is relatively low, unionism has been characterised by weakness and instability and has failed to achieve a mass base comparable to the union movements in Germany, Britain, Belgium and Scandinavia.
Also, it has somewhat different political perspectives in terms of a ‘persistent leftism’(Adams, 1983) rather than pragmatic reformism, and is more committed to direct political action than elsewhere.
This may be attributable in part to employer attitudes in the form of an extreme hostility to trade unionism (Clegg, 1976).
However, an important structural factor by way of explanation again relates to the nature and pace of industrial development.
The slow rate of industrial growth in France and relative lag within an industrialising Europe at the formative period of trade unions meant that they consisted of relatively skilled workers employed in comparatively  small-scale enterprises.
(As late as 1906 a majority of the industrial workforce were in establishments of less than 100 employees.)
This helped give French unionism an elitist philosophy, organising a minority of politically conscious and literate workers in contrast with the more solid and comprehensively organised, dues-paying membership of the British model (Kendall, 1975).
Other specific historical conditions and institutions distinct from those found in other Western European countries were also important in accounting for differences in the major characteristics of French trade unions.
These include the conservatism of the large rural sector together with that of the nineteenth-century Church which supported an apparently immovable state.
‘These factors and the repeated abortive revolutions gave to the French worker a sense of total mistrust in political parties and the political system’(Meyers, 1981, p. 204).
The result was the development of strong anarcho-syndicalist tendencies within the labour movement in which the potential for revolutionary political change was seen as residing in the trade unions or syndicats , so that‘the workers, schooled by militancy, made irresistible by the all-powerful weapon of the general strike, would take over society themselves, without need of a political party’(Kendall, 1975, p. 17).
Although it is true that this philosophy was dominant only in the relatively short period from the turn of the century until World War I, it subsequently left its imprint upon the labour movement and its appeal has not entirely been extinguished.
The labour unrest and factory takeovers of 1968, for instance, evinced echoes of earlier syndicalist strategies.
Maurice and Sellier (1979) draw  comparisons between what they term the ‘charismatic’ character of French unionism, appealing to elements of ‘emotional commonality’with the accent on class struggle, and the more functional (bureaucratic and professionalised) nature of unions in West Germany.
They ascribe the difference to factors such as a more socially homogeneous working class in Germany with less diversification in attitudes, in comparison with France.
Also, they note the more marked occupational stability of manual workers in West Germany as a result of the greater prestige of industrial employment, in contrast to France where the employees' aim on achieving promotion or becoming successful is typically to leave the ranks of the working class and become office workers or independent craftsmen.
These factors help to explain the emergence in West Germany of a more unified and organisationally disciplined trade union movement which, unlike French unionism, accepts severe restrictions on the use of  militancy within the enterprise under the co-determination system.
In fact, in contrast to those countries in which trade unions form virtually a single channel of representation for workers (as in Britain), in West Germany a dual system exists.
The enterprise is the domain of the works councils (Jacobs et al .,
1978) which provide an enterprise-based negotiating partner for management and are restricted by a ‘peace obligation’, whereas trade unions operate in principle largely outside the workplace (see Chapter 4).
We may also note that with the reconstruction of the German trade unions after World War II, following their demise under the Nazi regime, the DGB was founded as a unitary organisation to include members of all occupations and political persuasions.
This contributed to a formal union neutrality and ‘depoliticisation’, although in practice there are strong links with the Social Democrats (Günter and Leminsky, 1978).
As well as the existence of ideological cleavages between unions on political and religious grounds, together with differences of function — as organisations for representation and bargaining, or as a vehicle for mobilising the power resources of the working class unions also differ as between countries on a structural basis relating to industry or occupational boundaries.
These structural differences will now be examined more closely.
Trade Union Structure
Unions may organise according to‘exclusive’ principles, dependent upon their market capacities and resultant ability to erect boundaries, or they may recruit upon an ‘inclusive’basis.
Thus craft unions in pure form are confined to apprentice-served skilled workers and are intended to protect and promote a marketable skill.
(Sometimes occupational unions, which are not confined to apprentice-served workers, are seen as a form of craft union.)
By contrast, industrial unions cover all workers within a particular industry and general unions are completely inclusive in terms of their recruitment, representing a large number of different industries and occupations.
Technology is a major explanation for the establishment of these various types of union.
The early experience of industrialisation (prior to mechanisation) in both Britain and the USA and the emergence of skill patterns associated with it saw the rise and consolidation of craft unions.
Because of the early onset of modern economic development in these two countries workers' experience with industrial capitalism was slower  and the transition period longer than was the case in most of Northern and Central Europe (Kassalow, 1982).
As a consequence, forms of craft unions, with an attendant focus on occupational solidarity and ideas of job consciousness, became well entrenched over many decades.
Complications were, however, introduced into the overall structural pattern with the later growth of unions of other types, such as big competing general unions and white-collar organisations in Britain along with industrial unions in the USA.
In other countries such as Germany and Scandinavia, although craft unions were also foremost in the early stages of union development, their predominance was more short-lived — with the notable exception of Denmark (Gill, 1984).
As far as West Germany is concerned the post-1945 reorganisation of the union movement into just 16 industrial unions made trade union structure in that country the least complex in Europe.
In countries where the onset of industrialisation came later (as in Sweden) increasing mechanisation and mass-production techniques, with easily learned and repetitive tasks, did not provide particular occupations with resources to construct powerful unions.
Instead, semi-skilled mass-production workers looked to industrial and general union structures (Clegg, 1976).
In the case of France, Sellier (1973) has suggested that the tendency towards workers' organisations formed on the basis of craft unionism was hampered by the lack of a manpower surplus as a result of an early decline in birth rates.
His argument is that the motivation to form strong craft organisations to control entry to the trades will be greater in conditions of labour surplus which endanger the market position of skilled workers.
Other factors would also appear to be important in explaining the tendency towards organisation along industrial lines.
In a country such as Sweden where most manual workers (although not necessarily white-collar employees) are organised in industrial unions this seems to be partly a reflection of prior employer organisation on an industry-wide basis (see Chapter 3).
More generally, political influences appear to have been especially important by way of a facilitating role of socialist ideology in broadening the structural form of unions away from concern with narrow and particularistic special interests.
A contrast may be drawn in this respect between the highly fragmented union movements in Anglo-Saxon countries where the historical and ideological connection between socialism and trade unionism was much weaker, and the formation of broad, comprehensive interest organisations on the part of the working class by way of the existence of large industrial unions in those European countries such as Sweden, Austria  and Germany with a strong socialist tradition (Streeck, 1981).
As von Beyme has explained,
The industry principle was realised best in countries where there was a close co-operation between a big Social Democrat Party and a relatively centralised union movement.
Whether there was a direct organisation link between the Party and the unions (Denmark, Norway and Sweden) or only an informal relation (Germany and Austria) was only of secondary importance.
(von Beyme, 1980, pp. 32–3)
In France unions have long been organised predominantly along industrial lines.
National unions exist in each industry for each of several main confederations (national groupings of trade unions), including the communist-oriented CGT, the socialist CGT-FO and the radical (originally Catholic but now secular) CFDT.
These sort of divisions create a markedly different system from the ‘multi-unionism’ which exists in Britain.
Within any given plant French workers have a choice between several unions differentiated on political and ideological grounds rather than by means of any structural principles of organisation.
Similarly, Italian unions have never been organised on a craft or occupational basis (apart from a few exceptional cases).
They are, nevertheless, complex organisations comprising national, vertical unions which organise all workers of the same branch of the economy (with provincial, regional and local sections), together with horizontal structures aggregating all workers and/or vertical structures within each geographic area.
Horizontal linkages have been particularly important in Italy, probably more than in any other European country, as a result of a number of factors.
These include
the late development of Italian industry and the fragmented character of the labour market, the traditionally high level of unemployment, the very political orientation of the Italian labour movement, particularly of CGIL [the major federation]giving great importance to the unity of the working class…and to the pursuit of general goals by the unions.
(Treu, 1981, p. 114)
In a number of countries including France and Italy, it is also apparent that a good deal of prominence attaches to the central union federations.
Kendall (1975, p. 70) notes that ‘the competitive, politically-oriented nature of French unionism, the undeveloped character of  collective bargaining’ endows the national confederations with more power than they otherwise might possess.
In Denmark, Sweden and Norway the trade unions work together in similarly long-established federations called the National Organisations (Landsorganisationen, or LO) which exist not only for manual employees but with separate confederations for white-collar and professional workers.
Ulman (1974a) attributes this predominance of the central federations in relation to their constituent national unions (in contrast to the position in the United States) to greater governmental intervention in the employment relationship in European countries, since a comparative advantage of the federations lies in political activity in direct dealings with various government bodies (Hartman and Lau, 1980).
The prevalent structural forms of a country's trade union movement have a number of important consequences.
A predominance of occupational unions leads to highly fragmented unionism and ideological and religious divisions also make for duplication of union organisation, thereby weakening bargaining potential and often making for difficulties in promoting effective representation of workers in individual establishments.
By contrast, the presence of a relatively small number of unions — even if not entirely structured according to the principle of one per industry at least covering large sections of industry — appears to be associated with markedly fewer inter-union jurisdictional disputes.
This may be illustrated by the contrast between Britain and the United States,vis-à-vis Sweden and West Germany (Windmüller, 1981).
A further comparison between railway workers' unions in Britain and West Germany (Seglow et al .,
1982) has shown that the cleavages between the three railway unions in Britain, arising from the occupational exclusiveness of the drivers and the separate footplatemen's ‘line of promotion’(unlike Germany), has been a notable restraining influence upon the attainment of an integrated approach to pay bargaining to promote the interests of railway workers as a whole.
Outside Europe and the United States, however, the structural features (and consequences) of trade unions in Japan and Australia are of particular interest and will now be considered more fully.
As compared with other advanced economies, a notable feature of the structure of labour organisation in Japan is the prevalence of comprehensive unions at the level of the individual enterprise.
Enterprise unions generally group all regular workers, including white-collar staff, who are employed in an undertaking operated by a single management, but they are not ‘company’ unions and are basically independent of management.
In 1978 there were more than 33,000 unions of this  kind, some 90 per cent of the total, covering more than 12 million members.
Because of the lack of a pervasive craft history, since Japan incorporated advanced mechanisation and new technologies at a comparatively early stage in its development, the unions which were formed were unable to make a sharp separation among job groups a basis for organisation.
Indeed, because job distinctions and jurisdictions within largely self-contained, internal labour markets are very weak, and in the absence of an (external) market based wage system, it was probably inevitable that unions would be established on an enterprise basis.
Within any given industry,
Wages and conditions of work varied from firm to firm.
The employer sought to establish a paternalistic relationship with his workers and would not tolerate attempts by outsiders (e.g. trade union officials) to participate in negotiations.
The workers, for their part, were not conscious of sharing a common interest with the body of employees in the whole industry, and their conditions of employment were hostile to the appearance of any such consciousness.
Such attitudes were conducive to the development of enterprise unions rather than occupational or industrial unions.
(Allen, 1 98 1, p. 84)
This enterprise form of unionism does not create distinct organisations of craft and professional employees, and is therefore associated with an absence of demarcation problems.
Also, because of greater security from the related systems of seniority-based wages and lifetime employment (see Chapter 4) workers are less inclined to resist technological and organisational change or productivity improvements.
A further consequence of enterprise-based unions is that, although they permit a high degree of rank-and-file participation in decision-making, they nevertheless fail to organise large proportions of workers in smaller firms where unionism is discouraged by paternalistic employment relationships.
As Levine (1981) points out, the decentralisation, exclusiveness and high degree of autonomy of enterprise unions (despite their affiliation to industry-wide federations) sacrifice a high degree of labour movement solidarity and leave them open to at least the possibility of employer influence.
In comparison with the countries so far considered some rather different distinguishing characteristics typify the trade union movement in Australia.
Its trade unions have a structural complexity similar to that in Britain as a result of ‘the movement's craft origins, the  subsequent grafting on of semi-skilled and unskilled employees [and]flirtation with industry unionism’(Cupper and Hearn, 1981, p. 25).
However, the development of Australian unions has been markedly and uniquely influenced by the institutional support given to them by the federal arbitration system which has long played a fundamental role in wage-determination and the settlement of disputes (see Chapter 5).
Arbitration not only led to centralised wage-fixing and a high degree of centralised decision-making by both employers and unions, as well as inhibiting the development of a strong shop steward movement, it also fostered a fragmented union movement (Lansbury, 1978a).
Arbitration bestowed legitimacy upon the early trade unions — they were explicitly recognised and the system depended for its effectiveness upon their participation.
Unions became registered, thereby conferring access to an arbitration tribunal, and once registered they were largely protected from the emergence of new, rival organisations.8 As a result, the system of registration led to the early establishment and subsequent continuation of a large number of small unions and, as a secondary consequence, helped to impede amalgamation and union rationalisation.
In 1979 there was a multiplicity of 315, mainly small, unions organising a total union membership of less than 3 million employees.
Many Australian unions have therefore lacked the industrial strength to be able to achieve their industrial aims outside the framework of the arbitration system (Martin, 1975).
Having now examined the objectives and formal structural characteristics of trade unions in market-type economies, it is also necessary to consider their more informal organisation at workplace level since, in many Western European countries during the post-World War II period, there has been a notable growth of bargaining at plant level — often outside official union channels — along with a progressive enlargement of its scope (see Chapter 4).
This has been one reason for the increasing prominence of work groups at local level often demanding greater autonomy and a more active role in policy formulation than that provided by the official union structure.
(In Britain this development may also have accelerated the adoption by firms of multi-divisional forms of organisation, partly as a management control device to raise the level of effective decision-making away from the shopfloor.)
Workplace Organisation
In much of British industry the absence of exclusive bargaining jurisdiction for any one union created a hiatus in the lines of authority and communication between shop stewards and national union organisations.
As a result, shop stewards have been more closely tied to their work groups, and in several industries created spontaneous, coordinated organisations at factory level to take advantage of increased bargaining opportunities during a period of high economic activity.
These shopfloor pressures presented an important challenge to trade unions to which, as dynamic and changing institutions, they responded in a number of ways including attempts to decentralise wage negotiations (as in certain industries in Britain, and to a more limited extent in West Germany).
In West Germany, pressures from the shopfloor movement were also to some extent incorporated by legislation (in 1972) to extend the size and powers accorded to works councils in order to tackle workers' grievances.
In Holland, the unions made structural adaptations to their own organisations to meet the needs of the rank and file.
They retained their existing, geographically-based, local structures but supplemented them with official plant-based groupings, and union plant representatives became recognised.
In this way their organisational structures reflected and incorporated the shifting focus of trade union activity from national, regional and local interests down to the plant (Albeda, 1977).
In Swedish manufacturing industry, workplace bargaining is conducted by the workplace union organisations ('works clubs') which are sub-organisations of the branches of national unions (in contrast to some industries in Britain especially during the 1950s and 1960s workplace unionism is incorporated into the formal union organisation, although the bargaining which it conducts has a somewhat more restricted range of subject matter).
Nevertheless, workplace bargaining in Sweden is highly informal and there is evidence, certainly for the metalworking industry, that the works clubs have acted independently of the branches and headquarters of the national union (Korpi, 1978b).
The unions have attempted to accommodate work group aspirations by allowing local unions a greater say in employment practices and — via legislation — expanding the role and powers of shop stewards, including the right of safety stewards to order a work stoppage in certain circumstances (Forsebäck, 1980).
There have been even more intensive organisational changes within the Italian union movement during the 1970s together with the  development of new structures at plant level.
These were designed to reduce the gap between the formal and informal structures of union representation and lessen the distance between shop stewards and unions (Sciarra, 1977).
In this respect they show interesting similarities to developments in Britain.
Traditionally in Italy the official bargaining structure lay outside the factory and was in the hands of the industry-wide union.
The works council, as the representative structure at the plant level, was formally union-independent and had no powers beyond the handling of grievances resulting from the interpretation of the industry agreement.
In the post-war period, although the union confederations tried to limit organisation at plant level (as being potentially destructive of class consciousness), the councils became increasingly significant.
They were the only source of direct involvement for the rank and file as the channel through which they expressed their demands and discontent.
Consequently, new union-based structures ('factory councils') were developed as organisations of the shop stewards, to be directly representative of the rank and file.
They are regarded by many employers' associations (although lacking official recognition) as a means of encouraging greater stability in shopfloor relations.
As well as workplace organisation, a further level at which cross-national comparisons may be directed is the ‘internal’ government of trade unions and the extent of democratic control by their membership, as opposed to oligarchic domination by the leadership, since unions are formally democratic institutions.
Internal Union Democracy
von Beyme (1980) has pointed to the potential influence of union size and pluralistic divisions upon the degree of union democracy.
The pressures of bureaucracy are seen as being greater within large, comprehensive unions so that fragmented, ideological unions (as in the Latin countries) do not possess specialised staff resources to the extent of more pragmatically-based general unions, and they therefore leave greater room for local and plant initiatives by the membership.
Clegg (1976) maintains that power within unions is concentrated at the level at which bargaining is typically conducted (although this is not the only influence), so that‘industry bargaining concentrates power at the centre [and promotes integrated, bureaucratic union government], whereas bargaining at lower levels disperses it to the regions or branches’(p. 54).
Trade Unions 35
Workplace Organisation
In much of British industry the absence of exclusive bargaining jurisdiction for any one union created a hiatus in the lines of authority and communication between shop stewards and national union organisations.
As a result, shop stewards have been more closely tied to their work groups, and in several industries created spontaneous, coordinated organisations at factory level to take advantage of increased bargaining opportunities during a period of high economic activity.
These shopfloor pressures presented an important challenge to trade unions to which, as dynamic and changing institutions, they responded in a number of ways including attempts to decentralise wage negotiations (as in certain industries in Britain, and to a more limited extent in West Germany).
In West Germany, pressures from the shopfloor movement were also to some extent incorporated by legislation (in 1972) to extend the size and powers accorded to works councils in order to tackle workers' grievances.
In Holland, the unions made structural adaptations to their own organisations to meet the needs of the rank and file.
They retained their existing, geographically-based, local structures but supplemented them with official plant-based groupings, and union plant representatives became recognised.
In this way their organisational structures reflected and incorporated the shifting focus of trade union activity from national, regional and local interests down to the plant (Albeda, 1977).
In Swedish manufacturing industry, workplace bargaining is conducted by the workplace union organisations ('works clubs') which are sub-organisations of the branches of national unions (in contrast to some industries in Britain especially during the 1950s and 1960s workplace unionism is incorporated into the formal union organisation, although the bargaining which it conducts has a somewhat more restricted range of subject matter).
Nevertheless, workplace bargaining in Sweden is highly informal and there is evidence, certainly for the metalworking industry, that the works clubs have acted independently of the branches and headquarters of the national union (Korpi, 1978b).
The unions have attempted to accommodate work group aspirations by allowing local unions a greater say in employment practices and — via legislation — expanding the role and powers of shop stewards, including the right of safety stewards to order a work stoppage in certain circumstances (Forsebäck, 1980).
There have been even more intensive organisational changes within the Italian union movement during the 1970s together with the 
Thus in Sweden, where industry or higher level bargaining predominates, although there are variations as between unions within individual industries, the unions are generally strongly organised and their officials have considerable power.
The central union federation (the LO) is also very strong largely because it plays a significant and continuing role in collective bargaining.
Conversely, in the United States, where collective bargaining takes place mainly at plant level, union government is also very much decentralised and the branches (Yocals') have considerable independence.
In Britain the development of informal, workplace-level bargaining and shopfloor activism since the 1950s led to some (although by no means universal) decentralisation of union government in some of the public service unions for instance but, most notably, in the Transport and General Workers Union (TGWU).
In the latter union these changes ‘were less a surrender of power to the shopfloor than a formal accommodation to the reality of decentralisation which had occurred during the post-war years’(Hyman, 1983, p. 42).
A contrasting perspective, however, which makes little allowance for the effects of collective bargaining arrangements, is the study of democracy in British and US unions by Edelstein and Warner (1975), and that for Mexico by Thompson and Roxborough (1982).
The so-called ‘structural’ approach adopted by these studies concentrates upon the organisational structure of unions rather than focusing upon the activities of their membership.
It looks for formal arrangements such as size and frequency of union conventions or conferences, selection and voting methods for the union executives and the existence of intermediate union governing bodies, that is, the devices which can facilitate, when full advantage is taken of them, the development of power bases independent of union leaders.
The studies tentatively suggest that such union organisational factors are more important influences in promoting internal democracy than are national, contextual characteristics such as the political and industrial relations systems, or the existence of competing union federations.
However, this remains an open question since the research needs to be replicated for a considerably increased range of countries.
In addition to those dimensions of trade union activity which have already been discussed, a further important aspect relates to the significant cross-national variations which exist in the extent of trade union membership.
Despite the fact that many advanced western economies have similar characteristics in terms of a high degree of industrialisation, urbanisation and technological development, they nevertheless display  markedly different degrees of labour force unionisation.
Also, the size of union membership is an important consideration in its own right since it is one of the main indices of the unions' industrial power.
Levels of Trade Union Membership
Some indication of the disparities to be explained is contained in Table 2.1.
This shows overall union ‘density’(percentage of the number of potential union members) by country, in rank order.
There are, of course, problems with measuring and interpreting trade union membership since in the United States, for example , some professional bodies may not call themselves trade unions although they engage in bargaining activities and in France the only source of such statistics is from the unions themselves (or, indirectly, via the support given to the various unions in elections for enterprise committees).
Again, in countries such as West Germany and the Netherlands — despite their fairly low union densities — a higher proportion of workers are covered by the terms of the union-negotiated collective agreements as a result of the legislative provision for the ‘extension’ of agreements throughout an industry (principally in order to protect employers from the effects of low wage competition).
Furthermore, at a disaggregated level corresponding to where collective bargaining is actually conducted in most countries, unions may be well-organised in spite of an overall low average density (e.g. in the USA 70–80 per cent in some areas of employment).
In France the importance and influence of unions are certainly much greater than the low membership figures would imply — in 1975, for instance, a local union section had been established in 46 per cent of all enterprises with more than 50 employees.
In the public sector of the economy, Sellier (1978) has shown that the influence of French unions is particularly strong since the high concentration of workers within that sector reduces the costs of organisation, the bureaucratic tendencies of large undertakings encourage trade union membership, and the official role accorded by government to the unions gives them a greater authority than they possess in the private sector.
(Indeed, in most countries — with the exception of the USA — trade union density is fairly uniformly high in public employment.)
Such qualifications notwithstanding, however, what require explanation are the major inter-country differences in density which are depicted in the table.
In particular, we need to explain the contrast between the high  Scandinavian figures (with Sweden having the highest rate of trade union membership in the western world), and the low levels of unionisation found in the United States and France.
Clegg (1976) has put forward a theory of union density for those countries which rely predominantly upon collective bargaining to regulate employment terms.
Inter-country divergences ‘are explained by variations in the extent and depth of collective bargaining and in support for union [membership]security, either directly from employers or through collective agreements’(p. 27), i.e. the greater the ‘depth’ of bargaining (in terms of the involvement of local union officers and shop stewards) and union support, the higher the density.
In this approach the high level of unionisation in Sweden is not the result of any cultural propensity on the part of the Swedish population (because of its ethnic homogeneity) to seek objectives by way of interest group organisations — a factor which Adams (1975) notes has sometimes been suggested by way of explanation.
Rather, not only does Sweden have the widest coverage of collective bargaining for manual and white-collar employees, along with well-developed workplace organisations, but most importantly member firms of the centralised employers' body support trade union membership and encourage employees to join and remain in the union.
As early as 1906, after a period of intense industrial conflict, an agreement was reached (the ‘December Compromise’) on the membership issue between the union and employer central federations.
In return for the unions' consent formally to acknowledge managements' prerogatives of decision-making at plant level, employers would recognise the right of workers to join unions and would not discriminate against them  for doing so.
Yet employers were not prepared to give similar support to organisations of white-collar and professional employees.
Indeed, they vigorously opposed their unionisation.
Therefore, the catalyst helping to promote high density among salaried staffs was government support in the form of legislation since 1936 guaranteeing the right of association and negotiation to white-collar as well as manual employees.
In contrast to Sweden, at the bottom end of the union membership table a country with a comparatively low (and declining) overall density is the United States.
The explanation cannot be solely the fact of differences in labour force structure (a higher proportion of white-collar employment where unions have generally found greater difficulty in recruitment) since, on an inter-country basis, white-collar unionisation itself is also appreciably lower in the United States than in other comparable countries (von Beyme, 1980).
Once again the dimensions of collective bargaining would seem to be important as contributory factors by way of a somewhat narrower extent of bargaining in the USA, as well as employer hostility to trade unionism (especially in the South).
Moreover, to achieve recognition within the legalistic and decentralised bargaining system in the United States a union needs to win a majority vote in a ballot, and although perhaps 40 or 45 per cent of the employees in a given enterprise may desire union services the union fails to achieve recognition because of the unwillingness of the majority of their colleagues to opt for unionisation.
Consequently, because non-recognised unions are of little benefit to employees, there is less incentive to join.
(In European countries with industry-wide or regional agreements it is not uncommon for a union to represent less than a majority of workers within any given enterprise.)
In the case of France, also at the foot of the table, the low level of union membership may be explained partly by the deep-rooted ideological divisions within the fragmented trade union movement but more importantly, according to Clegg, because of the late development and lack of depth of collective bargaining whose regulatory effect has been relatively limited.
‘The system is characterised by union pluralism, complexity of the representative institutions at the enterprise level, and freedom to strike at any moment and on any issue’(Delamotte, 1982, p. 327).
Not only has there been strong opposition to trade unionism and lack of support for union security at enterprise level by employers (particularly those in small, paternalistic firms) but trade unions have also not regarded the negotiation of agreements and protection of immediate job interests — certainly at plant level — as  their central concern.
Rather, a contestative stance towards the employer coupled with political action has ranked highly in their strategy.
All this has no doubt limited the perceived usefulness of union membership to workers.
Other factors may also have been important in France.
The low capitalisation of industry together with its subordinate place to agriculture until fairly recently (and an early development of the service sector of the economy) has tended to limit workers' bargaining power, and diversification made for greater difficulties of organisation.
It has also been pointed out by Kendall (1975) that the original 1936 legislation on union rights within the enterprise gave the ‘most representative’ unions in the plant the right to bargain, which was not necessarily the majority union.
This allocation of bargaining rights to minority unions in some cases (thereby institutionalising union pluralism) may also help to explain the chronic weakness of union organisation in France over a long period.
As well as the influence of collective bargaining, a further thesis put forward to help explain more general inter-country membership differences relates to the effects of concentration of capital.
Stephens (1979) claims that in the Scandinavian countries, whose industrial structure (in contrast to the United States and, especially, France and Germany) is characterised by a small number of highly concentrated oligopolistic employers, to be able to operate effectively unions must organise a higher proportion of the labour force.
Under these conditions it is necessary to organise all employers operating within the same market to preclude the possibility of a wage increase secured at one firm adversely affecting its competitive position, and therefore employment.
Having considered possible explanations for some of the major inter-country differences between the levels of union organisation at a particular point in time it is also useful to examine the related question of the factors which help to explain the year-to-year growth and fluctuations in union membership over the course of time.
Union Growth
Much of the work in this area has been done by economists whose approach is based upon the hypothesis that workers will join unions if the expected benefits and returns from the services which unions can provide — in the form of relative wage gains, taking up grievances, access to specialised information and the like — exceed the expected costs.
These costs comprise not simply membership dues but also such factors as the possibility of employer hostility and retaliation (in the form of job loss or victimisation) as a result of taking up membership.
Most of the early studies on the causes of union growth related it primarily to the influence of the business cycle and its key components, including employment, industrial production and price changes.
It was claimed that union growth was positively correlated with business prosperity, increasing when it was good and falling when it was bad.
A notable early study of union growth which employed data relating to changes in general business conditions for France, Germany, England and the USA over the period from the 1890s to the 1930s was that of Davis (1941).
He was able to show that fluctuations in union membership appeared to be determined, at least in part, by fluctuations in economic conditions.
Nevertheless, he emphasised that ‘a mere analysis of economic conditions does not suffice for an adequate understanding of the ups-and-downs of unionism’(p. 627).
In addition, he pointed to the influence of union leadership which can have a decisive impact on union  membership growth via the policies and organising techniques which are adopted, and governmental encouragement which may also become a major factor in promoting union growth.
The main contemporary study of union growth which utilises international comparisons is the model derived by Bain and Elsheikh (1976).
This is tested against empirical data from four countries — the UK, USA, Sweden and Australia.
The general form of the model employs the rate of change of prices (ΔP), the rate of change of wages (ΔW), the level and/or rate of change of unemployment (U or ΔU), together with the (lagged) level of union density (D&subt-1;) as determinants of the proportional rate of change of union membership (ΔT), i.e.  with the anticipated positive (+) and negative (-) influences shown in brackets.
It is contended that for union growth to take place workers require both a ‘propensity’ to join a union and the ‘opportunity’to become a member.
The explanatory variables which are utilised are expected to have an impact on union growth because they affect the opportunity and/or the propensity of workers to join a trade union.
Briefly, the rationalisation for their inclusion is as follows.
Rising prices are perceived as a threat to living standards, so that the faster prices are  increasing the more likely are workers to wish to join a union in order to maintain their standards of living.
Also, in so far as price rises are a reflection of business prosperity, they may also favourably affect the opportunity to organise.
This is because employers may be more willing to concede worker demands and grant trade union recognition when any resultant higher labour costs can be passed on to their customers in the form of price increases.
Secondly, a wage-change variable is included in addition to a price variable since it is hypothesised that workers may seek to unionise not only to defend existing standards of living but also to attempt to improve upon them.
‘Hence, when money wages are rising, workers may, rightly or wrongly, credit such rises to unions and hope that by beginning or continuing to support them they will do as well or even better in the future’(Bain and Elsheikh, 1976, p. 64).
A further variable, unemployment, is presumed to influence both the opportunity and the propensity to unionise.
In conditions of high unemployment, employers, having relatively increased bargaining strength, may be in a better position and be more willing to oppose trade unionism.
At the same time unemployment is likely to reduce the propensity of unorganised workers who are in work to become unionised for fear of antagonising their employer.
It may also affect the propensity of workers who become unemployed to remain union members, since the cost of membership becomes relatively more expensive and any collective bargaining advance which the union secures will have little relevance for them.
Finally, it is anticipated that union membership growth will also be affected (negatively) by the existing level of union density because of the ‘saturation’, or upper limit, effect.
Union organisation tends to take place first among groups of workers who are the easiest to organise and, as union density rises, the greater the difficulty of increasing membership still further.
Although it might be thought that it would be difficult to capture the phenomenon of union growth across a number of countries on the basis of a single behavioural equation of this kind without making allowances for additional socio-political factors, or resorting to ad hoc explanations for individual countries, in fact the model performs surprisingly well.
When tested initially for UK data over an 80-year period (1893–1970) all the explanatory variables are statistically significant and have the expected (positive or negative) signs and the model is stable over time, i.e. the same factors explain union growth in various sub-periods.
For the entire period it accounts for some 70 per cent of the year-to-year variation in the rate of change of aggregate  union membership.
However, in attempting to ascertain the applicability of the model to other countries, in order to strengthen confidence in the results, it is recognised that instead of simply applying it to them mechanically, some account needs to be taken of prevailing differences in their industrial relations systems.
Nevertheless, it was found that only one modification to the basic specification of the model was required.
Allowance had to be made in the USA and Australia (though not in Sweden) for the impact on union growth of government action.
In the United States union membership from the mid-1930s to 1947 was undoubtedly stimulated first by the 1935 Wagner Act and later by the actions of the War Labor Board in promoting collective bargaining and union recognition (see Chapter 5).
Therefore, an additional variable is added to the equation to take account of this influence.
The results of testing the model over a period from the late 1890s to 1970 are satisfactory for all the variables employed, and the government's impact upon union growth is shown to be highly significant.
Also, as we noted earlier, in the case of Australia government arbitration directly promoted the formation and growth of unions.
Indeed, in the three decades from the turn of the century when the compulsory arbitration system was introduced the proportion of union members in the workforce increased sevenfold from 6 per cent in 1900 to 47 per cent by 1927.
This was a figure unmatched anywhere else in the world at that time (Martin, 1975).
Allowance for this favourable influence from the early introduction of arbitration is included in the equation, and it is further anticipated (correctly) that in the case of Australia the price-change variable will be statistically insignificant in accounting for union growth.
The reason is that the arbitration system to a large degree adjusts wages in line with the cost of living thereby reducing the ‘threat’ effect which rising prices would otherwise pose to workers' living standards.
Similarly for Sweden, three of the four variables are found to be significant — although the results generally for that country are less satisfactory than for the other three.
In Sweden, as in the USA and Australia, the government attempted to foster union growth by legislation.
The major intention of the 1936 Act, however, was specifically to encourage white-collar unionisation, and Bain and Elsheikh (1976) find no evidence that it had a significant impact upon aggregate union growth.
Therefore, in applying the model to Swedish data (as with union growth in Britain) it was not felt necessary to take account of government promotion of unionism.
Of the four basic variables utilised, the rate of change of wages is not significant and has  the wrong (negative) sign.
The authors speculate that this may be because, with a centralised collective bargaining system which is fairly remote from the workers, ‘the less conscious they will be of the gains achieved, and hence the less likely they are to be credited to union activity’(p. 109).
This explanation is not entirely convincing, however, since it overlooks the important industry and workplace negotiations which also take place.
In addition, the model employing Swedish data is not stable over time so that the relationships pre- and post-1939 are significantly different — again it is suggested because of the way in which the Swedish bargaining system became more centralised after 1939.
More generally, we may conclude that the Bain-Elsheikh study provides support from several countries for the effects of economic conditions and the influence of public policy upon union growth.
The model does not claim to include all the possible determinants of union growth, and because it is concerned with the rate of change (rather than the level) of union membership influences such as the structure of the labour force, which exhibit little annual variation, are excluded.
There are, however, a number of valid criticisms which can be made of the study.
These include conceptual problems such as the lack of theoretical explanation for the assumed ‘credit’ effect of money-wage increases to trade unions by potential members and the possibility of a two-way relationship between wage increases and union growth which, unless allowed for, could limit confidence in the results.
Furthermore, given that much of trade union growth in the four countries over the post-World War II period has been in the white-collar field there are difficulties in relating aggregate union membership changes to changes in the wages of manual workers only.
Although the authors do not deny the importance of the social and political environment in which unions operate, as well as the effects of economic forces, these influences are dealt with in only a limited way.
Little is said about workers' consciousness (awareness and interpretation of their situation), or the social and political impulses towards joining the labour movement which have undoubtedly been important in Western Europe.
(At particular historical periods political ideology helped provide a unifying force for labour, instilling a sense of perspective and purpose beyond the mere rectification of current grievances.)
In France, for instance, a country not included in the comparison, the bursts of activity and membership growth — interspersed with long periods of relative dormancy — seem to have depended more on political events (as in 1936, 1947, and post-1968) than upon changing economic circumstances (Sellier, 1978).
Summary
This chapter has examined from a comparative standpoint a number of important characteristics of trade unions, mainly in relation to industrialised, market-type economies.
In these countries unionisation emphasises the (collective) situation of employees as sellers of labour power, counteracting the bargaining strength of the owners of capital who direct their labour.
Beyond such common features, however, it has been shown that there are marked diversities between national labour movements as well as within them, in relation to their goals and objectives (broader or narrower conceptions), structural features, size and membership densities.
These differences have multiple causes since trade unions are responses of workers to the varying economic and political features of the environments in which they operate.
Ideology has been one major determining factor in the strategic approach adopted by unions.
In some continental European countries, where workers were confronted with deep-seated social and political inequities, unions have been markedly political in orientation, seeing themselves as committed and class-oriented agents of social change on behalf of all workers, and not merely union members.
By contrast, in the United States (and some would argue in Britain), greater emphasis has been placed upon the attainment of shorter-term economic gains for their own members, although broader considerations of social justice and ‘movement’ are by no means absent.
The importance of the formative stages of unionism in determining structural features (which are themselves closely related to function and objectives) and in giving direction to subsequent developments has also been emphasised.
Thus in countries where industrialisation and the establishment of the trade union movement came somewhat later this facilitated the organisation of industrial rather than craft unions and, in turn, often contributed to a strongly socialist influence over the labour movement.
Also in Western European countries social and political impulses towards joining a trade union have been important as well as any individualistic evaluations of the relative economic benefits and costs of membership.
This may help to explain why in models of the historical determinants of trade union growth which concentrate solely upon economic variables up to 30 per cent of membership growth typically remains unexplained.
Moreover, workers need to be predisposed, or mobilised, to take advantage of the opportune environmental conditions for unionisation which arise.
These conditions can include not only economic factors but also  government encouragement and the willingness (or otherwise) of employers to recognise and negotiate with them.
Employer policies in relation to trade unions, together with the more general role of employers and their organisations in industrial relations, are considered in the next chapter.
Further Reading
A general introductory survey of trade unions which includes much comparative material is the short book by Jackson (1982).
Kendall's (1975) study of the European labour movement provides a detailed treatment, and a shorter analysis of trade union development in the pre-1939 period is contained in Geary (1981).
For the USA, Australia and Japan a useful source is the book on trade unions in developed economies edited by Owen Smith (1981), and on France there is an excellent chapter by Meyers in Blum (1981).
Cross-national analytical studies of importance are Clegg (1976) and von Beyme (1980), whilst there is a stimulating chapter on diversities within national trade union movements by Cella and Treu in the symposium edited by Blanpain (1982b).
A fascinating comparative discussion of the sources of divergence between US and British trade unionism (as well as Canadian and Australian) is Phelps Brown (1983).
EMPLOYERS
Employer interests in industrial relations may be promoted by individual firms or undertakings acting singly, by a group of enterprises acting together via an ad hoc body, or by a permanent association of employers to represent their collective interests.
In the United States, although associations for multi-employer bargaining purposes exist in a number of key areas and industries, there are none with the membership density or authoritative stature possessed by many of their European counterparts (Adams, 1981).
In fact, as we shall see, employers in the USA — particularly in the manufacturing sector where enterprise-level bargaining and large corporations predominate — have felt less need for association with other employers for negotiating purposes, while in Britain over the past two decades there has been a trend towards the adoption of company-centred industrial relations policies rather than continued adherence to the norms laid down by an association.
This tendency has been especially marked within large establishments in the engineering and chemical industries, although multi-employer bargaining by means of an employers' organisation still remains the predominant pattern in highly competitive industries with low capitalisation and a high ease of entry such as clothing, construction and printing (Sisson, 1984).
It is therefore necessary to consider on a cross-national basis for industrialised market (or mixed) economies the genesis and evolution of employers' associations, external to the firm or enterprise, which have typified collective bargaining arrangements with unions in most Western European countries.
Equally, as in the USA and Japan especially, where bargaining is conducted mainly inside the undertaking and employers negotiate separately with union representatives, we shall need to consider aspects of industrial relations management within the individual undertaking itself.
Even in these countries, however, although employers' organisations may not be direct bargaining institutions they can still play an important role in industrial relations by helping to achieve a degree of cohesion among employers through their coordinating and advisory functions.
In Japan the influential Federation of Employers' Associations (Nikkeiren) draws up wage-bargaining guidelines which are often worked out by bodies where the major undertakings that will apply them are represented.
We shall see that employers are key actors within industrial relations and that they possess a considerable margin for defining their own policies which are not wholly determined in response to the actions of unions, or to economic and political pressures.
Employers' Associations and their Development?
Where the main impetus towards collective action on the part of employers related to the regulation of trading and commercial matters what are now called trade associations were set up.
If, however, a clear distinction could be established between such economic interests and social and labour policy matters then employers' associations were formed — as in the Nordic countries, and Germany and Switzerland.
They would undertake responsibility for all aspects of the employment relationship including trade unions and government legislation relating to labour matters.l Sometimes the two functional concerns were closely linked,
[since]the aim of achieving a strong competitive position in international markets, or at least the concern not to be at a disadvantage in comparison with competitors in other countries was one of the chief arguments advanced by some of the first employers' associations against proposals for social reforms through protective labour and social legislation.
(Windmüller, 1984, p. 2)
In France trade associations dealt both with ‘economic’ and ‘social’matters, although, as far as industry-wide relations with trade unions were concerned, organisation among employers remained greatly underdeveloped until well after World War I. At confederal level the central (peak) organisation, the CNPF, also combined the functions both of an employers' and a trade association from the time of its establishment in 1919, as did the Confindustria in Italy.
By contrast, the central bodies in Sweden and West Germany (the SAF and BDA) are exclusively employers' associations.
For individual industry organisations a further important consideration in this respect concerns the nature and characteristics of the particular industry itself.
In the building industry, not only in France but also in Sweden, West Germany, Italy, as well as in Britain, the main body was (and still is) both an employers' and a trade association since it is not easy to separate the negotiation of wages from matters  such as agreed arrangements for contract tendering.
Conversely, in the case of the metalworking industry in all these five countries the main body is exclusively an employers' association, since the great diversity and heterogeneous product range of the industry (basic steel, cars, electrical equipment, etc.) precluded representation via a single trade association.
Although dual employer structuring may be common in some industries, nevertheless our main concern is more specifically with the origins and development of employers' associations themselves, which will now be delineated.
The historical development of associations concerned with the employment relationship during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries may be explained as a negative response on the part of employers to accommodate the external challenges which confronted them on the basis of three broad sets of factors.
The objectives were first to counter the rapid growth of trade unionism which was taking place with the acceleration of the industrialisation process.
Secondly, to stimulate employer alliances for purposes of market regulation, especially in those industries with competitive product markets as a means of regulating wages and thereby helping to stabilise market conditions.
And thirdly the inducement in some countries for employers to federate was as a result of actual or threatened state intervention in the employment relationship, or sometimes because of the growing complexities of the legislative framework under which employers had to operate.
Each of these factors will be examined below.
There is no doubt that the early growth of trade unionism was a major influence in establishing the possibility of a cohesive bond between undertakings which otherwise would have been difficult because of their commercial rivalry.
Thus in France a quickening movement favouring patronal associations in the 1890s was in part a defensive response to a trade union movement which was about to adopt an ideology of radical syndicalism that appeared more threatening.
There was also a felt need for mutual protection against the changing nature of strikes, which were becoming organised and coordinated rather than being spontaneous reactions (Oechslin, 1972).
A central employers' body in Austria was similarly formed to resist working-class agitation after the ground had been prepared by a manufacturers' strike indemnity association.
In Sweden employers' associations were set up as a counter-mobilisation to the growing organisational strength and apparent centralisation of the trade union movement.
In particular, the 1902 general strike there accelerated the creation of a central employers' organisation to provide financial assistance to strike-bound  firms (Forsebäck, 1980).
Further, in the case of Australia, employers' associations were established partly to counter and present a united front against the rapid expansion of trade unions (Ford, 1980).
In Britain, also, the intention was ‘to establish a countervailing power to the growing effectiveness of unionism’(Yarmie, 1980, p. 212).
The genesis of employers' associations, however, was not only as a response to trade union growth and militancy because to some degree it was, in addition, a reaction to economic pressures.
The impetus for employers to associate was particularly marked for those undertakings which operated in highly (and often increasingly) competitive product and factor markets, provided that most of the market could be covered.
Association bargaining could prove a means of enhancing market control in labour-intensive industries since wages could be taken out of competition as between employers themselves.
Thus in Israel associations were formed on an industry-wide basis which usually coincided with product and labour markets (Shirom and Jacobson, 1975).
In the Japanese textile industry, long-standing employers' organisations were equally active in regulating employer competition for labour and in fixing labour standards — even at a time when the supply side of the market was little affected by trade unions (Taira, 1973).
It has been argued by Johnston (1962) that in Sweden, however, it was not so much the benefits of having uniform wage levels which were the major attraction of association, rather, it was the negative purpose of employers being able to present a united front to prevent the unions from ‘whipsawing’ individual firms (see Chapter 4).
More generally under association bargaining it has been shown that
the employer is not only provided with maximum assurance that his competitors will make the same settlement that he does; he is also assured that his competitors will be shut down…when he is shut down, so that he need not reckon on a permanent reduction in market share when calculating the costs of a strike.
(Ulman, 1974a, p. 104)
These considerations have been used to help explain the prevalence of multi-employer (association) bargaining in non-manufacturing industries in the USA such as trucking, construction and retailing which are characterised by a large number of small- and medium-sized firms operating within highly competitive and often localised markets — conditions which favour common settlements.
Where competing firms are small they may wish not only to help regulate competition in the  product market by joining together, but also to protect themselves against a marked inequality in bargaining power, since they are too small to be able to deal effectively with the trade unions unaided.
Conversely, large establishments may be reluctant to join since they will be more self-sufficient for bargaining purposes and less dependent on the services and support which an association can offer.
They may also wish to avoid the possible constraints of association membership if they enjoy lower unit costs as a result of economies of scale or capital intensity so that they can make wage concessions which might jeopardise the existence of smaller enterprises.
Therefore, very large firms which have secured a degree of market dominance will often prefer independence or, where they do retain formal employers' association membership, may have ‘nonconforming’ status whereby they are not required to follow the terms of a national agreement and disputes procedure (such as a number of firms in the Chemical Industries Association in Britain, including ICI and Glaxo).
Yet it can be argued that large size and a high degree of industrial concentration of capital tend to assist the organisation of employers by making agreements between them easier to secure.
Ingham (1974) maintains that this was the case in Sweden where strong, centralised employers' associations could develop as a consequence of the domination of a narrow and specialised export market by a small number of large-scale employers who had interests in common.
Also in Germany it has been claimed that cartelisation (reflecting the later date, and a particular mode, of industrialisation) gave rise to strongly structured employers' organisations which attained an authority over their members that was never to exist in the smaller diversified and undercapitalised industrial enterprises in France (Maurice and Sellier, 1979).
It would appear, therefore, that although large size may well reduce the propensity of firms to organise into associations it can enhance their opportunity to do so should they wish.
They could find it easier to come to an agreement to support each other during a lock-out for example, because they would have sufficient financial resources to enable them to survive periods of inactivity.
Moreover, given that such firms will wish to attain stable parameters for future planning within the undertaking over extended time-horizons, in order to reduce uncertainty, the need to secure market regulation will not be the only motivation to associate.
There may also be a need for more predictable and controlled behaviour on the part of the labour force, particularly in relation to the calling of strikes; that is, a desire for labour, as well as for market, regulation and control.
In this respect the associations can  try to ensure that disputes are processed in an orderly way (to promote stability) through the imposition of an industry procedure agreement.3
In addition to the factors already discussed, the main stimulus to employers' organisation in a number of countries appears to have been less that of a counter to growing union power, or an attempt to achieve market or labour force regulation, and more a response to what was perceived as a threat to common employer interests arising from increasing state intervention.
This was true to some extent in France where, by the turn of the century, it was necessary to articulate more forcefully to the government employers' opposition to labour legislation in view of‘the apparent receptivity of lawmakers to demands from Socialists and organised labour for assistance’(Kuisel, 1981, p. 20).
It was especially notable in the case of Holland where early employer alliances had been forged for pressure-group purposes with a view to opposing the introduction of new social policies and labour legislation.
With the advent of such legislation after World War I the creation of a central employers' association fulfilled the need for an authoritative spokesman to represent employer interests before the legislature.
At industry level there was also a demand by individual firms for association services and technical assistance in applying and interpreting the legislation since ‘most employers had neither the economic strength nor the managerial skills…to cope by themselves — and simultaneously — with the unions and government apparatus’(Windmüller, 1967, p.49).
In Japan during the 1920s expanding employers' associations also became active in opposing government labour policy.
They delayed revisions of the Factory Law which were aimed at strengthening protective measures for workers and they effectively opposed government attempts to grant legal recognition to trade unions at that time (Taira, 1973).
At an even earlier date in Australia, the development of employers' associations had been facilitated by government intervention and by the increasing complexity of the legislative, labour-management framework (see Chapter 5).
In that country the original intention was to oppose the compulsory arbitration system which employers had regarded as a fundamental challenge to management rights, and subsequently to disseminate information and advice to association members ‘in interpreting the maze of awards, classifications and legislation that the system was producing’(Plowman, 1980, p. 253).
It is apparent from these factors that, although it is sometimes assumed (by drawing on the basis of US experience, for instance) that the main driving-force behind the establishment and growth of  employers' associations is related to market or ‘economic’ factors, wider international evidence suggests that a more eclectic explanation is required.
Jackson and Sisson (1976, p. 319) have warned against ignoring ‘the processes which mediate the effects of economic forces upon actual behaviour.’
For one thing, employers' behaviour both in the USA and Sweden was profoundly influenced by what they perceived as the threat posed by unions to their ability to manage.
Furthermore, the juxtaposition of particular historical, political events with economic forces often seems to have been decisive in stimulating defensive reactions by employers.
In Sweden there was the 1902 general strike for manhood suffrage and in Germany, during a period of anarchist violence, the 1904 Crimmitschau strike had a critical influence on employers and accelerated the trend towards their organisation (Puysegur, 1951).
Certainly, it was the effects of such rising social tensions and widespread industrial conflict which motivated the giant Siemens company in the electrical engineering industry to join the metalworking employers' association (Homburg, 1983).
In France Sellier (1978) has pointed out that the (late) appearance of employers' organisations oriented towards labour rather than commercial interests, in 1919 and again in 1936, corresponded to two periods of social crisis and state intervention towards resolving it.
A confederated employers' organisation was set up in 1919 at the behest of the state which wanted a partner for the application of the new law on collective wage agreements.
European-North American Contrasts
The role of political pressures such as these as a major influence upon the development of employers' associations has been emphasised by Adams (1981), who puts forward a theory to account for the broad differences between Western Europe and the USA both in the extent of organisation among employers themselves and in their behaviour towards trade unions.
He notes that in Europe employers generally have formed associations and have been willing to accept trade unions, whereas in US industries, especially in manufacturing, employers have pursued more independent policies and their attitude towards unions remains at best, as Thompson and Moore (1975) have shown, one of grudging tolerance, if not of open hostility.
Adams maintains that these observed variations may be traced historically to differences in government action.
After the 1880s European unions expanded their membership among the ranks of the unskilled.
Many of these worker organisations also embraced a class philosophy, were centralised in structure and had links with Labour or socialist parties.
In Germany, for instance, important unions initially grew out of the socialist political movement itself, but they failed to achieve recognition in heavy industry because of employer resistance to the whole idea of joint regulation of employment which was interpreted as a political challenge to employer power and authority.
The position in other European countries was similar and, with exceptions such as Sweden and Britain, the unions were unable by their own devices to force employers to seek an accommodation with them.
At the same time, however, in response to the growing political power of labour, governments began to pursue a more conciliatory approach towards the labour movement.
Instead of openly siding with employers they instituted a rather more even-handed policy intended to bring labour and management together to regularise their relations.
Pressures began to be put on employers to recognise and negotiate with unions.
As a result employers came to reappraise their previous strategy of attempting to contain unions by means of active opposition since that was more likely to result in increased government intervention to facilitate recognition.
In any case, as has been shown elsewhere, ‘total suppression of trade union activity without the help of the state was impossible’(Jackson and Sisson, 1976, p. 311).
Thus employers came together for mutual support since labour's (political) goals posed a threat not merely to individual employers but collectively to employers as a class.
Moreover, in view of the government's stance, their new associations began to recognise and establish on-going relations with unions on an industry or regional basis — although they continued strongly to oppose a union presence within the enterprise in order to maximise their own control.
By way of contrast, the situation in the USA was quite different.
There, the mainstream of the labour movement was content to confine its challenge to employers to the economic sphere and in the absence of any socialist party alliance no serious political challenge was posed.
Employers, therefore, had less reason to associate for defensive purposes since although trade unionism did represent a challenge to employers' power to manage ‘it was manifest as a threat to specific employers in specific industries at specific times and places rather than as a general threat to employers as a class’(Adams, 1981, p. 286).
It is true, however, that for US employers direct control of the workplace  was crucial, and many of them fought unionism with every weapon at their command.
The difference in their market situation was also important in explaining their opposition to unionism, since US manufacturing employers concentrated upon standardised products sold on price — which had to be kept down (Phelps Brown, 1983).
In industrial relations within the major steel industry the most striking difference between the United States and Britain in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was undoubtedly the behaviour of employers (Holt, 1977).
As in other US industries technical change was more extensive and rapid than in Britain so that the importance of introducing technical innovation also helps to explain the greater hostility of US employers to (craft-type) unions.
In the US steel industry not only did employers control a rapidly changing technology but the small number of very large firms which existed possessed vast financial resources.
Also, employers were uninhibited by political constraints, unlike their counterparts in Britain, a country in which the working class was politically more potent.
As a result, US employers were adamant in their determination to resist efforts to unionise their steel mills.
In fact, more generally it has been shown that the most important single cause of violence in labour disputes in the USA during the early years of the twentieth century, involving at least 700 deaths and several thousand serious injuries, was the denial of union recognition for purposes of collective bargaining (Taft and Ross, 1979).
In the United States government support for organised labour came at a later date than in Europe (only in the mid-1930s), and even then it still remained open to employers to try to persuade their own workers (short of using overt coercion) not to vote for union bargaining rights (i.e. they still maintained ‘an ethical mandate to continue with their belligerent behaviour towards unions’(Adams, 1981, p. 287)).
Thus, according to Adams, employers in the USA — unlike those in much of Europe — were not required by government to recognise unions as the legitimate representatives of the working class.
Certainly, employers were not propelled into joining associations since by the time they were required by legislation to bargain with unions US manufacturing was itself organised into sufficiently large company units for employers to be self-sufficient and not to require association bargaining (Thomson, 1981).
Also, in several European countries legislation had been passed to ‘extend’ agreements to employers who were not a party to the negotiations (see Chapter 5).
This, too, encouraged the growth of employers' associations because non-members would then join in order to have a voice in determining bargaining outcomes which affected  them.
In the USA such extension provisions were virtually non-existent.
Finally, independent single-employer (rather than association) bargaining meant that US firms could still continue to deal with their own employees — even if they were now organised into trade unions — rather than be faced with an external trade union body against which they had fought for so long (Sisson, 1984).
In Western European countries, however, by the time of World War I, well-developed and stable associations of employers had become established both at national (confederal) and at industry levels, with the notable exception of France.
Their role and legitimation were further strengthened during the war since governments tended to incorporate the associations in order to assist in war-time economic administration.
As Windmüller (1984) has shown, employers' associations were then further consolidated and entrenched during the interwar period (although there were some marked exceptions) since collective bargaining became institutionalised in this period in many countries.
Similarly, in the post-World War II period more interventionist governments wished to deal with authoritative employers' representatives, sometimes with the aim of promoting greater centralisation in collective bargaining.
Since association (or multi-employer) bargaining became a major part of the industrial relations systems of these countries the specific collective bargaining role of employers' associations now requires more detailed analysis.
Collective Bargaining via Associations
There is no doubt that the growth and authority of employers' associations has had a major influence both upon the development and the direction of collective bargaining in many countries.
In Britain once employers' federations had been established, albeit often in response to trade union expansion and activity, they then proceeded to assume the initiative by redesigning the existing system of industrial relations to their own wishes.
This involved the introduction of centralised procedural agreements for dispute settlement and the associations were also a very significant influence upon the adoption of industry-wide agreements on pay and hours (Clegg, 1979).
Conversely, where employers' associations remained weak and underdeveloped — as in France up to the inter-war period — collective bargaining played a negligible role in setting the terms and conditions of employment, with the result that legislative provisions assumed relatively greater importance.
In Sweden the reaction of employers to the rise of trade unions was also vital in determining the level at which collective bargaining would be conducted.
The fact that employers were organised by industry had a feedback effect on the structure of manual workers' trade unions.
Employers demanded that unions bargain with them on an industry-wide basis and their pressure was critical for the eventual securing of the industrial union principle of organisation.
In more recent times the functioning of Swedish industrial relations has been as much, if not more, dependent upon the centralisation of power within the employers' confederation as upon the unions' peak organisation.
Similarly in the pre-1914 period in Germany the authority of employers' organisations over their members helped the attainment of an earlier recognition of collective bargaining (outside manufacturing industry), 6 in contrast to its much later acceptance in France.
The tight organisational structure of employers' associations both in Sweden and West Germany has also helped to make the lock-out (which is rarely used in most other countries) a potent weapon in contemporary industrial relations to be used, on occasion, against the unions.
In addition, the structure of collective bargaining is an important influence upon the role and locus of decision-making within employers' organisations themselves.
In West Germany where industry-wide bargaining on a regional basis is the most prevalent, industry-based employers' associations and their regional sub-groupings are the important bodies which carry out the major bargaining activities.
In fact, the employers' central confederation (BDA) does not engage in collective bargaining and, although it does provide information and guidance to its affiliates via its collective bargaining coordination committee, its pronouncements on wages take the form of non-binding recommendations.
In the building industry in France, Sweden, Britain and West Germany the fact that the respective employers' organisations are essentially federations is also tied up with the structure of collective bargaining, since in most cases the local or regional organisation was — or is — a bargaining agent (Sisson, 1984).
Although the central confederations of employers' associations are usually much less involved in collective bargaining than are the industry associations, nevertheless in a few countries the peak organisations do play a major role.
In Sweden the negotiation of economy-wide agreements on wages by the union and employer confederations has reinforced the prominent position of the Swedish Employers' Confederation (SAF).
In the Netherlands, as a result of a long history of legislative enactment in socio-economic affairs and close involvement  of unions and employers with government in this area the two national employers' confederations (denominational and non-denominational) also carry somewhat greater weight than their member associations.
This is a consequence of the fact that ‘a central body, like a national federation, is best suited and equipped to represent the employers’ view on any proposed legislative or administrative action' (Bomers, 1976, p. 78).
In Australia under the compulsory arbitration system, the peak employers' confederation (CAI) makes representations before the wage hearings of the Federal Arbitration Commission; and in Israel the central body represents its member firms before the Labour Courts.
At industry level, multi-employer bargaining under the auspices of employers' associations continues to play an important role in Western European countries such as Germany, France, Sweden and Italy.
In the case of Britain, however, and during the last 15 years especially, multi-employer bargaining within manufacturing has declined in favour of single-employer negotiations.
(This shift in bargaining level has, as we noted, been most apparent in the engineering Md chemical industries.)
The reasons for the contrast have recently been investigated by Sisson (1984).
His explanation is not, as is often supposed, the fact that in Britain multi-employer agreements failed to determine actual earnings levels in the workplace, or that employers have come to prefer independent negotiations.
(Interestingly, in the car industry, although Ford has never belonged to an association in Britain nevertheless in Germany it is an active member of the metalworking employers' association and follows the terms of its negotiated agreements.)
Instead, Sisson maintains that the real reason is that in Britain multi-employer bargaining has increasingly been found to be incapable of performing what employers regard as its major function, namely the neutralisation of the workplace from the activities of trade unions.
He therefore views multi-employer (association) bargaining as being principally a political institution rather than an economic one — a contention which now requires further examination.
For the important group of metalworking industries in all of the five countries which Sisson investigates, multi-employer bargaining was established by the parties themselves in Britain and Sweden, and by legislative enactment in the other three, but in response to a somewhat differing challenge from the trade unions.
In Britain it came from the craft unions which, due to the early date of industrialisation, were already well established in the workplace.
The emphasis in agreements was therefore placed upon procedural, rather than substantive, rules designed to uphold the employers' right to manage in the face of  attempted unilateral imposition of working rules by craft unions.
In continental Europe, however, the union assault came not from workplace-based craft organisations but from centralised and more politicised trade unions.
Multi-employer bargaining outside the establishment at regional and industry level — whose detailed substantive agreements were backed by law and left less scope for supplementary bargaining for improved terms — could therefore be a means of continuing to exclude trade unions from the workplace.
In Sweden, for instance, a strong employers' confederation enforced managerial prerogatives from the early years of the present century, prerogatives which were also supported by the legal framework until the law was changed in 1977 (see Chapter 7).
In Britain, however, worker attempts in the 1950s and 1960s to improve upon the minimum substantive terms of employment in more favourable labour market conditions, together with the lack of legally-binding disputes procedures, stimulated the expansion of (fragmented) workplace bargaining over pay and a high proportion of shopfloor strikes.
All of this transcended the frontiers of control and undermined the employers' ability to manage.
The result was that in order to regain control over industrial relations a restructuring and formalisation of ‘domestic’ bargaining, especially wage-payment systems, was needed.
But this reform could only feasibly be carried out within companies and plants by single employers, rather than by multi employer associations.7 Hence, the move towards single employer bargaining in Britain became more firmly established, especially in large firms which had the necessary managerial expertise to undertake such reforms.
There has been an increasing professionalism of industrial relations management in Britain and, as noted by Goodman:
As company size and the internalisation of industrial relations activity have increased many companies have acquired or strengthened their own specialist personnel management function…thus facilitating the pursuit of more distinctive, company-specific employment policies.
(Goodman, 1981, p. 606)
An accompanying development was that, from the 1960s, employers' associations in some important industries changed the emphasis of their role.
From being a central coordinator determining a common line to be followed by all member firms, they became more a centre to which their members might turn for advice and industrial relations services, particularly those relating to the expanding field of labour law  and other consequences of government action such as incomes policy requirements.
Although there has been no mass exodus of member firms from employer bodies, nevertheless ‘employers have used their associations more as advisers than negotiators and have increasingly looked after negotiations for themselves’(Brown, 1981, p. 24).
Not only has a trend towards the internalisation of negotiating activity been apparent in Britain but also in those countries such as the United States and Japan where enterprise level bargaining has predominated labour relations issues have long been handled by the managements of individual undertakings themselves.
Because employers can increase their profits when they have greater control over the labour process it has been suggested that in the USA internal ‘job ladders’ of promotion and wage benefits were developed by managements within some large firms as a deliberate control strategy to counter unionism and increase the dependence of workers on their companies.
Similarly, the emphasis in large-scale Japanese companies has been on the creation of organisation-oriented, bureaucratic policies (emphasising job security, seniority-based promotion, incremental pay scales, etc.).
In that country one of the most salient characteristics of post-World War II industrial relations has been the development of control by professional managements in the larger enterprises.
Also, in Germany firms such as Siemens originally joined employers' associations yet never fully relied on them as a collective means of defending managerial prerogatives and curtailing union activities in the workplace.
The association was not a substitute for, but rather a supplement to, internal company means of labour control (e.g. via a company union)(Homburg, 1983).
Some discussion is needed, therefore, from the limited comparative literature which is yet available, of internal labour control mechanisms at the level of individual establishments and the strategies of managements towards employment relations.
It has been pointed out by Gospel that ‘managers’ themselves cannot be defined simply as being either employers or employees, since for the majority of them their role is (simultaneously) of a dual nature:
On the one hand they are ‘employers of labour’ and managers because of the functions they perform, the authority they possess and the rewards they enjoy.
On the other hand, they are employees in that they do not own the organisation for which they work, they are salaried agents, and they are subject to superior authority.
(Gospel, 1978, p. 363)
In fact, for a number of reasons including changes in the market situation of managers (in terms of narrowing pay differentials and perceived increases in job insecurity) together with the more ready conceding of union recognition for those employed in the public sector of the economy, managerial unionism increased markedly in Western Europe during the 1970s.
‘Middle managers in Britain,cadres in France,Dirigenti in Italy and Leitende Angestellte [senior executive staff]in West Germany joined trade unions in large numbers’(Poole et al .,
1983, p. 426).
In this chapter, however, our concern is with managements' authority functions and their strategies in relation to their workforce.
The term ‘strategy’, as a way of conceptualising management actions, refers to long-term policies pursued by management and it implies, according to one common approach, that management has a choice between alternative possibilities with respect to the best ways of attaining its labour relations objectives — within the constraints set by the external environment.
Thus boundaries to strategic choices will be set inter alia by political and economic forces.
Moreover, as Poole has observed,
the implementation of strategies will in themselves depend greatly upon a series of further conditioning variables such as managerial organisation, patterns of authority within the management hierarchy and, above all, upon the power of oppositional groups (especially trade unions).
(Poole, 1980, p. 40)
Management Strategies in Industrial Relations
A number of typologies of employer strategies towards industrial relations have been suggested with the objectives of securing managerial control over the work process, obtaining the allegiance of the workforce, and negating trade union influence within the enterprise.
On the basis of US experience, Edwards (1979) identified a progression of employer strategies from ‘simple’(direct) control in small firms, whereby arbitrary power to issue instructions and discipline employees is accorded to foremen and supervisors, 8 through ‘technical’ control in which machines set the pace of work, especially in mass-production industries, to a ‘bureaucratic’stage where work becomes highly stratified and employers develop a system of impersonal rules to control workers.
Also, a range of managerial devices designed to enhance worker satisfaction and exclude or counter trade union influence in the undertaking may be introduced including company unions, welfare  policies and paternalism.
Much of the literature in this area has been of US origin, and the more general applicability of such managerial strategies to other countries needs, therefore, to be considered in the light of evidence from cross-national studies.
Gallie's (1978) comparative study of oil refineries in France and Britain highlights important differences in managerial strategies.
In broad terms it was found that British managements had adopted a control system which relied little upon direct managerial intervention and allowed the workforce a greater say in decision-making, essentially as a recognition of the de facto power of trade unions and shopfloor organisation within the industry.
Management could be faced ‘with severe economic losses if it failed to take into account their views, or to win their consent on issues which were felt to be of major importance by the workforce’(p. 314).
In contrast, trade unions in France had too little organisational strength in the workplace to be able to inflict major economic losses on the firm and they were considered to be too ideologically radical to be permitted a higher degree of participation.
French managements were able to exercise a much tighter system of control involving a higher ratio of supervisors to workers together with the imposition of more disciplinary sanctions.
At the same time there was an emphasis upon paternalism to enhance workers' motivation and promote effective work performance which might otherwise have been impaired by this control strategy.
Gallie concludes that the relatively greater emphasis upon authoritarian and paternalistic practices within the French context is not solely a reflection of managerial attitudes engendered by the structural characteristics of industry, as typified by a long predominance of small, family firms in which the employer regarded himself as having a right to exclusive control.
In fact, similar managerial characteristics have continued to prevail in larger, technologically-advanced firms.
Thus in both the French and British refineries industrial relations are ‘firmly locked into the wider institutional patterns of their societies’(p. 182), reflecting the historical development of their social structures and the differing cultural orientations of the actors.
Even within highly automated, and almost identical, sectors of the refining industry no process towards similarity or ‘convergence’ in managerial strategies in the two countries appears to have occurred.
In addition to direct, or personal, control it has also become usual to distinguish a form of control which is incorporated within (impersonal) technological structures.
Such technical control was first developed in  the mechanised, mass-production industries in the United States during the 1890s and early years of the present century, as epitomised in the steel mills.
Because expensive capital equipment and the attainment of a rapid through-put of production were central to this development, ‘the craft skill and judgement of the workers had to be as much as possible superseded, as did the control of workers over the pace of work’(Lazonick, 1983, p. 112).
Profitable mass production necessitated not only employer control over the planning and organisation of work, but also reliable, attentive and loyal workers to perform it.
One management response in the USA was therefore to introduce a range of welfare policies, and employee representation plans, generally known as ‘company unions’.
Similarly, in some of the large industrial enterprises in Germany during the inter-war period with the introduction of standardised mass-production techniques a parallel emphasis was placed upon welfare measures (company housing, provision of leisure activities, etc.) as a means of motivation, promoting integration and worker commitment to the company.
However, in contrast to the situation in the United States and Germany, recent comparative research has shown that both technical control and corporate paternalism failed to become important long-term strategies in much of British industry in the early part of the present century because of a predominant small-firm structure together with the opposition of well-entrenched unions.
In the engineering industry, for example, employers were unable completely to transform work relations towards deskilling and standardised mass production, mainly because they were not prepared to undertake the major capital investment which would have been required (Zeitlin, 1983).
In the car industry, control of the labour process through machine-pacing was also not generally regarded as a viable strategy by British management in the context of the existence of powerful labour organisations at the point of production and a desire to reduce the perceived increasing antagonism of labour to capital.
Instead, productivity improvements and more cooperative attitudes were to be attained by other devices such as wage incentive schemes (Lewchuk, 1983).
A third strategy used to manage and motivate employees as the size of industrial enterprises increased has been the development of bureaucratic personnel policies.
These are characterised by internal company training and promotion systems, complex wage hierarchies, as well as greater job security, since most jobs are insulated from the direct effects of competitive forces in the external labour market.
In the United States during the 1920s, job security and internal ‘job ladders’(i.e. promotion from within the firm) began to be introduced, it has been claimed, partly in order to differentiate (the semi-skilled) labour force and break up the sense of solidarity that united a firm's workers in collective opposition to their employer — and they were to prove particularly effective in forestalling unionism (Edwards, 1979).
In the case of the steel industry Stone (1974) contends that the restructuring of job hierarchies, the creation of internal job ladders and accompanying wage payments did not, in fact, reflect the attainment of technical skills derived from on-the-job training.
Instead, employee loyalty and dependability could be the major factors in securing promotion through the hierarchies.
(With this line of argument, however, it is possible to exaggerate the extent to which the hierarchical division of labour — fostering sectionalism among workers — was primarily a result of deliberate and purposive employer labour strategy, rather than being more an unintended consequence of technological advance.)
A similar strategy of bureaucratisation would appear to have emerged during the inter-war period among Japanese employers, which was to some extent directly influenced by developments in the United States (Taira, 1973).
In order to absorb growing labour militancy, maintain and prevent turnover among their (mobile) key workers, and strengthen their right to manage, employers' labour strategy in the larger enterprises turned to establishing their own training schools and internal promotion ladders.
Where necessary they were also prepared to set up enterprise works committees with employees' representatives, whilst at the same time strongly opposing external industrial or national unions.
By differentiating in a complex fashion its own workforce management from the practices of all other firms, each firm hoped to balkanise the labour market and to tie the well-being of employees to the success of the firm.
(Taira, 1973, p. 174)
In the heavy engineering industry, as well as internal labour markets, Japanese employers also chose paternalistic practices and employee welfare provisions, rather than accept the threat to their power posed by trade unions and collective bargaining (Okayama, 1983).
Nevertheless, the different rewards and promotion systems appropriate to Japanese industry, founded in part upon an acceptance by management of the need to enhance the welfare of all permanent employees, reflect quite different values to those of US management: ‘The example of Japan, therefore, indicates the importance of general social and  cultural factors in influencing the thrust and direction of strategic managerial thinking’(Thurley and Wood, 1983, p. 213).
Conclusions
In this chapter we have examined comparative aspects of the nature and development of collective employers' associations together with the management strategies of individual firms.
In many countries employers' organisations originated, often in periods of cyclical upswings in economic activity, with the intention of providing protection against onslaughts upon the position of employers and the undermining of their prerogatives, especially from trade unions.
Although mainly reactive bodies at the outset, they were not slow to initiate new patterns of industrial relations in countries like Britain and Sweden.
In more recent years provision by the associations of advisory services in labour matters, dispute settlement procedures and legislative issues — as well as pressure-group activities — have all become general, reflecting the increasing complexity of industrial relations and the enlarged role of government.
However, although it is possible to identify a number of common facilitating factors in the development of employers' associations in various countries there are also some important differences both between and within countries, particularly in the extent to which these bodies engage in direct negotiating activities on behalf of their members.
To some extent this has been influenced by the economic structure and market factors in the particular country or industry concerned.
But it also appears to depend upon the extent to which employer control over the workplace is enhanced by multi-employer bargaining rather than by independent, single-firm action.
From the evidence of a 10-country study, Gladstone (1984) notes that the activities, structure and functions of employers' associations do show a good deal of inter country variation, often a reflection of distinctive historical experiences and a particular course of industrialisation with resultant differences in the environment in which a country's industrial relations system has to operate.
Similar observations can be made in relation to the development of management strategies in industrial relations at the level of the individual enterprise.
We have noted similarities in company labour strategies in the USA, Germany and Japan during the inter-war period by way of the introduction of enterprise career structures and  bureaucratic internal promotion systems.
Britain was something of an exception, however, not only because of the slow development of the large corporation and mass-production techniques, but also because of the effects of a long-established, powerful and horizontally-structured trade union movement which opposed such firm-specific practices and internal labour market systems.
In sum, employers are highly significant as actors in their own right and their activities are a critically important variable affecting the direction and development of industrial relations.
Not least, as we have shown, an analysis of the role of employers and their organisations leads to important insights into the structure and dimensions of collective bargaining.
It is this topic which will be considered in the next chapter.
Notes
Further Reading
The most comprehensive international survey of the functions and activities of employers' associations is Windmüller and Gladstone (1984).
A more analytical investigation of a small number of Western European countries and the role of employers' organisations in collective bargaining is Sisson (1984).
Systematic comparative analysis of management strategies in industrial relations has only recently begun, the major work so far being Gospel and Littler (1983) which relates to the inter-war period.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
In many industrialised market economies collective bargaining has become so firmly established that it is sometimes regarded as being virtually synonymous with the prevailing system of industrial relations.
Collective bargaining determines wages and working conditions, and also regulates the relationship between the bargaining parties themselves.
It has been defined as
an institutionalised procedure…of joint determination of the rules to govern the terms and conditions of employment of the workers concerned and the labour-management relationship itself.
(ILO, 1980, p. 25)
In this sense collective bargaining is not only confined to formalised, written agreements between trade unions and employers' bodies, it can also include informal, collective dealings and negotiations at local level, both on wage and non-wage issues, between managements and works councils or similar bodies in countries like Austria and West Germany, even though in the latter country collective bargaining and the co-determination mechanisms are supposed to be kept separate.
Diverse Nature and Functions
Although it is perhaps the single most prevalent aspect of post-war industrial relations systems in advanced capitalist societies (Crouch, 1982a) collective bargaining is in fact a multifaceted institution which, on an international basis, has diverse meanings and functions.
In addition to rule-making, thereby reducing the degree of uncertainty confronting workers and management, it can also be a vehicle for resolving disputes, a power relationship and, where it takes place at enterprise or plant level, it may be regarded as a form of participation for workers or their representatives (see Chapter 7).
Thus in Norway, employers see it as a mechanism providing for industrial peace, whereas according to the CGT in France it is a form of class struggle (Schregle, 1981).
In the USA collective bargaining is viewed almost as ‘the alpha and omega of trade unionism’(Reynaud, 1975).
A different conception  of collective bargaining in terms both of its character and role is applicable in socialist countries with centrally-planned economies.
There, despite the identical name of ‘collective agreements’, it is regarded not as an adversary process but rather as a means of ensuring the full cooperation of management and workers in carrying out the economic and social plans and improving the management of undertakings (ILO, 1980).
Also, in West Germany, Scandinavia, Switzerland and the USA the collective bargaining agreement is a legal contract, whereas in Britain, traditionally,
collective bargaining is not typically concluded by a contract, specifying in detail the future rights and duties of either side but by an understanding [which]must depend on personal relationships and customary usages.
(Burrage, 1972, p. 150)
In the case of Japan collective agreements tend to be notably more general and abstract than their western counterparts, a characteristic — so it is claimed — of the nature of Japanese personal relations in which there is reluctance to have one's rights and obligations closely defined (Hanami, 1979).
In countries where there is a large degree of regulation of the terms of employment by the state, the role of collective bargaining may be correspondingly reduced.
For instance, in many Latin American countries collective bargaining is only a secondary source of rights and obligations in labour relations after legislation (Bronstein, 1978).
Among European countries, in the historical development of French industrial relations the frequent intervention of public authorities gave union struggles a decidedly political flavour.
Instead of bilateral employer-union agreements there developed belatedly a protective labour law which, by the very functions it fulfilled, was a hindrance to the emergence of collective bargaining (Maurice and Sellier, 1979).
Nevertheless, over the past 30 years statutory regulation has diminished somewhat in importance in France and collective bargaining has developed considerably, doing much more than filling the gaps left by legislation.
Collective bargaining is a flexible instrument and can build upon the minimum standards which the law lays down.
Sometimes it has played a pioneering role in bringing about new developments, such as the Renault agreement on the duration of holidays which then became generalised by legislation (Despax and Rojot, 1979).
Similarly, in West Germany collective agreements have on occasion introduced new labour norms which subsequently became generalised  minimum statutory standards.
An example is the ‘social plan’ package of protective and compensating measures for workers made redundant, originally negotiated in the coal and steel industries (Günter and Leminsky, 1978).
In that country legislation also maintains an important position in the setting of norms for industrial relations and working conditions, covering many fringe benefits that could be collective bargaining issues elsewhere.
Moreover, some topics are placed by law within the (co-determination) jurisdiction of the works council, a formally union-independent system of interest representation in which all eligible employees may vote and stand for election regardless of union membership.
The distinction between co-determination and collective bargaining is important in that works councils, as agents of co-determination, are legally forbidden to call a strike whereas unions, as collective bargaining agents, are not (Streeck, 1981).
Nevertheless,de facto , the works council forms the organisational backbone of the union within the plant and, furthermore,
owing to its early introduction in 1920 and also because of the substantial extension of its rights in 1952 and 1972 it was able to evolve into the virtual bargaining monopolist on the employees' side at the plant level, to the extent of being considered by unions as the proper bargaining agent at that level, much more so than in other countries.
(Sorge, 1976, p. 288)
Works councils have been particularly important in securing improvements in working conditions and other non-wage elements since many of these are so specific to individual workplaces that they cannot be regulated by means of a general, industry-wide agreement.
In Belgium it has been argued that there is so much social and labour legislation that there is less room for collective bargaining.
Although it is true that the legal provisions are mostly protective minimum standards which can be improved upon via collective bargaining, the fact remains that collective bargaining itself does not have the same range as might be the case if legal provisions were fewer (Blanpain, 1982a).
It may also appear that the scope for collective bargaining would be more severely curtailed in Australia, where the state-operated system of conciliation and compulsory arbitration has shaped labour-management relations since the turn of the century (see Chapter 5).
Nevertheless, such third-party regulation often incorporates and consolidates employment terms which have already been agreed via prior negotiations between unions and employers.
In this sense the Australian  compulsory arbitration system, although a form of statutory regulation, may also be regarded as part of a collective bargaining system (Clegg, 1976).
The compulsory arbitration system in fact emphasises conciliation, with arbitration by tribunals in the event of failed negotiations.
Bargaining Structure
The regularised patterns of union-management interaction, or the network of institutionalised bargained relationships, is referred to as the ‘bargaining structure’.
Although it may be contended that it is the process of collective bargaining as an ongoing activity which is at the heart of industrial relations, the negotiating process itself has received little attention in international studies (an exception is Smith and Turkington, 1981).
Greater interest has been generated by bargaining structures which, as will be shown, establish the framework for the exercise of power within the labour market.
A number of different dimensions of bargaining structure have been identified.
These include the one or more levels at which negotiations take place, the extent (or coverage) of the resultant collective agreement across different sectors of employment (often termed the ‘bargaining units’), and the scope of bargaining in relation to the range of subjects included therein.
It may be asked, how do these structural arrangements vary across countries? and what are the determinants of the variations and what are their consequences for industrial relations systems?
These questions will be considered in turn.
Bargaining structures within the international context, although extremely heterogeneous rather than conforming to any simple and tidy pattern, may be broadly classified in terms of the level at which negotiations are mainly conducted.
Three modal types can be distinguished:industry-wide , multi-employer bargaining which is external to the firm, as practised in much of Western Europe on wage-related issues;single enterprise or firm bargaining, as typically found in the USA and Japan; and economy-wide systems between trade union and employer central confederations which have been characteristic of several countries, including Norway, Sweden, Denmark and, at times, the Netherlands.
In many countries the terms and conditions of employment are the result of agreements made at two or more different levels.
In France industry-wide negotiation has been the preferred level for wage bargaining, being principally confined to the fixing of  minimum conditions.
Yet since the late 1950s extensive progress on the negotiation of general clauses on working conditions has taken place between the central employers' organisations and large trade union confederations, along with government participation, on an economy-wide basis.
But unlike the economy-wide agreements in Scandinavia, these exclude wages and deal instead with single, specific issues such as employment security or the progressive reduction of the working week (i.e. ‘they deal with problems often dealt with solely by the government and amount to the development of law by collective bargaining’(Meyers, 1981)).
As far as Italy is concerned, the relatively low level of institutionalisation of collective bargaining relations has meant that any matter can now be bargained at any level and any time — for instance, at shopfloor level matters already dealt with in the industry agreement can be negotiated (Treu, 1981).
How, then, may such differences in bargaining structures between national industrial relations systems be explained?
Why do some countries have a structure which is characterised predominantly by either highly centralised or industry-wide agreements, whereas others have far more decentralised arrangements?
There is a large measure of agreement within the literature that the structure of bargaining which becomes associated with a particular country's industrial relations system is not simply the result of chance occurrence or historical accident, but develops instead because of identifiable forces.
In this respect it would appear that the preferences and relative power of the parties are especially important in shaping structure — that either unions or employers, or in some cases the government, want (and if necessary can make) it that way.
Therefore, we now need to examine the explanatory factors which help determine on an inter-country basis each of the three major types of bargaining structure which have been identified.
It needs to be remembered, however, that in categorising collective bargaining arrangements there are marked differences not only as between countries but within each national context as well.
As Goodman has expressed it, in attempting generalisations for European industrial relations which cut across national boundaries
collective bargaining arrangements form a multi-coloured patchwork of different styles, tones and texture which makes all-inclusive comment difficult.
The search for appropriate generalisation and meaningful comparison is hazardous.
(Goodman, 1978, p. 30) Thus in Belgium, although most industrial sectors are covered by  national (industry-wide) agreements providing minimum conditions which can be improved upon, in sectors such as the chemical industry these provisions are almost meaningless since the bulk of collective bargaining is carried out at the level of the plant or establishment (Blanpain, 1982a).
Industry Bargaining
Industry-wide wage bargaining between national trade unions and employers' associations, whether conducted across an entire industry or, as in West Germany, more partially for the regional sub-divisions of an industry, has been the prevailing practice in most Western European countries.
This broadly-based or, as Windmüller (1977) terms it, ‘macro-oriented’ European bargaining structure eschewed formal negotiations at the level of the individual enterprise, in marked contrast to the enterprise-centred bargaining structures in the USA and Japan.
Industry-level bargaining would seem to have corresponded most closely to the preferences of employers and their capacity to organise themselves with a view to protecting market shares and strengthening their own bargaining power.
Contemporary bargaining structures are to some degree a reflection of bargaining patterns established at a fairly early stage of industrial development.
In most European countries collective bargaining, whether conducted at the regional or district level, involved a group of enterprises rather than individual firms or plants.
This early development can often be related to the competitive dimensions (ease of entry and relatively low degree of concentration) within the product market, together with labour market considerations.
Certainly, in Britain much of the impetus for joint action came from employers who were close competitors with each other in the sale of their products.
They were anxious to help regulate competition throughout the product market by establishing uniform rates of pay and standard conditions.
This interest in wage regulation, standardising and setting a floor to wage costs — thereby limiting competitive wage and price-cutting — was especially prevalent in labour-intensive industries where labour costs formed a relatively high proportion of total costs.
As well as the extent of product market concentration a further influence concerned the spatial or geographical concentration found in a number of important industries in Britain.
This also favoured  multi-employer bargaining arrangements because, since the workforces of geographically-concentrated industries are likely to be subject to less variation in local labour market pressures, it was possible to establish and more easily maintain a meaningful wage structure for district, or higher level, employer groupings (Beaumont et al .,
1980).
Moreover, by the time of World War I a widening in the geographical scope of product markets themselves, and a desire to eliminate competition from low wage districts — together with government-setting of many wage awards during war-time — all these influences tended to extend the area of collective bargaining still further to the industry level.
Similar considerations were also applicable in some continental European countries.
In France before World War I, collective bargaining existed only in mining and printing — both being geographically highly concentrated industries in which employers had an obvious interest in organising, in this case in order to avoid ‘whipsawing’ by the union.
In fact, Sellier (1978) attributes the generally late establishment of collective agreements in France (only since the mid-1960s for the bulk of the private sector) partly to the association by employers of workers and unions with revolutionary ideologies, but also to the marked weakness and slow development of employer organisations — the state long remaining the main partner of the unions.
Moreover, if employers had to bargain with trade unions their preference was for multi-employer bargaining at regional or industry level instead of engaging in direct enterprise dealings.
In Holland and several other continental countries the unions' rightful place was very much regarded as being ‘not inside the plant but beyond the gates’(Windmüller, 1967).
In France ‘unions were kept at a distance by the system of industry-wide bargaining which dealt with limited subjects and did not endanger the day-to-day power of management to make operating decisions’(Meyers, 1981, p. 191), although a union presence in the plant was later forced upon management by legislation as one of the consequences of the 1968 strikes.
Industry bargaining was also preferable to employers in Italy since it allowed their associations to maintain a tight control on bargaining activities whilst at the same time freeing the individual employer from direct impact with the union — yet giving him ample leeway to influence his employees from outside union channels (Treu, 1981).
Even in Britain Phelps Brown (1959) has shown that employers did not want to work in ‘double harness’ with their own men, that is to say, they would strongly resent their own workmen claiming to argue as unionists with them in their own works.
A preference by employers that bargaining relationships should  follow the contours of an entire industry, or relate to some other multiple of firms, was often matched by similar union attitudes towards bargaining structure.
They, too, wished to expand the size of the bargaining unit to reduce the possibilities of substitution within product and labour markets.
For those unions organised on a comprehensive, industrial basis it is easy to see that they would be likely to seek bargaining arrangements founded upon the extent of the product market.
According to Chamberlain,
Here the interests of the workers cross occupational lines…[and]if their product must enter into competition with a substitute product made under cheaper working conditions, they will find it difficult to maintain or improve their own circumstances.
If a common agreement blankets all competitors, however, none can secure an unfair advantage by undercutting the labour standards.
(Chamberlain, 1961, pp. 4–5)
By ensuring the general application of minimum wage standards industry-wide bargaining could also prevent workers from competing with one another by offering to work for less.
For Italian unions, in this respect, industry bargaining corresponded originally to a need to unite their scarce resources in order to guarantee uniform minimum conditions of work ‘to an impoverished, fragmented and still mostly agricultural working class, privileging the weak sectors thereof with respect to the elite’(Treu, 1981, p. 135).
For the more numerous, horizontally-structured unions in Britain of the craft-type which crossed industry lines their interest during the nineteenth century lay in obtaining uniformity of conditions for the particular occupation throughout the labour market.
Although, on the face of it, this might not appear to have been conducive to the development of industry-wide bargaining paradoxically such ‘division by occupation promoted bargaining by industry’(Phelps Brown, 1959, p. 362).
Because the various occupations in any one employment would monitor and compare their respective rates of pay, and given that the ability to pay of the employer was the same for all of them, they tended to negotiate a common bargain.
It was more practicable to do this for a district or industry, since firm-by-firm bargaining was precluded for want of suitable union organisation to bring together all employees at the workplace.
In this way the structure of British unions themselves contributed to the growth of industry-type bargaining.
It is true that these original objectives and policies of particular  types of union concerning the labour and product markets of the relevant occupation and industry have subsequently been modified as the unions amalgamated or became more diversified in terms of their recruitment.
Yet they did have an important influence on the evolution of bargaining structure and the characteristic form which it assumed.
In addition to such economic influences, it has been observed that there was also an ideological basis for continental European trade unions' preference for broadly-based industrial bargaining.
As we noted in Chapter 2 many unions regarded themselves as being part of a socialist-oriented labour movement directed towards a fundamental reconstruction of society.
From this viewpoint any highly segmented representation of worker interests in relation to employers, such as via individual enterprise bargaining, had little appeal.
Instead, the unions looked towards wider structures which would advance the interests of all workers in an entire industry, or a territorial subdivision of it, and promote as large a degree of solidarity as possible (ILO, 1974).
Consequently,
the employer tendency to favour the industry-type of bargaining was reinforced by the broad socialist, class consciousness of major European unions which probably led them to favour this approach, since it would engage ‘employers through mass class action’, and also extend protection to a larger part of the workforce.
(Kassalow, 1982, p. 216)
On the basis of the predominance of these industry-wide agreements some observers have suggested that an actual ‘European model’ of collective bargaining may be delineated (Litvak and Maule, 1972; Clarke, 1980a).
This is, however, a somewhat doubtful proposition since not only is it not entirely applicable to the Nordic countries without qualification (nor nowadays within manufacturing industry in Britain), but significant differences also exist even within continental countries, especially as between France and Germany.
We have noted the importance in Germany of the works council as a bargaining mechanism and there are numerous characteristics which have also distinguished collective bargaining in France.
Agreements there have generally been concluded for an indefinite term and (linked with this) no ‘peace obligation’ has arisen by the application of the agreement, in contrast to Germany.
The CGT, for instance, has regarded collective bargaining as no more than a temporary measure of the balance of power between management and unions, enabling the union to obtain  the best negotiating results for wage-earners at a given point in time (Goetschy, 1983).
As a consequence it would appear that ‘strikes are often the most practical means of renouncing an agreement’(Sellier, 1978, p. 222), although recently there have been attempts in France to institute more regularised collective relationships.
In contrast to this first basic pattern of bargaining which has been delineated, industry-wide and multi-employer agreements, we now turn to an analysis of the rationale of single-employer bargaining at the level of the enterprise or plant (not necessarily conterminous) which is typically found in the United States, Canada and Japan.
In the USA it is estimated that about 80 per cent of collective agreements are confined to employees of a single company and about two-thirds are limited to a single plant (Cohen, 1975).
Enterprise Bargaining in the USA
In the United States multi employer or association bargaining at district or regional level was by no means unknown, primarily in industries exemplified once again by highly competitive product markets.
There, the large number of small employers might combine together as a defence against an otherwise predominantly unilateral union imposition of terms.
For the union too multi-employer bargaining was probably the only administratively feasible form in many local product markets consisting of numerous small-scale undertakings.
Multi-employer bargaining makes for simplification of effort in that separate contracts do not have to be negotiated with each individual employer.
Similarly, in industries with casual employment such as building in which employees lacked permanent attachment to a given employer, the union's focus of organisation was the product or labour market rather than the individual firm.
This tendency became even more pronounced as the market widened with improved means of transportation.
For all these reasons multi-employer bargaining came to predominate in non-manufacturing industries and, more exceptionally, elsewhere in the concentrated industries of basic steel and the railways where government intervention seems to have been a decisive factor in shaping the bargaining process (Livernash, 1963).
On the whole, however, the trend in the USA was decidedly against broad industry bargaining arrangements, particularly in the dominant manufacturing sector, typified by large-scale firms, where single-employer bargaining units became the norm (see Chapter 3).
Once more employer influences in favour of a restricted bargaining base were reinforced by congruent considerations on the union side.
Livernash (1963) would even claim that the structure of bargaining in the United States has been primarily determined by union preferences and, unlike the situation in some European countries, employers appear to have exerted only a minimum positive influence.
Unions might favour single-employer bargaining as a deliberate strategy since it would enhance their relative bargaining power in terms of a potential ability to whipsaw individual employers.
In other instances this form of bargaining structure might prevail only as a second-best option because of the union's inability to organise the total product market — a necessary condition for the enforcement of industry-wide bargaining.
Also, in terms of their aims and philosophy most US unions concentrated their attention on practical ‘business unionism’ improvements in the terms and conditions of employment which
were best achieved by organisations that held secure positions inside the enterprise, and unlike their European counterparts the unions in North America insisted on establishing their presence in the plant itself and not merely outside it.
(ILO, 1974, p. 95)
As well as the interests and objectives of the bargaining parties themselves, an additional influence favouring single-employer bargaining structures in the USA relates to the role of state policy.
Certain kinds of employers' combinations seem to have been hindered by antitrust legislation and this may help to explain the generally low level of organisation among employers.
A more important factor, however, has been the provision of government support for collective bargaining.
In the United States the 1935 Wagner Act was the watershed for trade union recognition and protection of employee collective bargaining rights, particularly in the mass-production industries of automobiles, steel and rubber.
One feature of the Act was the principle of majority rule for electing the employees' bargaining representative which would then be granted exclusive jurisdiction as the negotiating agent for all the employees in the.
bargaining unit.
The important point in this respect is that the legislative rules introduced into industrial relations emphasised the establishment of bargaining relationships plant-by-plant and enterprise-by-enterprise rather than on any wider basis.
In the case of Canada, the 1944 legislation was patterned on the Wagner Act and introduced certification processes compelling employers to engage in collective bargaining.
Furthermore, Labour Relations Boards  would usually confine certification orders to single-plant, or single location bargaining units (Herman, 1966).
Enterprise Bargaining in Japan
Having examined the main reasons which explain the predominance of localised, single-employer bargaining on the North American continent we now consider the case of Japan, the other major country in which collective bargaining is normally conducted on an enterprise basis rather than in the form of industry-wide agreements.
Despite such decentralisation, however, the structure of bargaining in Japan differs from that in the USA since unionisation and collective bargaining are heavily concentrated in large firms rather than being more widely diffused throughout the industrial structure (Levine, 1980) .6
Japanese industrial relations display a number of singular characteristics of which the essential elements are the three so-called ‘pillars’ of the system, appertaining particularly to larger firms: single-enterprise trade unions, lifetime (or, more strictly, career) employment and seniority-related wages.
The enterprise-based bargaining structure is closely intertwined with the structure of workers' trade unions.
In Japan each union caters for workers employed within a particular enterprise and it concludes agreements with the management of that same enterprise.
The emergence of the enterprise union form of organisation after World War II, and the importance attaching to its role in the industrial relations system, has its economic basis in the practice of lifetime employment for key employees.
One sort of explanation sees such practices as permanent employment and seniority wage systems as being related to Japan's unique cultural traditions and the carry-over to modern industry of patterns of social relationships and obligations which characterised feudal Japan.7 Other, perhaps more convincing, approaches (as these practices are not characteristic of smaller-sized firms) see them as an employer response to the exigencies of the labour market and as a control device to elicit and reward loyal workforce behaviour (Jacoby, 1979), since lifetime employment is not a practice of very long standing in Japan.
In fact, the system developed during the transition to industrialisation in the early part of the present century.
In order to alleviate bottlenecks in the supply of skilled labour at that time, each enterprise or factory assumed the responsibility for training recruits for the emerging mass-production industries.
Therefore, training became internalised  within the structured organisation of the firm itself and, to reduce turnover, an internal labour market system of workforce allocation and promotion, along with a wage structure, was developed (see Chapter 3).
Moreover, because employees were typically trained as single-skill operatives for a particular type of (often) enterprise-specific technology their acquired skills were largely non-transferable.
Employees therefore had a vested interest in remaining with their firm since job mobility was restricted.
Employers also wished to retain skilled labour to recoup their investment in training costs.
In explaining the shape of the bargaining structure in Japan, as with the industry-wide structures in Europe and the decentralised arrangements in the United States, the wishes and expressed policies of the bargaining parties themselves would appear to have been a predominant factor.
Unionised workers sought employment security and income advancement primarily within their respective enterprises.
Similarly, Japanese employers have tended to favour enterprise bargaining.
They did not want outside intervention in the collective bargaining process from representatives of more broadly-based trade unions since such interference could be inimical to the preservation of paternalistic employee relations within the undertaking (Okochi et al .,
1973).
Also, in parallel with the United States, the influence of public policy seems to have been an additional factor of some importance since it has been observed that the policy of the occupying powers after 1947 probably strengthened the tendency to form enterprise-based unions rather than alternative structures for bargaining purposes (Levine, 1981).
(Collective bargaining in the public sector in Japan, however, remains more underdeveloped and problematic.)
Economy-wide Bargaining
We now turn to an examination of the third identifiable category of bargaining structure, economy-wide agreements in certain European countries.
Their outstanding feature is the conduct of negotiations, not initially through the individual trade unions and employers' associations themselves but rather via the central confederations to which they are affiliated.
The major agreements are drawn up between a small number of tightly-controlled organisations and the outcome of their central negotiations sets guidelines and limits to the industry-wide negotiations which then subsequently take place.
This sort of system was operative in the Netherlands from the end  of World War II until the early 1960s.
It resulted from government initiatives which centralised the process of wage-fixing to keep down labour costs and promote savings in an attempt to accelerate the modernisation of industry and foster economic growth.
Henceforth, key negotiations on changes in the basic terms of employment took place between the union and employer confederations in close consultation with the government agencies concerned.
Until its eventual collapse under the weight of accumulated economic pressures, the system operated successfully for almost 20 years.
It was administratively feasible because Dutch industrial relations had always been characterised by a relatively high degree of centralised control over the bargaining process, together with a weak position of the trade unions at shop floor level.8 Also, in that particular period, the country had been ruled by governments which by virtue of their composition and policies were able to secure trade union cooperation (Albeda, 1971).
Within the Scandinavian countries the predominant role of central organisations of employers and workers in negotiating collective agreements is best known in Sweden.
The evolution of Swedish collective bargaining into a system of economy-wide agreements was greatly dependent upon the presence on both the employer and employee sides of a small number of organisations ‘each large enough to bring crucial influence to bear on the development of bargaining issues across the whole labour market’(ILO, 1974, p. 340).
Certainly, on the union side, the central trade union body (the LO) attained much greater power and authority than either the TUC in Britain or the AFL-CIO in the United States and the Swedish Employers' Confederation (SAF) had tightly controlled powers over its affiliates since its inception.
Before World War II and in the immediate post-war period industry-wide collective agreements continued to be negotiated  between individual employers' associations and trade unions with little intervention from their respective central organisations.
During the 1950s, however, employers began to press successfully for coordinated, central wage bargaining, which has continued subsequently.
Centralised negotiations between the union and employer confederations led to ‘frame agreements’ which then provided guidelines for industry-wide negotiations between the national unions and employers' organisations.
As a final step the agreements were adjusted to local conditions via negotiations between managements and the workplace union organisations.
Swedish employers believed that the greater coordination of negotiations by means of central bargaining could reduce the incidence of industrial conflict.
A further consideration was that it would increase their own  bargaining power since wage settlements made under the previously more decentralised system were proving increasingly expensive for employers.
The unions would use the early settlements made in annual negotiations as a precedent to obtain leverage in their own bargaining and would attempt to improve upon them still further.
The leapfrogging process which resulted meant that as a wage round progressed, later settlements tended to be more favourable to the unions and also more costly to the employers.
In addition, unions would often delay settling in the hope of securing improvement, thus protracting wage bargaining.
It was further claimed that the wage determination mechanism conducted on this basis gave a strong impetus to inflation.
For the unions one of the main inducements in favour of centralised negotiations was that they offered a better prospect for promoting the labour movement's specific policy of wage solidarity.
This had originally been introduced in the 1930s with the aim of reducing what were regarded as unwarranted differentials in wages, and in particular as a means of improving the position of the lowest paid workers.
Since the main differences in wage levels were to be found between, rather than within, unions an expanded role for the LO in wage negotiations had also been deemed necessary.
With a central, unified system of negotiations there would be greater opportunity to reduce the wage ‘spread’ between industries, not least because then no bargaining group would be relatively disadvantaged for having settled in advance of the others.
The development of economy-wide agreements for both Scandinavia and the Netherlands reflects, however, not only those influences which are specific to the various countries themselves but also more general factors.
Country size, for instance, appears to be related to the propensity to centralise collective bargaining authority within national confederations.
As Weber (1963) points out, Sweden, Holland and Denmark are small nations with limited sized labour forces and only a few industries of major importance.
Consequently, economy-wide bargaining units were more organisationally practicable and easier to establish.
In addition, the economies of Holland and the Scandinavian countries are especially sensitive to international trade influences, which may also have encouraged a broad approach to wage determination.
In this latter respect, government policy (or the threat of intervention) would seem to be the most significant factor tending to remove authority over collective bargaining to the national confederations.9 Attempts to align the outcome of wage negotiations with macroeconomic policy objectives have been one factor which has tended to raise the level of bargaining and it has played a significant role at  certain periods in countries such as Holland, Norway and Austria.
In summary, it is apparent from the preceding discussion of industry-wide, enterprise and centralised (or confederal) collective bargaining arrangements that in focusing upon determinants of the main forms of bargaining structure a number of diverse factors are important in explaining the marked differentiation found between countries.
Their early bargaining patterns and nature of product markets at the time bargaining developed, the willingness or otherwise of employers to form bargaining coalitions in dealing with unions, the form of divisions between unions themselves, together with the role of state policy, have been the major, identifiable forces (ILO, 1974).
In attempting to weight the relative importance of these individual variables some observers, despite the countervailing evidence, would maintain that on a world-wide basis economic forces have had only a limited influence in shaping bargaining structures (Beaumont et al .,
1980).
However, it is generally recognised that economic considerations are undoubtedly important in shaping the changes which have occurred within existing structures over the course of time since collective bargaining itself is an evolving social institution.
These changes also require discussion.
Changes in Bargaining Structures
It is true that, once established, the main elements of bargaining structures tend to persist and remain relatively stable.
They do not usually break out suddenly from their traditional framework and veer off in a new direction.
Yet the structures are by no means completely static.
Shifts in market and technological factors, government policy and worker aspirations have been incorporated and bargaining structures gradually modified, sometimes substantially so.
In some Western European countries, where industry-wide agreements have been general, there has been a tendency in recent years towards greater decentralisation in the bargaining structure together with an extension in the scope and subject matter of agreements.
(Even with the economy-wide agreements in Sweden in the 1983 negotiations no settlement could be arrived at with the union side which insisted upon separate industry level negotiations being conducted.)
In Britain — outside the centralised and bureaucratic collective bargaining machinery which typifies the public sector — the trend has been towards more plant-level bargaining, more company-level agreements and generally  more participation in collective bargaining by union workplace and management representatives at local level.
Within private manufacturing industry as Brown (1981) has shown, multi-employer negotiations are no longer the major means of pay determination since two-thirds of manual workers now have their pay settled by single-employer bargaining — although, for the economy as a whole, 46 per cent of firms in the private sector reported multi-employer bargaining as being the most important for pay increases, as against 75 per cent for the public sector (Daniel and Millward, 1983).
The recession of more recent years does not appear to have induced a reversion back towards multi-employer bargaining.
In Italy, also, although industry agreements are still important, there has been a marked growth since the 1960s of decentralised bargaining at plant and company level, in contrast to the previously highly centralised system.
In companies such as Fiat and Olivetti the unions secured regulation of investment and development policy via decentralised negotiations (von Beyme, 1980).
Even in Franco's Spain during the 1960s and early 1970s bargaining power also became divested from the (state-controlled) unions to the level of the workplace (Fina and Hawkesworth, 1984).
The reasons for this decentralising movement towards the growth of workplace bargaining activity in Western European countries have been in part economic, as a result of generally high employment and continuous economic growth in the post-war years to the mid-1970s along with a varying capacity to pay of separate employers.
Strong competition for supplies of scarce labour encouraged managements in British industries such as engineering to negotiate additional supplementary agreements at enterprise or plant level.
Similarly in Germany, industry-wide agreements (especially in boom periods) were unable to exhaust the capacity to pay of prosperous firms.
As a result, enhanced earnings were negotiated informally (since technically it was illegal) by the works councils (Streek, 1981).
Furthermore, in many countries the bargaining power of shopfloor workers was enhanced because of the greater capital intensity and tighter integration of industrial processes and had to be accommodated.
Other influences include a demand by workers for more participation in enterprise decision-making.
When formal participation schemes have been introduced this has quickened the extension of bargaining to the enterprise level and promoted the integration of works councils into that structure (Windmüller, 1977).
Underlying changes in industrial organisation, via the increasing concentration of ownership  and expanded size of enterprises (Hannah, 1976), have also been important in stimulating decentralised negotiations at the expense of association bargaining.
In Italy the technological renovation of industry altered the basic conditions of employment in different ways across various firms and sectors, resulting in the general clauses of national agreements becoming obsolete and moving the centre of industrial conflict towards the enterprise itself (Treu, 1981).
Another significant factor working in the same direction towards decentralised negotiations in many European countries may also have been the increased importance of foreign-owned firms, particularly US multinationals (see Chapter 8).
Furthermore, in the case of the Netherlands, von Beyme (1980) sees the tendency towards decentralisation in the early 1970s as a reaction to the failure of attempts to promote a central incomes policy — which had been pursued more strongly than in other countries.
Finally, the effects of the economic recession have also helped to make bargaining more decentralised in Belgium by emphasising differences between the varying sectors, regions and enterprises.
(In the metalworking industry no national wage agreement for manual workers has been possible since 1974.)
It is also notable that in Australia, despite the predominance of the arbitration system, there were similar signs that during the 1970s collective bargaining had penetrated at plant and workshop level even though there was little formal institutionalised machinery for this.
The arbitration system was principally concerned with settling disputes over wages and working conditions, narrowly defined, rather than with matters internal or specific to the enterprise.
Also, since union officials concentrated their attention upon winning arbitration cases it was left to shop stewards to take up problems such as plant-level dismissals, work assignments and transfers (Levine, 1980).
Notwithstanding these developments, however, even in some European countries the tendency towards decentralisation in collective negotiations has been offset to some extent by cross-currents.
In France, for instance, we have noted the negotiation of general, economy-wide agreements on some non-wage matters and in Belgium a more centripetal force has been the ‘extension’ of certain, appropriate items in collective agreements to the rest of the economy.
In countries which already have predominantly enterprise-level bargaining reverse and countervailing pressures have operated only to a more limited extent — in this case towards greater consolidation in bargaining structures.
In Canada some provincial governments have encouraged moves towards broader-based, province-wide bargaining  as a means of reducing the potential for damaging shutdowns (Cordova, 1978).
Also in the USA one long-term influence has been an upward movement in the locus of decision-making in some business organisations, again through the creation of larger units by mergers or natural growth.
The effect at corporate, if not industry, level has been the ‘creation [of]enhanced bargaining power which unions will sooner or later try to match by corresponding adjustments, including an extension of the bargaining structure’(ILO, 1974, p. 129).
One corporate-centred bargaining strategy in the form of ‘coalition’ bargaining has been adopted by a number of US unions since the 1960s.
The aim is to attempt to neutralise the employers' advantage in multi-plant companies where the workers of each plant are represented by different (and otherwise uncoordinated) trade unions.
With coalition bargaining, the bargaining units remain separate, but nevertheless the unions agree to act together in the pursuit of a common bargaining strategy in relation to demands and settlements.
Similarly, so-called ‘pattern’ bargaining has occurred in certain industries.
By this means a single employer is selected for the initial claim and the resultant settlement is then extended to the rest of the industry — an arrangement which, in some respects, may be regarded as a de facto form of industry-wide bargaining.
In the case of Japan, however, enterprise bargaining seems as yet to have been rather less affected by centralising forces (although, since 1973, there has been some de facto industry-wide bargaining in the major metal industries).
Most enterprise-based unions remain fairly self-contained and although many do affiliate to the appropriate national, regional or industrial federations they accord them little authority for conducting collective bargaining or sanctioning agreements.
An approach towards more coordinated wage negotiations has been made via the annual ‘Spring Wage Offensive’ which takes place on a nation-wide basis, and in which many unions participate.
However, guidance only on the (varying) amounts and formulation of wage demands by the individual unions, together with a schedule of warning strikes, is centrally arranged.
The actual negotiations are still carded out by the various enterprise unions themselves and the role of the national union federations remains very limited.
We may therefore conclude in relation to bargaining structures (whether centralised or decentralised) that although there are clearly forces making for change in all countries their extent should, perhaps, not be over-estimated — especially not those changes which may appear to produce convergent systems.
Consequences of Bargaining Structures
Having explored at some length the categorisation and determinants of inter-country bargaining structures it is also necessary to look at some of the implications of these structures for the conduct of industrial relations.
In fact, cross-national differences in bargaining structures have been shown to produce a very significant impact upon a country's entire industrial relations system.
As we discuss below, these include the degree of centralisation of union and employer bodies, the level of trade union density, strike patterns and certain economic consequences which also appertain to bargaining structures.
There is a relationship between the level at which bargaining takes place and two other variables.
Bargaining levels are related to the structure of the parties themselves in collective bargaining, particularly the extent to which their own respective organisations are strongly centralised (federated) at national level, and to the extent or density of unionisation of a country's labour force (Clegg, 1976).
As a means of illustrating these relationships on a multi-country basis, the OECD (1979a) has produced two scatter-graphs.
It is admitted that the gradings assigned to the respective countries have been done on a subjective basis and that different observers might well have come up with somewhat different rankings.
There are also doubts about the validity of the linearisation of the ordinal scale which is implied in the diagrams.
Nevertheless, despite such limitations, the rough relationships which are depicted are not without interest.
In Figure 4.1 the relationship between degree of centralisation and level of bargaining is shown for a number of countries.
Each country is ranked into three basic grades of high, medium or low degrees of effective centralisation in its union and employer federated organisations.
The characteristic level of bargaining is similarly ranked according to a scale representing national, industry or regional, and enterprise or workplace levels, with intermediate values depicting cases of ‘mixed’ bargaining.
It is clear that there is a broad correspondence between the two variables.
Highly-centralised employer and union structures are related to the prevalence of national or economy-wide bargaining, and vice versa.
This is shown by comparing at the extremes Sweden, Norway and Austria in the top left-hand segment, with Canada and the United States in the bottom right-hand corner.
In the latter two countries there are markedly decentralised union-management structures and a large proportion of collective agreements are made at the enterprise or workplace levels.
It has been argued by Clegg (1976) that   in terms of the causal direction of the relationship it is the level of bargaining which determines the degree of centralisation, with the result that power is decentralised within organisations when bargaining takes place at a decentralised level, and vice versa.
A relationship between the bargaining level and the extent of union and employer organisational centralisation may be expected since appropriately structured organisations are likely to be established so as to meet the requirements of a particular level of decision-making in the bargaining process.
Figure 4.1: Relation of Centralisation of Structure to Level of Bargaining
Figure 4.2: Relation of Unionisation to Level of Bargaining
The somewhat weaker relationship shown in Figure 4.2, however, is perhaps less intuitively apparent.
Here the level of bargaining (again shown horizontally) is plotted against the level of unionisation (vertically).
There is found to be a consistent tendency for higher levels of bargaining to be associated with a greater degree of union organisation.
In Sweden, for instance, economy-wide bargaining arrangements are accompanied by a union density figure approaching 90 per cent , whereas the company or plant-level bargaining in the United States has a corresponding union membership density of less than 30 per cent .
The explanation put forward for this relationship is that where the coverage of collective agreements is extensive, as in centralised-bargaining structures, trade union membership is thereby encouraged since the benefits of agreements are seen to accrue to union members on a wide scale.
The stimulus to membership will be even greater if, in addition, local union representatives are actively involved in the administration of agreements and encourage union organisation and if employers are prepared to countenance, or even actively support, trade unionism for their employees (Clegg, 1976).
In contrast, decentralised bargaining systems have a restricting influence upon the degree of union membership attained.
Thus, in the United States unionisation must precede collective bargaining rather than following it since extensions of negotiating rights take place at plant or company level, on an individual and piecemeal basis, and often have to be secured against adamant employer resistance.
As regards France and West Germany, two countries with below-average union densities, the two leading trade union confederations in France (particularly the CGT) have strong reservations about collective bargaining, although its development in recent years has improved the status and authority of the unions because of the tangible results obtained.
In Germany union membership was perhaps less important to employees because of the benefits obtainable from an extensive legalistic employment code together with co-determination.
As a result, the  scope of autonomous collective bargaining was restricted.
In both these countries, therefore, collective bargaining lacks depth, in terms of the involvement of local union officials and workplace representatives in the administration of agreements, which is believed to have adversely affected union density.
In his study of collective bargaining in an international context, Clegg (1976) regards differences in the level at which agreements are concluded as an important determinant not only of membership density but also of a number of other aspects of union behaviour, at least in those countries where collective bargaining is the main method of trade union action.
As we have seen, he argues that trade union government will be relatively centralised where agreements are drawn up for an industry or an entire country, and will be relatively decentralised where they are regionally- or plant-based.
Accordingly, the level of bargaining influences the distribution of internal union power.
In turn, this affects the extent to which union workplace organisations have independent authority to negotiate over a wide range of issues.
Furthermore, Clegg maintains that the pattern of strikes is closely associated with the structure of collective bargaining (see Chapter 6).
He expresses the view that strikes will be fewer in number where collective bargaining is conducted at higher levels and more numerous where there is plant bargaining, largely because, in the latter case, since all workers within an industry or region need not be brought out, strikes can be called at much less cost to the membership as a whole.
Thus the relative cost and consequences of a strike to the parties concerned will vary with the type of bargaining structure.
An empirical investigation of the relationship between bargaining structure and strike activity has been carried out by Hibbs (1976) for 15 advanced industrial economies over the period 1950–69.
He shows that mean man-days lost per 1000 workers were highest in decentralised systems characterised by firm-level bargaining and lowest in highly centralised systems typified by economy-wide bargaining arrangements (i.e. an apparently negative relationship between degree of centralisation and strike activity).
However, when the analysis was extended from consideration of only a single variable relationship to a multiple regression model which controlled for other possible influences on strikes, such as unemployment, profits and real wages, it was then found that bargaining structures did not have a statistically significant influence.l'
Clegg's explanatory approach, relating differences in trade union behaviour to variations in the dimensions of collective bargaining, is penetrating and wide-ranging in its integrating of contemporary  international evidence and historical determinants, but it has also been subjected to criticism.
In the case of particular countries such as Sweden his interpretation has been challenged.
Korpi and Shalev (1979) insist that the development and pattern of collective bargaining in this country must be seen largely as a consequence rather than as the cause of changes in trade union density.
Increasing union strength and a changing (political) power balance forced Swedish employers to deal with workers as a collectivity rather than, as Clegg suggests, the support given by employers being decisive for union recruitment.
In Italy, Cella and Treu (1982) maintain that the structure and initiatives of employers' associations have tended to be a response to, rather than a determinant of, those of trade unions.
More generally, it may be asked to what extent it is appropriate to regard collective bargaining — the explanatory variable in Clegg's theory — as an independent and primary determinant in its own right, rather than as a transmission mechanism for other forces.
Although Clegg identifies the structure and attitudes of employers' associations and managements as the main, direct influences on the dimensions of bargaining themselves, in fact, the determinants of collective bargaining receive little detailed attention in his work.
It may be that bargaining structures and processes can be more usefully approached within a broader framework as secondary, or intervening, variables which are themselves dependent upon more basic socio-economic forces within modern industrial societies (Shalev, 1980).
As well as the effects on trade union activity, a further implication of cross-national bargaining structures which has received a good deal of attention concerns their economic consequences.
In this respect interest is often directed towards identifying which form of bargaining structure is the most ‘efficient’, where efficiency is usually defined in terms which attach primarily to managerial interests (Ogden, 1982b).
Pratten (1976), for instance, concluded from a detailed comparison of Swedish and British companies that negotiating procedures in Britain, as well as more fragmented union representation, contributed to the lower labour productivity of some UK companies.
It has been claimed that company-level bargaining has advantages over, and is presumptively more efficient than, industry-wide bargaining in that wages can be related directly to the firm's performance, profitability and capacity to pay (Ulman, 1974a).
With industry agreements there is a wider separation of the centres of decision-making as well as more overlap in the determination of pay since it has traditionally been understood that nationally negotiated terms in  some industries were minima which could be improved upon at enterprise level.
In Britain it is well known that the 1968 Donovan Report identified bargaining structures as a major strategic variable in determining the effectiveness of industrial relations.
Rationalisation and reform were felt to be needed, and it was assumed that the resulting improvements would benefit all the interested parties.
Particular attention was directed to the lack of accordance between bargaining outcomes and national, economic policy objectives.
The multilevel and fragmented bargaining which occurred in the private sector was seen as fuelling inflation and making the implementation of incomes policy more difficult.
Indeed, a radical reform of collective bargaining in the interests of acquiring greater control of the wage-determination process is still regarded as a prerequisite for any long-term, effective incomes policy.
This would seem to point to the need for more centralised bargaining since a government can most effectively pursue its policy of encouraging responsive bargaining if it can deal with the leaders of unions and employers who represent highly centralised structures, themselves have adequate authority and can expect appropriate support and consent from their memberships (OECD, 1979a).
Industry-level and Workplace Studies
So far in this chapter we have been concerned with the determinants and consequences of collective bargaining structures as they appertain on an inter-country basis at national level.
However, bargaining structures may also be compared at the disaggregated industry or workplace levels which vary greatly within countries as well as between them.
We therefore conclude with a brief examination of a number of studies which either explicitly compare bargaining structures of different countries at a sub-national level, or which seek to identify systematically by means of quantitative methods inter-industry determinants within a single, national industrial relations system — the results of which may then be compared as between countries.
In an interesting comparative study of the US and British steel industries (Elbaum and Wilkinson, 1979), explanations are sought in the historical development of the two industries for their pronounced industrial relations differences — a long period of violent conflict in the United States in contrast with more orderly procedures and fewer strikes in Britain.
From the common starting point of an industrial structure typified by similarities in basic technology, fragmented and  competitive product markets, with sub-contracting to organise production and the labour process, marked divergencies occurred in subsequent developments.
In both countries collective bargaining had emerged in a form strongly influenced by product market considerations.
Demand was unstable and in the highly competitive market prices fluctuated widely, thus requiring firms to be able to reduce costs quickly in a recession in order to avoid losses.
Sliding-scale arrangements provided the solution since,
by joining with the skilled workers in agreements linking wages and prices, employers could hope to regulate competitive wage cutting amongst themselves in recession and end costly stoppages as the workers recouped these losses in booms.
Such arrangements suited the mutual interests firms shared both with each other and with skilled workers.
(Elbaum and Wilkinson, 1979, p. 286)
A transformation took place, however, in the US industry in the late nineteenth century from a small scale, competitive structure towards a large-scale and increasingly concentrated one, controlled ultimately by a handful of firms.
The main influences were innovations in steel-making technology whose production indivisibilities meant that the minimum efficient scale of operations was greatly increased.
Also, an expansion in the level of demand occurred particularly for steel rails within a market well protected by tariffs from the effects of foreign competition.
In Britain, on the other hand, technical change was slower, plants remained relatively small-scale and demand conditions were far less favourable in competition with foreign steel industries.
As a result, the early system of collective bargaining continued intact.
In contrast, in the USA the development of large-scale steel production both weakened the craft basis of unionism and correspondingly enhanced the power of individual firms in relation both to the unions and product market.
The large firm could, by securing more effective control of its labour costs, use its massive productive resources to capture larger and larger shares of the market and consequently the benefits of collusion with rival producers and trade unions rapidly declined.
(ibid., p. 301)
Therefore in the USA the methods of collective bargaining associated with the heyday of competitive capitalism were outmoded and eventually  destroyed along with the breaking by employers of union control of the labour process.
In an investigation of industrial relations arrangements at workplace level Marsh et al .
(1981) compared a number of plants in the engineering industry in Britain and West Germany.
Although there are important variations within each country, on a cross-national comparison two principal structural differences are noted.
First, in Britain the primary basis of relationships is centred on the workplace itself where unions and managements function largely autonomously with no substantive, external, regulative framework.
This is attributed mainly to historical reasons whereby the function of external agreements in the UK has been largely procedural, rather than substantive.
In contrast, in Germany workplace relations are essentially dependent upon external regulation in the form of regional agreements.
Although informal plant bargaining does take place, the additions and amendments are not regarded as being competitive with external agreements.
A second difference concerns the single union-management channel for handling regulative issues in Britain as opposed to the dual, but clearly differentiated, system in Germany between the works council structure and that provided by the union and employer.
As a consequence of these differing structures of job regulation, notable differences in the behaviour of workplace representatives are apparent.
Shop stewards in the UK enjoy greater freedom in pursuing their own domestic negotiating relationships with their managements, especially since there is no alternative workplace structure to provide a competing focus of authority or regulation.
In Germany, workplace representatives in this industry see themselves as part of the administrative framework for the smooth conduct of industrial relations and work within given administrative and legal constraints.
By way of contrast, the British shop steward reacts to, and is more prepared to challenge, management decisions, regarding himself less as an agent of regulation than as a tactician in pursuit of tangible, if elusive improvements for the rank and file' (ibid., p. 185).
A further analysis of workplace bargaining in the metalworking industry, but in this case as between Britain and Sweden, has been carded out by Korpi (1978b).
He emphasises the actual similarities in the pattern of bargaining despite the differences which exist in the formal structures.
Although the scope of workplace negotiations has been more restricted (by law) in Sweden than in Britain, in both countries the bargaining which occurs relies largely upon informal agreements and tacit understandings.
Similarly, although the works  clubs which are in charge of workplace negotiations in Sweden are sub-organisations of the branches of the national unions and less loosely linked to union organisation than the equivalent shop steward system in Britain (at least before the expansion of single-employer bargaining), nevertheless they act independently of the branch and national union headquarters.
In both countries the high levels of unionisation and low unemployment rates for much of the post-war period gave workers significant leverage in workplace negotiations.
Korpi concludes that workplace bargaining is not more under the control of the central union organs in Swedish manufacturing industry than has been the case with its British counterpart.
In addition to such single-industry, cross-country studies the recent availability of quantitative survey data in Britain and the United States has now made it possible to test some explanatory hypotheses of bargaining structures more systematically across a much broader cross-section of industries.
In the absence of a fully-developed theoretical model, Deaton and Beaumont (1980) use a number of ad hoc explanatory variables derived from the case-study literature of bargaining structure in an examination of almost 1000 establishments in the manufacturing sector in Britain.
The objective is to identify the determinants of multi-employer or single-employer structures.
Utilising the statistical technique of discriminant analysis they find that ‘high regional concentration, high union density, and multi-unionism are associated with multi-employer bargaining whereas larger establishments, multi-plant firms, foreign-owned firms, high [product market]concentration industries and firms with industrial relations management tend to have single-employer bargaining’(p. 210).
Within each industry group high labour costs were associated with multi-employer bargaining, although as between industries no such relationship between labour costs and bargaining level was apparent.
Broadly similar findings emerged from an empirical study of US manufacturing industries (Hendricks and Kahn, 1982).
Their results indicate that bargaining structure is systematically related to product and labour market considerations and that high concentration and large plant size are found to be strongly associated with single-firm, as opposed to multi-firm, agreements.
The authors conclude that their findings support the hypothesis that ‘unions and management consider choices of bargaining structure in a systematic way that reflects the basic environment in which negotiations take place’(p. 182).
Summary
Throughout this chapter the emphasis has been directed towards the determinants and consequences of bargaining structure since this is a concept which has been accorded a considerable role in explaining a number of important collective bargaining phenomena both within and between national industrial relations systems.
It has been shown that the structural dimensions of collective bargaining vary greatly between industrialised countries, since they reflect the distinctive economic and social contexts in which they are embedded.
Moreover, as the ILO (1974) points out, although many aspects of collective bargaining are usually discussed within the confines of specific national contexts, comparative analysis can provide important insights into the operation of collective bargaining and the ways in which different systems respond and adapt both in convergent and divergent ways to the environmental changes generated within modern societies.
In particular, as collective bargaining becomes more wide-ranging in its functions and content so the levels at which bargaining is conducted tend to increase (Cordova, 1978).
We have also noted in passing the important and increasing role which public authorities have come to play in many countries in the bargaining process.
In the next chapter the role of the state itself in industrial relations is considered more systematically within the international context.
Notes
Further Reading
A succinct discussion of comparative aspects of collective bargaining is Cordova (1978).
An earlier, and still very useful, book-length exposition is the volume published by the International Labour Office (1974), whilst for the EEC countries there is the survey of the Commission of the European Communities (1979).
The relationship between collective bargaining and trade union behaviour is analysed in the well-known study by Clegg (1976).