

CASTLE DRACHENFELS
Welcome to Castle Drachenfels .
This Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay adventure book allows you to explore the grim fortress of the Great Enchanter from Jack Yeovil's Warhammer novel Drachenfels , and even to meet Constant Drachenfels himself.
What This Book Contains
Castle Drachenfels includes the following:
the introduction (this section), giving you basic notes on how to use the book, and full background information on the history of Constant Drachenfels and his Castle.
a detailed map key to all parts of the Castle, including some that don't exist in the material world!
detailed notes on adventuring in this unique environment.
a selection of adventure outlines and plot elements for use in the Castle.
a party of pregenerated and ready-to-use player characters.
Note that these characters don't have ordinary, mundane equipment listed among their possessions, only magical items and unusual equipment such as venoms.
These characters are highly experienced, and it may be assumed that they can equip themselves with pretty much anything they want (subject to GM approval).
three appendices, detailing new monsters, new spells and magic items, and a horrifying new disease — all of which can be encountered by incautious adventurers in Castle Drachenfels.
There are also handouts, which may be photocopied for personal use.
Handout 1, a view of the Castle which will help players orientate on arrival, has been provided in a form suitable for excising if you wish.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
In order to use Castle Drachenfels you will need the Warhammer Fantasy Roleplay rulebook, plus scrap paper, pencils and dice.
It is also useful — but not essential — to have The Restless Dead rules supplement.
Castle Drachenfels is designed to present a challenge to characters of all levels of experience, but inexperienced adventurers will have to be very careful indeed if they want to survive their visit to the Castle!
This adventure book is best used with experienced players.
Players can generate characters of their own using the WFRP rulebook, or they can use the pregenerated PCs at the back of this book.
These characters can be used to start play very quickly, saving time for eager players!
Whether you not you intend to use the pregenerated characters, take a look at them — you might be able to use them as NPCs at some time.
BEGINNING THE ADVENTURE
Castle Drachenfels is designed to stand alone, and does not depend upon any other WFRP adventure or campaign.
However, it can be incorporated into published campaigns quite easily.
The Enemy Within Campaign
If you want to use Castle Drachenfels in conjunction with The Enemy Within campaign, it is best used after Power Behind the Throne or later.
After Power Behind the Throne , the powers-that-be in Middenheim might well send the adventurers off to Castle Drachenfels in an attempt to get them out of the way — if they should chance to die in the Castle, their embarrassing knowledge will die with them.
After Something Rotten in Kislev , Sulring Durgul might send the adventurers to Castle Drachenfels in search of one or more of the magical treasures there.
He might have known the Great Enchanter personally, and will almost certainly covet some of Drachenfels' magical possessions.
Castle Drachenfels could provide a mind-numbing complication to add to the events of Empire in Flames .
The Empire is crumbling into civil war, Daemons are popping up on all sides, and who's to say that the Great Enchanter doesn't have a hand in it somewhere?
The adventurers might have to find some information in Castle Drachenfels to enable them to track down the location of Ghal-Maraz, or they might have to ensure that the Great Enchanter remains safely dead and doesn't enter the fray.
After Empire in Flames , the new Emperor might decide to destroy Castle Drachenfels once and for all, as a gesture to herald in the hoped-for new age of peace and prosperity.
What more natural choice for this task than the heroes of the Hammer Quest?
The Restless Dead Campaign
Castle Drachenfels can be used as a shattering climax to The Restless Dead campaign.
After the strange events of The Haunting Horror, the adventurers could find some books in room 11 which refer to the Great Enchanter, and possibly some letters implying that Ludovicus Hanike was involved with Drachenfels in some way.
A visit to Castle Drachenfels could be the ideal way to top off the adventurers' experiences in Hanike's house!
The Doomstones Campaign
Such powerful artefacts as the Doomstones cannot have escaped the notice of the Great Enchanter, and he would certainly make every effort to get hold of them.
Even if he knows of the flaws Tzeentch cast into their making — which he almost certainly does — Drachenfels will still want the four Crystals of Power.
It could be that Drachenfels already has one of the Crystals.
If you are playing Dwarf Wars , for example, the adventurers might reach Hargrim's tomb only to find that it has been defiled and looted.
Divination or talking to one of the Ghosts of Kadar-Gravning (if the adventurers can convince one that they are friendly!) might lead to a 
mention of a tall Human in a metal mask having been seen in the catacombs and passages not long before the adventurers.
Even if the adventurers don't pick up on this clue and seek out Drachenfels for themselves, they will find that, little by little, their steps are being directed northwards, out of the Vaults and into the Grey Mountains — towards Castle Drachenfels.
Once there, Drachenfels will do his best to isolate the crystal-wielding characters and rob them of their treasures.
If you have found that Doomstones make the adventurers too powerful for comfort, this could be a good way of getting the crystals away from them.
THE ENDURING NIGHTMARE
The Fortress was the man, Genevieve thought.
The towers and battlements, the corridors and chambers, the very mountain crag which the bowels of Drachenfels were carved from: they were the Great Enchanter's arteries and organs, his blood and bones.
—Drachenfels by Jack Yeovil
Drachenfels, the Great Enchanter, is dead.
The very embodiment of horror and evil, he was slain by a Vampire and a humble mortal man possessed by a force anything but mortal in a way still sung of by minstrels and extolled by poets and playwrights.
A life of unknown thousands of years — if legends are true — is over.
Man, beast or daemon, Drachenfels lies mouldering in a filthy sepulchre.
The nightmare of his existence has come to an end.
But Castle Drachenfels still stands, shunned even by the most desperate and corrupt inhabitants of the Grey Mountains.
Its seven towers claw towards the grey skies like the fingers of a mutated hand, and the bitter mountain winds howl around them like souls damned to torment by the foul sorceries of the Great Enchanter…
Beyond the winds, beyond the cawing of the unclean birds along the crags, beyond the scrabbling of a rock lizard or other hopeful, hungry brute, beyond any sound a mortal's hearing might detect, there is something else.
Sensed somewhere below the thinking mind, somehow older and wiser than consciousness, there is…
…
Something .
A noiseless sound, an odourless smell, an unseen sight, an indefinable Something.
While the conscious mind looks in vain for the source of the unease, neck-hairs rise in response to it, and the stomach churns and flutters.
Something is stirring.
Drachenfels is dead.
So, long live…
Castle Drachenfels?
THE CHALLENGE OF CASTLE DRACHENFELS
Castle Drachenfels is not a straightforward or simple adventure — not that you would expect anything to be straightforward in such a dreadful place.
If you're going to be a player in the adventure(s) which take place in the Castle, stop reading now.
If you continue, you'll spoil the surprises and terrors to come and ruin what could be some of the best adventuring you'll ever have.
Castle Drachenfels holds many surprises, and many adventures.
Reading books will not save you.
Constant Drachenfels, the Great Enchanter
Drachenfels.
The Great Enchanter.
A devil in human form, who cheated Death for centuries unknown; a man with appetites so base they lay beneath satiation; a necromancer, torturer of the dead, dismemberer of spirits; a vileness made flesh; a wizard, a scholar, a monster.
Untold are the reaches of his barbarities, uncounted the number of his treacheries, beyond belief the depravity of his practices.
Was ever such vileness born of mortal flesh?
—Lives of the Depraved , by Konrad Steinhoff (Talabheim, Schnuffler & Son Publishers, 2099)
A fuller treatment of Constant Drachenfels can be found in the Profiles section at the back of this book.
However, for the GM who does not know the GW novel Drachenfels — and reading this is a good idea — Drachenfels is, in brief, the embodiment of evil and malice.
A magic-wielding character of immense power, the Great Enchanter lived for untold centuries.
His atrocities were numberless; at the height of his career he struck at whole nations.
Drachenfels is perhaps the most famous Human — legend says he was once Human — monster in the history of The Empire and the Western Lands of the Warhammer world.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF CASTLE DRACHENFELS
This information is mostly for the GM, but some of it can easily be fed to the PCs before an adventure.
A Geography of Castle Drachenfels includes an encounter with a scholarly NPC who can brief the adventurers if players haven't read the novel, if the GM needs to ‘feed’ information in this way.
The first recorded observations of Castle Drachenfels, the accursed house of hell, were brought to us by Oskar Lefebvre and Jean-Pierre Lafontaine of the city of Quenelles in the year 184 (Imperial Calendar).
Their sketches show the castle fully formed, with seven towers and high battlements, the stone appearing slightly worn and aged.
Yet the accounts of the explorers Armand and Michaela Menise, who travelled the land but a season earlier, say nothing of such an edifice.
The evil monster brought his abattoir to birth from the mountain fully-formed in a matter of weeks or less.
—Archaeologia Maledicta, or, A Compendium of Places Wicked and Vile , Gunther Laubrich, Annals of Sigmar XXXVII libram CXX (Nuln, 613 IC)
All scholars agree that Castle Drachenfels is old.
The Proscribed Grimoires of Kháine document the growth of the Castle in the following centuries.
Depraved visitors came to witness the horrors Drachenfels devised, and pitiful slave-servitors catered for the debased appetites of visiting connoisseurs of carnage and debauchery.
At first, Constant Drachenfels used his own diverse and personal magicks to record these perversions for his own  languorous contemplations, but over time the very stone of the Castle itself began to listen, to record, to respond, to change.
Drachenfels found that he who listened correctly could see, hear, smell and even taste every act of wickedness that took place within the chambers and warrens of the building.
And he who allowed his mind to wander found that the Castle was only too happy to guide it for him, and to draw a little of the sensations and memories of that mind into itself, as if it too mulled over those things that stirred the black hearts within its halls…
In the first centuries of the Castle's existence, the atrocities which took place there were kept secret by the Enchanter's guests who took part in them.
Only in later centuries, when Constant Drachenfels' daring knew no bounds, did the famed, fabled horrors begin.
And of those, there were many…
The Lepers' Pavanne of 1104 set the stage for a series of evils, each more wicked than the last.
Drachenfels, disguised and dissembling, duped nearly a thousand souls from villages and towns around into attending a feast and ball.
To each soul, be they merchant or prospector, mannered gentlewoman or rough-handed son of toil, Drachenfels told a story which appealed to their own greatest vanity or desire: warmth and shelter, food and drink, society and snobberies, paintings and poets and Elven musicians…
They would, he promised laughingly, dance until they dropped.
And so indeed they did.
They danced until their limbs fell from their bodies, compelled to cavort as a fantastically swift leprosy rotted the flesh from their bones.
Drachenfels moved among them, laughing as he squeezed heads in his hands and shattered them like rotted fruits.
With every horror — the Poison Feast of 1907 being one of the most infamous — Castle Drachenfels seemed to draw more vileness unto itself.
The building grew more deformed, the illusions and deceptions more difficult to detect, the nightmares and hauntings more intense.
Souls and — worse — the remains of souls thronged the Castle as flies swarm around a carcass.
Constant Drachenfels is said to have boasted that he kept all the souls of his victims, in some form or other, within his home.
If this is so, it would explain many of the experiences of those who have sojourned there…
—Famous Mass Murderers of Our Lands , by Johann Biedenkopf (Middenheim, Popular Press, 2501)
Many have wondered why the Castle has not been destroyed.
At times, it has seemed that it was.
But always the Castle has reappeared, a tumour that cannot be cut out of the landscape.
The Emperor himself ordered its destruction, but even advisers inured to sycophancy were forced to advise him that this was an impossibility.
Castle Drachenfels is not a place which can be located and destroyed.
There are many reasons for this.
It is not always reported as being in exactly the same location, although recent reports seem to suggest that it is not now capable of the movement which it once, extraordinarily, may have demonstrated.
It is remote, hard to reach, in terrain extremely difficult to travel, where beasts of burden would be virtually incapable of conveying any loads.
The lands around contain savage beasts, Orcs, and worse.
Moving workers and tools to demolish it would be nigh impossible.
A misguided attempt to bombard the Castle with rocks conveyed by magically controlled Wyverns failed spectacularly in 1513, while demonstrating the accuracy and numbers of the undead archers within the towers of the Castle.
Magical destructions have been attempted, but without success.
Fire has proved impotent against the unyielding stone of the walls.
There are reports, well-authenticated, that wizards setting magic to destroy the Castle have been themselves assaulted by unseen and unknown magical forces.
The Wizard Kaster Dreckspatz of Altdorf lies still in the Great Hospice of Frederheim after one attempt to breach the walls.
This resistance has survived the death of the Great Enchanter at the hands of Koenigswald.
Unless there is dire reason to attempt its destruction, Castle Drachenfels must be left to stand where it is.
—Report to Emperor Karl-Franz by Arch-Lector Kaslain of Nuln, 2508
THE ROAD TO DRACHENFELS
Map 1 shows the general locale — the Grey Mountains — around Castle Drachenfels.
The Castle is situated on a tall rocky peak, some four miles above the now-abandoned mining village of Felsbrockenberg.
The Castle can be approached either via a narrow path leading up the mountainside which approaches the gates directly, or by a safer and wider path which leads up to the mountain peak and a pair of half-derelict mountain gates.
From these gates, a narrow secondary path leads down to Castle Drachenfels.
There is no obvious mountain pass or trail leading to the immediate area of the Castle, since Felsbrockenberg has been deserted for some 80 years.
Adventurers who want to reach the Castle have to contemplate mountain travel in fairly indifferent terrain, which counts as difficult ground for the whole journey.
However, as Map 1 shows, the adventurers shouldn't have to spend too much time in the mountains, but nonetheless such travel does have its perils.
It's best not to use avalanches and other such drastic ‘random’ events here, since you don't want to ruin the real tension of adventuring in the Castle by killing off adventurers before they get there!
On the other hand, if you do fancy livening the proceedings with a little mundane terror, some minor hazards can be added to mountain travel.
Here are a few ideas:
GENTLE SHOWERS
While travelling through the mountains, there is a 20% chance each day of a good heavy rainfall lasting D8 hours.
This chance rises to 30% per day between Kaldezeit and Pflugzeit.
If the rainfall lasts more than 4 hours, the terrain is transformed into very difficult ground (move quarter rate,Risk tests at -20, running impossible).
In addition, the adventurers may get a nasty colds unless they take cover or have special protections (such as a long-duration Protection from Rain spell ).
If the rainfall lasts more than 2 hours, each character must make a T test (+10 bonus for Immunity to Disease , +20 if the character has specifically prepared for the trip by buying waterproof clothing).
If the test is failed the adventurer gets a cold for D3+1 days.
This reduces all percentage characteristics by 5.
Any pack animals the adventurers have may get restless and skittish.
Each animal must make an Ld test or else spend a turn rearing, whinnying, and refusing to move.
The Ld score of any character with the Animal Care, Animal Handling or Charm Animal skills may be used instead.
This test should be repeated once per hour after the first full hour of rainfall.
There is also a 5% chance any pack animal will shed its load if it spends a turn indulging in this annoying behaviour.
Finally, heavy rain will soak — and render useless — any bowstrings, gunpowder and loaded firearms which are not carefully protected.
ENCOUNTERS IN THE MOUNTAINS
Some of the adventure themes in Adventures in Castle Drachenfels suggest specific encounters in the Grey Mountains.
Others do not, but you may want to add some staged encounters along the way.
We suggest that you keep these to a minimum.
The centre of the action is the Castle, and you don't want the adventurers dying at the hands of a bunch of miserable Orcs before they get there!
That said, a couple of encounters obviously have some value in keeping the PCs on their toes and hurrying them up if the pace of the game is slackening due to excessive caution by them.
The Unquiet Dead
This encounter should take place either just before dawn or just after dusk, so that the half-light makes it difficult to tell what is real and what is false.
Ideally, the adventurers' first or last sight in the half-light should be the dark, malignant shape of Castle Drachenfels outlined against the sky.
Just as the adventurers are making (or breaking) camp, a thin mist drifts across their camp site, chilling everybody to the bone.
If the adventurers have a fire going, it gutters and dies.
Any animals shy away from the mist.
Even if the adventurers decide to move, the mist moves with them, easily keeping pace with them and — most worryingly of all — moving against any prevailing breeze.
As soon as the adventurers realise that they can't outrun the mist, it coalesces into three cowled figures.
These are three of the Castle Spirits: Ghosts of those slain by Drachenfels.
They will make no move to attack or talk to the adventurers, but merely interpose themselves between the adventurers and the path to the Castle.
During this encounter the Ghosts are not subject to instability until they touch an adventurer, someone uses the name of Sigmar Heldenhammer, or one of their number is hit by a magical weapon.
Sigmar's name can be used in any context, not just as an appeal for aid.
Their ability to cause fear in living creatures is as normal.
Once the Ghosts have been defeated or have vanished thanks to instability , the mist disperses quickly.
Out of the Night
This encounter can, if the GM wishes, be created to run shortly after the encounter with the Ghosts (see The Unquiet Dead , above), just as the adventurers feel that they are probably safe for the night.
As darkness begins to fall, the adventurers are ‘lucky’ enough to chance upon a path that leads upwards towards a rock-strewn side-valley.
The path is clearly marked with small piles of rocks at intervals, and is obviously not an animal run.
As the adventurers reach the side-valley proper (which is only around 20 yards wide and approximately 100 yards long), the sky is darkening with yet another rainstorm.
Although the valley looks an uncomfortable place to spend the night, it offers some protection from the wind.
Nearby, several rocks have been piled up as if intended to make a rudimentary windbreak or wall.
The path and the valley are actually a trap created by a flock of Harpies who nest in a small cave hidden among the rocks.
While just intelligent enough to create the innocent-looking path, they are too stupid and impatient to spring a proper ambush.
As soon as the adventurers stop moving, the Harpies will swoop down from their roosts in the rock.
Being almost the colour of the rocks, the Harpies are difficult to spot before they move.
This requires a successful I test, with a -20 penalty, for any character who specifically states he is looking for something out of the ordinary.
The Harpies are all almost-blind mutants, who hunt by sound.
In the round before they attack, the valley is filled with their bizarre hoots and screeches, which they use in the same manner as bats to navigate and locate their prey.
During the next round, D4 Harpies swoop out of the darkness at the adventurers, followed a moment later by the remainder of the flock; there are six Harpies in total.
The Harpies are vicious, hungry creatures who will gang up on any isolated individual.
If the adventurers stick together, the Harpies will attempt to grab a pack animal (if the adventurers have one), or will swoop round attacking at random until an adventurer is wounded.
Once they have wounded someone, they will concentrate all their attacks on that person.
Although hungry, the Harpies are not suicidal.
As soon as any of their number is reduced to half Wounds or below, they must all make successful Ld tests or break off combat and flee back to their cave.
In addition, although they are almost blind the Harpies are scared of bright lights and fire in particular ; they are treated as being subject to fear of any magical effect that involves large amounts of light or fire (such as a Fire Ball ) in addition to the spell's more usual effects.
The Harpies' cave is little more than a smelly hollow in the side of the hill, and contains nothing of interest, save for old bones from the Harpies' victims.
A few coins — 6 Marienburg Guilders, 2 Imperial Crowns, 14 Imperial Shillings and a solitary Bretonnian Penny — are scattered amongst the filth.
If the adventurers pursue the Harpies back to their lair, they will fight to the death to defend it.
Bandits and Orcs
There are also mundane threats to travellers in the hills around Castle Drachenfels.
Both Erwin Kroetz and his bandits or Gobrot Pusfoot and his Orc warband can present the adventurers with a variety of problems.
Either group could stalk the adventurers during the journey to Castle Drachenfels.
Alternatively, the adventurers could stumble across a group encamped somewhere in the hills, presenting them with the choice of trying to sneak around unobserved, or mounting a surprise attack.
A third option is to have the adventurers caught in the middle of an ambush staged by the warband on the bandits or vice versa.
Rather than stage a formal encounter using either of these groups, we leave it to you to decide if — and how — to deploy them.
See Adventures in Castle Drachenfels and the Profiles section for more details of these groups.
Ogres
Sitting on a rock, arguing over the remains of a goat, are three Ogres — if there are such things as especially stupid Ogres, it's these three.
The Ogres stand up and move to block the adventurers path.
Their demands are simple: the adventurers must give them something to eat if they want to pass unmolested.
What ‘something’ means in this context starts an argument amongst the Ogres, but eventually they decide on ‘Wun myool, Wun 'oomin or, er, wun and wun — too — shorties .’
The Ogres point significantly at any Halflings or Dwarfs among the adventurers.
If not appeased with sufficient food, the Ogres attack the adventurers if they think that they can beat them.
They may attack in any case, thinking themselves ‘dead clever’ for tricking the adventurers by talking before attacking.
If the Ogres fail an Int test, they will attack regardless of the odds.
If any Ogre is reduced to 3 Wounds or below, it must make a Ld test or attempt to flee.
All three Ogres are very superstitious, and if the adventurers use some type of clearly visible magical effect each Ogre must make a Cl test.
Failure indicates that the Ogre has fled in fear of its life.
To trigger this test the magic effect can be from any source (item or spell), but must have a clear, easily discernable effect; an Aura of any type doesn't count, but a Flight spell would, even though it is not directly threatening.
Other than their crude clubs, the Ogres have no treasure.
Dead Wings
As the adventurers approach Castle Drachenfels, the land around takes on a dead, grey look.
The few trees look stunted and twisted, and even the grass appears to be shrivelled and lifeless.
The one consolation that the adventurers have is that it stops raining, and the sun breaks through the clouds — although its light is watery and without warmth.
The valley below the adventurers is hidden by a layer of thick mist that seems almost to glow.
It may just be reflected sunlight, but it has s sickly and unnatural look to it The Castle's towers are clearly visible in the distance.
Suddenly, the weak sunlight is blotted out by hellish 
wings.
Sweeping up from the adventurers' blind side (either a ridge line above their heads or out of the mist) comes a ragged flock of Carrion, one of these undead birds for every two adventurers (but at least three in any event).
Each adventurer must make a successful I test or be surprised (and therefore unable to act), thanks to the creatures' virtually silent approach.
The Carrion swoop around the adventurers, but make no attempt to carry anyone off.
Instead, they try to wound every character at least once.
Once a character has been wounded, he will not be attacked again unless he stands between the Carrion and one or more unwounded characters.
After D10 rounds or as soon as one of their number is reduced to 1 Wound (whichever comes first), the Carrion will fly off, this time cawing loudly.
They dive into the mist and vanish, only to reappear a few minutes later, some considerable distance away.
They are heading directly back towards the hellish towers of Castle Drachenfels.
While the Carrion's behaviour may appear to be significant — and the players will try hard to convince themselves that this is the case — this is only a spoiling attack to draw the adventurers' attention to the Castle.
Alternatively, the Carrion can attack just as the adventurers reach the final approaches to the Castle, as detailed below.
APPROACHING THE CASTLE
Castle Drachenfels stands on a partly artificial rock outcrop.
Give the players Handout 1 .
Note that the view assumes that the adventurers are approaching the Castle along the lower path, which leads up to the Castle.
The players may well ask for a general description of the Castle.
Feel free to be inconsistent each time you describe it.
The impression you want to create is that the Castle has an inconstant feel about it.
Of course, it's always there , but the walls and towers appear to have moved when they were not being watched, or maybe they are in the same place, but the adventurers aren't seeing the same thing all the time.
For example, the first time the players ask for a description, you could read out the following:
The Castle looks like an obscene multi-fingered, clawed hand, trying to tear the heart out of the sky.
The seven fingers — the towers — glisten with moisture, like the sweat on a dying man, emphasising the unhealthily pale colour of the stone.
From the very highest tower in the middle of the Castle, a thin plume of mist or vapour drifts down the wind.
And maybe it's your imagination, but there also seems to be a hint of laughter on the wind…
And on the next occasion you could try something along the lines of:
The towers of the Castle are bent and crooked, like an arthritic claw driven into the clouds.
A single, necrotic light shines from a high window, stark against the dark green-grey of the Castle walls.
The roofs of the towers look as though they would barely stand the rigours of a light breeze, let alone a rain storm.
The whole place looks dead and deserted, a ruin fit only for the dead and carrion birds…
…and so on.
The descriptions can be as varied as you like along this sort of theme, providing the adventurers with something to think over as they approach the Castle.
If you have players who are obsessed with mapping detail, they will have a very tough time inside the Castle, but in describing the outside of it, when their characters seem to see slight differences each time they look at the buildings, add the disorientating detail that the characters cannot remember exactly what the Castle looked like at any time prior to the present moment.
Does the Great Tower seem to be shifted a few yards?
Did the Weather Vane look the same shape?
Why can't I seem to remember what I saw before when I looked at these things…
There are two paths to Castle Drachenfels.
On the higher path, a pair of clifftop gates stand around 150 feet above the Castle on a rough track leading down to it (as shown in Map 1 ).
A second path leads up to the Castle from below.
Thanks to years of neglect, both pathways get rougher as they approach the gatehouse.
The paths are far to steep to ride any kind of mount, but it is safe to climb up or down either path at walking pace.
If you have saved the Carrion attack until now (see Dead Wings in the previous section), there is a chance that the adventurers will slip and fall if they engage in any combat.
A successful I test is required to avoid falling over.
If a character does fall, a second successful I test is required (Acrobatics +10,Scale Sheer Surface +10) to avoid sliding off the path and down the scree-slope, taking D3 S 1 hits in the process and coming to rest 2D10 yards away.
The loose scree is very difficult ground for anyone trying to climb back to the path.
A GEOGRAPHY OF DRACHENFELS
OVERVIEW OF THE CASTLE
The ground level of the Castle is laid out in Map 2 .
Other maps, given at appropriate points in the text, give layouts for the other parts of the Castle.
The Walls
The battlemented walls are some 24 feet high all around the Castle.
Some areas are slightly higher, such as the battlements at the top of the gatehouse.
The walls are 5 feet thick, with a buttressed wooden walkway just behind the battlements.
The wood is not entirely safe, as the driving winds and rains of the area have badly weathered it.
Map 2 shows shaded areas where the battlements are unsafe.
Any character setting foot on such an area must make a successful I test (+10 bonus for a Halfling, -10 penalty for any character carrying 75% or more of their normal encumbrance limit) or else the wood gives way, leading to an 8-yard drop.
Characters are allowed an I test to spot areas of rotted wood — there is a -25 penalty if they don't specify that they're actually looking!
There a few items lying around on the battlements for the adventurers to find: old arrows and rusty arrowheads, a bucketful of congealed pitch, a bunch of rotten torches tied up with twine, a rotted length of rope and the like.
These have no use or value.
Inside the Castle proper, buildings have external walls of stone some 9 inches thick for the most part.
The walls of the towers are 1 foot thicker.
Internal walls are 6 inches thick.
Note that many of the maps of the Castle show arrow-slits in the walls.
Unless noted otherwise, these are 6 inches wide and 3 feet high, with the lower sill of the slit about 2 feet above the floor.
INSIDE THE CASTLE
The windows of the Castle are of thick leaded glass with cross-leading.
They don't admit much light or let anyone see through them very clearly, even when the heavy curtains which hang behind them are open.
Exterior doors in the Castle (eg to the Minor Towers, locations 2 — 7) have T 4,D 12, and (if they have locks)CR 30.
Interior doors have T 3,D 7, and (again if they have locks)CR 25.
Exceptions to these general conditions are noted in the text.
All doors are shut and locked unless otherwise stated.
The Courtyards
The courtyards in Castle Drachenfels are cobbled stone throughout.
The cobbles are slightly greasy, so that if an adventurer runs at maximum rate for any reason he must make a successful I test or slip and fall suffering 1 automatic Wound .
Anyone who inspects the cobbles closely will find, if he makes a successful Int test (Physician or Physician's Student +10) that the greasiness is due to many small gobbets of what looks very like the remains of human fat.
Tucked away in small crevices can be found other, more suggestive and recognisable human remains.
You can be as gruesome as you like if the adventurers really start looking for bits and pieces!
‘Timewasters’ and Other Locations
A small number of the areas in the Castle are specifically designed to waste time — they are stuffed full of bits that adventurers, being adventurers, won't be able to resist looking at and playing with.
This is deliberate: in one of the adventures time spent in the Castle is of crucial importance.
It's quite possible for the adventurers to waste a lot of time on trivia before — and maybe even instead of— finding the object of their quest.
The Castle is also largely uninhabited by intelligent beings, and so has more than its fair share of dangerous — and still armed — traps.
However, there are NPCs who wander around the Castle.
They are largely aware of which areas are dangerous, although they may not know specific details of traps, just that there's ‘something there’.
Because there are so many locations within the Castle, it simply isn't practical to detail every last carpet and piece of furniture — if we did this book would be twice the size (and twice the price!).
‘Room dressing’ is usually ignored unless it's important for some reason.
Feel free to improvise and invent details for the rest of the Castle.
EXTERIOR LOCATIONS AND THE MINOR TOWERS
1.
GATES AND GATEHOUSES
Map 3 shows the three levels of the gatehouse.
The wooden gates to Drachenfels are solid and slightly ajar.
They are plain, simple gates of 8 inch thick wood hung on bronze hinges.
Two adventurers with a combined Strength of 5 or more can easily push them open.
The gates move with a long, low creaking sound that echoes round the Castle.
Tethered to one wall by the gatehouse are the remains of a mule.
This animal has been ripped open and partly eaten (by the Carrion).
This is the mount of Juliane Fassbinder (see location 52).
The adventurers ought to realise that the late mule's presence is a clue that someone else is around.
In chambers 1a and 1b there are some rotted wooden chairs and tables, a couple of quivers of crossbow bolts and a heap of human bones: the inanimate remains of the Skeletons which once guarded this place.
Chambers 1c and 1d, above, are similar and are connected by a passage above the gateway.
This passage has a number of murder holes in the floor, which allowed the Castle defenders to drop various unpleasant substances on any attackers below.
There are three buckets of long-hardened pitch, and a metal bucket with a hinged lid.
This contains 4 pints of very corrosive organic acid which only attacks living or organic items such as wood or leather, but not metal or stone.
The acid is still potent, and if 1 pint or more hits a living target it inflicts D3 S 6 hits.
A splash causes one S 3 hit.
Anyone foolish enough to put their hand into the liquid suffers one automatic Wound per round of contact, regardless of armour and Toughness.
At the top of the spiral staircases are two wooden trapdoors leading on to the battlements.
The trapdoor above 1d has fallen in, and there small puddles of water and patches of moss on the steps as a result, making the stairs difficult ground .
The trapdoor above 1c is closed but unlocked.
THE MINOR TOWERS
Each of the six towers around the walls was built primarily for defence, but also as a focus for painful emotions and experiences.
The Castle has ‘stored’ emotions in the stones of the towers, and the effects of these ‘memories’may weaken adventurers who enter them.
2.
THE TOWER OF EXHAUSTION
Map 4 shows the internal layout of this 100-foot high tower.
The thick wooden door to this tower is shut but unlocked.
However, the door has an irksome magical effect: a variety of a Rune of Renewal is etched into the wood.
A successful I test (with a -25 penalty) is required to spot the rune.
The trap works as follows: the first rune to pass through the doorway on any day (dawn to dawn) is automatically drained of its power until the following sunrise.
A rune weapon will lose its powers for this time, and other rune-based magic items will be similarly affected.
Chamber 2b contains only mouldering furnishings, an empty, rotted wooden coffer, and a pair of ancient, unusable crossbows in a wall rack.
The trapdoor to the basement (2a) has a large tear in the wood.
The wall-ladder below is unsafe, and requires a successful I test to climb down without falling (3 yard fall).
The basement is flooded to a depth of 1 foot with dank, foetid (but harmless) water.
A few mouldy bones break the surface of the water here and there.
A narrow spiral staircase leads up from chamber 2b to 2c; characters must ascend in single file.
This is unfortunate, as chamber 2c is occupied by two unusually cunning Zombie bowmen.
These two have functional crossbows, but will attack with their filth-encrusted claws after one  shot each.
The Zombies are aware enough to hide in the darkness and will gain surprise unless the leading adventurer makes a successful I test.
Again, this chamber and the one above (2e) contain only rotted furnishings and useless, rusted weapons.
A trapdoor in 2e leads upwards to chamber 2f; however, the wooden ladder set into the wall below it is obviously rotten and useless, so a skill such as Scale Sheer Surfaces or a Flight spell is necessary to reach the trapdoor.
Inside, chamber 2f is thick with bird droppings, feathers, mangled bones and scraps of cloth.
A pair of Harpies nest here, as they are just able to squeeze in and out of the narrow windows.
Their nest is in the wooden beams, some 15 feet above the floor.
It contains bones, cloth, rags and filth, but there is also a collection of coins (17 GCs, 62 SSs, 18 BPs) and a pair of small topaz rings (value 7 GCs each).
The Harpies will attack ferociously if anyone enters, but will try to fly away if either is reduced to 1 Wound or below.
Exhaustion
Keep careful track of how long the adventurers spend in this Tower during each visit.
When the adventurers leave the Tower, each must make a WP test.
For every three turns spent in the Tower there is a -5 cumulative penalty to this test.
Failure means that the character suffers temporary exhaustion (WS -10,BS -10,S -1,T -1 for D10+10 turns).
Adventurers who suffer these effects will feel a sensation of almost unbearable weakness and will see visions of exhausted people — dressed as adventurers like themselves — crawling to the doors of the Castle, but lacking the strength to escape.
3.
THE TOWER OF STARVATION
Map 5 shows the internal layout of this 90-foot high tower.
Any Halfling within 5 feet of this tower is allowed a WP test (+20 if he has Magic Sense ).
If the test is successful, he will feel very unhappy at the idea of entering the tower.
A roll of 01–02 gives the Halfling the feeling that Esmeralda herself forbids it, and makes the Halfling subject to fear of the tower and everything in it!
Despite such premonitions, chamber 3b is only a standard guard room, with piles of bones, bolts and the remnants of furniture.
The trapdoor in the floor is intact and a set of stone steps below lead down to the basement, location 3a.
In the cellar are six Skeletons manacled around a half-collapsed wooden table piled high with the desiccated and thoroughly foul remains of a meal set out on silver serving plates (worth 5 GCs in total).
If any adventurer enters, the Skeletons writhe around, snapping their slack jawbones eagerly, but they are too firmly manacled to escape.
Note that adventurers who are warped out of certain locations within the Castle (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels ) may well end up manacled here with these skeletons!
The first floor chamber (3c) is empty, but the chambers above are wickedly and horribly different.
Chamber 3d holds a large dining table with 10 massive wooden chairs.
Each of these, in turn, holds a Skeleton, with its arms manacled to the floor.
Before each ‘diner’ is a sumptuous silver and crystal place setting (value 20 GCs per setting), which isn't quite in reach, even if the Skeleton plunges its head forward.
This  time, however, the manacles aren't quite as firm as in the cellar.
As soon as the adventurers enter, two of the Skeletons will rip their rusty iron manacles out of the floor and attack.
However, they will only do this if they have a chance of hitting an adventurer — if a spell such as Zone of Sanctuary is in operation, for instance, the Skeletons will bide their time.
The Skeletons do not attack in the normal fashion.
If a Skeleton manages to score a wounding hit on an adventurer, something quite hideous happens.
The Skeleton rips a chunk of raw flesh out of the character (normal damage, +3) and then sits on the floor and begins to bite and tear at its ‘meal’.
During this time it is treated as prone , and ignores all attacks.
It takes the Skeleton D4 rounds to realise that it is no longer capable of eating — it can chew, but when it swallows the food simply drops through its bones to the floor.
At this point the Skeleton rejoins the fray, driven into frenzy by its realisation.
This is an exception to the Skeleton's normal immunity to psychological effects.
An adventurer who has had a chunk of his person ripped off by a Skeleton takes 3 Wounds from the blow, in addition to normal damage.
A Cure Severe Wounds spell is required to repair the torn and bleeding flesh.
Until the spell is cast, the ‘extra’ 3 W points cannot be recovered.
The ceiling in 3d is made of magically-transparent stone, allowing the adventurers to see the events described below.
Starvation
At the same time as the Skeletons attack, each adventurer must make a WP test.
Those who fail see an horrific scene in 3e: the Skeletons are starving people.
A delicious smell of roasted meat wafts through the chamber, and anyone who looks up will see a hugely fat man in the chamber above.
He is busily carving slices of meat from the carcass of a multi-legged Chaos Spawn.
The fat man drifts down through the ceiling, while the Skeletons strain at their chains, trying to reach the meat he offers them.
It oozes greenish yellow watery fluid as he puts a slice on each plate and demands ‘Are you ready to eat now?’
The Skeletons, of course, can't reach the meat, and the man takes great delight in taking each helping and stuffing it into his own face, wiping juices from his hands onto the Skeletons' bony faces.
Every once in a while he holds out a small portion of meat, which the Skeleton chews furiously and swallows, with the same lack of success as before.
This repulsive scene (and play it up for all its worth!) requires that each adventure make a successful T test.
Failure indicates that the adventurer is overcome by nausea (S and T -1 for D10+10 turns).
In addition, adventurers who failed the T test must make a Cl test or gain 1 Insanity Point as well .
In any event, all the adventurers who can see what's going on feel excruciating hunger pangs and take an automatic Wound .
The scene is an illusion, and when the adventurers reach 3e, it is empty.
4.
THE TOWER OF DESPAIR
Map 6 shows the layout of this tower, which is 60 feet in height.
This tower has a special nature.
It is partly cut from the mountain and almost seems to melt into the rock.
It ends in a flat roof.
The only entrance is from the battlements (see Map 2 ) into chamber 4d.
Chambers 4d and 4c are standard, mouldering guard rooms, but are wholly painted black, given them and bleak and depressing feel.
The third floor chamber (4e) is a small, dark chamber with two chairs, a hookah, and vials and bottles of potions.
Most of these are dried out or brackish and useless, but one is a still-potent Potion of Healing .
However, drinking this potion also causes despair (see below).
Stone steps beneath an unlocked trapdoor lead down to chamber 4a.
This room has a pile of 15 skeletons, each wrapped in a black robe and each clutching a dagger in one bony hand.
These are the remains of unfortunate wretches driven to kill themselves in a futile attempt to escape the torments of the Castle.
Their souls survive as a ‘collective ghost’ which begs anyone entering the chamber to bury all the skeletons and bury them in a graveyard consecrated by a cleric of Mórr.
While begging for this help, the Collective Ghost clutches at an adventurer (treat as an attack).
Each successful ‘clutch’ by the Collective Ghost causes despair .
If the adventurers agree to help the Collective Ghost, it will fade into nothingness, but return each dawn and dusk for the next seven days.
If the adventurers haven't buried the bodies properly after seven days the Ghost will attack  them, convinced that they were lying.
If the adventurers refuse to help, the Ghost will curse them for their callousness and attack.
One of the skeletons has an Amulet of Coal about its neck.
Any character may take this item, but each time it is used (not just when it is worn!), the wearer must make a successful WP test or suffer from despair for D10 turns.
Despair
As soon as an adventurer enters the Tower, a secret WP test should be made.
Those failing the test will not be able to move upwards towards the top of the tower, nor will they be able to leave it.
They will only be able to move downwards, ultimately ending up in 4a.
Affected adventurers also suffer despair:M and S -1,Ld, Int, Cl, WP and Fel -10.
This lasts while the adventurers remain within the Tower and for D10 turns afterwards.
Each time the Collective Ghost clutches at someone they must make a successful WP test or suffer the same effect; if they are already suffering from despair, the effect lasts an extra D10 turns.
As noted above, the Potion of Healing and the Amulet of Coal can also cause despair.
Unaffected adventurers can help their friends to leave the Tower, but affected characters will have to be manhandled out of the place.
Once outside, affected characters have no urge to return, but they continue to feel despair for the duration of this magical effect.
Players should be encouraged to roleplay the despair.
5.
THE TOWER OF WEAKNESS
Map 7 shows the layout of this 120-foot high tower.
Chambers 5b, 5c and 5d are standard guard rooms.
The Tower can only be entered from the battlements.
When the adventurers move from 5d to either 5c or 5e they are attacked by a swarm of shadowy, ethereal forms.
These are Wraithwisps (see New Monsters ).
There are three Wraithwisps for each adventurer, and they appear at the rate of four per round.
They will not leave the Tower, but are ferocious in their attacks within it.
Unless the sphere of darkness at the top of the Tower (see below) is destroyed, ‘dead’ Wraithwisps will reform at dusk.
The sphere of darkness covers most of the chamber at the top of the Tower.
Visibility is absolutely nil within the darkness, and the air has a dreadful chill.
Anyone entering the sphere suffers one automatic Wound per round and must make a successful T test each round or lose one point of Strength as well.
At the very centre of the sphere is its source: a magical Blackshard (see New Magic ).
The Blackshard can be destroyed in a number of ways.
It could be picked up and thrown to the ground below, but this would be incredibly dangerous.
The safest method of destroying it is by using the Ritual of Lightening from Lermontov's Grimoire (see New Magic for this item, and rules for different ways of destroying the Blackshard).
If the Blackshard is destroyed, all magically-induced reductions to the adventurers' profiles which have been sustained within the Castle are nullified.
This doesn't protect the adventurers against any effects that they might suffer in the future, only the ones that currently affect  them.
Profile losses from diseases acquired in the Castle are also not affected.
Weakness
If the adventurers leave the Tower without destroying the Blackshard they must each make a WP test.
If any adventurer fails the test his S and T are reduced by -1, and WS, Ld and Int by -10 for D10+10 turns.
Adventurers who fail the test feel weak and chilled, and shiver violently for 1 round when leaving the tower (penalty of -20 to any I test which must be made, for any reason, during this round).
6.
THE TOWER OF TERROR
This deformed-looking Tower is 75 feet high; its layout is shown in Map 8.
The very stones seem to be twisted and distorted, and the whole building leans inwards into the Castle.
The ground floor door is locked as usual, but the doors onto the battlements are not.
Chambers 6b and 6c are ordinary guard rooms.
The trapdoor in 6b leads to stone steps down into a cell (6a) which contains three huddled human skeletons and the glint of gold (19 GCs are spilled on the floor beside one).
This basement cell is one of the Castle's variable warp points (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels ).
The skeletons are harmless.
Chamber 6d has narrow wooden shutters over the arrow-slits, which are barred with iron on the inside.
The walls are decorated with black wall hangings and tapestries depicting skeletal forms rising from crude graves.
This chamber is also unnaturally cold; anyone who remains in it for one complete turn will take an automatic Wound unless they have some magical protection against cold.
Each character must make an Int test on entering chamber 6d.
Those who fail are convinced that a horde of Undead emerge from portals which magically open in the tapestries.
The other adventurers also see this happen, but see that the scene is an illusion.
Characters who failed the Int test must also make a Cl test.
If this is passed, they stand shivering with fear, rooted to the spot.
They are allowed one Int test per round to see the illusion for what it is, although they can also be helped out of the chamber by unaffected comrades.
Those who fail the Cl test flee in terror out onto the battlements — they just want to get out of the tower.
Of course, this may lead them to run onto the rotted wood, which will give way and let them in for a long fall…
The terror lasts for D10 rounds after leaving the Tower.
During this time affected characters run at maximum speed away from it.
Chamber 6e is different.
It does have barred and shuttered slit windows, but there are also several work tables and chairs in here.
On the tables are lenses, pouches with semi-precious stones, a box with rough ‘red gold’ coils (gold heavily adulterated with copper), cutting and polishing tools, and small oil-burning lamps (although the contents of the oil flasks have long evaporated), with some minor bric-a-brac items completing the setting.
One round after entering this chamber, the adventurers will be attacked by a Poltergeist (see New Monsters ).
The Poltergeist gains surprise unless the lead character makes a successful I test (with a -30 penalty).
It attacks by hurling tools, paperweights, ornaments and the like.
If the Poltergeist can be driven out of the chamber by a Zone of Sanctuary it will flee, as its bounded area is the whole Tower.
It can leave the Tower if driven out in this way, but it must stay close to the outside walls.
It is cunning, and quite insane.
The spirit is that of a Gnome gemsmith employed by Drachenfels many years ago.
Once it is aware of the adventurers, the Poltergeist will try its best to assault them anywhere within the tower.
The value of the gems, tools and the like in the chamber is 350 GCs.
If the adventurers specifically state that they want to look for spell ingredients, or if a spellcaster makes an Int test without specifically stating this intention, they can find the following: a fire opal (Resist Fire ), a crystal prism (Destroy Illusions ), an 8-inch diameter golden hoop (Vanish , but the hoop is red gold, so the spell will cost 9 MPs rather than 6), a magnifying glass (Banish Illusion ), and a polished silver mirror (Camouflage Illusion ).
Terror
As any character leaves the Tower, he must make an Int test.
Regardless of its success or failure, the character sees a hideous, faceless spectral form which radiates intense cold and malice, with clawed talons reaching directly at his heart.
The claws thrust directly into his body and cause an agonizing pain and mind-numbing fear.
Those who passed the test realise that this is an illusion.
Those who failed, however, have S and W -1 and WS, BS, Ld, Cl and WP -10 for D10+10 turns.
7.
THE TOWER OF RAGE
Map 9 shows the layout of this 90-foot high Tower.
It contains an imprisoned Chaos Warrior, mutated by Drachenfels as he felt befitted a servant of Tzeentch.
There is a Ward of Forbiddance spell (see New Magic ) on all three external doors to this tower, and the ground level door also has a Steal Mind spell cast into the Ward of Forbiddance laid upon it.
The basement (7a) is empty, while the ground floor (7b) and first floor (7c) are guard rooms, with the usual quota of decayed furnishings.
Chamber 7d, however, contains a clutter of decomposed bodies, weaponry and general junk.
The floor is also covered with a thick and malodorous slime which makes footing treacherous (WS and Dex -10 for the adventurers).
When the adventurers are halfway across the room four foul, mutated forms suddenly spring up from the corpses and attack.
The forms have no definite shape, as they change from round to round, but they are vaguely humanoid and attack with limb-like appendages.
See Profiles for more details.
Chamber 7e is dominated by a man-size iron cage which hangs from a ceiling hook.
Its door is open, and a trail of slime leads to a point in the middle of the floor where it suddenly ends.
This is a ploy by the Chaos Warrior, which uses its tentacled legs to straddle above the doorway and evade detection.
It will wait for one or two adventurers to enter the chamber, then leap on them.
It gains automatic surprise if it has not been detected.
Make it clear to the adventurers that this creature is truly savage.
Above the trapdoor the attic chamber (7f) contains a pair of locked chests wrapped with leather strapping, along with some mundane furnishings.
This looks almost like a long unused guest room with a view.
The Chaos Warrior has the keys to the chests, and these will be found if his corpse is searched.
Among a heap of mundane weaponry — a two-handed flail, spare sword and scabbard, two throwing axes, crossbow, 2 quivers each of 24 crossbow bolts, and a repeating crossbow — the first chest has a complete suit of Plate Armour +1 which the Chaos Warrior is no longer able to use due to his mutated form.
The second, smaller, chest has clearly been ransacked but it still has some items inside.
An ordinary-looking leather bag with 4 GCs inside it is actually a Bag of Lightness (capacity 1300 Enc) with a note inside (Handout 2 ).
Inside the small wooden case is a gold-chain necklace of large teeth.
These are actually the teeth of a very young Dragon (and could be used as material ingredients for the Cause Panic spell ).
The necklace is worth 100 GCs if this is recognised, but only 10 GCs otherwise.
There are also  three Kislevite vodka bottles, two of which contain Kislevite vodka, and one of which is actually a Potion of Disguise .
Rage
As a character leaves the Tower, he must make an WP test.
If the test is failed, the adventurer is filled with a terrible anger for D10+10 turns.
This rage gives S +1,I + 5 and WS +10, but no parries may be made while the character is affected.
An enraged character is also driven to find an enemy and fight him or it to the death.
If anyone gets in the way (like one of the other adventurers) he will attack them.
You should make every effort to ensure that this violent ‘kamikaze’ attitude is properly roleplayed by any affected adventurers.
If they know where to find a powerful enemy this is where they will go, even if it means almost certain — or, indeed, certain — death!
8.
THE WELL
A few rotted buckets lie around the well, which has a 3-foot high stone wall around it.
The water is some 20 feet down: a pool fed by a diverted underground stream.
The water is mostly harmless, but filled with bones and mouldy pieces of flesh — some of which are relatively — and disturbingly — fresh.
Anyone drinking the water will feel ill (S and T -1,WS, BS and I -5) until the following dawn, but these effects can be counteracted by boiling the water before drinking it.
9.
THE FOUNTAIN
The ornamental fountain is some 6 feet tall and carved from marble.
Now stained with bird droppings and weathering, it shows a pair of intertwined and horribly mutated lovers.
The curves and lines are strange and disorientating, giving the viewer an unpleasant feeling of unease and distraction, but nothing more.
No water flows from the sprinklers here, and clearly hasn't for a long time.
10.
THE STABLES
The stables have 8 stalls.
Stalls a, b, c, d, f and g hold the Skeletons of horses.
Those in 10a and 10f will animate to attack intruders, using stomp attacks; they use the profiles of standard Skeletons.
At the far end a number of tools, harnesses, tack and the like are scattered about — one harness still in good repair.
This is magical, and gives the rider of any horse wearing it a +20 bonus to all Ride tests.
A careful search of the stables will reveal a loose stone in the floor of stall g.
Beneath this is a small hole in which a long-dead stableman hid 18 GCs and 30 SSs.
11.
THE COACH-HOUSE
The building houses one of Drachenfels' coaches, which you should certainly try to get the adventurers to investigate!
The Grand Carriage
The carriage has a body of black wood, with gold roof rails and lanterns on each side.
The four lamps are worth 20 GCs each, the two rails 30 GCs each; all have Enc 25 each.
The whole vehicle looks unnaturally new and shiny: the leather harness is greased and polished, the dark velvet curtains are drawn inside the carriage and show no signs of decay.
The handles to the doors are made of preserved Skaven paws, with a snarling Skaven head mounted just above each paw.
The adventurers will be attacked if they try to open the doors, or start stripping valuables from the carriage.
Optionally — if you're feeling mean — the carriage will animate and attack the adventurers if they just stand around for ages wondering what to do next.
The possible attacks that can be sprung on the adventurers by the carriage are as follows:
The carriage attacks by charging, knocking characters down and crushing them (treat as stomp attacks).
The Headless Horseman appears on the carriage and swoops down on the adventurers.
The two Skaven heads will bite anyone who opens the doors (WS +20 for this); they can also detach themselves from the doors, flying around the coach-house and attacking anyone they find.
The four Skeletons in the coach will animate and attack.
These skeletons are dressed in decayed finery — lace and silks — and are covered in dust and cobwebs, but attack as normal Skeletons.
They still have personal jewellery (rings, neck-chains, etc.) worth a total of 250 GCs.
Further details of all these ‘creatures’ are given in the Profiles section.
If the adventurers manage to beat this array of monsters, they may search the coach.
If they do so they will find a small lady's reticule which has slipped down behind one of the seat coverings.
This contains three lace handkerchiefs, a small silver mirror (10 GCs), two vials of perfume (now stale and useless), numerous pots of spoiled Cathay cosmetics, a pair of pearl ear-rings worth 25 GCs, and a note wrapped with red ribbon — this is Handout 3 .
MAIN BUILDINGS, GROUND LEVEL
12.
FRONT DOORS
The front doors of the Castle are of solid stained brown wood.
On each door is a bronze plaque, etched with an indistinct mask-like face.
The doors are shut, but not locked.
They creak only slightly as they open.
13.
GARGOYLE CORRIDOR
All along this corridor, Gargoyle faces and stone hands protrude from the walls.
The faces are horribly contorted as if suffocating or in great pain, and their eyes seem to follow anyone who passes.
The hands are clawed, deformed, seemingly clutching madly or reaching out in desperation.
There are even some broken stone heads and hands lying on the floor.
The corridor is harmless as long as the adventurers don't damage any of the stone Gargoyles or cast any spells in, or into, the corridor.
If they do either, the whole corridor animates and attacks them as ‘Part-Gargoyles’(see Profiles ).
Two ‘Part-Gargoyles’ can then attack each adventurer each round.
If the adventurers try to reach location 14 they will have to pass scores of biting faces and clutching hands.
However, once they have destroyed six Part-Gargoyles, then assume that the adventurers have managed to reach the warded door at the end (location 14).
However, the adventurers must be speedy.
After three rounds of combat here, some Gargoyles will actually emerge from the walls and attack as complete creatures.
They will emerge at the rate of one per round.
Zone of Sanctuary and similar spells will not work against either type of Gargoyle; the adventurers must fight their way through.
14.
WARDED DOOR
This door has a weak spell cast on it; an adventurer with Magical Awareness will be able to spot this if he makes a successful Int test.
The spell is a weakened form of a Ward of Forbiddance spell (see New Magic).
Any adventurer who fails a WP test will be unable to get past the Ward, but the test may be repeated for each two rounds spent trying to force a way through.
During this time, a failed adventurer has WS and BS -20 — this may be a problem if Gargoyles from area 13 are still attacking at the time!
15.
WAITING LOUNGE
This room has six comfortable-looking armchairs with coarse horsehair covers, carpets, pleasant wall hangings, and generally looks like a plush — if exceedingly dusty — lounge.
Each of the armchairs has a corpse seated in it.
None is decayed, but each has been carefully flayed.
In one corner stands a silver-topped trolley with a pair of scalpels, a few scraps of dry skin, and some oddly-curved blunt metal spatulas.
There are no valuables in this room.
This is a disturbing scene to say the least.
If the adventurers enter and begin any kind of search, some of the muscles in the bodies twitch, and one of the corpses opens its mouth in a silent scream.
Anyone in the room must make a successful Cl test or gain 1 Insanity Point as a result of witnessing this event.
16.
CHAMBER OF THE POISON FEAST
The scene of one of Drachenfels' most infamous atrocities, this chamber has been shunned by most of the few who have penetrated the Castle.
Around a richly decorated dining table, the remains of Drachenfels' royal and aristocratic dupes sit.
Only one or two skeletons, in their finery, have collapsed into a mouldering heap on the tiled floor.
Before the bodies stand filth — encrusted silver plates and tureens, filthy and cracked crystal glasses: the decayed remnants of a great feast.
The victims attended the feast after Drachenfels' feigned repentance convinced the wisest and best that he had truly turned from evil.
The wondrous feast that Constant Drachenfels placed before them contained paralysing poisons, and after the first mouthful none of the guests could move.
They starved to death with the sumptuous feast laid out before them.
If the adventurers examine the dead guests, they will see insignia of the royal and noble houses of The Empire and Bretonnia, past and present.
There are also two bodies attired as a High Priestess of Verena and a Parravonese Wizard.
If you are using the sample player characters provided in this book, Erszebet will not find the mace she is looking for in here; Elmariel will realise that this is the body of the Wizard that he wished to find.
However, there is no sign of the Elven magical artefact.
There is certainly treasure to be found here: rings, bracelets, necklaces, neckchains, ear-rings and other items worth a total of 500 GCs.
But taking any of these valuables is definitely not without risk.
The Ghosts of the dead in here will attack if the adventurers loot the bodies.
As soon as any adventurer takes an item from a corpse, tell him that he can see ghostly shapes forming in the shadows.
If the adventurer is stupid enough to continue, he will be attacked by two Ghosts; there will be two Ghosts for each adventurer taking part in the looting.
Those who touch nothing will be left alone unless they join in any fight.
17.
LOUNGE
This room is fairly clean — as if someone still keeps the place tidy.
This, in fact, is the most likely place for the adventurers to encounter Bardul the Hunchback (see Castle Dwellers in the chapter Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels).
The chamber is full of clocks.
There are two huge grandfather clocks standing against the walls, and several carriage clocks with Bretonnian giltwork on tables about the place.
All are in pieces, and spare parts, jars of gilt polish, winding keys, pendulums and the like are littered about the place.
There is nothing else of interest in here.
18.
THE GREAT HALL
This very large chamber was a vast feasting hall, an audience chamber, or an atrocity exhibition, as the whim of Drachenfels dictated.
When the adventurers enter, it is laid out ready for some kind of concert or performance.
The raised stage to the west has lecterns and sheet music set out in front of chairs, and there is a harpsichord on the stage.
Three long rows of chairs are set before the stage, and there are tables with candelabras, goblets and punch bowls (the glass is cracked and filthy).
There are many framed paintings on the wall, showing warriors and nobles of Imperial, Kislevite and Bretonnian origins.
The whole room has the feel of a place set out to be conventionally acceptable and — if such a word is appropriate in this Castle — almost friendly.
Despite its huge size, disturbing echoes and sinister atmosphere this hall is quite harmless.
19.
CLOAKROOM
There are 20 cloaks and robes hanging on pegs here, made of various materials but none identified by any visible insignia.
One of the cloaks is actually a Chameleoleech, but it won't attack unless it is touched — by an adventurer searching the cloaks, or trying to put it on, for example.
The Chameleoleech also gains a free attack (WS +40).
Searching the cloaks turns up a few loose buttons and an Imperial silver shilling.
20.
PRIVY
This chamber has two large and comfortable commodes with a couple of hinge-top buckets.
An Amoeba lives in the left-hand commode, but will only attack if it is disturbed.
A mop and pail are propped against the wall, but there is nothing else of interest or value here.
21.
MUSIC ROOM
This is a small conservatoire, with very heavy and thick, black-lined curtains hanging from ceiling to floor level.
A collection of a dozen weird stringed and reed instruments sits on an ornamental willow-pattern rug on a table set against the west wall.
Before the table stands a large armchair.
Drachenfels had an ear for strange and disturbing music, and the guards he placed here — two Guardian Spirits (see New Monsters)— are still present.
They will attack anyone who picks up one of the instruments.
They will not follow anyone leaving the room unless an instrument has been removed.
In this case they will follow anywhere in the Castle to get it back.
The spirits can move the instruments, since they are strongly attuned to their protection.
The Guardian Spirits appear as a pair of Nipponese monks in saffron robes.
If a fight takes place in this room, the strains of disorientating Nipponese atonal music can be clearly heard.
Any adventurers within the room must make a successful WP test or lose -10 from Ld, Cl and WP for as long as the fight lasts and D10+10 turns thereafter.
The instruments are only valuable if the adventurers can find a buyer.
They are curios, but their use is alien to Old Worlder ears.
Their value is 200 GCs if sold to a collector; non-collectors won't buy them at any price.
22.
KITCHENS
In the centre of this room is a large wood-burning stove with a flue and vent which lead directly upwards, and hotplates on the top.
Rather unpleasantly, there's a pile of excrement at the bottom of one of the vents, suggestive of someone dumping the same down from upstairs (Bardul, in fact; see locations 55 and 58).
Work tables have plates and salvers, long-rotted tubers and roots, tureens and similar on them; an array of evil-looking cleavers, serrated spoons, filleting knives and other implements throng the walls, hung on barbed and blackened hooks.
What appears to be a pair of Zombies stand by the west wall, one in either corner, with a a cleaver in one hand and a filleting knife in the other.
The adventurers will probably attack them, but if they approach in any way a spectacularly disgusting scene ensues.
The ‘Zombies’ step forward as if to attack, but suddenly their bodies change entirely.
They are not Undead, and so are not kept at bay by a Zone of Sanctuary.
Their flesh becomes as living flesh; hair re-grows; eyes reform in sockets, peeling scraps of flesh re-knit and group around bone.
The Zombies take on the appearance of people the adventurers know (and preferably care about or at least like) and reach forward to them as if in greeting.
Then, they start filleting themselves.
With looks of utter disbelief on their faces, their hands jerkily begin filleting their ribs and carving off great joints of meat with knives, axes and cleavers.
They scream in horrifying agony, and thick gouts of blood spray over anyone in the area as the meats fly with a squelch into roasting-trays on the tables, where they flop about for a few minutes like dying animals.
Any character who has entered the room gets splattered with blood unless he makes a successful I test.
If spattered, the blood actually turns into thick, wriggling maggots which worm their way into the character's armour and clothes.
This is a truly disgusting sensation which lasts for 1 turn.
The character must make a Cl test or else be forced by nausea to strip off his armour and clothes, unable to put them on again until they have been thoroughly cleaned and washed.
There's nothing the adventurers can do to help the ‘Zombies’.
They simply completely dismember themselves and end up writhing and wriggling in meat trays and as piles of jerking bones on the floor.
Their heads thrash about on the bloodied floor, gnashing their teeth and foaming at the mouth.
The adventurers must each make a successful Cl test or gain an Insanity Point as a result of witnessing this hideous spectacle.
23.
LARDER
This small storage room is full of old and rotted roots and tubers, sacks of rotted and musty-smelling grain, barrels of reeking and vinegary wine and beer, jars of moulded fruits, and suchlike.
There's nothing edible here, and if the adventurers go poking about when it should be perfectly obvious this place is a filthy, worthless mess, set a few Giant Rats on them.
24.
CORRIDOR OF DISCORD
This corridor looks odd.
Map 2 (page 11) shows the true dimensions, but it appears to be twice as long as it actually is.
This should annoy players who are obsessive about mapping details.
The tapestries and wall-paintings look slightly different to different people, in such a way as to foster thoughts of distrust and discord between them.
One tapestry, for instance, shows an Elf and a Dwarf in animated discussion.
To an Elf or a Dwarf, they seem to be having a violent argument.
The Elf sees a couple of extra Dwarfs hiding behind a tree with poisoned daggers, waiting to back-stab the Elf.
A Dwarf sees an extra Elf sitting up the same tree, about to fire an Elf Bow and strike down his rockbrother.
And so on; add detail as you wish.
Discord
Make a secret WP test for each character entering this corridor.
Characters who fail are subject to discord (not unlike animosity).
Spring this on them at the worst possible time; make sure they're all in the corridor if possible, so you have the maximum number of potential victims.
A character affected by the magic in the corridor will turn on another character in the party, the one he likes least, and taunt him for D4 rounds.
The player should role-play this, insinuating that the other character is cowardly, worthless, treacherous, etc.
At the end of this time, the character will attack his fellow.
However, other (unaffected) characters may be able to force affected characters out of this state of discord.
They must shout at them, slap their faces, magically coerce them, or manage to force them out of the corridor.
This allows the affected Character a second WP test, this time with a +10 bonus.
At the worst, an unaffected character with Strike to Stun may find his skill called upon to save life and limb here.
A stunned character will find his mind cleared of discord by the blow!
The WP test must be made each time the adventurers re-enter this corridor.
For example, if they move through it to get to Drachenfels' bedroom (location 31), if they re-enter from the north they have to make fresh WP tests.
Don't overdo it, though; if they go through a side-door (i.e., into rooms 25 or 27) they don't have to make another WP test when they return to the corridor part-way along.
It's effectively one WP test per full transit of the corridor, as it were.
Also, a character who has successfully made at least one previous WP test here is allowed a +10 bonus for any subsequent test (this isn't cumulative with further successes).
25.
STUDY
The door here is locked, with the keys in location 53, but it can be broken open normally (T 5,D 12).
The study room has a couple of armchairs, one heavy wooden chair set at a writing desk, a bookcase set against the east wall by the door, ornaments and furnishings, and a set of five masks (as described below) mounted along the north wall.
Examining the desk, papers, etc., is largely fruitless; damp has affected them and nothing legible can be found.
The drawers of the desk are open, but contain only dust.
The books in the bookcase are either fallen apart with age, or mundane, or both.
There is an unpleasant hazard behind the bookcase, however.
Any character searching through the books there must make a Dex test.
If this fails, the bookcase — which has a rickety frame — just falls apart, revealing a thick patch of Red Mould on the wall behind.
The masks are clearly magical, as any character with Magical Sense may realize.
Each mask is made of a different substance, and each produces a different magical effect when worn.
The appearance and effects of the masks, from left to right, are:
Iron Warrior : +10 to Cl and WP ; subject to frenzy against one opponent type.
The GM should choose this opponent type to fit the campaign, or roll on the table for hatred in the WFRP rulebook.
Silver Rogue : +10 Int , +10 to all bluff and bribery tests and Fel tests involving a con or scam of some kind (‘silvered tongue’); -1 T .
Lead Ogre : -10 Int .
Copper Fox : Gain Concealment Rural, Concealment Urban, Silent Move Rural and Silent Move Urban skills (or +5 test bonus if the character already has the skill in question); -5 Cl .
Paper Courtesan : The face on this elaborately-folded paper mask appears Nipponese in character.
When donned, it crumbles to dust, but it confers the skills Charm, Mime, Mimic and Seduction.permanently.
Bonuses arising from the masks only apply when the mask is being worn (except for the paper mask), but the penalties are permanent and cannot be dispelled.
Clearly, a character wearing a mask is going to have a tricky time with some Fel tests.
Even with the silver mask, which gives the wearer some Charlatan-type skills, this doesn't mean that face-to-face encounters won't have a Fel penalty (the skill bonuses apply separately from any general Fel penalty or bonus)— after all, people don't tend to trust people who wear masks.
You will need to think carefully about modifiers for wearing a mask.
If stuck, use a general penalty of -10 to Fel if the mask can be seen.
If the character is able to conduct an interview in the dark, or use some similar subterfuge to avoid the mask being detected, the full bonus will apply.
26.
LIBRARY
The door to this room is closed and locked, and the only way to get in is by getting the key from the ‘attic’ above Drachenfels' master bedroom (location 53).
Nothing else will do, including Pick Lock skills, Smash spells (irrespective of MP augmentation), etc.
There is an impenetrable magical force here which only the library key can remove.
There are eight shelves of books within the library, plus two reading/writing desks with pens,(dried) inks and (ultra-brittle and useless) paper.
The eight shelves contain books under the following subjects: archaeology, history, genealogy, mythology, medicine (including alchemy), Lustrian and New World exploration and geography, the histories and sagas of Chaos incursions, and a large number of works on theology, heresies, witch hunts and the like.
This large collection contains nothing which couldn't be found in the libraries of a major city such as Middenheim or Altdorf (allow any scholarly type an Int test to realize this), except for the Chaos/heresy works, which would be restricted-access in the temples.
There really isn't much point in the adventurers sitting down to read (takes too long) or taking books away.
They are of no real value, although a Cleric might want to take a heretical work for the restricted library of his temple — this is quite acceptable.
Burning such works is also entirely acceptable!.
There are a couple of exceptions to this, however.
First, a careful search (takes 10 Turns) of the alchemical section turns up two works of note: De Lapis Philosophorum in Bretonnian, and the small and quirky Lermontov's Grimoire (see New Magic); the latter needs an I test to find it unless the adventurers know that it's here for some reason.
Second, a careful search (10 Turns) of the history section turns up a note stuffed into a tedious book on Parravon history if an I test is made to observe it; if found, give the players Handout 4 .
There are hazards here, of course.
Looking through the history section means that one character is hit by a simple but effective trap triggered by a pressure-sensitive plate below the carpeted floor.
From one left — hand set of shelves thin hardwood plates of wood scythe outwards at shoulder and shin height in front of the character; from the right-hand side a single similar plate scythes outwards at the level of the base of the spine.
These heights are in Human terms.
This trap inflicts D3 S 5 hits, or 1 S 3 hit for a Dwarf or Halfling (only hit by the lower two).
Also, anyone attempting to remove a book from the library will be attacked by a Guardian Spirit.
Each book has its own Guardian Spirit, which will attack until the book is dropped or replaced.
It should be fairly clear to the adventurers that this library isn't exactly packed with exciting Grimoires and forgotten lore, despite the find of Lermontov's Grimoire, and that if they want some really impressive magical reading matter they will have to look elsewhere.
That thought should get them deeper into the Castle, which is the general idea…
27.
HERALDIC DISPLAY
This chamber is of bare stone, decorated throughout with shields and emblems of noble houses of the Empire, Bretonnia and northern Tilea, together with some swords and maces, a couple of ornamental lances, a couple of crossbows, and a suit of plate armour either side of the west door.
Below each shield is a bronze plaque which contains rows of symbols of the Chaos Powers.
These are simply records kept by Constant Drachenfels of how many nobles he has slain by what means: for example, a descendant of the Duc de Parravon killed by disease is recorded as a symbol of Nurgle etched onto the plaque below the shield of that noble house.
A few complex cases are recorded with mixed or joined symbols (e.g., those of Nurgle and Tzeentch for someone killed by a disfiguring disease which caused the victim to be burnt as a mutant).
The weapons, as a point of detail, are mounted along the east wall.
Any players worth their salt will obviously expect the suits of armour to animate and attack, so don't disappoint them here.
Each suit attacks immediately a weapon on the east wall is touched.
Unfortunately for the adventurers, the swords carried by the suits of armour (one in each gauntlet) each have a Zone-dispelling effect enchanted on them; each sword can dispel any one Zone spell on contact, thereafter becoming an enchanted sword with no bonuses or special abilities.
One of the crossbows on the wall is magical, but wasn't quite enchanted properly.
It is a Bow of Strength with S 5, but 5% of its shots (roll of 96–00) actually fire backwards, right at the marksman himself, and hit automatically.
28.
THE CHAMBER OF TEMPTATION
This is a grim and vile sight.
The walls and floors are covered with massively bloodstained hangings and carpets, and mounted around the room are preserved bodies of victims killed in a manner which represents their ruling passion.
A glutton's gross body squats with eyes bulging from its face, suffocated with vast quantities of food forced into his mouth.
A miser's body lies cut in a thousand places by a huge array of coins with sharpened edges.
A drunkard has been drowned in a glass-sided butt of brandy.
There are, in all, ten such bodies carefully displayed as exhibits here.
Make a secret Int test for each character.
Those who fail see, at the far end of this room, something which they most wish to see — be it gems and gold, a magical weapon, a religious icon, a powerful Grimoire.
Use your knowledge of the adventurers to engineer an appropriate illusion for each.
Affected characters will find themselves compelled to walk over to take what they see.
When the affected characters get to the east wall (or as far as they can go in that direction if other characters stop them), they are attacked.
The expressions on the faces of the displayed bodies suddenly change; their faces contort and their limbs look as if their muscles are writhing below the surface of the skin.
Then, their chest cavities simply burst in a mass of bone and blood and repulsive, wriggling leeches explode forth, ten from each body.
The leeches look as if they have the faces of the bodies they have burst from, and they are capable of rearing up and attacking with a cluster of teeth around a central sucker.
Each leech attacks the nearest character.
These leeches are much tougher than most — see the Profiles section.
Characters witnessing the appearance of the leeches must make a Cl test or acquire D3 Insanity Points.
29.
THRONE ROOM
A detailed layout for this room is given in Map 10 .
The door has a Ward of Forbiddance spell upon it, with an active Cause Cowardly Flight as a secondary spell within the ward.
It also has a lock of unusual complexity (CR 55%).
Inside, the entire north wall is covered with a stained glass ‘window’— behind which is stone.
The ‘window’ shows the Chaos God Khorne, seated atop a pile of skulls, in an almost-parodied form.
There is a large ellipse of what appears to be a mirror within the design, just below the throne.
This part of the ‘window’ can be used for long-range  scrying ; a character looking into it and willing himself to see a far-distant scene can see into an elliptical area bounded by Middenheim to the north, Nuln to the south, some 25 miles west of Altdorf, and to around 100 miles east along the River Talabec out of Altdorf.
This doesn't allow fine-detail viewing — the viewer can't see into the windows of homes — but individual streets, river traffic, troop or merchant wagon movements and suchlike are readily seen.
Unfortunately, there is a dual peril in doing this if the viewer is not Constant Drachenfels himself.
First, it's hard to stop oneself looking at the scene, it's so fascinating.
A character must make a successful WP test to stop looking.
If this test is failed, the character must then keep looking for another Turn before being allowed to test again.
Characters looking into the mirror count as prone if attacked.
Second, each time the mirror is used for scrying, there is a chance that a Lesser Daemon (1–5, a Bloodletter; 6–10, a Fleshhound; see Profiles for reference) will come through the mirror and attack the viewer.
This chance is 1% for a quick look, then a re-roll each extra Turn with an additional 1% (cumulative) chance of something hostile turning up.
Attempting to destroy this ‘window’ is a bad idea; it's effectively indestructible.
The first time the adventurers make any attempt to break it, tell them that the figure of Khorne appears to move in the frame and the eyes of the god appear to be turned on them.
If they make a second attempt, have a Bloodletter arrive and attack them.
If they still persist in their foolish attempts at destruction, set a Bloodthirster (ROC-SD, or use the Greater Daemon profile from the WFRP rulebook) arrive and attack.
Before the scrying glass stands Drachenfels' throne, bounded about with thick black satin curtains hanging from ceiling rails.
These curtains have very heavy gold threading at the edges, and tapestry-work in other colours — especially red — portrays the Great Enchanter at play.
Characters casting more than a cursory glance at the extremely distressing scenes here must make a WP test to avoid gaining an Insanity Point.
The throne is of very solid wood, carved with symbols and sigils of all the major powers of Chaos and Evil.
Not surprisingly, it radiates magic to a character with Magic Sense skill.
It has some forty inlaid black opals and similar gemstones, each worth 10 GCs.
For each one that is removed, there is a 5% chance that either a Bloodletter or a Fleshhound (equal chance for either) suddenly appears and attacks.
The gems are also very carefully inlaid, so that a successful Dex test (Gem Cutting +30) is required to extract each gem whole
Sitting on Drachenfels' throne is a very bad idea, unless the sitter is Drachenfels himself.
Otherwise, the sitter's ankles and wrists are immediately grasped and held firm by tentacular protrusions which shoot from the mouths of certain Chaos faces in the wood.
These protrusions are hard as steel (T 7,D 8), and striking at them means that any miss is 75% likely to strike the unfortunate in the throne.
Only small hand weapons (knife and dagger) can be used in this way anyway.
The tentacles crush the victim for D3 automatic Wounds per round.
Anyone trying to free a seated victim also has to cope with the fact that the faces sculpted on the chair start gibbering and screeching, radiating a Cause Cowardly Flight effect in a 3-yard radius.
The throne itself has T 5 and D 22, and if it is destroyed, any victim sitting in it will be freed.
Unfortunately, destroying the throne also releases a Foetid Cloud into the area around it.
Along the south wall are small shrines to all the gods of Chaos and Evil known to the adventurers, and also to some gods they will not recognise; Nipponese, Cathayan and Lustrian gods of Chaos and Evil (a character with Theology skill is allowed an Int test to recognize these).
The adventurers will presumably have the sense to avoid these.
If they do something silly, such as taunting or defacing them, set some appropriately nasty servant of the deity on them (consult Realm of Chaos as appropriate).
If, however, a Cleric of Good or Law wishes to conduct some ritual cleansing, or calls down a blessing to effect same, then this is fair role-playing and the Cleric should not be grossly penalized; all the same, something should take an interest!
If you are using the pregenerated characters, Dunderl Goldhand will want to destroy the shrine to Slaanesh here; in this case, a Daemonette will arrive to attack him.
In short, if the adventurers wish to cleanse a shrine for some good role-play reason, set a minor enemy on them; if they are just thoughtlessly smashing the place up, have a much tougher enemy arrive.
Before these shrines, and the floridly-decorated prayer mats and suchlike which lie before them, a Harpy's cage is swinging from a metal chain and hook set into the ceiling.
The Harpy is magically kept alive, but suffers agonizing hunger pangs and is in constant pain.
She will attack in frenzy if the door of the cage is opened.
The Harpy is able to evade blows aimed through the bars of the cage, and missile fire is at a -30 penalty; if you wish, missile fire has a 10% chance per missile of freakishly breaking open the cage door, allowing the Harpy out!
Along the west wall, macabre curios and warped ornaments throng the shelves.
A one-handed clock moves backwards, an hourglass contains white sand (mixed with a little Warpstone) which flows upwards, a pipe-rack made of fused vertebrae holds meerschaums with bowls crafted in the forms of Daemon heads.
Add details as you see fit.
If the adventurers want to collect some curios, they can collect up to 250 GCs worth, with each GC of value being 1 Enc point.
30.
WARP PASSAGE
The east-west and north-south parts of this corridor both count as variable warp passages (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels).
They are plushly decorated with a red carpet and a fine wooden floor, and the walls have recessed oil lamps, paintings and hangings.
31.
MASTER BEDROOM
This large chamber was once very beautifully decorated.
The wooden floor (no carpets) is of Lustrian teak and mahogany, the walls are hung with black and red silks and satins, and a comfortable armchair set, tables, and other fine furnishings giving an air of luxury completed the decor at one time.
Now, everything has been destroyed, and the room is simply wrecked.
The one surviving item within this room is the cause of the senseless destruction.
Dominating the room — and presenting the adventurers with an implacable and unexpected enemy — is Drachenfels' bed.
This is a magically-animated four-poster which can move and attack.
The bed-posts are made of fused bones — hundreds of them — and the frame of fused ribs and skulls.
Black curtains hang from the rails atop the bed, and the side-curtains are each embroidered with four curious creatures — dog-sized bats with grinning Gnome heads.
The curtains at either end of the bed each has an embroidered design of a cherubic figure holding a golden trumpet; each of these can fire off one Wind Blast spell per round.
Luxurious furs (total value 200 GCs, Enc value of 140) cover the bed.
The bed trundles forward to attack the adventurers when they have moved fully into the room.
At the same time, the ‘Gnomebats’ project out from the curtains and attack as well.
This bizarre combat is a very dangerous one — refer to the Profiles section.
If the adventurers are able to defeat the Killer Bed, they can search the wreckage.
If they do, they can find the following (at a rate of 1 per 6 ‘character-turns’ of game time): a small steel casket containing four black opals (value 15 GCs each), a stick of pink coral which has the symbol of Tzeentch running right through the middle (harmless; value 60 GCs), four bloodstones (15 GCs each), and a pair of dented golden goblets (5 GCs apiece).
The wooden stairs along the north wall lead directly upwards to location 53.
32.
BATH CHAMBER
A sunken marble bath here has several copper water urns around it, vials of liquid soap and an ivory comb on a dressing table, towels, and similar accoutrements.
A black quilted silk jacket on a peg is enchanted, and gives 1AP, body/arms only.
This does not combine with any form of armour, normal or magical, but it will add to any protection given by, for example, a Robe of Toughness.
33.
WARP PASSAGE
This is a fixed warp passage (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels).
It looks slightly different each time the adventurers walk along it — slightly longer, shorter, thinner, lower ceiling height, etc — but it always terminates in a door which gives access to location 7a When the adventurers have entered 7a, the door behind them disappears.
If Bardul the Hunchback is with the adventurers, then they have other options he will tell them about.
They can walk along this passage holding hands in a human chain, holding on to the Dwarf, and be guided to either of two locations.
They can go upstairs to the first floor, almost directly above this passage; in this case they walk up a gentle incline and arrive at the west door leading from location 54.
Alternatively, they can be taken to the entrance to what Bardul knows only as ‘the rooms of light and darkness’, where (Bardul believes) Drachenfels has some important magical secrets hidden.
Bardul is far too scared to enter these places, and indeed he physically cannot; even if he tried (or was forced to) he would simply be warped out into his own room (location 55).
If the adventurers want to enter these rooms, they arrive at an entrance to location 49 (see location key for areas 49–52 for more details).
The choice is up to the adventurers.
2 34–48.
GUEST BUILDING
Locations 34–48 are a separate building inside the Castle walls, used exclusively for the accommodation of guests.
Rooms 34–43 are guest bedroom suites, mostly the same, with furnishings as one would expect (bed, chaise longue, chairs, table, dresser, etc.).
However, these rooms are not all the same.
Rooms 34, 36 and 41 have clearly been looted or pillaged, since even the covers have been torn from the beds and the rooms have been trashed.
On the floor of room 41 is the shrivelled corpse of an Orc in filthy, rusted chain mail, clutching at a battle axe, slain without a mark on his body, his face a frozen mask of fear even now.
Room 42 is different from the rest.
This was occupied by a junior cleric of Sigmar who accompanied one of the nobles attending the infamous Poison Feast of 1907; unlike his master, he was not deceived by Constant Drachenfels and he undertook rituals to purify this chamber and dedicate it to Sigmar.
Any devout follower of Sigmar is allowed a WP test to sense that this chamber is unlike the rest of the Castle, somehow more wholesome (Cleric of Sigmar +20, Initiate of Sigmar +10).
Astoundingly, even after all these centuries something of his efforts survives (Drachenfels himself shunned this chamber).
A loose stone under a bed-leg (I test to find, -10 penalty if not a follower of Sigmar, +20 if a Cleric or Initiate of Sigmar) can be prised up, to locate a hollow space in which the Cleric hid a note stuffed inside a small copper jar.
If the adventurers find this, give the players Handout 5.
This is also an especially good place to rest and sleep — see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels.
Room 44 is a simple storage room, which has mouldering old linen, brittle and useless wicker baskets, and some lumber piled up against the west wall.
Room 45 is a menial work-place, with a wood-burning stove used for heating water with a flue to the outside on the east wall, some simple utensils, butler and maid uniforms, and similar items.
Chamber 46 is a bathroom with two baths, and chambers 47 and 48 are privies.
There's nothing important in any of these locations, and if the adventurers fancy a bath they'll have to fetch water for themselves from the well outside (location 8) and heat it somehow.
They will probably want to do something about the fat and other charnel substances floating in the water, as well.
General Note : These chambers have deliberately been scripted with very little detail so that you can add your own.
These rooms are the most likely camping-place for bandits, Orcs and similar organized creatures who may have made (or are planning) an initial foray into Castle Drachenfels.
The Profiles section gives some fleshed-out NPCs, but you can easily develop your own or import them from other WFRP products if you wish.
Also, these chambers are a natural haunting-place for Ghosts and suchlike, who may be mad and hostile, or tormented souls seeking peace and possibly able to pass on useful information to the adventurers.
49–52.
THE CHAMBERS OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS
These chambers can only be reached via location 33, if the adventurers have the guidance of Bardul the Hunchback (see location 55).
If they follow him, wishing to come here, they find the passage filled with thickening fog and the path increasingly hard to follow.
Shortly, they stand before  a pair of frail-looking panelled and inlaid wooden doors which open readily into a simple chamber before them (Map 11 .
Chambers 49–51 all have the same floorplan, as shown in Map 11 .
As soon as the doors are opened, the adventurers find themselves standing at the threshold of room 49.
Bardul, and the passageway behind them, have simply disappeared.
& illus :
49.
LIGHT AND GOOD
This chamber is decorated entirely in yellow.
A bright yellow light shines from what looks like a small window in the east wall.
The ‘glass’ is hard as steel, and this is but a magical source of illumination.
The table bears glass and crystal goblets, ornate and slender-necked decanters of fine dessert wine, and silver trays of sweet biscuits (enough for two full meals, they are so nutritious).
Characters not of Good alignment suffer a -5 penalty to all tests here.
Shortly after entering, the adventurers find themselves faced by the Ghosts of three Elves standing before the doors to the south.
These Ghosts wear the insignia of Liadriel and are dressed as Initiates.
These ghosts want to stop the adventurers heading through the doors to the south; they believe Evil and Chaos lurk behind them.
Unlike most Ghosts, these have spellcasting abilities and will use them to stop the adventurers heading south.
The adventurers could fight, but it would be safer to try and talk their way past.
The Ghosts don't know exactly what is beyond the doors.
They have forgotten who they are, knowing only that they have been trapped by an evil enchanter.
Their confused intention is to protect the adventurers' souls from the evils beyond, but they also want to prevent some great evil being released into the world.
The Elf-ghosts are anxious, rather confused, and take a lot of time to decide anything when spoken to.
How to resolve this?
This should be done by some progressive staging.
If the adventurers hang around trying to reason with the Ghosts, they start to feel slightly drowsy.
The yellow light seems warm; the chaise longue inviting; the wine tempting (drinking any of this gives a -5 penalty to all tests for the duration of all encounters in rooms 49–52; it's terrific, but strong).
Lay this on gently.
The solution is to make a dramatic action here.
The place is full of torpor, which the adventurers must overcome.
One or more characters must stride towards the southern doors, declaring that they are here to destroy the Chaos and Evil beyond.
Make a Fel test for the character announcing this to the ghosts, and apply the following modifiers:
+5 if character is an elf;
+10 if lead character is of Good alignment;
+10 if the adventurers have made reasoned attempts to discuss their actions with the ghosts;
-5 if lead character is of Neutral or Lawful alignment;
-10 if the adventurers just try to force their way past the ghosts;
-20 if the adventurers don't specifically state that they are here to destroy evil and Chaos.
Apply other modifiers as you see fit.
The ghosts only attack the adventurers if they say or do something stupid, ignore them, or attack them.
This Fel test is to determine whether the Ghosts accept the adventurers' intentions, or whether they remain unhappy about them.
The EP award, rather than the likelihood of being attacked, is the way to calibrate how good the adventurers are at role-playing this encounter.
The Ghosts are of Good alignment, and if they give the party a really bad time in combat they may desist, not wishing to kill, and offer the adventurers a chance to reconsider.
There's nowhere else for the adventurers to go, of course, but it could buy them time to use curative spells, potions, and suchlike.
When the adventurers open the doors to chamber 50, the Ghosts disappear.
50.
DARKNESS AND CHAOS
This room is decorated entirely in lilac.
The room's decorations are very similar to room 49, but the occupants are very different.
Two Daemonettes lounge on the chaise longue, inviting the adventurers to enjoy their favours in their changed forms (see below).
Above them, a small incense burner gives off a languid and heavy, musky scent.
In addition to aiding the illusion (see below), this slows the adventurers' reflexes (I -10 while in this room).
The Daemonettes appear to characters failing an Int test as attractive members of the opposite sex of their own race; a successful WP test is required to resist their charms.
As soon as a character is within reach, or if they are attacked themselves, the Daemonettes attack and the  illusion of their appearance is immediately dispelled.
If they manage to lure a victim within reach before dropping the illusion, the Daemonettes will automatically gain surprise on the first round of hand-to-hand combat.
The Daemonettes fight viciously to prevent the adventurers entering room 51, but they won't enter this room themselves.
51.
LIGHT AND LAW
This chamber has the same decor, but is pure white.
A vase of white lilies stands on the table; the decanter is a silvered jug of water only.
All non-Lawful characters suffer a -5 penalty to all tests here.
Standing at the far end of the room, before the southern doors, is a man clad head to toe in plate mail armour, wielding a rune-inscribed bastard sword.
His breastplate shows the insignia of Solkan, the Avenger; a character with Heraldry or Theology skills will recognize this at once, as will any Lawful character on a successful Int test.
He looks extremely real and solid, and is clearly not illusory, but he talks in a stiff, halting manner.
Thadeus Schnelling is a Witch Hunter, the one survivor of a Lawful band whom Drachenfels mostly slew.
Most of the time he spends in suspended animation in an interdicted bubble of the warp, summoned here only when intruders arrive — hence his confusion.
However, he isn't uncertain about his role.
He knows that the intruders are followers of Chaos and wicked heretics, here to find some terrible evil beyond the south doors.
He prepares to attack…
The adventurers have got to be very fast here.
They must state immediately that they are here to destroy Chaos and Evil or some direct equivalent (such as‘Hail to Solkan!’).
Nothing less will halt Thadeus in his tracks.
This buys them an extra round while Thadeus hesitates, in which time they must come up with something more to prevent him from attacking after this initial hesitation.
Showing the insignia of Neutral deities cuts no ice with Thadeus — such gods are little better than the Proscribed Ones.
Showing the insignia of a Good deity (eg Liadriel) is better, and adds a +10 modifier to the Fel test here (see below).
If there's a Lawful character in the party, the bonus is +20 (+30 if a follower of Solkan).
However, it's more important to consider what the adventurers say next.
If they offer a brief story of their exploits against Chaos and Evil, with some supporting evidence (eg, if they have the bones belonging to a Ghost which they have offered to bury in hallowed ground, if they have Lermontov's Grimoire, etc), Thadeus stops to listen.
Make the adventurers sweat.
They must prove to Thadeus that they're here to destroy what he hates, and they've got to do this in a reasonable period of time.
No fast talking, no false promises, and if combat ensues there's no quarter asked or given.
Appealing for the Witch-Hunter's aid will help.
If a character points out that there may be Chaos or Evil behind the doors (or, even better, asserts confidently that there is), and asks Thadeus to help, this adds a +10 bonus to the Fel test to be made.
Make a Fel test for the character who has done most of the talking.
Apply the modifiers listed above.
Subtract -20 as a penalty from any character whose player specifically states that his character is using Bluff or some similar skill; Thadeus favours the straightforward approach and strongly dislikes people who behave otherwise.
Then, apply a modifier of between -30 and +30, depending on how you rate the performance of the character doing the talking.
Be moderately harsh in this judgement.
Thadeus is a harsh person.
If the test is successful, Thadeus will let the adventurers enter room 52.
If he has agreed to help them, he will also try to enter, but will vanish on crossing the threshold — called back to his stasis somewhere in the warp.
If the adventurers enter room 51 again for any reason, he will reappear, but will have no recollection of meeting them before.
52.
DARKNESS AND EVIL
This chamber is decorated entirely in black, with a red window to the east allowing a baleful light into the chamber.
The internal decor differs from that shown in Map 11 .
There is no southern door, and along the west wall is a shrine and magical circle of Kháine, and black candles burn and gutter in black iron candlesticks.
Golden bowls of blood stand on a table within the circle.
At the far end of the chamber is a coffin on a heavy table, and seated beside it a woman in a low-cut black dress with red silk edging.
The adventurers have come upon Maximilian von Steinhoff, a Vampire from Talabheim, and Juliane Fassbinder, a Vampiric Minion (see New Monsters) who travels with and protects her master.
When the adventurers first arrive, Maximilian opens his eyes and begins to awaken; from this moment on, he is gaining strength all the time.
The Profiles section gives details of profile changes.
He is silent until 6 rounds have elapsed; Juliane does the talking.
She waves a scroll grandly and announces that this is the only way to escape this room (indeed, there are no doors to the south).
She holds the adventurers at bay by holding the scroll over a candle flame and threatening to destroy it.
Mockingly, she says that she and her lover can escape ‘as the mists’, but the adventurers cannot.
If the adventurers stop to negotiate, Juliane explains that she and Maximilian have come to the Castle to find something in the Great Tower.
She will not say what the item is, claiming (reasonably) that she won't divulge the secret of a valuable or important item to people she does not know and can hardly be expected to trust.
The scroll they have with them allows entrance to that Tower, and is the only way out of this room.
It contains a ritual to Kháine which will open a portal to the Tower, and the adventurers will be allowed to accompany Juliane and Maximilian if they don't harm them.
The truth is different, of course, and Juliane is just stalling until Maximilian awakens fully.
These two entered this room ethereally, drawn by the evil and the existence of the portal to location 64 inside this room; they seek the evil magic within the Great Tower.
They have drawn out the magical circle simply to trap the adventurers, when they saw them approaching the area.
Now they feign co-operation with the adventurers in the hope of slaying them and feasting on their blood.
The adventurers, poor dupes, may agree.
If they really do trust a Vampire, or even a Vampiric Minion come to that, they'll deserve all they are about to get.
Maximilian, rising from his coffin after 6 rounds, orders the adventurers to stand around the perimeter of the magic circle while he and Juliane stand within it, reciting incantations from the scroll.
You might charitably allow an Academic with spellcasting powers an Int test (with a -25 penalty) to recognize that this ritual doesn't seem to have anything to do with travel, but does have quite a lot to do with death and blood.
Completing the Ritual : If the ritual is completed, the adventurers will be in desperate — possibly terminal — trouble.
When the ritual is finished, a ring of stone around the perimeter of the magic circle flies out of the ground and a huge spout of blood gushes outwards in a wave over the adventurers.
The blood is hot and corrosive, and as it splatters the adventurers (there is no way of evading it) it burns the skin, irrespective of armour, magical protections and the like, causing burning and bleeding wounds.
From this moment onwards, each character loses 1 W point per round, and anyone trying to cast spells or do anything else which requires concentration must make a successful T test or be too distracted by the pain.
Wounds only heal, and W loss is only stopped, if magical healing is used or if a character with the Heal Wounds skill spends at least 3 rounds attending to the bleeding character.
Maximilian and Juliane, laughing, attack the adventurers on the round after they are struck by the wave; the Vampire and his Minion are immune to the effects of the corrosive blood themselves.
A fight now ensues (see below).
Disturbing the Ritual : The adventurers can do this simply by stepping into the circle and attacking the Vampire and his minion, but the circle offers them some protection by the time the adventurers attack: treat Maximilian and Juliane as having 1 AP, all locations, and +10 bonuses to their I scores while within the circle.
This doesn't apply if the ritual is completed, since the circle will have exploded outwards and had more serious effects.
Fight : If the adventurers attack quickly, be sure that you have Maximilian's spells listed correctly (see Profiles).
Juliane does not have Maximilian's weaknesses to holy objects and the like, and will use any means to prevent such objects being used against him.
Maximilian, however, is desperately hungry for blood, and after 3 rounds of combat he must make a Cl test (and at 2-round intervals after this until a test is failed).
If he fails, he loses control and attacks only with his bite, overcome by lust for for blood.
Only when he has drained (killed) a victim will he attack more logically (with spells, etc.) again.
If reduced to 1 Wound or below, Maximilian turns ethereal and then passes through the floor in the centre of the circle, leaving Juliane to her fate.
Maximilian has other coffins within travelling distance of the Castle, of course.
If he gets away, you can easily have him become a nemesis figure for the adventurers in future, returning again and again to avenge himself for the loss of Juliane.
Hunting him down and destroying him forever can become a full-scale adventure in itself.
Victory : The only valuables the Vampire and his minion have are on their persons (see their profiles).
The adventurers will probably want to go through the usual routine of tipping the earth out of the coffin, smashing it, and suchlike, but then they have the pressing problem of getting out of this room.
Heading backwards is useless; the door by which they entered the room has disappeared.
If the ritual was completed, the adventurers still alive have it fairly easy.
A ring of stone has erupted from the floor and left a glowing red ring of clotted blood and red light.
The circle of stone within this can be peeled away like the skin from a grape, revealing a blood-red shaft below.
The depth of the shaft is inestimable, since it is disappears into a red fog.
Ropes let down into it seem to go down forever, coins dropped never make a sound, etc.
It's the only way out.
If a character simply jumps in, he lands on the floor in location 63.
It looks like an insane risk, but it's the only way to go, so the adventurers will do it eventually.
You can simply enjoy watching your players come up with ingenious, crazy or simply bizarre plans to avoid the inevitable.
If the ritual wasn't completed, the adventurers will have to locate the portal within the circle for themselves.
This is actually pitifully simple.
All they have to do is erase the magical circle, which they can do simply by rubbing out a few inches of the chalk with a rag or cloth.
The circle then disappears wholly, and a glowing red ring of light within marks out the circle of the portal.
The stone within can be peeled away as before — it feels rubbery and soft.
The magical circle simply hides this portal, and it's very simple to reveal it.
Obviously, the adventurers may try elaborate or complicated ploys here such as calling for a blessing, Dispel Magic spells, and so on.
It's all entirely unnecessary.
FIRST FLOOR CHAMBERS AND THE GREAT TOWER
Map 12 shows the first floor of the Castle, and Map 13 shows the higher floors of the Great Tower.
53.
THE ATTIC AND THE CLOCK
The attic is effectively ‘open plan’; that is, there is no door between this chamber and the bedroom below (location 31).
The attic is full of clutter: carpets, old chairs, tables, stacked paintings, a rocking-horse, children's toys, and suchlike.
However, all of these have a sinister twist to them.
An abacus uses human gall-stones on taut human sinew, the rocking horse has a semi-skeletal head, a set of wooden toy soldiers all have subtle mutations when looked at for a second time, and so on.
The one real hazard here is the clock mounted on the north wall.
Below the clock is an iron hook holding a key ring, with a set of iron keys (for locations 25, 26, 79, 91).
This means that the adventurers are very likely to approach the clock…
It appears to be nothing more than a large cuckoo clock, with a single hand.
When the adventurers are searching the attic, the clock suddenly chimes very loudly; the single hand begins whizzing round at high speed, and the clock chimes a random hour each round.
Every time it chimes, the clock creates a different magical effect.
Roll a D12 to determine which hour the clock strikes, and refer to the Profiles section for details of the corresponding magical effect.
The clock's chime also stirs other things into action, as explained below.
In addition to its magical effects, the clock can lash out with its pendulum chains (which are amazingly ‘elastic’), and it can generate illusory Clone Images of itself.
The cuckoo flies out to attack — a tiny opponent, but it has a savage peck and if wounded without being destroyed it becomes a frenzied killing machine.
Check the profile for the clock and the cuckoo carefully to make sure you use this remarkable opponent to the full.
While the clock is chiming, there is also a 50% chance per character per round of being attacked by another object in the room: the rocking-horse bites, a chair leg strikes at a shin, a table drawer flies out and strikes a vicious blow in the stomach, a toy soldier stabs at an ankle, and so on.
Each of these secondary attacks should be treated as having WS 25 and S 3; it is impossible to destroy  everything in the room which is capable of delivering these attacks, and the only way to stop them is to destroy the clock.
When the clock has been destroyed, the rest of the objects in the room cease attacking at once.
When the adventurers have finished with the clock, this chamber will probably be a complete shambles.
Worse, there's not much of any real value or interest here-no treasures or magic, no childhood diary, no valuable antiques.
But there are the keys, without which the adventurers cannot gain entrance to vital areas of the Castle.
And there is a door to the west, to allow them to continue their explorations.
54.
WARP PASSAGE
This is a variable warp passage (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels).
Note that if the adventurers are with Bardul, they will emerge at the west end of passage 33, as shown on Map 12 .
55.
BARDFUL'S ROOM
This small room is quite spartanly decorated, with a wooden pallet bed, simple furnishings, and a number of broken clocks about the place.
There is also a small locked coffer hidden under the bed; this contains several bags of clock parts, plus a bag with 162 GCs, one with seven turquoise stones worth 3 GCs each, and a pair of black pearls (value 60 GCs each) in a pouch.
This room is inhabited by Bardul, a hunchback Dwarf, who is a pivotal NPC fully described in the next chapter (pp 70–72) and in the Profiles section.
This chamber is a natural place for Bardul to retire to talk with the adventurers and offer some of his Lustrian coffee.
If the adventurers haven't met him yet, this is a good first place to encounter him.
56.
THE SLOUGH
The door to this chamber is bolted from the outside and there is a Ward of Forbiddance spell cast upon the door.
Bardul warns strongly against entering, saying that dreadful magic lies beyond; the walls and door are magically treated to prevent the magic escaping, he says, so it's quite safe outside.
If the adventurers really want to investigate this place, it appears as a whirling vortex of buff-coloured smoke, with a strong smell of bile.
There is a quite hideous screaming and wailing coming from what seem to be endless depths within the Slough.
If any character enters the chamber, he is sucked into the Chaos-stuff instantly and lost forever in the Warp.
This chamber simply offers the careless character the chance to disappear from campaign play permanently.
57.
STORAGE CHAMBER
Bardul uses this chamber to store an amazing range of things which he has picked up over the years in the hope that one day they might be useful.
The place is a real magpie's nest.
There is nothing outstandingly valuable here, but there is much which might be useful.
Here are some examples, which you can easily add to:
a pair of storm lanterns;
flasks and bell-jars holding a total of 192 pints of oil.
This could be perfect for heating water to wash clothing (and characters), if combined with oil burners from location 72;
a box containing sealed jars of dried raisins, amazingly still edible (enough for 30 meals here, but they need to be eked out with other food to avoid severe stomach upsets!);
61 boxes each containing 24 tallow candles;
a (broken) magnifying glass in a fine wooden case lined with silk;
six waterskins bearing the branded Bretonnian legend ‘Property of Merceaux-Descloux Chamber of Commerce’;
…and so on.
If you need a rule of thumb, any item which is common or plentiful is 90% likely to be here; any item which is average or scarce is 70% likely to be here; anything else is 20% likely to be here.
The adventurers may be able to beg or buy some badly needed pieces of equipment from Bardul here.
They could steal them, too, or force the Dwarf to hand them over, but that would not be the smartest of moves, as Bardul's friendship and co-operation is a valuable asset.
58.
KITCHEN AND PRIVY
Bardul has a small stove with a chimney set into one flue here, where he brews Lustrian coffee (he has many sealed tins of this here) and cooks whatever he can find to eat.
There is a half-eaten roast rat in an oven tray here, to indicate his tastes in cuisine.
There is also a chamber pot by an adjacent vent; Bardul cheerily dumps his personal refuse down a vent into the kitchen below.
59.
THE SCRIBE'S ROOM
This chamber is equipped as a scribe's workroom, and is inhabited by the Ghost of old Stanislav Goethe, a half-Kislevite (on his mother's side), half-Ostlander scholar.
Goethe is a very irascible and difficult old man, who has one major problem: he doesn't believe that he is dead.
He is on good terms with Bardul, who tactfully doesn't refer to his being dead, and will brief the adventurers on this point.
Stanislav's bones lie on the floor around the study chair in which he died.
Details of Stanislav, what he knows and how to role-play him, can be found in his profile and in the section Castle Dwellers in the following chapter.
The adventurers need to be well role-played here.
Stanislav is a difficult old man who believes that the current year is 2464, a half-century or so in the past.
‘The Master’(Constant Drachenfels himself) is away for a while, and the adventurers have to pose as friends or messengers, etc., to gain any help from the old sage-Ghost.
Players should be made to work hard for anything they get from the old Ghost.
If they can prevent frustration with the crotchety old Ghost from driving them to violence, they could obtain some very useful information from him.
The study itself is rather decrepit.
The inks have dried out, the papers crumpled and crumbled, the wrapped piles of letters have begun to crinkle and fall apart, the seals have aged and cracked, and the place is generally a mess.
The adventurers will only be able to search the place if they  destroy Stanislav, who will protect his work-place to the bitter end.
There is very little here of any value, though — the room's treasure is the knowledge possessed by the Ghost.
Much of the paperwork concerns mundane transactions like the ordering of supplies for the Castle.
In a secret drawer at the back of the top drawer in the desk (I test to find if searched for), there are some coded entries for suppliers of magical materials who are clearly unscrupulous people.
An Int test (Cryptography +10) allows these names to be decoded; there are no exact addresses, but an entry such as‘Schwenninger of N., four unbaptised infants’ could be enough to track down the supplier in Nuln.
The adventurers could use the information to denounce the suppliers to the authorities and hope for a reward (or perhaps a Chaos cult declaring war on them), or less scrupulous characters might turn to blackmail, either for money or for magical training.
Obviously, much of the information recorded here will be very out of date, but the families of those incriminated might still be powerful, rich, and/or engaged in cultist activities, necromancy, or generally nefarious deeds.
The adventurers could even try a little blackmail of their own.
For the fiendish GM, some of the information here might be inaccurate…
Finally, the scribe's petty cash box is in the bottom drawer of the desk, and contains 2 GCs, 71 SSs, and 145 BPs.
60–63.
CHAOS CHAMBERS
These chambers all have the feature that they are far, far larger inside than their external dimensions suggest they could be.
Their exact dimensions aren't easily measured, though, since they are as inconstant as all Chaos terrains, and whenever dimensions and scale are important, these are specified in the individual descriptions below.
They are shown as separate locations only because Drachenfels was able to visit them in whatever order he chose, and characters might somehow be able to by-pass one terrain to get to another in the sequence.
Drachenfels threw prisoners into these chambers to watch their struggles and death-throes with the occasional guest in the Chamber of Portals (location 64).
These rooms are nothing but a dangerous hazard for the adventurers, and best avoided, unless you are using an adventure theme which forces them to enter these terrains to regain some lost object or person (see Adventures in Castle Drachenfels).
60.
THE BONEFIELD
This room appears to be bare and innocuous, with a door to the south, but as soon as one character steps through the east-facing door, all the adventurers find themselves drawn into the Bonefield.
The terrain consists of endless crushed and mangled bones, shattered skeletons of humanoids and beasts, and skulls scattered about like pebbles.
All characters suffer a -1 penalty to M and a -10 penalty to I here; they're walking through shin-high bone piles.
Running is only possible at half normal running speed.
In the distance can be seen a shimmering blue-green arch with tinges of pink, and beyond this a fuzzy indistinctness.
There's no other way to get out of this nightmare land than to crunch one's way to the arch.
When the adventurers get within 48 yards of the arch in the distance, a dreadful obstacle springs up before them.
Bones fly up from the ground all around them, magically assembling themselves into the massive skeleton of some huge, dinosaur-like beast.
On the brow of the enormous skull the symbol of Khorne is clearly visible.
The Skeletal Dinosaur attacks immediately.
The adventurers have to deal with this quickly.
Six rounds after the Skeletal Dinosaur springs up, two Bloodletters appear 12 yards from the arch (between the arch and the adventurers if they are still heading for it) and attack any characters still present.
Three rounds later, and each four rounds thereafter, two more Bloodletters appear.
They will not pursue the adventurers through the arch, so a well-organized and swift exit is indicated!
61.
THE MEADOW OF CARESSES
As soon as a character moves through the arch from area 60, he finds himself in a meadow of what looks like thick, lush, flesh-coloured grass.
However, the ‘grass’ is actually myriads of slender wiggling fingers, which caress and tickle those walking along.
The effect is partly magical, so armour doesn't stop this, although specific enchantments against Chaos will.
The clutching, fondling and tickling is distracting, and characters suffer -5 penalties to Cl, WP, WS and BS here, and a -1 penalty to M .
Occasionally, there erupts from the surface a squirming    mass of waving and clutching hands.
Roll a D6 for each character once per Turn, and when the Daemonettes appear: on a roll of 1 or 6, hands erupt right by the character, who must make an I test (Wrestling +10, Escapology +10) to avoid being held fast.
A character who is held fast cannot move or fight, and is treated as prone.
The hands have T 2 and W 12, and companions may try to hack a held character free.
The clutching hands do not move, and are themselves treated as prone.
In the distance, the adventurers can see an archway of yellow and green, with running colours and an unpleasant appearance.
The archway looks much like a giant length of intestine.
This is the only way out, so the adventurers must head for it, even though they can't be sure that the haze and mist they see beyond the archway offers any real hope of release.
When the adventurers get within 48 yards of the arch, three Daemonettes appear and attack them.
These Daemonettes have important Chaos attributes — Multiple Arms and Elastic Limbs — which make them dangerous opponents.
The Daemonettes have the symbol of Slaanesh clearly marked on their foreheads.
Six rounds after these three attack, two more will appear 12 yards from the arch, and then two more each three rounds thereafter.
The adventurers must cut their way to the archway quickly if they are to have any hope of surviving.
62.
THE MIASMIC MARSH
As soon as a character walks through the green and yellow arch from area 61, he finds himself in this vast stagnant bog.
Here and there, the sodden, pool-strewn ground is broken by outcrops of black, rotted trees, rather like the blasted remnants of a mangrove swamp; if examined closely, the stumps have the symbol of Nurgle etched into them.
Black, stinking water is covered by a thick green scum, which crawls with bugs, centipedes, bloated flies and worse.
Here and there, dead rats and other corpses float on the scum.
Swarms of flies and mosquitoes hover over the marshes.
Characters suffer an M penalty of -2 here (to a minimum of 1).
In the distance is an arch of pink and blue, continually changing hues and exact shape, beckoning as the only exit once again.
There won't be any encounters here; the danger is the place itself.
It takes 10 minutes to reach the arch, slogging through the filth and scum.
Make a secret I test for each character (Dwarf -10, Halfling -30).
Those who fail will, at some time during the trek, lose their footing and fall into the fetid water of the marsh.
They can get up again, but must make a T test or else acquire the black plague.
If the adventurers have the sense to give Halfling comrades a piggy-back ride, award a few extra EPs.
Unfortunately, Dwarfs are too heavy for piggy-backing.
Also, the effect of wading waist-deep in this stuff is really disgusting.
It's impossible to get the stench out of one's clothing until it is thoroughly washed.
Until a character can wash himself, and clean his clothes (including armour), he suffers a penalty of -5 to I and C1 due to distraction and a -5 penalty to all T tests.
63.
THE ETHEREAL WOOD
When a character steps through the ever-changing arch, he finds himself on a narrow pathway through a forest of bizarre trees.
The trees are bleached, or grey, or silver and translucent, or semi-ethereal, and within their branches and trunks appear the contorted faces of people in awful torment.
A cold, bitter wind blows through the branches, its whistling filled with the cries of tormented souls.
Each character must make a Cl test (modified as normal for protections against fear) or suffer -10 penalties to WS, BS, Cl and WP .
In the distance, the adventurers can see a green hill, and the rays of a rising sun on the other side.
The adventurers have to head for the hill, but as they do it appears that the grey trees begin to grow and spread up the hillside.
The adventurers must hurry to reach the hill ahead of the expanding grey forest.
At the foot of the hill, just ahead of the expanding forest as the adventurers reach him, the Ethereal Champion of Tzeentch appears (see Profiles).
The Champion rasps, ‘I want a soul.
Give me a soul to crush’, clenching his gauntleted fist in a graphic gesture.
The adventurers have three options:
They can give the Champion a soul.
This satisfies him and allows the other adventurers to run and escape automatically while the Champion is otherwise engaged.
The character whose soul is taken becomes a lifeless husk, never to return from this place.
You can improvise details of how the soul is destroyed if needs be, but the odds are that the adventurers won't agree to one of their number getting this treatment.
The adventurers can run (and this means running at maximum rate, not standard movement!).
This allows the Champion several free rounds of attacks, since movement up the hill is at half normal running pace and the distance  to the top of the hill is 128 yards.
These ‘free attacks’ will be directed at the slowest character, who will almost certainly be slain.
However, if a fast character turns round to help with spellcasting support after getting (most of the way) to the top of the hill, this just might work.
The adventurers stop and fight.
This is probably the best option, but the Champion is a dangerous opponent, and time is against them.
Three rounds after combat begins, the forest catches up with the adventurers, and then it spreads up the hillside at a rate of 16 yards per round.
Slow movers may need to break off combat and leave finishing off the Champion to their swifter-moving friends if all are to get out alive!
Any character who doesn't get to the top of the hill before the forest does is sucked into the trees, lost forever as one of the damned souls trapped in the translucent trunks.
Characters who make it to the top of the hill see a brilliant flash of sunlight, experience momentarily the scent of a summer day abundant with wild flowers and the taste of sweet wine and nectar- and then find themselves standing in a corridor, with their backs to the west wall, opposite the door to the scribe's room (location 59).
64.
THE CHAMBER OF PORTALS
This chamber is only reachable via the portal in room 52.
This huge circular chamber has walls which are inlaid with a complete circle of archways, and in the centre of the room is a spiral staircase which leads directly down to the dungeons (location 69).
Stairs to the south lead up to a gallery which runs around the room above the level of the archways (some 16 feet up), with a door visible on the north side.
One of the archways — the one exactly at the north — is a large wooden door, which leads into a small passage which is a fixed warp passage leading to location 53.
As shown in Map 13 overleaf, there is a massive throne-like wooden chair, with comfortable cushions, which is capable of magically moving around the room on command, to give its occupant a view through any archway he desires.
Chained to the chair is a Daemonette of unusually human and attractive appearance (although it has a normal profile), captured as a concubine by Drachenfels long ago.
It is furious at its long magical captivity and unable to escape.
Its magical chain is about 18ft long, allowing the Daemonette to reach the central stairwell and most of the half of the room in which the chair stands at any time; when the adventurers arrive, the chair will be as shown on the map.
When the adventurers arrive here, roll a D6 for each character to see where they appear:
1 — in west half of room, stunned, unable to move or attack or cast spells for D4 rounds, but can parry with a -20 penalty.
2 — as above, but stunned for 1 round only.
3 — dumped on seat of pants in west half of room, penalty of -10 to WS, BS and I for first round only.
4 — standing in west half of room, no penalties.
5, 6 — standing in east half of room.
The Daemonette attacks the nearest character immediately; on appearing in the room, all characters must make a successful I test or be surprised, giving the Daemonette a free round of attacks.
The Daemonette is deaf to reason, and longs only to kill.
Some characters may not realise that it is a Daemonette at first, of course .
When the adventurers get the chance to investigate, the archways are an intriguing find.
Four archways show the scenes in areas 60–63, and it is possible to walk through these archways to appear within the area in question (a one-way portal, alas).
A number of small windows look into areas 80, 81a–e, and 82a–i, and these allowed Drachenfels to watch the atrocities that took place in these chambers.
The other archways show areas in Cathay, Araby, Nippon, Lustria, Norsca, and the New World, or far more sinister lands such as the Chaos Wastes, the Castle of a dread vampiric necromancer, Ghouls feasting in a graveyard, and other wonders.
This offers you an opportunity to expand the scope of adventuring in the Castle greatly.
If you wish to allow the archways to be portals (and this doesn't have to mean all of them!), then the adventurers can reach one or more of the areas shown beyond the archways.
If you don't want to complicate life like this, then the archways only show these areas; they don't permit access to them.
65.
THE WHISPERERS
This huge chamber is reached by a short spiral staircase which leads up a few feet beyond the gallery door in room 64.
The scene beyond is odd, because it is partly illusory (characters making a successful Int test recognise the illusions for what they are, but they still experience them).
There are no windows, but there is the illusion of  windows.
There are illusory curtains, from ceiling to floor, which gently billow into the room as if blown by a warm, gentle breeze.
There is a (real) wooden floor which looks bewildering; the grain and ring patterns in the wood look as if the wood was a liquid oil, allowed to run and then dry.
The furnishings are very luxurious and inviting.
The one exit is a spiral staircase leading upwards in the distance, on the south side of the chamber.
In the centre of the room sit two small, wizened figures, playing chess with unusual wooden pieces.
The chess set changes every so often, unpredictably, in colour and form, as if Tzeentch himself were influencing it (it will lose this property if it is taken out of the Castle).
The small figures are magical creations, Homunculi (see New Monsters).
They watch the adventurers with curiosity, but continue their chess game.
They will defend themselves if attacked, and will speak if spoken to or if the adventurers head for the spiral staircase opposite.
They speak courteously, but in a strangely mechanical way, with a flat intonation.
Here are some sample questions and answers; as you can see, they don't know much, and lack the mental equipment for intuitive or imaginative leaps.
Who are you?
We are servants of the Oracle.
The Oracle?
Who's the Oracle?
He who lives upstairs.
Can we see the Oracle?
If he has invited you.
How do we get an invitation?
If the Oracle has invited you, you may see him.
Can we see him without an invitation?
We may not let you pass.
Well, can we go and ask him for an invitation?
If he has invited you.
Sigh.
What do you know about the rest of the Castle?
The Oracle lives upstairs.
Who lives downstairs?
We live downstairs from the Oracle.
And apart from you and the Oracle?
We do not know.
Well, it's been nice talking to you, but we'd like to see the Oracle now.
If he has invited you.
Oh, yes, he invited us all right.
We've been friends for years.
He didn't tell you we were coming?
We are ordered to see your invitation .
Ah.
Just a minute — oh, bother, I must have left it at home.
I'm afraid you'll just have to take our word for it .
We may not let you pass.
The Homunculi do not allow anyone to see the oracle unless invited.The adventurers will need to keep their wits about them to get past these pests.
The kind of tactic which can work here is this: the adventurers bluff, say they've left their invitation behind, retire downstairs, write an invitation, and seal the paper or vellum with an impressive wax seal which they then flourish at the Homunculi.
The Homunculi are not truly intelligent, and can be taken in by any subterfuge along these lines if they fail an Int test (which should be modified by the role-play skill of the adventurers).
However, they're not so stupid as to allow the adventurers to forge such a document right in front of them and get away with it.
The Homunculi will attack the adventurers if they try to reach the oracle without showing some form of invitation.
66.
THE ORACLE
Seated alone in an almost lightless chamber, the Oracle is a potentially terrifying sight.
His chamber is decorated almost wholly in black and midnight blue, and an 8-yard diameter circle around the Oracle's throne is covered in thick, slimy strands which look like a gooey spider's web.
Astrological charts, a couple of crystal balls on oddly clawed stands, litters of long-decayed scrolls, and similar items are scattered about the floor, on a couple of tables, and on stands.
The Oracle himself is both frightening and disgusting to look upon.
He appears as a man of unbelievable age.
His skin is translucent, revealing the arteries, veins and bones beneath the surface, the outlines of internal organs being apparent also.
He permanently secretes a thick, transparent mucus about this body, which is clad only in an ancient blue-black robe.
The eyes in his skull-like face have long sunk into their sockets, and the rotted remains of a few teeth share his fetid mouth with a blackened, slightly forked tongue.
The Oracle's scabrous, hairless scalp is — fortunately — mostly concealed by the black hood of his robe.
The Oracle responds at once to anyone entering this chamber, and asks them slowly in his husky, graveyard voice what they wish with him.
If the adventurers ask about the Oracle himself, he will give only the barest of details; that he is a seer into the future, a servant to his master (Drachenfels), and he has been here for — he can't remember how long.
That's all he gives away; any further questioning makes him irritable and he refuses to answer further on this point.
If the Oracle is asked about Drachenfels, his reply depends on the adventure you are running.
Usually, the Oracle says simply that ‘the Master is asleep’, but if you are running an adventure in which Drachenfels is returning to life and the adventurers haven't killed him yet, the Oracle's eyes gleam as he says that ‘the Master is growing stronger, he will come to see me soon’, as he clasps his hands together in unholy pleasure.
The adventurers may ask other questions of the Oracle, but the questioner must make a Fel test for each question he asks.
A failed test means that the Oracle dismisses that character, refusing to answer this or any further questions for him.
Stupid or frivolous questions don't get an answer; the Oracle dismisses the questioner regardless of the Fel test.
The Oracle's answers should have some grain of truth.
For example, a prediction can be tied into a later encounter in  the Castle, or to an encounter on the way back to the adventurers' base.
Alternatively, you can make an intriguing doom-laden prediction (‘beware the old Tilean who walks with a limp — he carries a poisoned blade for you’) which you can make come true at any later time you like.
If the adventurers are a talkative bunch, you might allow the Oracle to reminisce fondly over the counsel he gave to Drachenfels over the years.
For example, the Oracle might say, ‘I could see in the stars that the Feast would take in the foolish, I told my master to prepare for a great revenge’, and then have the Oracle tell the adventurers the story of the Poison Feast from the Drachenfels novel in full , if the players haven't read that book.
If they have, you can embellish the tale of the Leprous Pavanne from the Introduction in a similar way.
However, at the end of all this the adventurers have to move to the staircase opposite to continue their journey upward.
The Oracle clearly becomes very anxious about this and demands to know their business.
They will have to fight or bluff their way through.
Bluffing means that the adventurers must have a plausible story ready immediately.
An example might be, from a spellcaster, ‘I have come to study the magic atop the tower, my own master wishes to fortify his own Castle with a similar protection.
He exchanged letters with the Great Enchanter years ago — were you not told?’.
Even so, the speaker must make a Fel test (modified by relevant skills, and by up to ±30, according to how you rate the story), or the Oracle becomes hostile and attacks.
Check the Oracle's profile carefully before running combat, to familiarise yourself with his abilities and tactics.
He is by no means as feeble as he appears, and the Homunculi will appear from area 65 to fight with him if they have not already been destroyed.
67.
TRAPPED STAIRWELL
If the adventurers are able to ascend the spiral staircase, they come to a landing (Map 13 ).
This entire area isn't actually part of the tower; while it gives access to the top floor, the landing and the stairs beyond are a portal which exists in an alternate space.
There is a single wooden door here.
Beyond is a set of stairs leading upwards, of rich, dark wood, with panelled wooden walls and a single bannister rail running up the right hand side.
The stairs are narrow (4ft wide) and must be ascended in single file.
They lead to a door some 20 feet above, as it appears to the adventurers.
If all the adventurers pass beyond the door at the foot of the stairs, it closes and remains firmly locked.
It cannot be unlocked, and can only be damaged by magical weapons or spells (T 6,D 24 due to powerful enchantments).
Wedging it open could save a life or two later on.
When the adventurers are half-way up the stairs, the bannister rail suddenly sprouts teeth and attacks with its bite, writhing like a snake.
The stairs then retract, turning the stairway into a sheer slope and dumping the adventurers down to the bottom.
A character making a successful test against one-half his I can just manage to brace himself and avoid falling down, but you have to roll the tests from the top (front of the party) down.
When a  character fails, he hits the person behind, giving a -20 penalty to that character's test.
Characters who slip down the stairs take D2 Wounds to random locations, modified by armour.
As the adventurers lie in a heap, there is a horrid, liquid churning noise from behind the door at the top of the stairs.
The adventurers now have four rounds to do something — and don't forget, the bannister rail is biting all the time.
The adventurers can try to destroy the door behind them.
There's so little space, though, that no weapon can be swung effectively (damage is halved, and two-handed weapons are useless save for pommel-smashing), and no more than two characters can get in an effective blow each round.
They can also try to force their way up the stairs.
A Flight spell would do the job, of course.
If they want to climb the sheer slope, an I test (Scale Sheer Surface +10) allows a character to head upwards D6+2 feet during the round (only D6 for a Dwarf and D4 for a Halfling).
A failed test means no progress that round, and a test failed by 30 or more means the character has slipped right back to the bottom of the stairs — anyone beneath him must make another I test at -20 to avoid being carried back down as well.
Thirdly, the adventurers could attack the door at the top of the stairs, probably magically (eg, with a Smash spell).
The top door has T 4,D 8.
Destroying this door is a seriously bad idea, since it will hasten the working of the trap which is already triggered.
After four rounds, whatever happens, the upper door will burst.
Make sure you know exactly how far up the stairs each character is when this happens.
As the door bursts open, a vast torrent of blood-flecked yellow-green mucus comes smashing down into the stairwell, settling into most of the bottom half of it.
Each character must make an I test (with a +10 bonus if the character specifically says he's bracing himself) or be forced down to the bottom of the stairwell.
Now work out where each character is in the stairwell.
Mercifully, the tide of filth stops the attacks of the bannister in the ‘submerged’ area, at least.
If the adventurers have wedged open the door at the bottom of the stairs, the mucus pours away into a magical nothingness over the landing area.
Otherwise, they're in for a grim time of it.
Any character who has managed to hang on at least 8 feet up the stairwell can keep his head above the filthy muck and breathe.
He can also slowly inch his way up the stairwell at a rate of 1 foot per round.
A character who is desperate to get up faster can make an I test each round.
If he passes the test, he ascends D4 feet that round.
If he fails, he slips back D6+1 feet.
Any character who hasn't hung on at least 8 feet up the stairs (9 feet for a Dwarf, 10 for a Halfling) will be submerged below the filth.
Each round the character must make a T test to be able to hold his breath.
If he fails, he inhales the disgusting muck in which he is mired.
The effects of this are given later.
Movement rules are the same as above — 1 foot per round or D4 ft/rd if an I test is made with a -10 penalty.
Swallowing Mucus
This filth is disease-infected.
One round of inhalation means that the character must make a T test (Immunity to Disease +10) or acquire galloping consumption (see Appendix 3, New Disease).
A second round of inhalation forces the character to make a second T test, this time with a -10 penalty.
A third round of inhalation means the character automatically acquires the disease.
Characters may also drown in the filthy mess.
Use the normal rules for drowning from the WFRP rulebook.
Finally, as if all this wasn't enough, the effects of being covered with this diseased, filthy mucus are identical to those from falling into the Miasmic Marsh (area 63)— although they are not cumulative with those effects.
68.
A TOP THE GREAT TOWER
This area has a bizarre appearance.
Around most of the walls are black stone excrescences which take the form of a rib-cage projecting from a central spine which grows up the north side of the room and arches up to the centre of the ceiling.
There are odd, feathery growths around this black stone, which look rather like clusters of iron filings drawn to a magnet.
Across the ceiling, thick black veins spread out from the centre, coming to within 8–10 feet of the floor.
Hanging from a cord in the centre of the room is a thick, coarse black crystal.
The cord is 5 feet long, so the crystal hangs some 20 or so feet above the floor level.
If the adventurers have found the Blackshard in area 5g they will recognize this as another such item.
The Blackshard here can be destroyed in the same way as before (see New Magic), with the same effects.
However, this is not the major source of magic here.
Characters cannot rely on skills such as Magical Awareness and Magic Sense to show this, since  the whole of this room radiates magic.
Rather, the central focus of the magic is the weather-vane on top of the Great Tower.
A test as simple as a Detect Magic spell will show some stronger focus of magic above the ceiling of this chamber.
How the adventurers get to it, and how they deal with it, is dealt with shortly.
They probably can't do anything about it unless they leave the Tower first.
If the adventurers have destroyed the Blackshard, the Oracle (if he still lives) won't attack them when they return to room 66 (all the mucus in stairwell 67 will have magically vanished by this time, allowing them to return).
If they have the Blackshard with them, the Oracle will simply mutter some words of warning and vague threat.
Only if the adventurers have, or have destroyed, the weathervane-Fiend (or attack the Oracle himself) will the Oracle attack them.
Getting the Weather-vane
There are two ways in which the adventurers might attempt this; physically or magically.
Physically, they might try climbing the Great Tower if they have Scale Sheer Surface skill and/or relevant equipment.
They must leave the Great Tower via room 69 to passage 24, and then make their way outdoors.
The weather-vane is perched atop the Great Tower, some 34 yards above ground level.
Magically, the two most obvious options are Flight and Become Ethereal, although other innovative solutions are possible.
Either way, when the character can see the weather-vane clearly, show him Handout 6 .
The bronze weather-vane can be removed by simply unscrewing it from the metal assemblage holding it, which takes 2 rounds.
However, as soon as they remove the weather-vane, several things happen very rapidly.
First, dark clouds begin to boil in the sky, and lightning starts to crackle and fizz.
Each Turn until he gets indoors, the carrier of the weather-vane will be the target for a Lightning Bolt (as the Level 2 Battle Magic spell).
A target on the ground is allowed a test against one-half I to dodge this; if the target is descending the Tower, the test is against one-tenth I .
Worse, character struck by lightning while climbing the tower must make a successful I test or lose his handhold and fall to almost certain death (apply standard falling damage rules from WFRP, p.75).
Harsh?
Not really.
If the character has any sense, he will realize that being out in a lightning storm carrying a chunk of metal isn't a good idea, and drop it to his associates on the ground, turn ethereal, or take some other steps to ensure his safety.
As the storm grows, cracks begin to develop in the stone of the Castle, radiating out from the point where the weather-vane was fixed to the Tower.
They radiate some 2 yards out from this central point, and then no further effect is obvious immediately.
This is a physical indication that the protections on the Castle have been weakened.
Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels gives full details and rules for this.
Third, as soon as the weather-vane is detached, the metal begins to feel slightly warm, and a gentle buzzing sound comes from it.
This sound gets progressively louder over the next 3 Turns, and nothing will stop it.
What is happening — and this cannot be prevented — is that the bound Fiend within the weather-vane is being freed, and at the end of 3 Turns the weather-vane will shatter and it will be released.
Anyone actually holding the weathervane when it shatters suffers 4 automatic Wounds (3 if wearing metal armour on all limbs or a metal breastplate), and anyone else within 2 yards suffers 1 automatic Wound from fragments of flying metal, whether wearing metal armour or not.
Dealing with the Fiend
The profile for the Fiend is given in the New Monsters section.
The Fiend is an elemental entity of Evil from the Warp, which can be magically bound and commanded in various ways by powerful Evil wizards.
However, the adventurers' problem is not how to get it to do their bidding, but simply how to evade its fury when it finally escapes centuries of unwilling bondage.
This is actually very simple.
All the adventurers have to do is to be out of sight of the Fiend when it emerges after 3 Turns.
If they are out of sight (eg, they leave the buzzing weather-vane in a courtyard and retire indoors), the Fiend simply flies away when it appears from the shattering weather-vane.
If the Fiend sees any living thing when it emerges, it attacks immediately.
69.
DUNGEON STAIRWAY
This spiral staircase leads downwards a total of what seems to be about 100 feet.
Note that it ‘should’ lead directly down into the Throne Room (29), but it doesn't.
This is a magical passageway, and it doesn't work like that.
However, some 25 feet down there is a side-door, which opens into passage 24 as if it were the eastern door in the Throne Room.
If the adventurers enter the passage, close this door and re-open it, it will have become the door into the Throne Room.
At the bottom, the spiral staircase descends directly into area 70.
THE DUNGEONS
70.
DUNGEON LANDING
This chamber is bare and completely featureless.
The only door here opens into a north-facing passage.
Map 14 shows the layout of the dungeons.
71.
PUPPET THEATRE
A small scattering of chairs is spread around a small stage which has curtained-off side-booths.
A number of dressed mannikins sit and lie around the stage.
It's quite possible that the adventurers will take Handout 4 (if they've found this) to refer to these puppets, who are in any event only too eager to put on a show for any visitors.
The puppets spring to their feet when anyone enters the room.
Subtle lighting changes in and around the stage from magical lights are automatic, and the puppets can duck in and out of the curtained-off side-booths to change costumes.
There are eight puppets in all.
Drachenfels enjoyed watching his magically created puppets humiliate and denigrate his ‘guests’, an immature pleasure but a pleasure nonetheless, and the puppets are very eager to put on another performance after so long inactive.
One of the puppets, dressed in a formal costume, announces ‘the commencement of the evening's entertainments’ when the puppets jump up, and he raps a cane on the floor to command attention.
The puppets then begin enacting some scenes from the adventurers' recent exploits in the Castle, growing progressively more sarcastic and venomous in their dialogue.
Tailor this to fit with events to date.
For example, if they have been in the Chaos terrains of locations 60–63 and a Dwarf character fell into the Nurglesque marshes, one puppet will enact this while another (preferably an Elf Puppet, to antagonize the Dwarf adventurer) conducts a running commentary: ‘Oh look, boys and girls, the stunty's fallen down.
Perhaps he's drunk!
Pheeeww!
He smells bad, doesn't he, boys and girls?
Stinky, stinky stunty!’
Work up to this gradually.
Don't go over the top until the end of the performance.
Use sarcasm and rile the players.
Why should the adventurers stop and listen to any of this?
Because the puppets throw in the odd line pertaining to other locations in the dungeons.
These won't be major giveaways, but the puppets have become magically affected by the overall magic of the Castle and their ‘minds’ have picked up fragments of what is elsewhere.
Judge carefully what you want to give away.
For example, you might have a puppet say ‘they're much too stupid to leave the blue bottles alone’— a clue which will help the adventurers avoid the poisons in location 79.
Don't repeat anything, either.
If your players don't latch on to such throwaways first time, too bad.
Also, you could have the puppets act out some scenes from Drachenfels' past, with the ‘Master of Ceremonies’ puppet taking the twin roles of general narrator and of the Great Enchanter himself.
If the adventurers are not very knowledgeable about Constant Drachenfels, this is a novel way of feeding them some more information.
The puppet performance grows more venomous until the adventurers walk out or the puppets attack.
If the adventurers walk out, the ‘MC’ puppet launches a Fire Ball at them from his cane (the cane stores three such spells which can be cast with no Magic Point cost) as they are in the doorway.
The adventurers can just take the damage and shut the door behind them; the puppets won't follow, they'll just hurl a torrent of abuse at the cowardly adventurers.
If the adventurers just sit there taking every abusive comment the puppets cast their way, the puppets eventually tire of such a tedious audience and attack — a Fire Ball being followed by a physical assault en masse.
The adventurers can defend themselves or they can flee, but in this case if they flee they get a second Fire Ball on the way out.
If the adventurers return to this room after a first encounter, the puppets ‘remember’ the events of the first meeting and will make suitably sarcastic comments.
Second time around, they will not dispense any new information, and the MC puppet is noticeably ruder and shorter-tempered than before.
This time, the puppets will attack very swiftly.
On any subsequent return by the adventurers, they will attack immediately.
Perhaps the adventurers will stay and heckle the puppets, or join in the performance.
This goes down well for a while, until the ‘MC’ puppet finally orders them to ‘kindly leave the stage’or to be quiet.
If the adventurers don't    comply, they are attacked.
If the players really impress you with their heckling and barracking of the puppets (and they'll have to be witty as well as abusive), the puppets will eventually break off their performance, perhaps concluding with an important tip about a major location within the dungeons (if the players did exceptionally well).
The puppets do not attack, but simply become lifeless once more.
Reward witty, fast-thinking and/or humorous role-playing here with an additional EP award for the characters whose lines add the most fun to this encounter!
72.
ALCHEMICAL CHAMBER
There is a Ward of Forbiddance spell on the door to this chamber which has a secondary Steal Mind spell within it.
If the adventurers get past this, they find a classical alchemical laboratory.
There is no flue or vent for any furnace or burners here, however; smoke and heat are dissipated magically within this chamber.
Among huge piles of (mostly broken) glass equipment, which covers work tables and the floor, there are several items of note.
There are a total of 14 still-sealed potion bottles and vials here, but most of them are no longer magical due to age, evaporation, or adulteration.
None are in blue bottles, in case the adventurers have heard the clue from the puppets.
Eleven potions are spoiled, and drinking any of these just gives a character stomach pains for D6x10 Turns.
There are three others which are still usable — a Potion of Healing, a Potion of Disguise, and a Potion of Strength.
The Potion of Healing, however, has a highly unfortunate side-effect due to an accidental extra ingredient.
Anyone drinking the potion must make a T test or, after D10 Turns, fall into a comatose sleep for 3D10 hours.
The character can't be woken up in any way during this time!
A pair of large oil-burners can be salvaged intact here, which the adventurers can use for heating and boiling water for safe drinking, bathing, and cleaning contaminated clothes and armour.
Elsewhere, a bookshelf has a row of books which are mostly mundane, with some exceptions.
First, there are two copies (one in Kislevite, one in Elthárin) of Rudiments of Alchemy.
Second, there is a copy of Johann Adenauer's dread book Ascension to Lichedom, which gives instructions for becoming a Liche.
If a character insists on reading this, the gruesomeness and horror of the instructions are such that he gains D3 Insanity Points.
If the character actually wants to become a Liche, this is a matter for GM improvisation!
If a successful I test is made, the character searching the shelf finds a folded page tucked inside the covers of an otherwise uninteresting volume on Tilean genealogy (Handout 7 ).
This contains the recipes for making the Potion of Toughness and the Potion of Fortitude (see New Magic for details).
The recipes don't actually tell the adventurers what the potions do, of course(although an Alchemist among the adventurers is allowed an Int test with a +20 bonus to guess the general nature of the effects), but they are worth 150 GCs apiece to an alchemist.
Finding a buyer should not be difficult!
If the adventurers want to search this room very thoroughly after finding these treasures, then each Turn they search they have a 50% chance of finding an item worth D10+10 GCs — a small jar of mercury, a vial of powdered gemstone, a jar with half a dozen sulphur balls (also useful as a material component for the Fire Ball spell, of course), an ornately decorated heavy marble pestle and mortar, and suchlike.
However, if you feel they're spending too much time on this, you can have a hostile Ghost arrive and attack.
The Ghost will appear as the spirit of the alchemist.
If the adventurers still hang around, another Ghost attacks.
They should get the hint.
This chamber should be a nice treat for the adventurers, allowing them to gain some resources they will need for the harder and more dangerous encounters to come.
73.
DAEMON ROOM
This chamber is the one in which Drachenfels did most of his daemonological research, and one or two of his dealings with Daemons took place here.
This is a perilous place, but one where the adventurers can gain  considerable rewards and where the objects of personal quests may have to be found.
There are no magic circles or pentagrams on the floor, since location 77 is where most of Drachenfels' summonings took place.
Instead, there are a number of tables and work benches scattered about the room, which is decorated with wall hangings and tapestries showing Daemons at play.
One or two of these show Drachenfels himself urging Daemons on in their gruesome activities.
Each character sees something most abhorrent to himself in the tapestries — his loved ones being defiled and slaughtered, Clerics of his religion being massacred, his people being slain by racial enemies, or similar.
The adventurers can find many items around the room (the exact position of each item isn't important).
Items of value or interest which are not material ingredients for daemonological spells are: silk squares and cloths (a dozen, worth 2 GCs each), crystal vials and prisms (10, total value 75 GCs), and decorated silver bowls (six, total value 100 GCs).
Other items, which are material ingredients, are in some cases rather gory and distressing, but are all clearly unusual.
These are as follows:
a Human skull on one table has a circle of copper banding around its forehead.
This is only specifically noticed by the adventurers 50% of the time (add 20% to this chance if they make a prolonged search), since it isn't obviously unusual.
However, the bone does have spongy leprous changes, enabling a Physician (or Physician's Student) to spot this if a successful Int test is made.
It's actually the skull of a Chaos Warrior of Nurgle, ingredient for the Bind Daemon spell.
a total of six bell jars full of Human-size hearts floating in a slightly opaque magical fluid; they still beat (very slowly).
One jar has 11 Elven hearts, one has 9 Dwarven hearts, and the others have a total of 62 Human hearts.
The first two have a simple sigil etched on the glass which indicate the racial type (a character of the relevant race can identify these easily).
These are ingredients for various summoning spells.
If you are using the pregenerated player characters, then Erszebet Lauschenberg will receive a sign from Verena that one of the jars has the heart of the High Priestess which she seeks.
four bell jars, each containing a preserved Human brain.
Two are preserved in clear liquid; these are brains from Good clerics, used for the Dispel Greater Daemon spell.
If you are using the pregenerated characters, Erszebet Lauschenberg will receive a sign from Verena that one of these is the brain of the High Priestess she seeks.
The other two are preserved in yellowish fluid.
These are the brains of lunatics, used for the Spread Insanity spell.
three silver-banded, blue, fluted bottles which are very securely sealed and faintly magical (Magical Sense can detect this) each contain 1 pint of Daemon ichor.
Two of these bottles are inscribed with the rune of Tzeentch, one with the rune of Slaanesh.
The ichor comes from Daemons in the service of the indicated Chaos Powers.
There is one final item which appears valuable but innocuous enough, if one isn't a daemonologist.
A pentagram of solid gold lies on one table, wrapped in black silk; this is worth 600 GCs.
It is the material ingredient for the Zone of Daemonic Protection spell.
If a character picks it up, then all hell is suddenly let loose (so to speak).
The pentagram, left undisturbed in its place, radiates a zone within the room.
As soon as it is disturbed, the zone is disrupted, and the Daemon within the room — which actually is the room — is released from centuries of servitude.
The Daemon-room comes alive, attacking the adventurers as fanged daemonic mouths and taloned daemonic claws erupt from floor, door, and walls.
Describe these vividly.
The claws are stone-veined, scaled, seething; the faces are deformed, diabolic, hate-filled.
Treat the Daemon-room as having D2 attacks per character,WS 45,S 4,I 49.
The Daemon-room is not affected by any psychological effects or illusions.
The adventurers have two options here: they can run or they can stay and fight.
Run : If the adventurers run, their movement is impeded by claws and faces erupting from the floor.
Each character will take D3 rounds (computed separately for each character) to get to the doorway, irrespective of M score.
The first two characters to the door can get out freely, but then a Ward of Forbiddance appears in the doorway and other characters still in the room will have to make the appropriate WP test(s) to escape.
A Dispel Magic spell may be needed, or escaped characters may have to re-enter the room to help out with fighting within the room.
Fight : If the adventurers stay and fight, then the Daemon-room should be treated as having T 5 and W 27.
The walls and floor do not move and so count as prone, but the Daemon-room can only be damaged by spells and magical weapons.
Dispel Greater Daemon will destroy the Daemon-room as effectively as accumulated damage.
When the W total is exceeded, there is a huge sigh within the room and all faces and claws disappear, but a Foetid Cloud instantly fills the whole of the room.
74.
MAGICAL STOREROOM
There are some valuable items in this chamber which the adventurers may well need by now.
However, they have to get past the door first.
The door appears as ordinary dark wood door at first sight, with a pair of brass doorknobs.
However, as soon as any attempt is made to open it, it speaks sonorously, saying ‘You aren't allowed in here.’
Attempts to interrogate or reason with the door are fruitless, but may be entertaining.
The door refuses to allow access to anyone who is not ‘the Master’(Drachenfels himself, of course).
The door can converse intelligently, and has a haughty and slightly sarcastic tone of voice.
The door is adamant that it will not allow anyone inside, other than the Master.
There is one exception to this.
A Druidic Priest who addresses the door politely can make a Fel test and, if successful, the door will say something along the lines of ‘Well, I'm not sure about this…’.
If the Druidic Priest is quick to come back with a reply of ‘Your Master has given me permission to enter’ or something equally convincing, the door will say, ‘Oh, all right.
But you'd better be quick about it’, and open.
The door will then keep up an anxious running conversation with the Druid of the ‘Can't you hurry up?’ variety while the adventurers are inside.
This option, at least, allows for a brief semi-humorous episode.
If the adventurers don't have a Druidic Priest with them, they will have to defeat the door (see Profiles).
Inside the Room
Map 15 shows the layout of this room.
When the adventurers are able to enter, there is still a guardian to overcome — a suit of animated plate armour which attacks at once.
It stands just beyond the doors.
After the adventurers have overcome this, they can take stock of the shelves and tables.
There are several usable magic items here (and some the adventurers won't be able to use), but their form is always unorthodox and sometimes rather unpleasant.
The room itself has several tables with linen and silk covers, cupboards, chairs and the like, and there is much general bric-a-brac in addition to the magic stored here.
Feel free to add some minor magical trinkets such as stone hedgehog paperweights which snuffle about and catch bugs, self-lighting hookahs, or similar minor flourishes.
First, there are some items the adventurers should not touch.
A suit of Khornate Chaos armour stands pinioned to one wall; if so much as touched (or if directly attacked) it will attack the adventurers.
Since almost all of the original powerful magic within this armour has been drained, you can use the Animated Armour profile for this, save that one of the attacks is actually from a Chaos sword gripped in one gauntlet.
The nature of the sword is indicated by the fact that the pommel, hilt and cross-guard are fashioned from fused, deformed vertebrae.
Any hit from this weapon drains one point of S, T , or W (roll D6: 1–2 S , 3–4 T , 5–6 W ) permanently in addition to normal damage.
Second, hanging on a peg is a black robe with a monogrammed ‘D’ which, if put on by anyone other than Drachenfels himself, wraps itself about the unfortunate wearer and attacks with tiny mouths in its lining; it gets 2D6 Attacks at S 2 each round.
The cloak has T 2 and W 8, but half the Wounds inflicted on it by characters other than the wearer affect the person wearing it.
The cloak is immune to all psychological effects and illusions.
The third item is a Blackwand (RD , p.103) which has enough energy remaining to fire 31 Arrows of Weakness.
Lying next to it is a Wand of Fear which extracts a special cost for use: if a spellcaster picks it up, it drains one point of T permanently from that spellcaster and is then attuned to him, and will function normally.
Finally, there is a nastily cursed item: among a box of silver jewellery (worth 150 GCs) is what appears to be an Amulet of Righteous Silver, but in fact the making of the item was botched and anyone wearing it suffers a -20 penalty to all Cl tests to resist the fear and terror effects of certain undead.
The cursed item cannot be removed, either, once put on.
Only a blessing from a deity the victim devoutly follows, expending a Fate Point, or a Dispel Magic from a 4th level Wizard, will allow the amulet to be removed.
More usefully, in the same set of jewellery is an Amulet of Thrice-Blessed Copper; unfortunately, it doesn't always detect poisons, but it has an 80% chance of doing so.
The more useful items are the following:
In a glass case sits a shrivelled liver, which duplicates the function of an Energy Jewel (8 Magic Points).
The liver must be in contact with the skin of the user, however, to be used.
In an adjacent glass case is an 8-foot length of preserved intestine, luridly green and red and covered in prominent blood vessels, which acts as an Enchanted Rope.
These two items appear simply to be ghoulish trophies, since they sit on a table with other specimens of internal organs.
Another casket presents the adventurers with an intriguing puzzle.
It contains five plain gold rings, interlinked to form a circle.
Each is a Ring of Protection, and each of which will only function as a magical ring if it can be separated from the others.
The rings give protection from: Ethereal undead, Non-ethereal undead, Skaven (two of these) and followers and creatures of Khorne.
Breaking a ring obviously destroys its magic.
The adventurers can easily get two rings (by breaking the other three), but they might find some ingenious solution to the problem.
This could be an adventure in itself, and won't be resolved here.
You should determine a suitably demanding solution to the problem for yourself.
For example, a magical liquid which needs a component of ethereality might allow the links to be separated, but the adventurers will have to find an Alchemist or Scholar to tell them of this, and then they must find the ingredients for the magical liquid.
This is up to you, but it is a good hook to introduce a later adventure with.
Bolted to one side of a table is a strange stone implement which looks like a huge flinted knife-sharpener, and this radiates faint magic to a character with Magic Sense.
One single-handed edged weapon — not a two-handed weapon or an axe — can be sharpened with this tool, and this act drains the last magic from it (other weapons can be sharpened subsequently, but this will not enchant them).
The effect is to give the weapon the special ability of Characteristic Gain (see WFRP, p.188).
Finally, there is a large mirror on a stand.
Despite the suspicions the adventurers will surely have, this is nothing more than a standard mirror with no magical properties whatsoever — unless you decide to add some, of course.
75.
THE BOOKS OF FLESH
This room contains some truly bizarre magical items.
Most of the room is filled with metal frames which hold marble troughs, and inside most of the troughs are piles of stinking, rancid yellow fat.
The stench is overpowering.
However, there is magic of a sort within.
There is also a simple trap just beyond the door, triggered by opening it.
Two rounds after the door is opened, the floor between the doors to 76 and 78 retracts and the passage becomes a pit, 4 yards deep, with jagged iron spikes set into the bottom.
Apply standard falling damage rules, and add D6+1 Wounds for the spikes (D4 for a Halfling).
The spikes also have a 50% chance of causing infected wounds.
Trying to rescue people in the pit is also hazardous.
Four rounds after people fall in, the metal plates close again.
Anyone who is leaning into the pit (e.g., hauling people up on a rope) must make an I test or be knocked into it, suffering falling and spike damage as above.
The doors have T 8,D 16.
When the adventurers get an chance to check the room out, they can find four surviving Books of Flesh cowering in a corner.
Each appears in the shape of a book, some 12in tall, 8in wide and 3in thick.
Each appears to be bound in a very pale and supple leather (on inspection this is seen to be Human skin).
The inside of each binding is a compacted mass of yellowed fatty tissue in which whorls and furling can be seen, looking not unlike the surface of the cerebral cortex.
Two of these books are Grimoires.
In each case, the wizard must pick up the book and caress it for a minimum of 1 hour.
This feels rather like fondling several pounds of lard wrapped in skin.
At the end of this period, the wizard is allowed an Int test and, if this is successful, he has learned one of the spells in the book.
It cannot be recorded in written form elsewhere, however; the understanding is intuitive.
Only one attempt per day can be made to so learn a spell.
The first Book of Flesh contains the Battle Magic spells Dispirit, Strength of Combat, Mental Duel, Smash, Animate Sword, Cloak of Darkness, Corrode, and Foetid Cloud.
The second Book of Flesh contains the Elemental Magic spells Hand of Fire, Zone of Hiding, Move Object, Wither Vegetation, Breathe Fire and Animate Water.
Note that some of the Battle Magic spells come from the Restless Dead book and, if you don't have this, then you should substitute spells of your choice.
The third book bears tattooed symbols of Slaanesh.
The book talks, and is very cunning.
It offers a character great combat skill in return for being able to share the physical and mental sensations of combat.
Any character carrying it will gain +10 bonuses to WS and BS so long as the book is kept next to the skin.
The book delights in combat, squirming with pleasure and letting out little gasps and moans of delight as adrenalin races through the character's body.
The catch is this: the book has a rated WP of 45, and when the WP of the character carrying it is reduced sharply (by magic, etc.) the book will attempt spirit combat (see Guardian Spirits in New Monsters for rules).
It will try to do this when the character is separated from his fellows.
If the book wins, it will control the character and  try to deliver itself to a powerful follower of Slaanesh.
You should be as devious and cunning about this as the book is itself.
Pick a time when the character is most vulnerable.
The fourth book has the design of a sword on its cover.
It has a unique function which cannot be commanded, it simply happens automatically once per day for the character carrying the book as soon as that character suffers any lost Wounds from a melee or missile attack.
The book automatically creates an Animate Sword effect on the character's primary close-combat weapon, and the animated weapon attacks the creature which struck the character.
The effect stays in existence until the character, or his enemy, is slain or mortally wounded.
These books are very useful, and a weird departure from normal magic.
Don't just give them away to the adventurers if they don't bother even to search this room; they must make an effort to find these bizarre items and take an interest in finding out what they do.
76.
THE JUNIOR MAGISTER IMPEDIMENTAE
The northern half of this room is filled with surgical implements in racks, preserved body parts, anatomical diagrams and plates, flasks of liquids, and similar apparatus.
In the south-west corner, behind a curtained screen, is a desk bearing similar items, and set by it is a chair on which the slumped form of a mutant is easily visible.
The mutant is clothed in moist sacking only, and his skin is covered in most places with thick green scales.
He is barely alive; his breathing is very slow and shallow, and he is comatose.
Before him on the desk is an ornate bronze lamp which glows with a very, very feeble purple radiance due to the coloured quartz lenses set into it.
It does not employ any visible fuel source.
If the lamp is adjusted, by a circular knob set into the side, the purple glow can be made much brighter and plays over the mutant.
In this case, he wakes up in D10+10 rounds, although he takes another 10 rounds to come fully to his senses after being awakened.
The mutant, Gerd Buchwald, will be very frightened if awoken.
He will say that he has duties to attend to and then, looking at the adventurers, will ask who they are and become confused again.
His profile gives details of what he used to do, but what he wants to do now is to find his Master.
However, if he suspects that the adventurers are here to cause harm to his Master, he'll die rather than help them at all.
If the adventurers can trick him into believing that, for example, his Master is in danger and they are here to help, then Gerd will be very eager to assist them, and he does know his way around the dungeons rather well.
In this case, if the adventurers feign friendship and allegiance, Gerd will become almost pitifully talkative.
If the adventurers want to loot this room of its equipment, they can do so, but the stuff has no real value — most of it is outdated, rusted, falling apart or otherwise valueless.
Of course, looting will be interpreted as a hostile act by Gerd, and it will put an end to any co-operation from him.
What Gerd Knows
Gerd can tell the adventurers a little about the following locations:
Location 71 : ‘Entertainments here.
Funny wooden puppets with strange eyes.
I used to sweep up sometimes when I first came to the Castle.’
Location 72 : ‘Experiments, specially locked.
Can't get in.’
Location 73 (or 77 ):(shudder)‘The Master worked his magic there.
It's dangerous.’
Gerd clearly is very apprehensive of this place, won't enter here, and if forced to do so the terrible event described in the next section occurs automatically, right in the doorway.
Location 74 : ‘Magical things.
I'm not allowed in there, it's trapped and very dangerous.
Master says no-one can go in there.’
Gerd regards any intrusion here as evidence that the adventurers are hostile, and he won't co-operate any further if he knows they have forced their way in here.
Location 75 :(shudder)‘The Master did things there.
With dead people.
Scarey.’
Gerd's knowledge is hopelessly out of date on this location.
Locations 78/79 : ‘Um — mixing stuff, yes, that's what it is, mixing stuff.
Lab…er, lab…mixing stuff, yes.’
Again, Gerd's knowledge is a little out of date.
He doesn't know about the fungi.
Locations 80/81/82 : ‘Bad people went here, people the Master was angry with.
People who did wrong, the master had them imprisoned there.
You're not doing wrong by the Master, are you?’
Location 83 : ‘Nah, not there — nah, nah.’
Gerd refuses point-blank to say what this is.
He does know the truth, but he won't say.
Other locations were always out of bounds to Gerd, and he will say so.
Death of a Mutant
The adventurers had better talk with Gerd reasonably quickly.
They have only D6+6 Turns before something appalling happens to him.
You can extend this time if necessary to have it happen at a suitably dramatic moment; the staging of the event is more important than the exact time.
Gerd suddenly says he is hungry, and begs some food from one or more of the adventurers.
If he isn't given anything, the subsequent events occur in much the same manner anyway.
Gerd gulps down the food, and then coughs a few times, each time a little louder, and exhibiting a little more distress.
Suddenly his face suffuses with panic as his chest heaves and his coughs become violent, edging into retching.
He collapses to the ground, clutching at his chest as his back arches.
His chest is suddenly stained with blood as something pulses frantically beneath his thin shirt.
Then, Gerd is killed instantly, a look of intense agony on his face, as the Render bursts forth from his body.
It takes a brief second to look about itself and then attacks the closest character.
The Render is small, but it is an horrific killer.
77.
THE RITUAL ROOM
This is dangerous territory, and the room has a Ward of Forbiddance spell on the door.
The centre of the room is dominated by a huge magical pentagram, which has many Chaos symbols and sigils, together with the symbol for Daemon.
Anyone with Daemon Lore, Rune Lore or Theology will know at once that this room is used for Daemon summoning.
So long as the adventurers keep out of the circle, all well and good.
If they step into it or break it, they summon a Lord of Change, a Greater Daemon of Tzeentch (RoC-LD.
If you don't have this book, use the profile for a Greater Daemon from the WFRP rulebook).
The Daemon might toy with the adventurers before killing them, but it won't take kindly to being summoned.
At the far end of the room is a mirror, whose surface appears darkened, and which radiates magic.
Its only function, though, is to show the viewer Constant Drachenfels, posing as a young man, without his mask, his arm thrown around a Daemon.
The mirror always shows Drachenfels as young, and Drachenfels kept it purely from vanity.
78.
CHAMBER OF FUNGI
This room was used to grow fungi which were, in part, used as sources for creating poisons.
The fungi haven't been attended to for decades and, warped by the magic of the Castle, have changed considerably.
They want to get nourishment from anything they can, including any characters entering.
The fungi can be treated as a single, collective entity (see Profiles).
If the adventurers enter, the place appears simply to have rows of dried-out compost beds along the floor and in great, half-rotted wooden troughs suspended along metal frames.
Some of these troughs have collapsed in the middle and scattered their contents about.
Mould covers much of the walls and floor.
The door at the north end of the room might lure the adventurers into entering; it leads to a tiny cubicle-cupboard containing some simple gardening tools.
The fungi wait for at least a couple of characters to enter before they attack.
They fire clusters of fungal spores, and each attack has a 10% chance of also liberating Red Mould into the area, so that characters are subjected to two attacks.
Critical hits should be rolled on the Sudden Death Critical Hit Chart.
A ‘K’ result indicates the character has choked to death.
Any body left in this room will be digested by fungal enzymes over a period of D4+1 days, depending on size, and organic equipment left here — leather, sacking, cloth, etc. — will likewise be digested in 24 hours.
79.
CHAMBER OF POISONS
This chamber looks in some ways similar to the alchemical laboratory (location 72) save that nothing is broken here, it's simply very dusty and cobwebbed.
Virtually all the large bottles here are of thick, opaque blue glass.
A character with Herb Lore, Manufacture Drugs or Prepare Poisons will be able to see that this place was used for preparing poisons.
Virtually all are now decayed and useless.
However, if the adventurers make a thorough search here, they have a 50% chance each for turning up a sealed vial with 2D4+1 doses of Trollbane, and another with D4+1 doses of Graveroot.
The labels, however, have fallen off or become illegible, and only if a character with Chemistry or Prepare Poisons makes a thorough (1 dose) analysis coupled with a successful Int test will he know what they are.
80.
TORTURE CHAMBER
Before the adventurers can really take in this chamber, a skeletal figure clad in a tatty, filth-encrusted black robe standing not far from the door eagerly holds out its hands to them, one of which holds a hot branding iron.
‘Ah, you have brought someone for me?’ says the torturer expectantly.
Friedrich Bremer has waited long for another victim, and is eager to begin.
The adventurers just might be able to talk their way out of a fight with this Skeleton Major Hero, and might even be able to talk one or two details out of him, but a combat is likely at some stage; see Friedrich's profile for details.
The room itself has a wide range of torture equipment laid out very carefully, almost obsessively, all kept clean, polished, and (where appropriate) good and sharp.
A magical brazier in the north-west corner has a number of branding irons heating in it, and next to it is an inlaid marble slab with iron supports which has room for a body to be strapped on to it, plus a tray of gleaming metal scalpels, thumbscrews, small-bone crunching implements, pincers and similar implements.
The rest of the room won't be described in such depressing detail, but all the favourites one would expect are here — the rack, the manacles hanging from the ceiling, lots of wooden staves and buckled leather strapping, an Iron Maiden, and so on.
81.
CELLS
Friedrich Bremer has the keys to all these.
The first, 81a, has actually been converted to a living chamber for him, if this isn't a contradiction in terms.
The wooden pallet bed isn't needed for rest, and like the rest of the room has been used to mount a display for one of Bremer's collections.
Bremer collects gallstones, the middle-ear bones of Dwarfs and Halflings, preserved shrunken ears (separated into male and female, nobles and commoners), and one of his more distressing habits is keeping one eyeball from each of his victims if at all possible.
Consequently, there are 14 large jars of preserved eyeballs here, each holding between 50–150 eyes in each jar.
From a distance they might look like jars of pickled quail's eggs….
Bremer's box of coins is (ineffectually) hidden in a large hole in the planking which supports the pallet, and this contains 84 GCs, 115 SSs, and 132 BPs.
The other cells are all empty, and are almost disturbingly clean — Bremer is especially devoted to keeping his place clean and tidy.
However, hidden in a crack in the stonework in cell 81d (I test to find) is a small silver signet ring with the symbol of Verena etched into it.
Any cleric of Verena should be coldly angered by such evidence that a follower of the goddess should have been incarcerated here, and behave accordingly!
82.
CELLS OF TORMENT
The door to the main corridor (82a) is unusually tough, having T 7 and D 16.
Each of the doors to the cells has a barred grille which allows the adventurers to see into the cell; there is a low level of light within each cell (usually from a magically-sustained burning torch) which allows some sight of what lies beyond the door.
Most cells have a prisoner, magically kept alive (or at least sentient), being subjected to one particular form of torment in perpetuity.
These prisoners are all chained with very strong, unrusted iron chains and heavy manacles.
In most cases the adventurers should leave well alone here.
There is usually little they can do and, even if they could, the imprisoned creatures are too demented to thank them for it.
They will simply attack in a maddened frenzy.
In all cases, if the creatures actually get out of their cell they die instantly, since only the magic within each cell has sustained them so long.
Profiles for the victims are given, for reference, in the Profiles section if the adventurers decide to free one or more of them.
The first cell (82b) contains an Ogre, clearly very starved, straining desperately to reach what appears to be a joint of meat which cowers against the opposite wall of the cell.
The joint of meat, horribly, has a Human face and cowers in obvious terror.
The second cell (82c) contains a moaning, naked Orc chained down on a bed of nails which rip the boil-infested flesh on his back.
The third cell (82d) contains a handsome young man clad in (very dated) Estalian clothing who suffers an eternal curse on the vanity which Drachenfels now mocks.
He is cursed to stare into a mirror, preening himself, and then the reflection in the mirror suddenly changes, as does the appearance of the young man to match his reflection.
Boils and sores burst out over his flesh, his body becomes hunched and arthritic, his skin aged and withered.
The man spits hatred at anyone who sees his humiliation and affliction.
The next cell (82e) is empty, but 82f has a disturbing occupant.
Here, Drachenfels incarcerated a courtesan who displeased him, and inflicted a dreadful curse on her.
She is only a skeleton, but she believes she is still alive and highly attractive.
Drachenfels left her dressed in some revealing clothing (revealing if she still had a body, that is) to top the effect off.
She will try desperately to use seductive charms to lure a male character into freeing her, telling a tragic tale of her spurning of Drachenfels and her long imprisonment, talking in a husky and seductive tone.
The effect should be disturbing and bizarre, to say the least.
Cell 82g is also empty, as is 82i, but 82h contains a man wearing the insignia of a Cleric of Sigmar.
His torment is that he is forced to face the etched face of a Daemonette carved into the wall opposite, which flicks out a long serrated fleshy tongue which rips into the man's neck and chest.
Purple blotched wounds ooze blood which trickles down over his body.
All he can do is moan with pain.
This is the cell the adventurers are most likely to enter.
If they do, they have to break the shackles (T 7,D 12) to free the Cleric.
During this time, the Daemonette-tongue attacks the adventurers; it has S 3,T 3,W 8,WS 45,I 49, and A 1 (Cl and WP are 89 if needed; the thing is immune to psychological effects and illusions).
Every round the tongue regenerates fully; it must suffer 8 Wounds in a single round before it is put out of action for good.
If the adventurers free the man, they only get attacked for their pains; he is actually a Doppelganger.
The creature flings itself on the nearest character, crazed with pain and the desire to escape.
The creature will run off if allowed to, assuming the form of the character it attacked last.
Beyond the final door, 82j is not a cell, but rather a (seemingly endless) passage.
This is a variable warp passage (see Adventuring in Castle Drachenfels).
83.
TREASURY
Drachenfels kept just part of his massive treasure here.
This room cannot be entered ethereally; the stonework contains enchantments which make it as solid to an ethereal traveller as to a material one.
Any other magical means of entry the adventurers can dream up is likewise defeated by special enchantments placed on the structure of this room.
A Ward of Forbiddance spell is placed on the door.
There are four locked chests here, each inside a locked and barred metal cage (T 7,D 25 each bar).
A Halfling can squeeze in through the space made by breaking one bar, but an Elf or Human needs two bars removed and a Dwarf three.
The room also has two tough guardians.
The two suits of adamantine plate armour (see Profiles) will attack the adventurers immediately they enter the room.
If they overcome these guards, and manage to break into the cages, the adventurers still have the difficulty of getting into the chests.
Each is of iron-banded black-varnished wood, with copper fittings, and an ornate lock of fiendish complexity (CR 50%).
However, each has its own unique additional hazard(s) and rewards.
The Traps
The first chest is trapped with spring-loaded darts.
It must be unlocked, and then the key (or lockpick) turned one additional turn in the lock, to disarm this trap.
Otherwise, a volley of 10 darts fires out in a semi-circle around the front and sides of the chest.
The darts can be treated as having BS 60 (this is very close range) and S 1.
Any hit which causes a Wound, and even 50% of hits which don't (they are taken to graze the skin), inject 1 dose of Manbane into the victim.
Determine randomly which characters are the targets of which darts; no character can be a target for more than three unless he is standing right in front of the chest (e.g., raising the lid).
If the chest is forced open, the same trap will be triggered, save that there's no chance of defusing it with the extra lock-turn.
The second chest has an identical trap, save that this time the poison in the darts is Elfbane, and it has a second trap which will be activated only if the chest is forcibly opened.
Inside this chest is a delicate glass globe packed with Yellow Mould spores, and if the chest is tipped up, broken  into, etc., this will release its deadly contents in a 10-yard radius.
If the adventurers are successful in picking the lock, this trap won't be activated, but they will have to be very careful taking out the money without breaking the glass sphere (no test needed, but you should roll dice as if you were making some secret test just to scare the players).
The sphere is much too delicate for the adventurers to carry (e.g., to use as a weapon).
The third chest has a slightly decayed, but permanent, Magic Lock on it, such that an attempt at mechanical lock-picking is only 50% likely to be successful even if the lock-picker makes his Dex test to pick the lock.
This chest also cannot have the sides broken open, since it has a full iron inlay — the only way to force it is to crowbar the lid open.
There is an especially nasty trap here.
Exactly three rounds after the lid has been opened, from the top of the sides of the chest, a full array of amazingly sharp knives spring inwards so that the whole top of the chest is effectively suddenly full of knife blades.
If a character is reaching into the chest at this time, he suffers 2D6 Wounds (modified by armour on the arms).
Worse still, he must make an I test.
If this is failed, he is too slow to jump back and one arm is simply amputated (roll D6: 1–3 left; 4–6 right, or you can be charitable and rule that the shield arm rather than the weapon arm is affected).
If the I test is failed by 30 or more, both arms are severed at the elbows.
The fourth chest has a renegade Chaos Daemon bound into its lock.
If the lock is picked, the Daemon is freed and attacks the lock-picker.
If the chest is broken open, the Daemon attacks one of the adventurers doing the breaking.
The unusual Daemon has a unique profile (see the Profiles section).
When the chest is opened in any manner, a gas trap is triggered which liberates gas up to a 10-yard diameter (spreading at a rate of 1 yard per round).
The gas causes weakness, and characters in the gas cloud must make a T test or suffer penalties of -10 to WS, BS and I , and -1 to S and A .
Even if the T test is made,WS, BS and I are lowered by -5 each.
The Daemon is immune to these effects.
Treasures
Whichever order the adventurers open the chests in (unless they have some magical means of finding out in advance what's inside), they get the poorest haul first and the richest haul last.
It's unfair, but that's the way it goes.
The first haul is eight huge sacks of brass pennies — a total of 10,403 BPs, worth 43 GCs, 4/3 and weighing 1,040 Enc.
The second haul is four smaller sacks of silver shillings — 3,822 coins, worth 191 GCs, 2/ —.
The third haul is of gold crowns — of a sort.
One sack holds 847 GCs in Imperial coinage.
A second sack holds 1,022 GCs of Estalian origins, with the head of Dom Luis XIV on them — unfortunately, these are of ‘red gold’, heavily adulterated with copper, and mostly worthless.
They might be sold for 70 GCs for their metal value, but most Imperial money-changers will only give one shilling in the crown for them.
A character with Metallurgy will know of the adulteration, one with Numismatics will know the coins are worth less than face value.
A third sack holds 1,882 Kislevite gold roubles — Imperial money-changers will only give 1 GC for 3 of these.
A fourth sack holds 400 Imperial gold crowns of some antiquity — the head of Carolus is on them with the date 1903 IC.
Each is worth 10 GCs to a collector (providing the adventurers don't flood the market).
Unfortunately, they have been treated with a contact-poison form of Manbane.
Simply handling them causes 1 dose to be absorbed through the skin, counting them (or similarly continuously handling them) causes 1 dose per Turn to be absorbed.
There is a delay of D6+4 Turns (5–10 minutes) before the effects make themselves felt.
The poison is soluble in alcohol.
The fourth and final haul is a splendid casket of mahogany and teak which is bound with silver filigree and lined with red velvet.
The casket alone is worth 250 GCs.
Inside, each in its own compartment, is a total of 24 gems of fair size.
All but two are fine stones of decent value — peridots, pearls, spinels — and are worth 250 GCs each.
The other two are fine rubies, each worth 1,200 GCs.
84.
THE ROOM OF BONES
This chamber is brilliantly sculpted to appear as the inside of a vast chest cavity.
Huge yellowed bone ‘ribs’ grow from the floors along the curved walls, up to the ceiling where a sternum runs along the central ridge.
The other parts of the walls and ceiling — between the ribs — seem to be impossible to perceive.
To the eyes, and to the touch, they simply trail away into velvety nothingness — but resist being forced past, as if a semi-solid wall prevented this.
Huge piles of bones are stacked on either side of the room.
At the far end, where the sternum-ceiling begins to slope down, a skeletal figure draped in the vestments of Mórr is seated crookedly on a throne of bone and iron, holding a thick black wooden wand in its hands.
Magical Awareness or a Detect Magic spell will reveal that the wand is magical; it isn't even necessary to touch it — the magic is strong.
A devout follower of Mórr who doesn't have Magical Awareness will still sense a magical effect on the wand if he makes a WP test with a -10 penalty.
The adventurers are only attacked if they try to vandalise the structure of the room, the piles of bones, or the seated figure, or if they try to take the wand from its skeletal hands.
Note that magic of any kind (including Annihilate Undead) will not affect the Skeletons here; the adventurers must fight for their lives!
Taking the Wand
As soon as a character lays a hand on this item, the skeletal Cleric grips it more tightly.
The character has a base 20% chance each round of dragging it from the skeleton's grasp.
This chance is increased by 10% for each point of Strength the character has over 4 and reduced by 10% for each point of Strength the character has below 4.
The Cleric attacks with its other hand.
Remember that a character with one hand holding a wand can't cast spells, use a shield, etc.
If a character manages to take the wand he's not going to be able to sit down and figure out what it does in the heat of battle, so it's not usable immediately.
The wand is a Wand of Dust, detailed in the New Magic section.
Attacked!
If the adventurers are attacked, each pile of bones forms into 5 human-size Skeletons; use the standard Skeleton profile for these.
The Skeleton-Cleric is covered separately in the Profiles section.
These Skeletons have a dangerous additional combat ability.
Use the Sudden Death & Critical Hit Table in the WFRP rulebook for hits against the Skeletons.
If a Skeleton suffers a ‘K’ result, it isn't immediately destroyed.
What happens is that it falls apart, its rib-cage falling away and the limbs dropping from their sockets.
However, each limb can now attack, clawing or kicking at the adventurers.
Profiles for the skeletal limbs are in the Profiles section.
This isn't likely to be a major hazard to the adventurers, but it will surprise them, slow them down and prevent easy escape.
85.
WARP PASSAGE
This part of the passageway is a fixed warp passage.
Make a secret WP test for each character as they enter the area.
Failure means that the character is magically warped into one of the holding cells (82b–82i).
If you want to be kind, the character can find himself manacled to the wall in one of the empty cells.
Otherwise, you can choose between the occupied cells, where the character will find the occupant between himself and the cell door…
86.
CHAMBER OF ELEMENTALS
The door to this chamber is unusually tough and hard to break down (T 8 and W 20).
Inside, little remains to show that this chamber was used for summoning Elementals.
Very unusual pentacles and magic circles etched into the stone and traced with silver and mercury have been destroyed as if by something bursting up through them from below.
The walls look as if they have been fire-blasted, and there is a smell of sulphur hanging in the room, with faint wisps of smoke.
Despite these forbidding appearances, there is no danger within, but no rewards either.
87.
WARP PASSAGE
This part of the passage is a fixed warp passage.
Again, make a secret WP test for each character as they enter here.
Failure means that the character has been magically warped into one of the cells in the torture room (81a-81e).
The character will find himself in manacles, but is allowed a test against S each Turn to free himself.
If the Torturer from location 80 is still ‘alive’, he is allowed a Listen test (as for a soft noise) to hear a character struggling with his manacles each Turn.
An unstruggling character has a 5% chance each hour of being discovered by Bremer.
On the other hand, if the character ends up in chamber 81d you might allow him to find the ring of Verena since he has so much time to kill.
If Bremer the torturer finds a character in chains, of course, then it's going to be fairly grim for that character.
Bremer hasn't had anyone to torture in ages, so he'll make it slow.
Improvise rules for character profile loss, depending on how fast the character's friends come to rescue him.
88.
THE GALLERY
This observation area was used by Drachenfels to admire and enjoy the torments of the Black Pit below.
When the adventurers enter, there is a screen of mist before the gallery, and also half-way down the steps.
This appears almost as a solid wall of mist, obscuring the view.
It is possible to hear faint moans, as if muffled and some way distant, however.
There is a row of stout wooden rods supporting a handrail which runs along the edge of the gallery, allowing the adventurers to lean on it and look down into the Black Pit (which they won't immediately be able to see, of course).
The rods are carved in the form of a series of gargoyle faces and grotesques, but are harmless.
Lying in a groove carved in the top of the handrail is a silver-topped black wooden rod, some 12’ long and quite slender.
If the adventurers want to see what is going on in the Black Pit, all they have to do is rap twice in rapid succession with the rod upon the rail.
Then, the mist dissipates to allow them to see what is below.
89.
THE BLACK PIT
This is sunk into the stone some 30 feet below gallery level, and is also affected by powerful size-altering enchantments.
The Black Pit appears to be some 70 yards wide and 30 yards long, despite the dimensions shown on Map 14 
The Black Pit is a vivid recreation and magically sustained celebration of some of Drachenfels' most lurid evils and wickedness.
A small group of people are re-enacting the final slow  elegiac movements of the Leprous Pavanne as their rotting, stinking flesh falls to the ground in scabrous lumps.
A skeletal butler is serving dinner to a seated group of pig-headed mutants, who sit slavering at their table while the butler rolls the intestines of a living, writhing man around a hooked serving fork and serves them, still steaming to the bestial dinner guests.
There is no need to belabour the point here.
This scene is one of appalling carnage, torment, and pitilessness.
Anyone viewing it for more than 1 round acquires D3 Insanity Points.
Drachenfels Lives!
If you are using the Drachenfels Lives! adventure (see Adventures in Castle Drachenfels), you may have a special scene in the Pit, showing a man in an iron mask greeting a bunch of people who are exact duplicates of the adventurers.
He laughs as the figures, unable to resist, are subjected to the torments they most fear.
Play on the adventurers' terrors here.
If they are afraid of rats, an iron cage of rats strapped over the chest or face is used.
If they are afraid of the undead, a Vampire is unleashed upon them.
If they fear Chaos, they begin to mutate in horrible and painful ways.
The images play on the deepest fears of the adventurers, and the man in the mask laughs again.
There is nothing the adventurers can do about any of this.
Magical effects directed into the Black Pit simply don't operate, but no Magic Points are expended if an attempt is made.
Missile fire simply dissipates; arrows fade into nothingness in mid-air.
Liquids poured into the area evaporate into nothingness.
The area can't be affected by the adventurers physically or magically.
Going down the stairs is a very bad idea.
When the adventurers set foot on the stairs, each is allowed a WP test (Magic Sense +10) to sense that some form of magical trap exists.
Passing the test allows a character to sense that there is some magical allure or drawing-in effect here which is dangerous.
If anyone steps off the stairs, they simply become one of the participants in one of the scenes, endlessly re-enacting the Feast of Corpse Candles, the Leprous Pavanne, or any of the other atrocities on show.
The character becomes only a mindless actor on this hideous stage, lost forever.
90.
THE FIRE GHOST
The spirit infesting this passageway is 20% likely to appear each round any character is in the area (along this passage and beyond the doors to location 91).
This ghostly figure appears as a scarecrow-thin, stooped human male in late middle age, which mutters and cackles to himself.
Oddly, there are tiny elemental effects which spark and flicker around the Ghost; tiny phosphorescent sparks around its hands, small ripples in the stone beneath its feet, a gentle breeze around its head, a sudden dampness and dripping of water from the stones of the walls around it.
This is the Ghost of an Elementalist forced to help Drachenfels with his researches into this area many centuries past.
The Ghost mutters and gibbers, and is wholly insane.
Any attempt to converse with it is useless.
However, 2 rounds after its appearance a very dramatic change flares around it: if the adventurers have backed off this is no problem for them, if they haven't (e.g., fear effects have caused people to be rooted to the spot, they're trying to talk to the Ghost, etc) then the spirit is a dangerous opponent.
The Fire Ghost simply bursts into flames, its spectral body surrounded with a huge halo of dancing fire.
It attacks dementedly until it is destroyed, or until all the adventurers leave the passage, in which case the Ghost instantly fades.
91.
VORTEX OF THE SOUL PUPAE
This chamber cannot be entered in any way without the keys from location 53.
Nothing else either physical or magical can force the door open, and there is an absolute barrier to ethereal travel and similar magical by-passing here.
Characters entering this room must make a Cl test or be affected by fear.
The scene within is chilling and eerie.
The temperature is bitterly cold, the chamber is filled with freezing fog, and drifting towards the adventurers to surround them come the soul pupae.
These appear as human-headed wriggling forms, like massive maggots, created from ectoplasm.
Their vestigial hands grope around them as their blind, closed-eyed faces press forwards against a thin film of ectoplasm which seems to shield them from the outside.
This effect looks like that of normal human faces stretched against a latex film.
The pupae move by wriggling, all around and through the room (including floating in the air).
They press themselves up against the adventurers.
They can be pushed away fairly easily, but any character heading into the room will soon find many of them surrounding him.
Weapons pass through the pupae, causing no damage, but a terrible reaction takes place.
The Transformation of the Souls
The soul pupa opens its eyes very widely, the pupils dilated with terror, and the horror of its own death is reflected in the retinas — scenes of terrible demise reveal themselves to the character, who cannot avoid the gaze.
The soul pupa opens its mouth in a voiceless scream.
The skull seems to become translucent, and within it — and in the flesh about it — knotted cords of white begin to form into a spiral which funnels back into a single thicker cord at the back of the skull.
These cords trail away into the distance, and there can be seen the hands of Drachenfels himself, drawing the essence out of the soul and into his own hands.
Images, feelings and emotions are drained down the cords and into the hands of the Great Enchanter, who crushes them into a frail stream of dust, all that remains of the soul.
The pupa's skull is jerked back, its jaw dislocated and its eyes suddenly black and empty.
In an instant, it disappears into a small pool of grey slime.
This transformation will take place even if the adventurers don't attack the pupae.
Two rounds after the adventurers enter here, and each round thereafter, there is a 50% chance that a pupa will be destroyed in this way.
Determine randomly which character is nearest to the pupa, and is the one to witness the transformation.
Any character directly witnessing this gains D4 Insanity Points.
Escaping
The crucial matter, of course, is to open the doors to 92 as quickly as possible.
The key to 91 appears to fit the lock to the internal doors here, but 1 (wasted) round of turning it shows that it doesn't unlock them.
Force is the only option, and the door has T 5 and D 17.
The pupae will be drifting around the adventurers by this time, so a swing with a weapon will automatically be an attack against D2 of them (the pupa is hit if the character fails a WS test).
92.
BLOODHEART DRACHENFELS
What lies beyond the doors is a shaft leading downwards.
This shaft appears to be like a giant windpipe.
A gentle rhythm pulses along it, the material of which it is constructed looks like membrane-covered cartilage (and has a similar consistency), and slender blood vessels can be seen under the lining of membrane.
There are plenty of tough cilia and small polyps along the pipe, and small sections of scar tissue also.
This shaft is magically protected against attacks in one way.
It simply regenerates damage done to it instantly.
One side-effect of this is that affixing spikes and suchlike for climbing is impossible — they just slip out next round as the hole they made heals.
The adventurers can climb or slide down, or use a Flight spell; the landing is soft enough in any event.
Map 16 shows Bloodheart Drachenfels itself.
The adventurers end up at a confluence of shafts, one of which leads to the Bloodheart itself.
The warp loops marked on the map are to misdirect intruders and add to the security of the Bloodheart — whenever anyone or anything except Drachenfels himself treads on the start-point of a warp loop, roll a D10 to see where they end up:
1 At the cliff gates, outside the Castle
2–6 At the end of the same warp loop
6–9 At the end of a different (random) warp loop
10 At the entrance to the Bloodheart
Within this central chamber is the great catafalque of Drachenfels, with his mouldering body lying as if in state.
Around the catafalque are some of his most powerful magical items, which lie scattered around in a strange quasi-circular pattern as if they were being drawn to the catafalque in a spiralling motion and suddenly stopped.
Drachenfels Lives!
If you are running this adventure (Chapter 4), Drachenfels won't be in his catafalque, of course, unless the adventurers have met him earlier and killed him within the Castle.
He'll be here in his final retreat, waiting for the climactic battle.
See Chapter 4 for details of his tactics, and also his Profile.
Treasures of Drachenfels
Adventurers who have got this far deserve some hefty magical rewards for their efforts, especially if they have overcome the Great Enchanter himself.
No simple, all-purpose listing is given here, because any GM will need to dish out powerful items which are suitable for his campaign.
Also, the rewards will depend on how many locations within the Castle the adventurers have had to enter and how many battles they have had to fight.
As a guideline, suitable rewards for the pregenerated characters would be as follows.
Items marked with an asterisk [*]would only be given if the adventurers had overcome Drachenfels himself.
Sword, +3 damage, causes fear on a hit
Full suit, +1 mithril plate armour
Full suit, chain mail Armour of Corrosion *
Shield +1,Protection rune 
Amulet of Iron , +20
Energy Jewel , 10 Magic Points
Multiple Spell Jewel , 4 spells (GM's choice)
Multiple Warding Ring , 4 protections (GM's choice)
Quiver of 14 Arrows of Division 
Elf-bow of Might (S 8) *
Unicorn Horn *
Wand of Absorption with 11 Magic Points (maximum store 27) *
To this, you must add some of Drachenfels' personal Grimoires.
You should decide exactly what is in them, to suit the circumstances of your own campaign.
They should be suitably powerful, though.
Select spells within them from the spells listed with Drachenfels' profile.
Final Note
If — and only if — you are using the pregenerated characters, then there will be two additional Grimoires here with gold and silver banding.
Elmariel will recognize these as the Grimoires he is ordered to seek out.
It is impossible to break the magic wards on the Grimoires, so the adventurers cannot use them.
They are only useful to the people who sent Elmariel on this mission.