

Introduction
This study of the religious history of England during the early modern period commences in 1529, a year which proved a fundamental turning-point in the fortunes of the church and religion in England.
The autumn of 1529 not only saw the fall from power of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, who had dominated religious and political life in England for the previous fifteen years, but also the beginning of the first session of the Reformation Parliament.
The members of this parliament immediately set about introducing legislation to reform abuses within the English Catholic church, and during the course of the next seven years they passed a series of statutes which would lead that church into schism and formalize its break with the Roman papacy, which has lasted down to the present day.
The immediate spur to both these events was the marital dilemma faced by the English king, Henry VIII.
As is well known, Henry wanted to be rid of his wife, Catherine of Aragon, in order to marry a lady of the court, Anne Boleyn, with whom he had fallen in love in 1526.
An annulment of his marriage was deemed essential not only because Anne had steadfastly refused to become the royal mistress, but more importantly because Henry was deeply anxious about the succession.
The only surviving child of his marriage to Catherine was a daughter, Mary, and unless Henry was able to produce a legitimate son, the realm was likely to suffer a disputed succession on his death and, if Mary were to marry a foreigner, might even lose its independent status.
As early as 1524, Henry had given up all hope of Catherine bearing another child, and by the time he became infatuated with Anne Boleyn two years later, he had already begun to convince himself that his wife's failure to give birth to a son who survived infancy was a sign that his marriage to his brother's widow was sinful, in that it had broken the laws concerning affinity laid down in the Old Testament Book of Leviticus (chapter 20: verse 21).
The following year, Henry and Wolsey began negotiations with Rome, aimed at securing an official papal annulment of the king's marriage; by 1529, however, it was clear to all involved that the pope had no intention of allowing Henry to put Catherine aside (see Chapter 4).
The principal victim of Henry and Anne's anger and disappointment at the failure of the negotiations was Thomas Wolsey.
In October 1529, the cardinal was charged with the offence of praemunire, of introducing an illegal foreign authority into England through his acceptance of the office of papal legate a latere .
A few days later, parliament met and some MPs took advantage of Wolsey's disgrace to air their grievances against the church.
Instead of siding with the bishops who protested at this action, Henry put his weight behind the anti-clerical agitation and agreed to pass legislation reforming the church in a number of relatively minor ways.
Yet neither at this stage nor for the next eighteen months did he have any clear plans to launch a full-scale attack on the church or to break with Rome.
In the immediate aftermath of Wolsey's fall from power, his advisers offered him a range of options on how to obtain the annulment and Henry responded by trying a number of different schemes.
Only in 1532 did he alight on the policy of the royal supremacy: the idea that the English monarchy had enjoyed an unlimited authority over the church within its realm for centuries and only now needed to start exercising this on a more regular basis.
Geoffrey Elton has consistently argued that this revolutionary new strategy was the brainchild of the recently appointed secretary to the privy council, Thomas Cromwell, who should thus be seen as the sole architect of the Henrician Reformation.
More recent research, however, has revealed that the radical theories justifying the supremacy were being promoted at court by members of the Boleyn faction as early as the summer of 1531, well before Cromwell became the king's chief minister (see Chapter 4).
But if Cromwell was not the architect of the Reformation in England, he was its main builder, for without question the implementation of the policy was his achievement; he masterminded the legislation which severed the ties with Rome, manoeuvred the statutes through parliament, sponsored a propaganda campaign to encourage obedience to the changes, and launched a programme of coercion against those refusing to comply.
Although Henry's desire to have a new wife and greater control over the English church was the primary incentive for the schism, Cromwell and the members of Anne Boleyn's faction were also keen to bring about reform of the church (see Chapters 4 and 6).
Sharing the humanist outlook of the continental reformer, Desiderius  Erasmus, they were in favour of allowing the laity easy access to English translations of the Bible, placing a greater emphasis on preaching, and instituting simplified forms of worship, stripped of superstitious practices such as the worship of relics and images.
Through the influence of Cromwell and the new Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, the 1530s witnessed a number of reform initiatives of this nature.
However, when Cromwell fell from power in 1540, a conservative backlash ensued; several purges of heretics followed and little further progress towards religious reform was made until after Henry's death.
The accession to the throne of the minor, Edward VI, in 1547 brought to power at court a reform group led by the new king's uncle, Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset.
During the course of the next two years, Somerset's government brought about a number of Protestant reforms, including the dissolution of the chantries and the introduction of an English Prayer Book and a new liturgy for the mass.
In 1549, Somerset was replaced as effective head of the government by John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, and from then on the Reformation took an even more radical direction.
The authorizing of a new ordination service for the clergy in 1550 was followed two years later by the appearance of a second Edwardian Prayer Book, and by the last months of Edward's reign the country was officially Protestant.
This new Protestant church was, however, extremely precarious, for its survival was threatened by Edward's ill health and the fact that the heir to the throne, Catherine of Aragon's daughter Mary, was a staunch Catholic.
Consequently, during the last months of his life Edward conspired with Northumberland to exclude his half-sister from the throne and to elevate instead the duke's Protestant daughter-in-law, Lady Jane Grey.
Although Jane's hereditary claim was weak, she was initially recognized as queen in many parts of the realm, and it took Mary several weeks to organize an effective coup d'état and take control of the throne.
Once in power, she immediately set about turning the clock back to 1529 by returning England to papal jurisdiction, restoring Catholic forms of worship, and reintroducing the old heresy laws.
Despite her subsequent burning of nearly 300 committed Protestants, her efforts to reimpose Roman Catholicism were ultimately doomed by the brevity of her reign and her failure to produce a Catholic heir.
In November 1558, she was succeeded by her half-sister Elizabeth, who within a few months of coming to the throne had authorized a new religious settlement which once again left the country officially Protestant.
At one level, therefore, the English Reformation was undoubtedly ‘an act of state’, or perhaps more accurately acts of state — a series of changes initiated by monarchs and imposed by them upon their subjects.
It also, however, involved conversions at grass-roots level, for in the course of the sixteenth century the people of England ceased to be overwhelmingly Catholic and became predominantly Protestant.
The question of how quickly and how voluntarily this process of ‘Protestantization’ was accomplished has seriously divided Reformation historians over the last thirty years; it will be discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
One view put forward by A. G. Dickens in the mid-1960s held that because Protestantism greatly appealed to the many lay people who had been alienated by the formalistic, clerically dominated Catholicism of the later middle ages, the Protestantization of the country was achieved very quickly.
Dickens declared that: ‘Long before Henry VIII broke with Rome numerous developments were preparing Englishmen for some sort of religious and ecclesiastical change or crisis.’
Among these long-term influences he included the deplorable state of the late medieval Catholic church, a widespread and deeply-rooted anti-clericalism, and the indigenous English heresy of Lollardy, which had both fuelled lay anti-clericalism and prepared the ground for later Protestant doctrines.
Thus, he argued, when Henry VIII quarrelled with the pope over his marriage, he was able to use a pre-existing anti-clericalism as a stick with which to beat the church, and when he subsequently embarked on the official Reformation, the greater part of the political nation readily gave him their support.
According to the Dickens view, opposition to Henry's ecclesiastical policies was negligible, being restricted to the unrepresentative northern backwoodsmen who joined the 1536 Pilgrimage of Grace, and a few saintly martyrs, such as the London Carthusians, Sir Thomas More, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester.
Dickens' reading of the English Reformation held sway for nearly two decades, but in the early 1980s Christopher Haigh and Jack Scarisbrick began to challenge and revise his interpretation of events.
Both denied that the underlying causes of the Reformation which he had identified had actually existed, claiming that rather than being an institution in terminal decline, the late medieval Catholic church had been ‘a lively and relevant social institution’, displaying ‘growing and vigorous’ forms of piety.
They also dismissed Dickens' evidence for the existence of widespread anti-clericalism and heresy on the eve of the Reformation, and argued that the vast majority of the laity were both well satisfied with their parish priests and orthodox in their doctrinal beliefs.
Furthermore, they doubted whether the  new, austere Protestant beliefs had in fact appealed to the laity, suggesting instead that Protestantism proved highly unpopular and was only imposed on the English people through force, by means of a government-sponsored process which met with great difficulties, and was only completed late in Elizabeth I's reign.
Much of the work of these and other ‘revisionist’ historians has proved invaluable, and many of their findings have been incorporated into subsequent chapters of this book.
Most importantly, they have demonstrated that the late medieval church was functioning effectively, and that historians have been misguided in relying too heavily on the testimony of condescending sixteenth-century intellectuals like Erasmus who were so hostile towards superstitious and non-biblical religion, while ignoring the perspective of the contemporary rural parishioners, who participated happily in this type of unsophisticated religious life and seemingly gained great spiritual comfort from the various rituals of the liturgical year.
The revisionists have also encouraged historians to focus more attention on the conservatives and the committed Catholics, whose opposition to the policies of Henry VIII and his Protestant successors has too often been overlooked or underestimated.
On the other hand, some of the original assertions of the revisionists are themselves now in need of revision.
Haigh's denial of the existence of anti-clericalism on the eve of the Reformation is a case in point.
It may well be true that there is little evidence of a widespread parochial anti-clericalism in the early sixteenth century, if by that we mean an endemic lay hostility towards the local priesthood.
There is, however, clear evidence of the existence of both literary anti-clericalism and the corporate anti-clericalism of specific interest groups with a power and influence well beyond their numbers (see Chapters 4 and 8).
Other areas where the revisionists appear to have overstated their case will be identified and discussed in the following chapters.
Thanks to the work of the revisionists, no future history of the English Reformation will end in 1559.
Elizabeth's reign is now seen to be of crucial importance because it saw the completion of the Protestantization of the English people and witnessed the creation of a uniquely English style of Protestant church which was later to be labelled Anglicanism.
Elizabeth was determined to preserve within her church a number of liturgical features which were roundly condemned by more radical Protestants as popish, and throughout her reign she consistently thwarted the efforts of those who sought to bring English Protestantism more closely into line with its continental counterpart.
Some of her bishops and prominent lay subjects, meanwhile, were engaged in a process of creating a learned Protestant ministry and imposing a godly discipline on the parishes.
On Elizabeth's death in 1603, therefore, her successor James I became head of an English church which included a wide spectrum of religious opinion.
Despite his mother's Catholicism, James had received an impeccably Protestant upbringing in Calvinist Scotland, and was personally extremely interested in religious issues.
Shortly after arriving in England, he responded to a petition from a number of Puritan ministers by calling a theological conference at Hampton Court Palace, at which he took the chair for a series of debates between his bishops and the representatives of those looking for reform.
In the event, however, rather than witnessing yet another religious volte face , James's reign saw the continuation and consolidation of the ecclesiastical policies set in train by Elizabeth.
For this reason, the years 1559 to 1625 need to be viewed as a distinct religious period, during the course of which the Elizabethan church founded in 1559 gradually came to acquire a deep hold on the affections of the English people.
James worked closely with his bishops, and in particular with George Abbot, whom he appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 1611.
By turning a blind eye to the activities of moderate Puritan laymen and clergy while at the same time dealing harshly with Presbyterian extremists, king and archbishop ensured that the first fifteen years of Abbot's primacy were some of the most tranquil in the religious sphere during the entire century following the break with Rome (see Chapter 7).
The absence of serious internal religious discontent during these years is illustrated by the lack of parliamentary concern.
Even during the later years of the reign, when Europe was embroiled in the early stages of the Thirty Years' War and James's MPs were calling for active English intervention on behalf of Protestants abroad, there were very few complaints in parliament about the state of religion at home.
Although historians have differed somewhat less in their interpretations of the religious history of the Elizabethan and Jacobean periods than in their views on the turbulent years between 1530 and 1560, there have, none the less, been a number of notable areas of dispute.
The most important of these controversies has arisen over the theological nature of the established state church, and in particular over the prevalence and popularity of the doctrine of predestination — the belief that humankind is divided into immutable groups of the saved and the damned, and that an individual's salvation depends not  on his or her actions while on earth, but rather on a predetermined and arbitrary decision by God (see Chapter 2).
Some historians, most notably Nicholas Tyacke, have argued that between 1560 and 1625 this doctrine was accepted unquestioningly by all the leading officials, theologians, and teachers of the Elizabethan church.
R. T. Kendall and Peter Lake have refined this position by drawing a distinction between a moderate majority of ‘credal’ predestinarian Protestants and a smaller group of more intense ‘experimental’predestinarians.
However, the view that there was a predestinarian orthodoxy in the Elizabethan church has been challenged by another group of historians, which includes Peter White, Kevin Sharpe, and George Bernard.
They have argued that Elizabeth's church contained a variety of acceptable doctrinal positions, that predestinarianism never managed to achieve the dominance accorded it by Tyacke, and that at no time during the sixty-five years between 1560 and 1625 was the idea that good works could be an aid to salvation anything other than a perfectly orthodox belief.
One of the chief reasons why these issues have been so hotly contested is that they have enormous bearing both on the significance of the religious changes introduced under Charles I and on the possible causes of the English civil war.
Sometime before he became king in 1625, James I's son Charles had adopted as his personal religion a conservative version of Protestantism known as Arminianism; he had done so either because he disagreed with the doctrine of predestination, or more probably because he found the austere liturgy of undiluted Calvinism distasteful.
Arminianism had also been adopted by a small group of clerics within the Jacobean church who, as well as questioning the doctrinal basis of Calvinism, had sought to reintroduce into church worship certain decorational features and ceremonies most commonly associated with Catholicism.
Aware that Prince Charles was the key to their bid to take control of the church, shortly before James's death the Arminian polemicist Richard Montagu entitled his new theological work Appello Caesarem — An Appeal to Caesar.
Once he had come to the throne, Charles quickly answered this call for religious change by promoting notable Arminians to positions of prominence in both church and state.
Disquiet at the new direction of religious affairs soon surfaced in parliament, and over the next few years a growing number of MPs began to speak out against the Arminian threat.
In 1629, the intense anxiety and frustration of the MPs erupted into violence, as the Speaker of the Commons was held down in his chair while the House forced through motions condemning the religious innovations.
This incident finally convinced Charles that he should abandon his efforts to work with parliament, and he embarked on a period of personal rule, which lasted until 1640.
Throughout the 1630s he continued to lend his wholehearted support to the Arminian takeover of his church.
In 1633, one of the leading Arminians, William Laud, who had been the king's chief religious adviser since the beginning of the reign, was appointed to succeed Abbot as Archbishop of Canterbury, and by the mid-1630s most of the other bishops' thrones were also occupied by Arminians.
In alliance with the king, these bishops set out to impose both their theological preferences and their particular brand of ceremonialism on the parish clergy and the laity (see Chapter 7).
The large numbers of the English gentry and aristocracy who enjoyed the profits from impropriated tithes were further alarmed when the Laudian ecclesiastical authorities made it clear they would spare no pains in an attempt to recover as much as they could of the church's former wealth and power.
Their suspicions and anxieties were further fuelled when both Laud and the Archbishop of York, Richard Neile, were appointed to Charles's privy council, and became intimately involved in the king's plans to achieve a more ordered secular, as well as ecclesiastical commonwealth.
These developments were clearly of some considerable significance; just how considerable, however, depends on the nature of the Elizabethan church that the Arminians set out to change.
If one agrees with the view of Sharpe, White,, and Bernard that prior to 1625 predestination had merely been one of a number of alternative doctrines vying for supremacy within the church, the rise to power of the Laudians represented little more than another swing of a theological pendulum which had been fluctuating wildly since 1560.
As such, it was not something that many people were particularly upset about.
If, on the other hand, one accepts Tyacke's argument that predestination was the one mainstream belief down to 1625, the Arminians were responsible for an unprecedented attack on a well-established orthodoxy, and their activities accordingly met with great hostility and resistance.
Thus, while Sharpe, White, and Bernard do not believe that the Arminians should be blamed for causing the civil war of the 1640s, Tyacke, John Morrill, and other historians have conversely argued that Laud and his fellow prelates should bear a major part of the responsibility for provoking what they regard as ‘England's wars of religion’.
This controversy will be discussed in more detail in subsequent chapters.
Following the outbreak of civil war in 1642, the revolutionary years  of the 1640s and 1650s witnessed the attempts of a succession of governments to impose several quite distinct forms of established church on the English people.
During the course of the civil war, the Long Parliament removed from the church all the innovations introduced by Charles and Laud during the 1630s, abolished episcopacy and the Elizabethan Prayer Book, and entrusted the task of devising a new church to the Westminster Assembly of Divines, a committee made up of a small number of MPs and peers, several representatives of parliament's allies the Scots, and over 100 English churchmen.
The eventual product of their lengthy discussions was the strongly Presbyterian Directory of Public Worship, which was accepted by parliament in early 1645 as a blueprint for the new ecclesiastical establishment.
As well as imposing this Presbyterian liturgy on the country, parliament also attempted to reorganize ecclesiastical government in the localities by bringing parishes together into new administrative groupings presided over by ‘classes’(see Chapter 6).
Furthermore, in 1648 it passed a restrictive Blasphemy Act, which threatened those convicted of denying the central tenets of Christianity with death, and those dissenting from orthodox Calvinist theology with imprisonment.
The Scots' commissioners in London were far from pleased with this new English church, and one of them referred to it as ‘but a lame, Erastian presbytery’.
However, if it was too weak and watered down a version of Presbyterianism for the Scots, it none the less proved far too rigid and alien for the majority of the English laity.
Although the ceremonies contained in the Directory of Public Worship remained the official liturgy of the English church throughout the period from 1645 to the Restoration, few English parishes appear to have welcomed them with any enthusiasm, and all over the country clergymen continued to conduct services based substantially on the old Book of Common Prayer.
The classis system proved equally unpopular; a number of parishes in London, Manchester, Bury, Nottingham, Yorkshire, Essex, and Shropshire were grouped together, and provincial assemblies were established for London and Lancashire.
Elsewhere in the country, however, the idea met with at best a lukewarm response, and evidence of the existence of classes exists for only about a quarter of English counties.
Handicapped from the outset by its widespread unpopularity in the country, the new Presbyterian state church soon also lost all official backing from the central government.
In the months following the end of the civil war, parliament's New Model Army, which contained  large numbers of soldiers who had rejected the Presbyterian establishment in favour of greater religious toleration, grew steadily more and more disenchanted with its masters.
Frustrated at the persistent refusal of the MPs to listen to their grievances, at the end of 1648 and beginning of 1649 the army staged a military coup, ejecting the most prominent Presbyterians from parliament, publicly executing the king, and imposing a military regime upon the country.
For the next eleven years, the country was under the effective control of the army, and as its commander-in-chief, Oliver Cromwell, and most of his fellow officers were far from convinced of the need for any state church, and firmly opposed to any compulsory religious system, Presbyterianism was consigned to a limited and localized presence.
During the 1650s, England experienced what was probably the freest religious environment of the entire early modern period, within which Protestants who believed in the doctrine of the trinity and refrained from breaking the law were allowed a wide measure of toleration.
In 1650, the Rump of the Long Parliament replaced the 1648 Blasphemy Act with their own far less harsh legislation, which although it continued to outlaw the extreme beliefs of disruptive fringe groups such as the Ranters, signalled a far more liberal approach on the part of the civil authorities.
In the same year, the Rumpers passed an Act for the Relief of Religious and Peaceable People; this retained the legal requirement on the laity to take part in some form of Sunday worship, but released them from their obligation to attend the local parish church.
Throughout the remainder of the 1650s, successive governments presided over a wide diversity of religious practice; large numbers of English men and women continued to frequent only their parish churches, many worshipped solely in gathered congregations of Independents, Baptists, and Quakers, and many more regularly attended both sectarian and parish worship.
Official toleration was denied only to Roman Catholics and episcopalian Anglicans, and in practice if they exercised discretion, they too were able to worship without much disturbance.
If the military regimes of the Interregnum were prepared within reason to allow lay men and women to be godly in whichever way seemed most appropriate to them, they did expect them to be godly in some way.
Cromwell and his army colleagues considered the improving of the morality of the English people one of the chief priorities of their government, and they made every effort to eradicate a range of popular pursuits which they considered to be sinful, profane, or unseemly.
Brothels, gaming-houses, and unlicensed ale-houses were  sought out and closed down, a strict Puritan Sunday was enforced, the much-loved festivities associated with Christmas, Whitsuntide, and Mayday were outlawed, and a whole range of rural sports was banned.
It can indeed be argued that the strict Calvinists who controlled England during this period were attempting by such means to bring about a cultural revolution (see Chapter 5).
When Charles II returned to England as king in 1660, the old compulsory state church was quickly restored and the freedoms of the 1650s soon vanished.
Having gone down with the monarchy in the 1640s and learnt from that experience that its fortunes were closely dependent on those of the crown, the established church was more than ever determined to shore up the monarchy as a means of guaranteeing its own survival.
Dr Robert South emphasized this point when he declared shortly after the Restoration that the Anglican church ‘glories in nothing more than that she is the truest friend to kings and to kingly government of any Church in the world’.
It is also clear that there was a great deal of support for the old church throughout the country, and particularly from the gentry elites of provincial England.
Although Charles's own personal inclination was to refound a wide, comprehensive church able to encompass as many of the various denominations of the 1650s as possible, it was soon clear that the king would have to bow to pressure from the bishops, the conservative landowners, and their representatives in the Cavalier Parliament, who wished to see a more narrow restoration.
In the event, the restored Anglican church of the 1660s was a conservative, in some respects even Laudian church, which large numbers of Presbyterians, Baptists, and Quakers could not in conscience bring themselves to join.
These nonconformists or dissenters — were no longer, however, simply allowed to opt out and organize their own services, for the legislation of the Clarendon Code passed in the 1660s made any such unauthorized meetings for worship illegal.
During the twenty-nine years between 1660 and 1689, many thousands of nonconformists chose to disregard the Code and participate in secret ‘conventicles’; many hundreds of them who were caught subsequently languished for years in gaol.
Only in 1689, the closing date for this study, were they at last given the legal right to conduct their nonconformist worship in their own meeting-houses (see Chapters 3 and 6).
Over the course of the period between 1529 and 1559, the English church experienced a number of dramatic changes in its nature and status; starting out as a branch of the international Roman Catholic church, it moved to become first an independent, schismatic Catholic  church, and later a unique, hybrid Protestant church.
After 1560, this new English church was engaged in the task of establishing its traditions and defining its boundaries, a process which lasted well over a century and was only effectively completed by the end of the seventeenth century.
It is to the detail of these developments that we shall turn in the following chapters.
Theology and liturgy
During the late medieval period, the core doctrinal beliefs of the Roman Catholic church were salvation through faith and works, transubstantiation, and the efficacy of the grace transmitted through the seven sacraments.
The church taught that the individual's fate after death was primarily decided by the way he or she acted while on earth.
Those who avoided temptation, practised good deeds, and regularly sought forgiveness for their sins through the sacrament of confession would receive the reward of a place in heaven.
Before they reached heaven, the great majority of men and women would be required to spend a period in an intermediate location called purgatory, where those destined for eternal bliss would first be subjected to severe punishments for the sins they had committed on earth.
It was, however, possible to obtain either partial or total remission of one's time in purgatory through the acquisition of indulgences.
These had originally been envisaged as rewards for the undertaking of religious exercises, but during the late medieval period were increasingly also being sold for cash.
The individual's attempts to avoid the pitfalls of sin were assisted by the spiritual food of grace, which was transmitted through the seven Catholic sacraments: baptism, confirmation, confession, the eucharist, marriage, ordination, and the last rites.
Of particular importance was the eucharist, which involved the miracle of transubstantiation; since the twelfth century, the Catholic church had argued that, although the ‘accidents’(or external appearance) of the bread and wine remained unchanged during the mass, the substance of both was turned by the priest at the moment of consecration into the body and blood of Christ.
For this reason each Catholic mass was considered a re-enactment of Christ's sacrifice on Calvary.
As late medieval Catholics also believed that they could elicit the help of the Virgin Mary and the saints in heaven not only for  themselves but also for those in purgatory, intercessory prayers, masses for the dead, and the worship of relics of the saints were all extremely important features of lay piety.
Hundreds of chantries and lay fraternities were established with this as their major function.
During the 1520s, this theological orthodoxy came under challenge throughout Europe from the new ideas of the continental reformers, Martin Luther and Ulrich Zwingli, both of whom claimed that the truth of their new theology was evident from scripture and based upon a biblical authority which took precedence over tradition and papal decree.
Central to their challenge was the doctrine of justification by faith alone, or solafidianism (from the Latin sola fide —‘by faith alone’).
They argued that sinners were quite unable to attain salvation through their own merits or through the long process of confession, repentance, and partial purification, and that justification or redemption was obtainable only at a stroke through the gift of faith from God made possible by Christ's sacrifice.
As well as eliminating the spiritual importance of good works, this reformed theology of grace and salvation rejected a number of the doctrinal cornerstones of late medieval Catholicism.
It discarded purgatory and intercession for the dead, asserting that the damned went straight to hell and the saved directly to heaven.
It also rejected worship of the saints and relics, pilgrimages, indulgences, and masses for the dead as futile attempts to purge the sins of the deceased or pile up merit for the living.
Luther and Zwingli also attacked the orthodox theology of the mass.
The Catholic miracle of transubstantiation could be performed only by an ordained priest, who then received the body and blood alone at the altar.
The laity were merely passive observers and their view of the process was obscured by the rood screen which separated the nave of the church from the chancel.
The great majority of them participated in the sacrament only once a year at Easter, when they received the host (or wafer) but not the consecrated wine.
While continuing to believe in the real presence of Christ in the bread and wine at communion, Luther rejected transubstantiation for a position which has been labelled consubstantiation.
He argued that the bread and wine somehow coexisted with the body and blood, and more importantly that the miracle occurred because of the presence of the faithful and not as a result of the magical powers of the priest.
Consequently, he demanded regular communion in both kinds (bread and wine) for the laity, and he denounced private masses celebrated by a priest alone.
Zwingli departed still further from the orthodox  Catholic position; although he believed in Christ's spiritual presence among the faithful at communion, he totally rejected the idea of any physical presence of Christ in the bread and wine.
Henry VIII was horrified by what he understood of Luther's theology, and, in an attempt to rebut it during the early 1520s, he wrote with the help of a number of court scholars the theological tract The Assertion of the Seven Sacraments , for which he was rewarded by the pope with the title ‘Defender of the Faith’.
His subsequent break with the Roman church during the 1530s was not the result of any change of heart or conversion to the reformer's views, nor due to any theological differences with the papacy.
Henry remained a doctrinal conservative until his death, and as a consequence, although the legislation enacted by the Reformation Parliament brought about a jurisdictional revolution, it created no new theology for the English church.
Indeed, the Act of Dispensations of 1534 specifically affirmed Henry's commitment to Catholic doctrine, stating that the king did not intend to ‘vary from the congregation of Christ's Church in any things concerning the very articles of the Catholic faith of Christendom’.
None the less, during the period immediately following the schism, both domestic politics and considerations of foreign policy proved an encouragement to religious change and theological experimentation in England.
At court, Anne Boleyn and Thomas Cromwell, Henry's vicegerent in spirituals, used their influence to promote reform of the church and to advance those evangelicals who questioned the sacramental power of the priesthood.
Furthermore, as Henry VIII had relied on the authority of scripture to justify his annulment, it was difficult for him to resist pressure for the translation of the Bible into English, or demands that doctrine and liturgy should conform to the word of God as revealed in the scriptures.
Abroad, the German princes who had reformed their churches along Lutheran lines saw Henry as a potential ally against their common enemy, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, but demanded as a preliminary to a political alliance that he accept their Protestant statement of faith, the Augsburg Confession of 1530.
The 1530s, therefore, saw some tentative official moves towards religious reform, although they all reflected the tension between the forces for conservatism and those who looked for change.
Typical of the uneasy compromises that resulted was the Ten Articles of Faith laid down by convocation in 1536.
On the sacraments, this document accepted the traditional Catholic doctrine that baptism, penance, and the eucharist were ‘necessary for man's salvation’, but  made no mention at all of the other four Catholic sacraments deemed unscriptural by Luther; similarly, its statement on the eucharist was left sufficiently vague to be interpreted as either transubstantiation or consubstantiation.
On purgatory and prayers for the dead, the Articles were also ambivalent, since they admitted that: ‘it is a very good and a charitable deed to pray for souls departed’, but made no claim that such prayers were efficacious and even questioned whether purgatory existed at all.
Finally, although they sanctioned images in churches, prayers for the dead, and the veneration of saints, the Ten Articles included a warning about the superstitious beliefs which sometimes lay behind them.
The question of images in churches was further addressed by two sets of injunctions issued by Cromwell in 1536 and 1538, but even here the reforms did not go as far as some iconophobes would have liked, as they drew back from condemning all images and denounced only those that encouraged ‘superstition and hypocrisy’ and ‘that most detestable sin of idolatry’.
Nor was it clear from the 1538 injunctions whether the offending images should simply be removed or totally destroyed.
Even after Cromwell had promoted the translation of the Bible into English and ordered that a copy be placed in every parish church in order that it could be read by the laity, William Tyndale's New Testament could not be circulated, as the author was still considered to be a heretic.
To religious conservatives, however, even these tentative and moderate reforms were undesirable and alarming.
While men like Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester, were prepared to accept the royal supremacy, they baulked at these evangelical reforms, which in their view smacked of heresy and threatened to lead England into the Lutheran camp.
Their opportunity to discredit the reformers and gain influence with the king came in the late 1530s.
The conservative rebellion known as the Pilgrimage of Grace and the threatened Franco-Imperial invasion of 1538–9 awakened Henry to the dangers of the evangelical reform programme, and he decided to call a halt to all further theological discussion and experimentation.
In 1539, he supported, and perhaps even initiated, a parliamentary Bill which contained a Catholic statement on six central points of doctrine.
These Six Articles affirmed royal support for the central Catholic doctrines of transubstantiation, communion in one kind for the laity, clerical celibacy, the inviolability of priestly vows of chastity, the validity of private masses, and the necessity of private auricular confession.
The fall of Thomas Cromwell the following year helped to ensure that this conservative statement of faith remained in force until Henry's  death.
At the beginning of 1547, therefore, the doctrinal position of the English church was  unequivocally orthodox.
Henry's main religious innovations — the break with Rome, the dissolution of the monasteries, and the partial dissolution of the chantries — had been introduced for political and financial rather than theological reasons.
Other reforms such as the vernacular translation of the Bible, the attack on idolatry, and the use of an English litany were not entirely incompatible with Catholicism, and their impact was deliberately limited in order to prevent any movement away from orthodoxy.
Thus, a statute of 1543 condemned ‘untrue’ translations of the Bible and forbade the lower orders to read even those licensed by the government.
It was not until Edward VI's brief reign that the Protestant Reformation was brought to England.
Between 1547 and 1552, a series of parliamentary statutes ushered in major doctrinal and liturgical change; restrictions on the reading of the scriptures were ended; the fifteenth-century heresy laws were rescinded; all remaining chantries were dissolved; and clerical marriage, communion in both kinds, and the use of a Protestant English Prayer Book were all authorized.
In the event, this official reformation was both rapid and radical, but up until just a few weeks before Henry's death it had by no means been inevitable.
On the contrary, it had only resulted from a number of complex and unforeseeable political developments at court.
Despite the fall of Cromwell, the evangelicals had survived the attacks of the conservatives during the early 1540s and managed to maintain an important presence on both the council and the privy chamber.
As a consequence, the last six years of Henry's reign had witnessed a long and bitter power struggle between the conservatives led by Gardiner and Norfolk, and the evangelicals led by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, Sir Anthony Denny, and the Seymour uncles of Prince Edward.
The outcome had remained finely poised until the last months of Henry's reign, when the conservative cause was seriously damaged by the actions of Norfolk's son, the Earl of Surrey.
After foolishly drawing attention to his own royal blood, Surrey was arrested on a charge of treason, which was subsequently extended to his father.
Two weeks later, Henry changed his will and excluded Gardiner from the regency council which had been appointed to rule during the minority of his son.
On Henry's death, therefore, the evangelicals were dominant at court, and they further consolidated their position when Edward Seymour overturned the dead king's will and appointed himself Lord Protector Somerset.
Somerset's arrest in 1549 did not, as many expected, return the conservatives to power, but  rather led to the primacy of John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, who in alliance with Archbishop Cranmer eliminated the remaining conservatives from the council.
By this stage too, the young king, who was himself a committed Protestant, was beginning to exert his own personal influence.
Initially the religious innovations of Edward's reign reflected the Lutheran doctrines on salvation and the eucharist.
The dissolution of the remaining chantries in 1547, for example, was justified on the Lutheran grounds that they encouraged ‘vain opinions’ concerning purgatory and intercessory masses and left people ignorant of ‘their very true and perfect salvation through the death of Jesus Christ’.
Similarly, the liturgy of the eucharist outlined in the 1549 Prayer Book was consistent with a belief in consubstantiation, although it is doubtful whether its author, Cranmer, either fully understood or shared Luther's eucharistic views.
The new communion ceremony was designed to dispel the belief that each individual mass was a re-enactment of Christ's sacrifice, or that the bread and wine were physically changed as a result of their consecration by a priest.
Yet, at the same time, the wording of the administration of the bread and wine, which referred to them as the ‘body and blood’ of Christ, implied the real presence so important in Luther's theology.
From 1552, however, official statements on doctrine and liturgy began to depart from this Lutheran standpoint, and to echo instead the theology of the Reformed Churches of Zurich, Strasbourg, and John Calvin's Geneva.
The threat from the gathering forces of the counter-Reformation, and in particular the defeat of the German Protestants by Charles V at the battle of Muhlberg in 1547, had driven many European Protestants to take refuge in Edwardian England.
These Protestant refugees set up ‘stranger churches’ in London, thus providing models of the ideal Reformed church, and also forged close links with influential English Protestants, such as John Hooper, the future Bishop of Gloucester.
The leading Reformed émigrés — Martin Bucer of Strasbourg, the Italian Peter Martyr, and the Pole John à Lasco — provided theological leadership in the universities and offered advice to the English bishops.
Their influence encouraged the assimilation of the Reformed theology of grace, salvation, and the eucharist into the new Edwardian Protestant Church.
The distinctive feature of this Reformed theology of salvation was its emphasis on the doctrines of predestination, assurance (or perseverance), and sanctification.
Luther's solafidianism had implied the doctrine of predestination, but had not explicitly asserted it.
Reformed theologians, however, and in particular John Calvin, emphasized that all men and women were predestined by God before their births either for election (salvation) or reprobation (damnation).
As works or good deeds played absolutely no part in this process, the elect were assured that they could never fall from grace, and derived great comfort from this ‘assurance’.
They could not, however, simply rest on their laurels, for they were obliged to fulfil God's purpose by sanctifying themselves and doing his will on earth, both individually and collectively.
It was also generally believed that, while good works could never of themselves merit salvation, the leading of a saintly life was both a consequence and a sign of one's elect status.
While sanctification was essentially a work of God's grace rather than of the human will, it was believed that the process could be assisted by the discipline imposed by the church.
This Reformed or Calvinist doctrine of grace and salvation was clearly reflected in Cranmer's Forty-Two Articles of Faith issued in 1553; Article Seventeen in particular declared: ‘predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God’, and it went on to imply that individual salvation and damnation had been decreed at the beginning of creation, even before the Fall of Adam and Eve.
In the same way, the second Edwardian Prayer Book of 1552 conformed to the Reformed theology of the eucharist and denied both transubstantiation and consubstantiation.
Any suggestion of a re-enactment of Christ's sacrifice or of a bodily presence in the bread and wine was now removed from the communion service.
The word ‘mass’ was no longer used, vestments were forbidden, and the communion table was positioned east to west rather than altarwise.
The wording of the administration no longer referred to the body and blood of Christ but emphasized instead the commemorative significance of the sacrament, the minister declaring: ‘Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving.’
In addition, the Prayer Book include a communion rubric, known as the Black Rubric, which contained an explicit denial of the real presence; it stated that the bread and wine ‘remain still in their very natural substances’, and that kneeling to receive communion did not signify that ‘any adoration is done or meant to be done’.
Ironically, the close association between this new English Protestant church and the Reformed churches abroad was reinforced with the accession of Queen Mary in 1553.
For while she returned her kingdom to full doctrinal and liturgical conformity with Rome, many English Protestant exiles fled their homeland and took up residence in Strasbourg, Zurich, Emden, Frankfurt, and Geneva, where they gained first-hand experience of the Zwinglian  and Calvinist forms of Protestantism, and became fully immersed in the Calvinist theology of grace and salvation.
On Mary's death in 1558, it was by no means certain what form of religion the new queen, her sister Elizabeth, would adhere to.
Some foreign observers, including Philip II of Spain, thought that England might remain doctrinally and liturgically Catholic, even if the royal supremacy were restored.
Most English politicians, on the other hand, seemed confident that Elizabeth would attempt to introduce a Protestant form of worship, although they were unsure whether it would be based on the first or second Edwardian Prayer Book.
Elizabeth's intentions in 1558 have been no more clear to historians than they were to contemporaries, and have been the subject of much debate and discussion.
The oldest tradition, which goes back to the contemporary historian John Foxe, claims that the queen and her Protestant councillors had intended to introduce a settlement based on the 1552 Prayer Book, but were later forced to make some concessions in the Catholic direction because of the implacable opposition of the bishops and some of the lay peers in the House of Lords.
During the 1950s, Sir John Neale presented an alternative view, which dominated historical accounts for a generation, but which some now believe was based upon questionable assumptions.
According to Neale, Elizabeth had originally wished to do no more than reintroduce her father's national church, but was pressured into a more radical programme by Protestants in the House of Commons, who insisted on the adoption of the 1552 Prayer Book.
Neale's thesis was challenged in 1982 by Norman Jones, who exposed a number of errors in his argument and demonstrated that the religious settlement which finally emerged in 1559 was the one that had been originally planned by the government.
This account is now generally accepted, although some historians still suggest that Elizabeth herself would have preferred to have reintroduced the 1549 Prayer Book, had she been able to enlist any support for this move from her lay and clerical advisers at court.
In the event, the 1559 parliament restored the Henrician anti-papal statutes and the 1552 Prayer Book-albeit modified in a number of important respects- and in 1563 convocation drew up thirty-nine articles of faith, based substantially on Cranmer's Forty-Two Articles of 1553.
This religious settlement has sometimes been described as a via media between Catholicism and Protestantism.
In reality it was uncompromisingly Protestant in doctrine, although it did reflect both Lutheran and Reformed teachings, and was sometimes deliberately ambiguous in its theology.
Thus, while Article Seventeen of the  Thirty-Nine Articles incorporated the Reformed doctrine of predestination, its comments about the reprobate and the absolute assurance of salvation were left vague.
Similarly, the Prayer Book published in 1559 described the baptized child as ‘a member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom’, a form of words which seemed to discount the possibility that the infant might have been born reprobate.
The eucharistic theology of the new Elizabethan church also hovered uneasily between the Lutheran and Reformed positions.
Articles Twenty-Nine to Thirty-One of the Thirty-Nine Articles denied transubstantiation but were ambiguous about the real presence, while the 1559 Prayer Book combined the formula used in 1549 to imply a physical presence with that of 1552 which was meant to indicate commemoration only.
Thus, the Elizabethan minister was enjoined to declare ambiguously: ‘The blood of our Lord, Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life.
Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee and be thankful.’
While the doctrinal pronouncements remained inexact, the commemorative interpretation was encouraged by Elizabeth's injunctions of 1559, which ordered that communion be dispensed from a table placed in the middle of the chancel during services, rather than from an altar.
In the longer term, it was Reformed rather than Lutheran theology that came to dominate Elizabethan Protestantism.
As early as 1566, the Earl of Sussex had pointed out that Calvinism was being preached throughout the country, and after 1570 it was difficult to hear or read any non-Calvinist theology.
All the published sermons preached at St Paul's Cross in London from 1570 onwards took a firm Calvinist line on predestination, and the theology faculties at the universities dispensed doctrinal Calvinism to those training for the ministry; meanwhile the laity were provided with the Genevan Bible in 1560 and a Calvinist catechism in 1563.
The Geneva version of the English Bible was extremely popular, and ran to at least thirty-nine editions between 1579 and 1615.
Virtually all the leading Elizabethan churchmen were thoroughly imbued with predestinarian theology, and in 1595 nine leading English theologians, including John Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London, approved the Lambeth Articles, an unequivocal assertion of the Reformed theology of grace and salvation.
While a small number of individuals in Elizabethan England stood outside this Calvinist consensus, as Nicholas Tyacke has commented: ‘it is not an exaggeration to say that by the end of the sixteenth century the Church of England was largely Calvinist in doctrine.’
Some historians have argued that there was a deep theological divide within Elizabethan and early Stuart England, between so-called Anglicans on the one side and Calvinists or Puritans on the other.
This, however, was clearly not the case, for the leading figures of the established church shared with their Presbyterian critics a common theological position, all of them being, in the historian Peter Lake's phrase, ‘credal’ predestinarians.
The orthodox clerics were distinguished from the Presbyterians and from those dubbed Puritans not by a differing theology of salvation, but rather by the fact that they did not share the intensified spirituality displayed by the latter two groups, a spirituality which Lake and R. T. Kendall have labelled ‘experimental’ predestinarianism.
Anxious to lead their lives in accordance with a strict and literal interpretation of predestination, experimental Calvinists sought to distance themselves both religiously and socially from the reprobate or ungodly.
In their view, the practical separation of the elect and the damned was an essential prerequisite for the creation of the true church.
Consequently, some experimental predestinarians would only associate with sub-groups of the elect within the established church, while others like William Bradshaw would have preferred to have limited communicant membership of the visible, national church solely to the elect.
Such exclusivity was viewed with horror by mainstream credal Calvinists such as Whitgift, who saw in such elitism the seeds of a subversive and divisive separatism which might threaten the very existence of a national church.
While, therefore, he accepted the idea, of an invisible church of the elect, Whitgift rejected any suggestion that it should be synonymous with the visible church of this world, arguing that: ‘We must walk in those ways that God hath appointed to bring them [the reprobate]to salvation which is to feed them continually and watch over them so long as they are in danger.’
Although both the credal and experimental forms of predestinarianism may now appear harsh and inflexible creeds, during the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries they accorded well with the political and social realities of life in England.
The survival of Catholic recusancy and the existence of large numbers of ungodly and seemingly unregenerate vagrants and dissolutes gave credence to the idea of reprobation.
In addition, the proffered certainties of Calvinism had great appeal for the many men and women who were suffering from the dislocation and anxiety produced by a period of unpredictable economic development and rapid social change.
Not that even the staunchest of experimental Calvinists could allow the doctrine of assurance or perseverance to make them complacent  about their own salvation.
Indeed, many of them experienced agonies of self-doubt; all too aware of their inadequacies as Christians, they threw themselves headlong into acts of piety and charity in order to prove to themselves that they really were God's elect.
Their insecurities were doubtless increased through reading theological works such as William Perkins' Whether a Man , published in 1589, which argued that a reprobate might attain temporary faith and ‘seem both unto himself and to the Church of God to be a true professor of the Gospel, and yet indeed be none’.
Only after many years of mental torment did some Calvinists achieve a certainty of conviction about their elect status, which helped them to cope with, and sometimes to change, the threatening and disturbing world that surrounded them.
While its theology was unmistakably Protestant, in ceremonials and externals the Elizabethan church retained many features which closely resembled those of the Catholic church.
An Ornaments Rubric included in the 1559 Prayer Book ordered the use of vestments and the alb and cope during the communion service; and the 1559 injunctions required the clergy to wear the surplice during services, as well as their distinctive outdoor dress which set them apart from the laity.
Communicants were allowed to kneel to receive the bread and wine, and the 1552 Black Rubric, which had declared that kneeling in no way implied a real presence, was deleted from the 1559 Prayer Book.
The sign of the cross in baptism, the ring in marriage, crucifixes, candles, and other ‘popish’ remnants were also permitted.
Initially, many believed that their retention would only be temporary; they failed to understand, however, that Elizabeth herself saw the 1559 settlement as final, and that she intended to resist all pressure from her councillors, divines, and MPs to purify or reform these ceremonials.
As her reign progressed, the 1559 Prayer Book came to attract considerable support, both popular and intellectual; its most outspoken critics, meanwhile, diminished in number and influence, particularly as a consequence of Archbishop Whitgift's successful campaign against unorthodoxy during the 1590s.
During the final years of Elizabeth's reign, the unique form of Protestant church she had erected was given a more distinct theoretical and philosophical identity in the writings of Richard Hooker, an Oxford academic and master of the Temple church in London.
During the late 1580s, Hooker became involved in a bitter theological dispute with the Presbyterian, Walter Travers, and as a result in the early 1590s he retired to a country living in Wiltshire to compose a literary apologia for the church which had been created in 1559.
The various books of the resulting work, entitled A Treatise on the  Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity , justified the Elizabethan church as a via media between the extremes of Roman Catholicism and radical Puritanism, and defended its own particular ceremonial style and form of government.
In his theology, however, Hooker was not simply a traditionalist; although he stood within the mainstream of the Calvinist consensus on the issue of predestination, he challenged many of the assumptions held by both credal and experimental Calvinists.
His view of the visible church, for example, was much wider than that of even Whitgift, as he appeared to argue that since Christ had died for all, all men and women — including Roman Catholics — were potentially part of the visible church, and as such should be offered the sacrament of the eucharist, if they were prepared to receive it in good faith.
He also put more emphasis on public worship, prayers, and the sacraments than most of his contemporaries, and played down the role of preaching as a means of edification; for these reasons, Hooker has been seen by some ecclesiastical historians such as Peter Lake as ‘close to the ideological origins of Arminianism’.
The death of Elizabeth in 1603 resulted in few immediate changes in the English church.
The new Calvinist monarch, James I, retained all the most important doctrinal and liturgical features of the Elizabethan settlement, and his first Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bancroft, continued Whitgift's campaign to impose uniformity and eliminate irregularity.
As part of this policy, Bancroft issued a new set of ecclesiastical canons in 1604.
With regard to liturgy, these canons demanded the retention of a number of procedures which had come under attack from Puritans, such as the use of the surplice, kneeling to receive communion, and the inclusion of the sign of the cross and godparents in the baptism ceremony.
Doctrinally, the canons were undeniably Calvinist in outlook; yet at the same time they expressed some ambivalence over the doctrine of predestination, and hinted at a recognition of the potentially damaging consequences of it being inadequately or incorrectly explained to the laity.
One canon stipulated that the parish clergy were to avoid discussing predestination in their sermons, and leave the topic to bishops, deacons, and ‘learned men’, who would approach it ‘moderately and modestly by way of use and application rather than by way of positive doctrine, as being [more]fitted for schools and universities than simple auditors’.
The inclusion of this statement suggests that, while the theology faculties of Oxford and Cambridge universities remained firmly committed to the doctrines of predestination and assurance, some other Jacobeans, including perhaps James I himself, believed that the more extreme implications of these beliefs  needed to be played down in order to make them more palatable to the laity.
During the latter half of James's reign, the existence of such doctrinal contradictions within the English church was cleverly exploited by a small group of conservative clerics who were firmly opposed to predestinarian Calvinist theology and subscribed instead to the theories of the Dutch theologian, Jacobus Arminius.
Although Arminius, who had taught theology at the University of Leyden, was in most respects an orthodox Protestant, on the question of salvation he had turned his back on a century of Reformed theology by arguing against the extreme predestinarian theology of Calvin's successor at Geneva, Theodore Beza.
While Arminius had not explicitly denied predestination, he had claimed that God's grace could be resisted by the individual, that salvation was open to all men and women, and that it depended not only on faith but also on the individual's conduct while on earth.
Many of the most committed Calvinists, who had wrestled for lengthy periods with the doctrine of predestination before finally convincing themselves of the assuredness of their salvation, reacted with fury and outrage to Arminius's teachings, and in the United Provinces the resulting theological controversy provoked a major political crisis, culminating in the defeat of the Arminians at the Synod of Dort in 1618.
In England, Arminius's theological opinions proved attractive to a small group of influential churchmen, including Lancelot Andrewes, Richard Neile, Richard Montagu, William Laud, and John Cosin.
As well as accepting the Dutch theologian's views on salvation, these English Arminians, or Laudians, exhibited a number of other conservative theological and liturgical positions, which were not to be found in continental Arminianism.
They were suspicious of preaching and the personal interpretation of scripture by the laity, and placed great stress on the sacraments as sources of grace.
They argued that episcopacy was divinely instituted, and emphasized the divine sanction behind royal authority and the duty upon all subjects to obey monarchs without question.
While accepting that Roman Catholicism contained many errors and abuses, they denied that the pope was the Antichrist and that it was impossible for Catholics to attain salvation.
Some Arminians were even accused of attempting to disseminate views on the eucharist that were suspiciously similar to transubstantiation.
Others rejected the Calvinist insistence on an uninterrupted round of religious duties on Sundays and advocated a far less austere observance of the sabbath, encouraging the laity to indulge in a range of sporting and leisure activities.
Above all, however, the Laudians  disliked the asceticism and astringency of Calvinism, and desired a return to what Laud called ‘the beauty of holiness’.
This involved the embellishment of church interiors through the use of the visual arts; the incorporation of more music into church services; and an emphasis on the need for greater reverence and respect in worship.
Although James I may have begun to experience some doubts about the validity of the doctrine of predestination during the last months of his life, earlier in his reign he had given little if any encouragement to the Arminian caucus within his Calvinist church.
His son, Charles I, however, who possessed both a highly developed aesthetic sense and a strong attachment to decorum and order, found the ceremonialism and sacramentalism of the Arminians extremely appealing.
Consequently, following his accession to the throne in 1625, he took every opportunity to advance the ecclesiastical careers of the Arminians, and by 1633 when William Laud succeeded George Abbot as Archbishop of Canterbury, they had gained control of virtually all the most important high offices in the English church.
As a result of their advancement, marked alterations to the official theological outlook of the church were introduced.
In 1628, William Laud persuaded Charles I to issue a declaration prohibiting all theological disputation and ordering that the Thirty-Nine Articles should be adhered to in their full and literal sense.
By the late 1620s, it was impossible to obtain a licence to publish any theological books containing predestinarian opinions.
Attempts were also made to purge the theology departments of the two universities of all Calvinist influences, and any who dared to criticize the new orthodoxy were prosecuted with the full vigour of the ecclesiastical courts.
The impact of the rise of the English Arminians and the scale of their departure from pre-1625 theological norms has been the subject of some considerable historical debate over the last few years.
In an article published in the early 1970s, Nicholas Tyacke argued that during the period from 1560 to 1625 there was a common predestinarian Calvinist heritage within the English church, shared by both prelates and Presbyterians alike, against which Laud and his supporters firmly set their faces in the 1630s.
In the early 1980s, this view was attacked by Peter White in a controversial article which questioned whether the Elizabethan church was ever fully predestinarian, and went on to claim that the apparently religious conflicts within England in the late 1620s were in fact primarily caused by the pressures of international power politics rather than by theological differences.
White further asserted that a basic theological harmony was restored in the 1630s after England's withdrawal from  the Thirty Years' War, and concluded by declaring that the so-called rise of Arminianism was merely ‘a puritan alibi for repeated failures to impose rigid predestinarian doctrine on the Church of England’.
In 1987, Tyacke vigorously restated his original position in his book Anti-Calvinists: The rise of English Arminianism c. 1590 1640 , only to be turned on once more by his critics.
In an article published the same year, Kevin Sharpe questioned whether it was entirely accurate to label Laud as an Arminian, stressing that the archbishop saw as his main task not the propagation of a new theology but the prevention of divisive doctrinal debate.
More recently, George Bernard has also attempted to refute the contention that the church established by Elizabeth was predominantly predestinarian.
Claiming that Tyacke has paid too much attention to the academic debates of the university teachers and too little to the realities of parochial life, he asserted that throughout the period from 1529 to 1640 the English church was in essence a monarchical church whose leaders were primarily concerned to maintain stability by restricting controversy.
According to Bernard, as there was a long and well-established tradition of acceptability of anti-predestinarian theology going back to 1559 and beyond, the events of the 1630s did not represent any sea-change in the doctrinal position of the English church.
Tyacke's critics are right to point out that he and other historians have been too preoccupied with the theological disputes within the academic communities of pre-civil war England.
It must never be forgotten that the great majority of the English people had only a passing interest in the niceties of academic theology, and that outside the bishops' palaces and the two universities such issues remained relatively unimportant.
Furthermore, it is almost certainly true that the great majority of the English laity did not share the intellectuals' and higher clergy's attachment to the doctrine of predestination, but retained instead a residual loyalty to the idea that all could potentially achieve salvation.
The work of these revisionists has also done much to advance our knowledge of the intricacies of sixteenth and seventeenth-century theology.
None the less, the attention they have rightly drawn to parochial religion and to non-predestinarian elements within the church should not be allowed to obscure the fact that during the period from 1560 to 1625 credal predestinarianism claimed the allegiance of the great majority of Elizabethan and Jacobean churchmen, or that during the 1630s this creed came under a concerted and unprecedented attack from the ecclesiastical authorities.
What White and Bernard also omit to make clear is that, while the great majority of the ordinary members of the church may well have been largely indifferent to theological issues, many of them were at the same time both outraged and alarmed by a number of alien liturgical practices, which were a unique and highly visible feature of English Arminianism.
In line with their wish to introduce greater solemnity into worship, the Arminian bishops insisted that the parish clergy should incorporate into their church services a number of ritualistic features regarded by ministers and parishioners alike as ‘popish’; these included bowing at the name of Jesus, genuflection, kneeling to receive communion, and the insistence that women should wear veils while being churched following childbirth.
Particularly divisive at a parochial level was the stress placed by the bishops on the need for a greater reverence in the communion rite, and their determination that the portable communion tables, which had been used since Elizabethan times, should be replaced by altars permanently positioned at the east end of the chancel and separated from the body of the church by altar rails.
These innovations, which were much more obvious and immediate than any doctrinal changes, struck at the very root of Reformed religious beliefs, and in the popular imagination closely equated Arminianism with popery.
As a consequence, they elicited a widespread and determined opposition, an opposition consistently down-played in the work of Sharpe, White, and Bernard.
Despite their growing unpopularity, the Laudian bishops continued to pursue their objectives with great vigour throughout the 1630s.
In 1637 Laud attempted to impose his sacramental and ceremonial brand of English Protestantism on the rigidly Calvinist Scots, a move that precipitated both the Bishops' War and a profound political crisis in England.
Yet, even as this crisis came to a head, the bishops remained unrepentant.
In the summer of 1640, they pressured convocation into publishing a new set of conservative canons, which both confirmed the innovations of the previous decade and demanded that the clergy swear an oath not to support any alteration to the government of the church ‘by archbishops, bishops, deans, archdeacons, etcetera’.
The imposition of this notorious ‘etcetera oath’ was, however, a tacit acknowledgement that their policies had proved unpopular and had brought the office of bishop into serious disrepute.
There can be little doubt that the liturgical policies of these Arminian prelates engendered very deep frustrations, fuelled anxieties about a Catholic insurrection, and produced an increase in support for the alternative, non-episcopalian, Presbyterian system of church government.
In so  doing, they probably constituted the most important single cause of the subsequent civil war and revolution.
In the confused political and religious climate of the 1640s and 1650s, a wide range of doctrinal and liturgical practice was displayed by the various different religious groups which now had the freedom to worship openly.
Throughout the period of the civil war and Interregnum, successive parliamentary and military regimes presided over a church establishment which remained staunchly Calvinist in outlook, and accepted the full, literal interpretation of the doctrine of predestination.
However, many ordinary men and women came to find this undiluted predestinarian Calvinism uncongenial and repressive.
John Morrill has recently suggested, in an as yet unpublished paper, that the religious history of the period 1640 to 1660 can be usefully viewed as a revolt by large numbers of the English people against the more rigid applications of the doctrines of predestination and perseverance.
One thrust of this revolt displayed itself in a widespread attachment to the established church of the pre-1625 period, with its more relaxed doctrinal approach that was able to accommodate the beliefs of Richard Hooker as well as those of the compilers of the Lambeth Articles; the other took the form of the ‘left-wing Arminianism’ of radical groups such as the General Baptists and Quakers, who rejected the rigidities of predestination in favour of the belief that all could attain salvation, and who, it is argued, won much popular support as a consequence.
During these same revolutionary years, others took advantage of the breakdown of press censorship to publicize doctrinal positions which were far more unorthodox.
In the tract Man's Mortalitie , published in 1644, the Leveller Richard Overton expressed his belief in mortalism, the heretical idea that the soul dies with the body at death to be reborn with it at the Second Coming.
In the late 1640s and early 1650s, radicals like William Walwyn and Gerrard Winstanley began to express doubts about the doctrine of hell, while the Ranters went so far as to deny the existence of sin, and some early English Unitarians, such as John Bidle, attacked the doctrine of the trinity and denied Christ's divinity.
A similar wide disparity in liturgical practice was evident during these decades.
Between 1645 and 1660, the official liturgy of the state church was that outlined in the Presbyterian Directory of Public Worship, which contained shortened and simplified versions of most of the pre-1640 Prayer Book ceremonies, purged of the features that the Puritans had found so offensive.
The new baptismal ceremony, for example, dispensed with the sign of the cross and godparents, the  infant being now presented by its own parents, while the marriage service no longer included the use of the ring or the husband's promise to worship his bride with his body.
The Directory failed, however, to gain much popular support; many parishes neglected to purchase a copy, and large numbers of conservative clergymen continued to conduct services based predominantly on the Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer.
Throughout the Interregnum, there is evidence of a strong popular attachment to the old Prayer Book liturgy, particularly with respect to the traditional rites of passage.
Despite the exclusion from the Directory of any ceremony of thanksgiving following childbirth, many women continued to be churched during the 1650s.
There was also a widespread attachment to the Book of Common Prayer burial service, and when in 1653 Barebone's Parliament abolished church weddings, hundreds of couples refused to accept the new civil ceremony and continued to be married by the clergy.
In contrast, a wide range of new and often revolutionary liturgical practices were adopted by the various radical sects of the 1650s.
The Quakers, for example, dispensed with a professional ministry altogether and held completely unstructured meetings, at which both male and female members of the congregation could testify as and when the spirit moved them; they also developed their own simple marriage and burial services.
With the restoration of the monarchy and established church in 1660, this doctrinal and liturgical Babel was brought to an abrupt end.
Those who had hoped to see the, return of a comprehensive church encompassing a wide spectrum of opinion were disappointed, for the restored Anglican church of the 1660s possessed a narrow, virtually Laudian theological base.
As Charles II's reign progressed, more and more Anglican theologians turned their backs on the rigid predestinarian Calvinism so prevalent in the pre-1660 period in favour of a  modified version of the Arminian position on salvation.
The restored liturgy was also broadly Laudian.
Following the failure of leading Anglican and Presbyterian divines to devise a compromise Prayer Book during the debates at the Savoy Conference in 1661, a new Book of Common Prayer was drawn up by convocation.
This 1662 Prayer Book retained a number of highly contentious features, such as vestments, the sign of the cross in baptism, kneeling at communion, and the ring in marriage, and its preface dismissed the Puritan objections to such practices as ‘either of dangerous consequence…or else of no consequence at all but utterly frivolous and vain'.
The compilers of the new Prayer Book talked of priests rather than ministers, and even incorporated sections of Laud's 1637  Scottish Prayer Book into the communion rite.
Altars were once more to be railed off at the east end of parish churches.
The Act of Uniformity passed by the Cavalier Parliament in 1662 demanded that the clergy accept every one of the Thirty-Nine Articles and every detail of the Prayer Book.
This narrow Restoration orthodoxy remained the doctrinal and liturgical basis of the Anglican church for the next half-century, and the many hundreds of men and women who were unable to accept it were forced to leave the established church and join the ranks of the nonconformists.
Throughout the seventeenth century, therefore, the English church was wracked by a series of bitter and divisive doctrinal and liturgical conflicts.
During most of this same period, however, there existed within Anglicanism another more liberal and conciliatory tradition, which drew inspiration from the work of Richard Hooker and sought to minimize controversy by advocating a wide measure of toleration on questions of dogma and ceremony.
In the pre-civil war period, one group of clerics and laymen who shared this approach and who thus opposed the confrontational policies of Laud and his followers, began to meet at the house of Lucius Cary, Lord Falkland, at Great Tew in Oxfordshire.
As well as Falkland himself, the ‘Great Tew Group’ included individuals like John Hales and William Chillingworth, who were opposed to rigid dogma and argued that the laity had the right to interpret scripture for themselves ‘in the light of private Reason’.
These conciliatory figures were profoundly disturbed by the bitter armed conflict of the 1640s, and the Royalist Falkland appears to have committed virtual suicide on the battlefield at Newbury in 1643.
None the less, even in the climate of intense religious controversy which existed during the civil war and Interregnum, this moderate strain survived.
During the 1650s, the Cambridge Platonists, a group of academics centred on Emmanuel College, Cambridge, who included within their number Henry More, Ralph Cudworth, and Benjamin Whichcote, continued to advocate a non-dogmatic, liberal, and rationalistic version of Anglicanism, and sought to bring about greater unity among English Protestants by emphasizing the core of belief upon which all could agree.
Although in the immediate post-Restoration period the religious climate proved uncongenial to such ideas, by the later decades of the seventeenth century churchmen schooled in this tradition began to gain some real influence within established Anglican circles.
In a recent article, the historian John Spurr has suggested that the name ‘Latitudinarianism’, which has traditionally been given to this movement, is inappropriate.
He has argued that historians who have  sought to identify a Latitudinarian party within the church have been chasing a chimera, as the label was merely a vague, derogatory term devised by embittered contemporary Puritans who felt betrayed by the abandonment of predestinarian theology.
It none the less remains true that there existed within the late seventeenth-century church a group of churchmen who adopted a tolerant approach towards dissent, were willing to respond to the discoveries of the early natural scientists, and were interested in the relationship between religious belief and reason.
Spurr concedes that the influence of this group grew steadily between 1660 and 1688, and that by the 1690s, when one of their number, John Tillotson, was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury, they had become the dominant Anglican theological school.
However they should be labelled, these men represented a modernist strain within the late seventeenth-century church and anticipated many elements of the religious and intellectual climate of the eighteenth century.
Figure 1 Plan of a church interior
Figures 2a and 2b Changes in church interior and clerical dress as a result of the Reformation
The fabric of the church
During the course of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries over 60 per cent of the parish churches in England were extensively rebuilt, normally in the magnificent Perpendicular style of Gothic architecture first employed in the construction of Gloucester Cathedral during the thirteenth century.
In all parts of England, but particularly in the rich wool-producing regions, church naves were enlarged, new aisles were added, and stone replaced by vast expanses of stained glass.
This work was financed by the laity — both patrons of livings and parishioners, large numbers of whom made contributions during their lifetimes and left bequests in their wills for the refurbishing of their local churches.
During the period 1370 to 1532, 95 per cent of testators in Norwich left bequests to their parish churches.
Similarly, on the eve of the Reformation, over 90 per cent of testators in three of the archdeaconries of the diocese of Lincoln were leaving bequests to cathedrals, and over 80 per cent to parish churches.
A number of distinct but linked motivations accounted for this high level of support, including a personal piety which sought the glorification of God, a deeply-felt anxiety about the attaining of personal salvation, and a desire to display their wealth and express their communal pride in impressive local buildings.
Often, of course, all these motives coexisted, as they did in the erection of the magnificent Holy Trinity Church at Long Melford in Suffolk.
Built as a rival to the parish church at Lavenham, Long Melford was financed by local parishioners, some of whose names were carved in stone around the clerestory in an inscription which called for prayers to be said for their souls.
By contrast, during the century or so which separated the Reformation from the civil war, very few English parish churches were built or substantially renovated.
Only one major new church, St Giles, Cripplegate, London, was constructed during the last years  of Henry VIII's reign.
During Elizabeth's long reign a mere nineteen churches or chapels were built, and only a handful more, including Fulmer and Bletchley in Buckinghamshire, Groomsbridge and St Nicholas, Rochester, in Kent, and St John Briggate in Leeds, were completed under the early Stuarts.
Given the widespread destruction of church interiors during the post-Reformation period and the relentless removal of ‘superstitious’ objects, it is hardly surprising that the parishioners of the mid- and late sixteenth century were unwilling to finance new ecclesiastical building or furnishing.
Furthermore, the new Protestant theology did little to encourage donation, since solafidianism removed much of the potential advantage to benefactors, and the emphasis upon the Word reduced the importance of beautifying the church interior.
The laity, therefore, became reluctant to invest in their local churches, while an impoverished ecclesiastical establishment had few resources to spare for its buildings.
The small number of new Elizabethan and Jacobean churches that were constructed were built in the Perpendicular style, and, in order to assert the continuity of medieval and Reformed churches, they retained the compartmentalized lay-out of the Gothic buildings.
The post-Reformation additions to existing churches were also Gothic, with one notable exception — the Renaissance-style porch added to St Nicholas church at Sunningwell in Berkshire in 1562.
The porch was commissioned by Bishop John Jewel, and its design may have been influenced by the neo-classical architecture to which Jewel had been exposed during his years of exile in Mary's reign.
Although a more general move away from the indigenous Gothic style of architecture and church design only began in earnest a century later after the Restoration, the trend was signalled as early as the 1630s with the construction of St Paul's, Covent Garden.
St Paul's was the first important example of the new ‘auditory’ churches which were to become increasingly common in the later seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
Architecturally, these churches reflected the impact of the Renaissance, and their internal lay-out gave physical expression to the doctrinal and liturgical changes of the Reformation.
Unlike Catholic churches, which had been primarily places of sacrifice, Protestant churches were essentially arenas for the exposition of scripture, and the new auditory style was more appropriate for services dominated by preaching and the reading of the Word.
In commissioning St Paul's, Covent Garden, the Earl of Bedford is reputed to have told his architect, Inigo Jones, that he wished the building to resemble a barn, and the interior of the church was indeed extremely simple, consisting only of a chancel and a nave    without arcades.
Its exterior was, however, more elaborate, built to a Palladian design and fronted by an impressive classical portico.
Plate 1 Holy Trinity Church, Long Melford, Suffolk.
The names of the donors are inscribed above the upper windows.
(The Hulton-Deutsch Collection)
Prior to the introduction of these purpose-built auditory churches, existing Gothic church interiors were adapted for Protestant use by the cheapest and most convenient means possible.
Although some Protestants, such as Bishop Hooper, argued that a single-roomed effect was more appropriate to the new Protestant liturgy and the  doctrine of the priesthood of all believers, the compartmental interior of the church with a separate nave and chancel divided by a huge rood screen was usually left unaltered, and in many parishes ministers chose to use different parts of the church for distinct types of corporate worship: the nave for matins and evensong, the side chapels for weekday services, and the chancel and sanctuary for Holy Communion.
Theological change, however, rendered some alterations to the fabric of parish churches unavoidable.
The most significant of these was the substitution of a wooden table for a stone altar, a move that gave a visual emphasis to the Protestant belief that the eucharist was not the re-enactment of Christ's sacrifice on Calvary but a remembrance of the Last Supper.
As even Calvinists were not opposed to all ornamentation, the new communion tables were not entirely without detail.
Some indeed were heavily decorated; at Hedenham in Cambridgeshire the table had seven legs, while at Townstall in Devon the bulbous-shaped legs were carved into the forms of allegorical beasts.
The position of the communion table was also changed by the Reformation.
Protestants found it theologically unacceptable to separate the table from the laity in the nave, and to place it on high in the position of an altar at the east end of the church.
The 1559 Elizabethan injunctions had specified that, while not in use, the holy table should be ‘set in the place where the altar stood’, but that during the communion service it should be moved down ‘in good sort within the chancel’ so that the minister could be more clearly heard.
Some parishes followed this peripatetic approach, using a trestle table to facilitate mobility; others, however, preferred to keep the table permanently in the middle of the chancel, sometimes surrounding it with rails to protect it from dogs.
In these latter churches, the minister would conduct the main part of the communion service in the nave with the screens closed, and then take communicants through to the chancel to receive the eucharist, an arrangement that inevitably invested the sacrament with a sense of mystery.
A number of other Catholic accessories to the mass disappeared along with the altar after 1559.
With no elevation of the host there was no need  for the pyx, and now that the notion of sacrifice had been denied, censers too were redundant.
Communion in both kinds also rendered the existing small chalices inadequate, and many were melted down to make new cups large enough to hold  sufficient wine for all the lay communicants.
Further changes to the interior of parish churches resulted from the new emphasis upon the importance of the sermon, although here implementation was only gradual.
As a great many parishes had invested in new pulpits and lecterns during the fifteenth century, few were erected during Elizabeth's reign, but following the issuing in 1604 of new ecclesiastical canons which ordered that ‘a comely and decent pulpit’ should be kept in every church, the reign of James I saw a notable upsurge in pulpit-building.
Some of these new Jacobean pulpits were raised to a great height and topped by impressive sounding-boards in order both to emphasize the importance of the sermon and to make the preacher visible above the rows of high-backed pews.
Pews were also modified in a number of ways in the post-Reformation period.
To satisfy the demands of wealthier parishioners for more comfort during the often lengthy sermons, pews with cushions began to proliferate.
Many were also given lockable doors to preserve privacy, and curtains to prevent draughts; indeed, some became so elaborate that during the 1630s the Bishop of Norwich, Richard Corbett, was led to remark wryly that they lacked ‘nothing but beds to hear the word of God on’.
The pews all faced the pulpit and reading-desk, and were usually arranged so that the most prosperous and socially elevated parishioners were positioned nearest the front.
These seating arrangements thus provided a visual reflection and reinforcement of the social divisions within the parish; when Richard Gough set out at the end of the seventeenth century to write the history of his parish of Myddle in Shropshire, he decided that the most natural way to organize his account was to consider in turn the occupants of each pew in Myddle church.
The most noticeable and dramatic changes, however, in the fabric of post-Reformation English churches were those resulting from iconoclasm — the widespread destruction of ‘popish’ images and ornamentation during the reigns of Edward and Elizabeth.
During the second half of the sixteenth century, hundreds of medieval sculptures and carved images of saints were destroyed or removed, the colourful wall-paintings which had decorated most churches were whitewashed, stained glass was shattered or taken away, and the rood lofts which had held up the great crucifixes and figures of the Virgin Mary and St John were pulled down.
The motive for this  destruction and its impact upon contemporaries was well described by the Protestant, Bernard Gilpin, who wrote in 1552:
They [Catholics]come to the church to feede their eyes, and not their soules: they are not taught, that no visible thing is to be worshipped.
And for because they see not in the church the shining pompe and pleasant variety (as they thought it) of painted clothes, candlesticks, images, altars, lampes, tapers, they say, as good to go into the barne.
Iconoclasm was from the outset inspired by the government.
It began during Henry VIII's reign with the Cromwellian injunctions of 1536 and 1538, which singled out for destruction superstitious images attracting pilgrimages and offerings.
At this stage, however, the vast majority of churches remained unaffected, and it was not until Edward's reign that images were removed and destroyed wholesale.
In response to the government's condemnation of images in July 1547 and February 1548, commissioners roamed the country, either chivying churchwardens into taking action, or on occasions, as at Hull, smashing the images themselves.
At the same time, the royal visitors checked that rood screens had been demolished, wall paintings covered with white lime, and stained glass windows reglazed with white glass.
While initially the work of these Edwardian commissioners was motivated primarily by religious conviction, later in the reign churches began to be looted purely for profit.
Hard-pressed financially, the government, headed by the Duke of Northumberland, ordered the commissioners to confiscate all remaining church treasures, in the form of plate, jewels, vestments, and even the bronze of the bells, to meet royal debts.
Many ecclesiastical objects of great value and craftsmanship were thus lost during Edward's reign, but a large number of others managed to escape detection and destruction.
The high cost of substituting plain white for stained glass deterred some churchwardens from complying with the government's orders, while many others were motivated to hide and preserve sacred objects by an enduring spirit of Catholic piety.
Roger Martyn, churchwarden of Long Melford in Suffolk, for example, kept the reredos, organ, clocks, and bells of Holy Trinity Church in his own home, in the hope that his heirs would be able to restore them to the church sometime in the future.
After Mary's accession in 1553, considerable numbers of images, vestments, chalices, and crucifixes did indeed reappear in parish churches throughout the country, but only a few years later many of them were to fall foul of renewed attacks  on images at the beginning of Elizabeth's reign.
In some parts of the country Elizabeth's accession was greeted with spontaneous outbursts of iconoclastic activity, and shortly afterwards a new set of royal visitors began systematically to pull down, smash, or burn any remaining images.
As a result, the interiors of Elizabethan churches were barer, plainer, and far less colourful than those of the early sixteenth century.
Yet, once again, although devastating in places, the destruction was far from complete.
In some of the more remote parishes, sculptures and carvings escaped the attentions of the iconoclasts, and elsewhere ornamental features such as carved fonts were boarded over and plastered to protect them from the commissioners.
Nor did the widespread destruction of the vestments, stained glass, and crucifixes, which many Calvinists found so objectionable, meet with the approval of Elizabeth herself.
As a result, many ornamental objects once again survived, if only to become the focus for the activities of Puritan iconoclasts during the civil war.
Only two kinds of ornamentation were allowed by the Elizabethan church: painted boards and family memorials.
The former depicted the royal coat of arms, texts from the scriptures, the Creed, or the Lord's Prayer.
The royal arms, which symbolized the supremacy of the crown over the church, were generally placed over the tympanum where the rood had previously stood.
The painted texts, which emphasized the importance of the Word, were intended as an aid to devotion, and were more readily seen than the Bibles, which were also on display in every church.
These texts were often inscribed on woodwork which had formed part of the old rood screens, reredoses, and triptychs; this was the case at Binham Priory in Norfolk, where the medieval paintings of saints are now showing through the worn whitewash and black-letter Protestant text.
The second vehicle for ornamentation allowed by the Elizabethan church was the family tomb.
While the superstitious veneration of the saints had been swept away by the reformers, the worldly vanity of elaborate family memorials was permitted and grew ever more popular.
Indeed, it became almost de rigueur for a man of substance to put aside a considerable sum for his funeral monument, the £600 spent on the third Earl of Sussex's memorial being fairly typical.
Even the godly were not averse to the outward display of a funeral monument, as the tomb at St Bartholomew's, London, of Sir Walter Mildmay who endowed Emmanuel College, Cambridge, for the education of godly preachers well illustrates.
Many of the godly liked to portray themselves and their families kneeling in prayer on their tombs.
For the most part, however, Elizabethans  preferred to be remembered for their ancestry and achievements rather than for their piety, and in order to impress succeeding generations of parishioners, they incorporated into their monuments inscriptions, heraldic devices, and portraits of themselves in their lavish official robes.
Funeral monuments continued to be erected in parish churches in all parts of the country throughout the seventeenth century.
By this stage, many of them reflected the growing importance of the classical movement, depicting their subjects in classical settings, surrounded by symbolic fruits, flowers, and urns.
During the later years of the century, it was also common to show the deceased dressed in Roman costume.
Among the best surviving examples of seventeenth-century monuments are Lady Elizabeth Carey's at Stowe-Nine-Churches in Northamptonshire, Sir Thomas Lucy's at Charlecote in Warwickshire, Edward St John's at Lydiard Tregoze in Wiltshire, Sir Edward Spencer's at Great Broughton in Northamptonshire, and Edward Marshall's bust of William Harvey at Hempstead in Essex.
Despite these minor concessions towards decoration, between 1560 and 1625 the great majority of English churches remained without any significant internal ornamentation.
With the accession of Charles I, however, and the subsequent rise to prominence of the Arminian party, the situation was to change dramatically.
Charles and his leading ecclesiastical adviser, William Laud, agreed with Roman Catholics about the efficacy of the visual arts as aids to devotion, and thus made the revival of what they called ‘the beauty of holiness’ one of their chief religious priorities.
This campaign to reincorporate the visual arts into religious devotion had a particular appeal for Charles I, who was one of the foremost art collectors of his day.
During the 1630s, the king and his Arminian bishops encouraged both laity and clergy to fill their parish churches with lavish decorations and furnishings, in the form of new altars, chalices, pictures, and stained glass, thus provoking a bitter conflict with those who preferred the plainness of the pre-1625 church interiors and who continued to regard decoration as popish and idolatrous.
Several bishops, in particular Laud himself and Richard Neile, were responsible for important changes in the decoration of their cathedrals.
At Durham, Neile installed a new marble altar at the east end of the cathedral, and he subsequently introduced similar changes to the interiors of Winchester Cathedral and York Minster.
Laud altered the internal lay-out of Gloucester Cathedral while dean of that diocese, and as Bishop of London he launched a nationwide appeal in the late 1620s for the repair of St Paul's Cathedral in  London, which was on the point of collapse, entrusting major restoration work to the classical architect, Inigo Jones.
Altars were also erected in Bristol, Exeter, Salisbury, and Worcester Cathedrals.
The interiors of a number of parish churches were similarly transformed as the Laudian bishops campaigned vigorously for the erection of altars positioned permanently at the east end of the chancel and railed off from the nave.
Parishes such as St John's, Beverley, in Yorkshire, All Saints, Maidstone, in Kent, and St Thomas-in-the-Cliffe, Lewes, in Sussex, responded quickly to episcopal pressure and introduced the new altars and rails.
In some churches the importance of the Laudian altar was further emphasized by the addition of an elaborate new reredos.
At Wigan, a reredos depicting the death of Ananias, which had been woven in the Mortlake tapestry works, was placed behind the altar of the parish church, and at Nicholas Ferrar's parish church at Little Gidding in Cambridgeshire, a reredos consisting of three brass plates inscribed with the Ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer was erected.
The Commandments were also written in gold above the altar of St Peter's, Wolverhampton.
Several churches were structurally redesigned along Arminian lines during the 1630s; the Arminian cleric and poet, George Herbert, supervised the restoration of the ruined church at Leighton Bromswold near Huntingdon, and Abbey Dore church in Herefordshire was restored by a local landowner, Viscount Scudamore, who commissioned a new oak roof and screen.
Elsewhere, however, the Arminian initiatives were widely resisted.
In the late 1620s, some Calvinists attempted to obstruct the collection of money for the repair of St Paul's, and throughout the 1630s large numbers of churchwardens were summoned to appear before the ecclesiastical authorities for failing to introduce the required changes to the lay-out of their churches.
In 1635, the churchwardens of Beckington in Somerset were excommunicated and imprisoned for defying the authorities; yet the following year William Piers, Bishop of Bath and Wells, admitted that fewer than a third of the parishes in his diocese had converted their communion tables into altars.
A similar widespread refusal to co-operate was encountered in the diocese of Peterborough, where parishes such as Pattishall and All Saints', Northampton, witnessed prolonged battles between the churchwardens and the episcopal visitors over the position of the communion table.
In East Anglia, the efforts of the Bishop of Norwich, Matthew Wren, to enforce the new orders caused great resentment and led to the publication of the highly critical, anonymous tract,Newes from Ipswich .
Even some of the most socially  elevated paid a heavy price for opposing the policy.
In the mid-1630s, John Williams, who as Bishop of Lincoln was one of the few remaining non-Laudian prelates, made public his opposition to his colleagues' initiative; he became involved in a heated literary battle on the subject with the staunch Arminian, Peter Heylyn, and following the publication of his work The Holy Table Name and Thing , he was thrown into prison.
Charles I's government gave the bishops its firm backing on this issue; when the parishioners of St Gregory's in London appealed to the Court of Arches against a directive from the dean and chapter of St Paul's Cathedral concerning the position of their communion table, no less a body than the privy council itself intervened with an order in favour of the ecclesiastical authorities.
With the coming of war and revolution in the 1640s, the interiors of many churches were once more substantially altered.
Within weeks of their meeting in November 1640, the MPs of the Long Parliament launched a full-scale attack upon Laud and his Arminian innovations, and throughout the country those who had objected to the physical changes introduced during the previous decade began to destroy altars, rails, and stained glass.
The next two years saw frequent attacks on churches, leading to considerable loss and damage.
In 1643, parliament gave retrospective official approval to this iconoclasm by passing an ordinance for the dismantling and destruction of ‘all crucifixes, crosses and all images and pictures of any one or more persons of the Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, and all other images and pictures of saints or superstitious inscriptions’.
Zealous Calvinists, like Sir Robert Harley and William Dowsing, received specific commissions to oversee the destruction of images; Dowsing, who kept a journal of his activities, personally visited nearly sixty churches in East Anglia.
Among the hundreds of churches that suffered attack during the 1640s, particularly badly affected were the parish churches of Shrivenham in Oxfordshire, Compton Wynyates in Warwickshire, and Harley's own church at Brampton Bryan in Herefordshire.
Perhaps surprisingly, however, a great many funeral monuments survived the destruction of the civil war period, and indeed new tombs and  monuments continued to be commissioned and placed in parish churches throughout the 1640s and 1650s.
The English cathedrals also paid heavily for their association with Arminianism, as image-breakers inflicted considerable damage on them during the civil war.
At the beginning of the war, parliament seized the remainder of the money which Laud had collected for the repair of old St Paul's, and the MPs later gave the scaffolding  being used to repair the tower to one of its army regiments in lieu of pay.
Carlisle Cathedral suffered badly from the attentions of garrisons between 1645 and 1652, and York Minster only avoided serious damage through the personal intervention of the New Model Army commander, Sir Thomas Fairfax.
The period following the parliamentary victory saw a number of proposals for the demolition or conversion to secular use of the English cathedrals.
In 1651, the Rump Parliament debated a suggestion that all twenty-six should be demolished and their stonework and furnishings sold to provide funds for the poor.
Yarmouth corporation argued that Norwich Cathedral should be pulled down and its stone used for the construction of a workhouse, and in 1657 it was proposed that Rochester Cathedral should be sold and the proceeds used to pay the arrears owed to disabled sailors.
At Lichfield, demolition work was actually started; some lead was removed from the roof and the great bell was broken up.
While the threat of wholesale destruction failed to materialize, the cathedrals were turned over to a variety of secular uses.
The portico of St Paul's in London was let out to shopkeepers, and the main body of the church became a cavalry stables.
At St Asaph, a wine-shop was set up in the cathedral and the font was used as a trough for animals.
At Exeter, the bishop's palace was used as a bakery and the cathedral became a centre for preaching, a wall being built to divide the building in two so that Presbyterians and Independents could worship separately.
Other cathedrals functioned as barracks and prisons.
Many important and beautiful works of art were undoubtedly lost as a result of the image-breaking of both the Reformation and civil war, and succeeding generations have rightly regretted the serious cultural impoverishment which has resulted.
Indeed, iconoclasm has frequently been portrayed as little more than mindless vandalism perpetrated by Philistine bigots.
It is, none the less, important to remember that such activity was by no means simply destruction for destruction's sake.
For those who carried out the purges of the English cathedrals and parish churches during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the artistic objects they destroyed were synonymous with paganism and superstition, and were thus the antithesis of true religion.
Puritans like Harley and Dowsing regarded altars, statues, paintings, and stained glass not as aids to religious devotion, but as positive dangers to men's souls, and they reacted to them rather as a modern-day Jew might do to a beautifully sculpted or painted swastika.
Justifiable regrets, therefore, about the effect of the iconoclasts' activities on the nation's ecclesiastical  heritage should not be allowed to blind us to the sincerity of their motives.
In the midst of all this destruction of ecclesiastical property, the decision of one individual to build an entirely new church assumed considerable political importance.
The only completely new church to be constructed in England during the Interregnum was built at Staunton Harold in Leicestershire by the staunch Anglican and Royalist, Sir Robert Shirley.
It was constructed to a traditional Perpendicular Gothic design, and despite the official proscription of Anglicanism, its internal lay-out and furnishings incorporated a number of obvious Laudian features.
The commissioning of such an overtly Anglican church was seen by the authorities as a deliberately provocative gesture, and when Shirley shortly afterwards refused to contribute towards the military defence of the Cromwellian state, he was imprisoned in the Tower of London, where he later died.
In the immediate aftermath of the Restoration, the newly restored bishops made the rebuilding and renovating of their cathedrals one of their chief priorities, and by 1662 all except Lichfield and Rochester were once more in a good state of repair.
The most important development in English ecclesiastical architecture, however, during the post-Restoration period came about not through any new religious initiative, but as a result of the ever-present danger of fire.
In early September 1666, the old city of London was devastated by the Great Fire, which as well as destroying thousands of secular buildings left old St Paul's with severe structural damage, and no fewer than eighty-seven of the capital's parish churches gutted or in ruins.
In the aftermath of the disaster, the rebuilding of London's churches was entrusted to the brilliant young architect, Christopher Wren, who set to work almost immediately, and over the next few years completely transformed the ecclesiastical architecture of the capital.
Wren designed fifty new churches, most of which were constructed during the 1670s.
Although he consistently employed classical conventions in his designs, he also incorporated features reminiscent of the older indigenous style of English ecclesiastical architecture, and he was careful to make each church unique.
The churches were built to two basic designs — the traditional format of nave and aisles, and the newer auditory lay-out of a rectangular space decorated with varying arrangements of columns and vaulting.
Of particular importance to his designs was the great variety of individual spires, steeples, and towers which he employed; again, while some of these, such as at St Vedast, Foster Lane, and St James, Garlickhithe, echoed the earlier  English Gothic style, others were classical in influence.
Among the best examples of Wren's parish churches are St Stephen's, Walbrook, St Magnus Martyr, St Martin's, Ludgate, St Bene't's, Paul's Wharf, and St Margaret Lothbury.
Before long, new parish churches in other parts of the country began to reflect Wren's innovations, one early example being Willen parish church in Buckinghamshire, built in 1680.
The centrepiece of Wren's work in London was, of course, the construction of his imposing new cathedral, a project that occupied much of his working life from the submission of his earliest plans in 1669 and the beginning of construction work in 1675, to the eventual completion of the building in 1710.
As we have seen, old St Paul's had been in a very poor state of repair even before 1640, and had suffered further damage as a result of the events of the 1640s before being fatally weakened by the Great Fire.
The justly famous building that replaced it once more illustrated Wren's genius for combining classical and Gothic themes.
The lay-out was traditional and mirrored that of the old medieval cathedral, but both exterior and interior were lavishly decorated with classical arches and columns, and the whole building was dominated by a vast classical dome, which rose almost to the height of the spire of Salisbury Cathedral, one of the tallest Gothic buildings in Europe.
Wren's thrusting and dynamic cathedral reflected the pride and confidence of what was by now one of the foremost cities and commercial centres in Europe, and symbolized the growing assertiveness and patriotism of an emergent imperial power.
It was an arena perfectly adapted to pomp and circumstance and was to witness many subsequent celebrations of the successes of the English nation as it grew to become a dominant world power.
Following the passing of the 1689 Toleration Act, which gave Presbyterians, Baptists, Quakers, and other dissenters from the Anglican church the right to worship in public, new nonconformist meeting-houses began to be constructed throughout England.
While these buildings often shared with Wren's London churches a basic classical design, they fundamentally differed from them both in their smaller scale and greater simplicity.
The dissenters who met in these new places of worship belonged to a Puritan tradition which disapproved of the decoration of churches, and the interiors of meeting-houses were thus kept bare and plain.
Many, none the less, displayed an ordered and simple beauty.
Among the best early examples are ‘Old Meeting’ in Norwich, Flowergate Unitarian Chapel at Whitby, Friar Street Chapel, Ipswich, and Churchgate Street Chapel, Bury St Edmunds.
The earliest Quaker meeting-houses, such as Jordans      in Buckinghamshire, Colthouse in Lancashire, Skipton in Yorkshire, and Marazion in Cornwall, were built in the vernacular style of the late seventeenth century and closely resembled the farm buildings which had been used for Quaker services prior to 1688.
Hidden away in a secluded Chilterns valley, Jordans meeting-house has the appearance of a small farmhouse with sparse internal furnishings, and represents a clear visual symbol of the self-effacement and exclusivity of nonconformity.
There is perhaps no better way to appreciate the chasm which was to grow up between the established Anglican church of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries with its close links to the powerful secular state and English nonconformity with its tenacity and separateness, than to contrast the pride and grandeur of Wren's St Paul's with the humbleness and lack of pretension of Jordans meeting-house.
Plate 2 St Paul's Cathedral, London, and some of Wren's parish churches.
(The Hulton-Deutsch Collection)
Plate 3 Jordan's Quaker meeting-house, Buckinghamshire.
(The Hulton-Deutsch Collection)
The church in England and churches abroad
During the late medieval period, the English Catholic church was extremely wealthy and enjoyed many privileges.
On the other hand, its independence was seriously curtailed and its affairs were firmly controlled by the monarchy; fifteenth-century English kings appointed their own bishops, regularly taxed the clergy, and used parliamentary legislation to limit clerical immunities.
The English church was thus an essentially Erastian church, and by 1500 the English crown had few reasons to complain about the otherwise privileged position that it had acquired within the realm.
Certain sections of the English laity, however, were clearly much more hostile.
Common lawyers detested the right of benefit of clergy, and made strenuous efforts to legislate against the practice in the parliaments of 1512 and 1515.
Many town corporations resented the rival jurisdiction of ecclesiastical institutions, and on occasions their officers became embroiled in unseemly disputes with the heads of cathedrals and monastic houses; in 1506, for example, the sheriff and gaol-keeper of Norwich became involved in a brawl with the prior of the city's Benedictine cathedral priory, who was seeking to rescue one of his servants recently arrested by municipal officers.
While some historians have dismissed such jurisdictional conflicts as routine and insignificant, others have argued convincingly that they were signs of a well-established corporate anti-clericalism.
A. G. Dickens, in particular, has consistently maintained that the anti-clerical tracts of lawyers such as Simon Fish and Christopher St German were not merely isolated examples of lay hostility to the church, totally unrepresentative of public opinion, but on the contrary part of a long tradition of anti-clericalism among the literate classes, and most especially London merchants, common lawyers, parliamentarians, and royal officials.
However, while some real tensions existed between the church and  a number of vested interest groups within England, no such animosity appears to have clouded relations between the English state and the papacy.
By the eve of the Reformation, the English monarchy had firmly subordinated papal authority to its own secular power, and relations between crown and papacy were on the whole productive and harmonious.
Papal influence over the English church had been significantly eroded during the course of the fifteenth century, partly as a consequence of late fourteenth-century legislation, such as the statutes of Provisors and Praemunire, and partly as a consequence of the international political situation.
From the 1480s onwards, the papacy needed the diplomatic support of the early Tudor monarchs in order to strengthen its political hold over the Papal States and to mount a crusade against the Turks, who had captured Constantinople in 1453.
In return for their help, individual popes were prepared to accede to the political requests of the early Tudor kings, even at the cost of the loss of their plenitude of power.
Compliance sometimes caused no hardship; Innocent VIII, for example, issued a bull of excommunication against claimants to Henry VII's throne, granted Henry a dispensation to marry Elizabeth of York, and later validated the marriage between his son, Prince Henry, and Henry's brother's widow, Catherine of Aragon.
Other concessions, however, were more serious; both Henry VII and Henry VIII were allowed to nominate at will to the English episcopal bench, to translate bishops from see to see, and to obstruct the collection of papal taxes.
Henry VII even received papal support for the reduction of the important clerical immunities of right of sanctuary and benefit of clergy.
There would also appear to have been relatively little popular hostility towards papal authority.
The financial demands made by Rome were in no way oppressive, for in an average year the early Tudor kings were exacting two-and-a-half times as much money from the English church as was the pope.
In addition, far from questioning the spiritual supremacy of the pope, large numbers of the English laity regularly applied to Rome for indulgences and dispensations from the requirements of canon law.
Indeed, so popular were indulgences that during 1498 and 1499 an estimated 2000 English priests were obliged to request plenary indulgences from the pope on behalf of their lay parishioners.
Given this tranquil climate, few contemporary observers could have predicted that by the late 1520s the English crown and the papacy would be locked in a bitter jurisdictional conflict which would eventually end in schism.
The issue which brought Henry VIII into dispute with Pope Clement VII was the question of the  annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon.
By the spring of 1527, Henry had convinced himself that his marriage to Catherine of Aragon was contrary to divine law and canonically invalid, and had resolved to put Catherine aside and to marry Anne Boleyn.
As his determination to change his wife was motivated not only by his infatuation with Anne but also by the pressing need to produce a legitimate male heir to the throne, the papal stamp of approval for an annulment and remarriage was essential.
Henry, therefore, asked Clement to establish a decretal commission, authorizing the cardinal and papal legate, Thomas Wolsey, to make a judgment on the case in England, where he could most easily influence the outcome.
Although the case for an annulment was weak in terms of canon law, it was politically expedient for the pope to concede and few believed that the request would be denied.
Henry, however, was extremely unfortunate in his timing, for his agents arrived in Rome just when his wife's nephew, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, was winning important military victories in Italy; in May 1527 imperial troops sacked Rome, and the following year Charles forced Clement to promise that he would not find against Catherine of Aragon in the annulment case.
Neither Henry's pre-existing contacts in Rome nor the special envoys sent out from England were able to improve or circumvent this adverse diplomatic situation.
Despite engaging in extended negotiations lasting two years, Henry's representatives failed to persuade the pope that the case should be heard by Wolsey in England, with no right of appeal to Rome against the verdict.
In May 1529, Henry decided to wait no longer and arranged for Wolsey to hear the case under his own legatine authority at a court at Blackfriars in London.
His hope was that the pope would allow the decision reached there to stand; the plan, however, misfired for soon after the court's opening the case was revoked to Rome, and Henry was left with little hope of a satisfactory verdict.
None the less, Henry did not rush headlong down the road to schism.
Initially, he attempted to browbeat the pope into judging the case in his favour or handing it back to an English ecclesiastical court.
In order to intimidate Clement, he brought a charge of praemunire against Wolsey, and orchestrated the attacks on the clergy by the MPs of the 1529 parliament.
When the London Mercers' Company presented a petition attacking clerical malpractice to the first session of that parliament, Henry allowed it to be transformed into three statutes, which curbed abuses in the areas of pluralism and non-residence, and in the exaction of probate and mortuary fees.
Although these measures were not especially radical in themselves, the Act against pluralism did infringe ecclesiastical immunity from secular jurisdiction, as offenders were to be prosecuted in royal rather than ecclesiastical courts.
Consequently it was bitterly opposed by some of the bishops.
Henry's backing for this parliamentary assault on the church was also intended to demonstrate to both the pope and Catherine's supporters among the bishops how much the church needed the protection of the crown against the anti-clerical elements in parliament, and how this royal safeguard would be jeopardized by a papal refusal to grant the annulment.
When the pope nevertheless steadfastly refused to give way, Henry intensified his attack on the church; in the summer of 1530 he issued a charge of praemunire against fifteen clerics, including the four bishops who had supported Catherine, on the grounds that they had aided Wolsey in the exercise of his legatine authority and thereby given support to papal jurisdiction within his realm.
During these same months, Henry was also pursuing an alternative strategy to obtain the annulment by sending his agents to rifle through archives in England and on the continent in the hope of uncovering precedents to support his claim that the pope had no right of judgment over his marriage.
These researchers soon went beyond this narrow brief, and their study of the Bible and various other historical sources led them to formulate many of the theories which were later embodied in the royal supremacy.
Two of these scholars, Edward Foxe and Thomas Cranmer, who were both members of Anne Boleyn's faction at court, were responsible for drawing up a document called the Collectanea satis copiosa , in which they advanced a claim of imperial sovereignty for the English monarchy.
They argued that, as Henry was answerable to no earthly superior, neither he nor his subjects could appeal to or be cited in any court outside his realm.
Such an assertion was not entirely novel; as early as 1515 Henry had declared that: ‘By the ordinance and sufferance of God, we are king of England, and kings of England in time past have never had any superior but God only.’
However, the fact that the royal scholars had found conservative rather than revolutionary arguments to support their case only added to their appeal, and Henry read the Collectanea with interest and approval in the late summer of 1530.
Somewhat before this he had been introduced, probably by Anne Boleyn, to some rather more revolutionary reading matter:The Obedience of a Christian Man , written by the suspected heretic William Tyndale.
Tyndale's claim that ‘God hath made the king in every realm judge over all’ also made a favourable impression on Henry, and he subsequently declared: ‘This book is for me and  all kings to read.’
In the event, Tyndale's unorthodox beliefs and his lack of support for the annulment prevented him from having any direct impact on royal policy.
The Collectanea , on the other hand, almost certainly influenced both the tone and direction of Henry's statements on the subject, for unlike Tyndale its authors were not calling for Henry to seize new powers in order to reform the church, but were merely insisting that he was already head of the church and only needed to exercise a pre-existing authority.
From late 1530 onwards, Henry became even more determined not only that his matrimonial case should be heard in England, but also that he should reassert his imperial status which had been usurped by the papacy.
He followed up his earlier limited charge of praemunire against selected churchmen with a similar charge against the whole of the English clergy, accusing them of exercising a spiritual jurisdiction that conflicted with their duty as his subjects.
Pardoning them in return for a fine of £18,840, he initially demanded that in the prologue to the official grant of pardon he should be styled ‘sole protector and supreme head of the English Church and clergy’.
However, after impassioned protests from Bishop John Fisher, he agreed to the less contentious formula: ‘especial protector and as far as the law of Christ allows even supreme head.’
In 1532, he again revealed the drift of his thinking by informing parliament that the clergy's oath of allegiance to the pope was ‘clean contrary to the oath that they make to us’.
Over the next two years the powers of the papacy were gradually whittled away by successive parliamentary statutes; all papal financial exactions were withheld; papal dispensations were invalidated; and papal consecration of bishops and the right of appeal to Rome were both declared unnecessary.
The same legislation which stripped the pope of his control over the English church gave a range of new powers to Henry, authorizing him to reform the church, supervise canon law, lay down doctrine, and conduct visitations of monastic houses.
Ecclesiastical canons now required royal sanction, all proceeds from the taxes of annates and tenths were annexed to the crown, and final appeals against judgments in the ecclesiastical courts were to be made to the king in the court of Chancery.
By the end of 1534, papal jurisdiction was confined only to the investigation of cases of suspected heresy, and this last vestige of authority was to disappear in 1536.
It is difficult to state with any certainty the exact date at which Henry finally decided on a full breach with Rome.
He may have come to this decision in 1531 or 1532 and then proceeded cautiously because of the fear of opposition both at home and abroad.
Alternatively, he  may have devised the anti-clerical legislation of the period 1529 to 1533 as a weapon to bludgeon the pope into granting the annulment, only to resort to the supremacy as an emergency measure when Anne Boleyn became pregnant in 1533.
Though admittedly inconclusive, the evidence suggests that the annulment was uppermost in Henry's mind until early 1532, but was then overtaken by thoughts of the supremacy.
Between 1532 and 1534, the passing of each individual piece of legislation was closely followed by the appearance of official government propaganda justifying it and anticipating the next move, a fact that suggests that a coherent policy was unfolding by this stage.
Furthermore, although Anne's pregnancy may well have determined the exact timing of the Act of Appeals, the statute's assertion that England was an empire was by then well-established government policy and echoed arguments formulated several years earlier.
Throughout the remainder of the 1530s, royal propagandists were systematically employed to justify and publicize Henry's claim to supremacy over the English church.
Their arguments were deliberately couched in language which played down the revolutionary implications of the legislation and was designed to convince doubters that no changes of any real significance were taking place.
But while it was certainly true that there were precedents for government policy towards the church in the 1530s, and that earlier monarchs had acted on the assumption that they had no superior within their realm, the Henrician supremacy was none the less unquestionably revolutionary.
As a result of the royal actions of the 1530s, the church's institutions were weakened, much of its wealth was confiscated, and the right of the state to interfere in its affairs was dramatically extended.
By the Submission of the Clergy of 1532, convocation surrendered its position as an independent legislative body for the church, and agreed both that all existing canons should be reviewed by a royal commission composed of both lay and clerical members and that in the future ecclesiastical laws would be subject to royal assent.
Direct royal involvement in ecclesiastical affairs intensified from the middle years of the decade.
After 1534, Henry began to issue ecclesiastical injunctions on his own authority; in 1535 his secretary of state, Thomas Cromwell, who had already played a major role in engineering the break with Rome, was appointed vicegerent or vicar-general of the church.
In 1536 and 1539, Henry and Cromwell dissolved the English monasteries and confiscated their wealth and property.
Taken together, these changes represented a decisive shift in favour of the secular power.
Furthermore, Henry was not content with investing himself with  merely an administrative and political imperium, but also claimed a spiritual supremacy, arguing that the monarch was the vicar of God.
Although he did not assume priestly powers, he did act as a ‘lay bishop’ with the right to define articles of faith.
Thus, the Act of Appeals of 1533 empowered him to punish heretics and hinted that he possessed the additional authority to determine what constituted heresy.
Similarly, the Act of Six Articles of 1539 laid down the penalties for disobedience to the prescribed articles of faith, and left it to him as supreme head to pronounce upon their doctrinal content.
Henry also felt able to authorize a new translation of the Bible and to insist that it be made available to the laity.
No king before him had ever assumed so complete a spiritual leadership of the English church.
In the mistaken opinion that the only obstacle to a reconciliation between Henry and the pope was the annulment issue, many observers initially believed that the rupture with Rome would be temporary.
Their hopes for a reconciliation were especially high after the death of Catherine of Aragon in January 1536 and the execution of Anne Boleyn several months later.
In reality, however, such expectations were entirely unfounded, for by now neither Henry nor Thomas Cromwell had any great desire to mend the breach, or at least not on terms that would undermine the newly promulgated royal supremacy.
Both had become convinced that papal jurisdiction had been wrongful, and now wished to make use of the supremacy to strengthen the monarchy.
Their true intentions were revealed by their promotion of the 1536 Act Extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome; by their dissolution of the smaller monasteries; and by their execution of prominent opponents of their policy, such as Sir Thomas More, Bishop John Fisher, and the London Carthusians.
These moves convinced Pope Paul III that Henry's disobedience was serious, and in an attempt to activate an earlier bull of excommunication against the king, he lent his support to the Northern rebels during the Pilgrimage of Grace.
Henry's anti-papalism was based on the belief that the pope had wrongfully usurped the spiritual and temporal power which had traditionally belonged to the kings of England, and while he therefore rejected the pope's claim to jurisdiction in England, he was prepared to regard him as the rightful Bishop of Rome.
Others, however, including Cromwell and Archbishop Thomas Cranmer, were much more vehement in their condemnation of the papacy; attracted by the new ideas and reforming zeal of the continental Protestants, they argued that the papacy had falsified the word of  God and distorted true religion.
Cranmer indeed went so far as to claim that: ‘where the word of God was adversary and against his authority, pomp, covetousness, idolatry and superstitious doctrine, he [the pope], spying this, became adversary unto the word of God, falsifying it, extorting it out of the true sense.’
During the later years of Henry's reign, a number of radical Protestants, such as John Bale, took such comments to their logical conclusion by arguing in a series of historical and theological works that the pope and the Roman church should be seen as the Antichrist — the powerful antithesis of Christ and the fount of all evil whose downfall was a necessary forerunner of the second coming of Christ.
By the reign of Edward VI this identification of the papacy with the Antichrist had emerged into the mainstream of religious opinion.
During the succession crisis of 1553, Edward's Roman Catholic sister Mary studiously declined to make any public statement about the possibility of a restoration of papal authority in England.
None the less, the supporters of the Duke of Northumberland lost no opportunity to represent her as a staunch papist, and attempted to make use of anti-papal fears to win support for their rival candidate for the throne, Jane Grey.
A proclamation issued by the ill-fated Queen Jane announced that Mary wanted to bring ‘this noble, free realm into the tyranny and servitude of the Bishop of Rome’, and the letters which the council sent out to the provinces declared that Mary's accession would have resulted in ‘the bondage of this Realme to the old servitude of the Antichriste of Rome’.
That there was, none the less, some considerable support for Mary's successful bid for the throne must be attributed to the widespread distrust of the duke and respect for the rights of legitimate succession, rather than to any general desire for a return to the papal fold.
Undoubtedly, many members of the English political nation viewed the prospect of a reunion with Rome with grave misgivings, and when it became reality it was far from popular.
The anti-papal propaganda of the preceding twenty years had not been without effect, but more importantly there remained considerable anxiety about the new queen's plans for the vast amount of ecclesiastical land which had been acquired by the laity.
Thus, although Mary's first House of Commons readily accepted the restoration of Catholic doctrine and liturgy, it initially refused to repeal the Henrician anti-papal legislation, and it delayed the reconciliation with Rome until Pope Julius III had secured the future of secularized ecclesiastical property by guaranteeing the rights of existing lay holders.
Parliament eventually agreed to rescind the royal supremacy in November 1554, but fears that the papacy might renege on the land  settlement persisted.
These anxieties were heightened  after 1555 by the election of Pope Paul IV.
Far from possessing the tact and sensitivity required to construct a harmonious relationship with the English church and restore Mary's subjects' confidence in the papacy, Paul was a rigid, inflexible pontiff who could hardly have been less suited to the task of cementing the reunion of England and Rome.
Given his hard-line views — in particular his anti-Spanish outlook, his personal hostility to Mary's chief religious adviser, Cardinal Pole, and his inflexibility over the issue of ecclesiastical property-it was only a matter of time before relations between England and the Holy See foundered.
Indeed, one of Paul's first actions was to issue a bull denouncing the alienation of ecclesiastical property, and it was only the considerable diplomatic efforts of Pole that eventually persuaded him to exempt England from its provisions.
Knowledge of the bull overshadowed the discussions in the 1555 English parliament on the Bill restoring annates and tenths to Rome, contributing to the strength of anti-papal sentiment and forcing the government to redraft the measure so that these taxes would remain in the hands of the English church rather than accrue to the pope.
During the next two years, although Anglo-papal relations continued to be strained by a number of minor irritations, further serious disturbance was avoided.
In 1557, however, Paul once again took action which severely tested the relationship.
After breaking off diplomatic relations with Mary's husband, Philip II of Spain, he revoked Pole's legatine commission and proceeded to order the arrest of Cardinal Morone, a close friend of Pole and the representative of English interests at the papal court.
Finally, he summoned Pole himself to Rome to answer ‘certain religious suspicions’.
Mary was outraged by these measures, and resisted Pole's recall by forbidding him to leave the country, and refusing to receive either the papal nuncio bearing the letters of revocation or any replacement for the cardinal.
She further declared that any charges of heresy against Pole would be heard in England, announcing in words ironically reminiscent of her father's that: ‘she would in observance of the laws and privileges of her realm, refer them [the charges]to the cognisance and decision of her own ecclesiastical courts.’
Despite endless negotiations and a subsequent improvement in the international situation, the quarrel was never resolved.
Mary died in November 1558 in union with Rome, but at loggerheads with the pope.
She was followed just a few hours later by Pole who, like Wolsey before him, had remained to the end torn between his allegiance to his monarch and his obedience to his spiritual lord.
Following Mary's death, observers at home and abroad realized that the papal connection with England would once more be severed by her successor.
Elizabeth's legitimacy as Anne Boleyn's daughter depended upon the validity of her father's divorce, and the new government was also propelled in an anti-papal direction by the crown's need for money and by the general uneasiness about the papal attitude to expropriated church property.
The immediate appointment of Protestant ministers and the introduction of a Supremacy Bill in the 1559 parliament was therefore widely predicted, but despite Elizabeth's concession in changing her title from ‘Supreme Head’ to ‘Supreme Governor’, the move was none the less fiercely contested by the Marian bishops in the House of Lords.
Although primarily designed to win over Catholic waverers, the new title was also preferred by some Protestant zealots who argued that only Jesus Christ could be the head of the church, as well as by those who believed that Elizabeth's gender debarred her from assuming a quasi-episcopal role.
The queen herself was quite ready to concede that her area of responsibility was confined to the administration and jurisdiction of the church and did not extend to defining ‘any article or point of the Christian faith and religion’.
In practice, however, although she was powerless to prevent some of the religious changes she disliked — such as the introduction of clerical marriage, the use of bread rather than unleavened wafers at communion, and the removal of crucifixes and roods from the interiors of churches — she frequently intervened personally in religious matters and had an important influence on the nature of the English church established during her reign.
In January 1565, she ordered Archbishop Parker of Canterbury to impose uniformity of clerical dress and ceremonials on those radicals who were disobeying her regulations.
In 1576, she insisted that her new Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Grindal, should suppress prophesyings, and when he disobeyed and challenged her right as supreme governor to decide on the matter, she suspended him from office.
In 1595, she even refused to allow the publication of the predestinarian Lambeth Articles, although they had been approved by her favoured archbishop, John Whitgift.
Although the Act of Supremacy was passed shortly after her accession in 1559, papal condemnation of Elizabeth was postponed for over a decade.
The delay was partly the result of the intervention of Philip II of Spain, who had no desire to see the English queen deposed in favour of the Catholic but pro-French claimant, Mary Queen of Scots.
In addition, until 1568 there seemed a good chance that Elizabeth might have married Philip's cousin, Charles  of Austria, and have thereby returned England both to the Catholic church and the Hapsburg interest.
Although Anglo-Spanish relations deteriorated after 1568 and Philip's protective mantle gradually began to slip away, the Spanish king still declined to involve himself in plots and conspiracies to overthrow Elizabeth.
Pope Pius V, on the other hand, was from the late 1560s prepared to give his support to Catholic activists in England who were plotting against Elizabeth.
Assured by his agents that disaffection was widespread in England and that the Catholic Northern rising of 1569 would win extensive support, Pius responded to the appeals of the rebels by signing in February 1570 the bull Regnans in Excelsis , excommunicating Elizabeth and releasing her subjects from their allegiance to her.
This bull did irreparable harm to the Catholic cause in England; coming too late to assist the Northern rising, which had already collapsed by the time it was issued, in the long term it equated Catholicism closely with treason and made the recusant community the object of deepening fear and suspicion.
Papal implication in subsequent plotting against Elizabeth and financial support for the Spanish Armada only served to confirm this equation, and as a consequence Elizabeth was unable to withstand the growing pressure from her Protestant subjects for the introduction of harsher recusancy laws and civil disabilities for Catholics.
Given this international climate, it is not surprising that the Catholic missionary priests, who began to arrive in England from continental seminaries during the 1570s and 1580s, were viewed as papal spies and fifth columnists, and if captured were dealt with accordingly.
By the end of Elizabeth's reign, the pope was regarded by an increasingly patriotic English people not only as the Antichrist but also as their sworn national enemy, a view that was deeply embedded in, and reinforced by, John Foxe's highly popular Acts and Monuments , better known as the Book of Martyrs .
The initial Lutheran challenge to papal authority in 1517 had ushered in an age in which Europe would be divided into hostile confessional camps, but, despite the fact that he himself had dispensed with papal authority within his own realm, Henry VIII had been extremely reluctant to accept this reality.
He had continued instead to think in terms of a united Christendom organized into national churches, ‘compacted and united together to make and constitute but one Catholic Church or body’.
Considering himself throughout a true Catholic, Henry had been reluctant to enter into close association with foreign Protestant states, and when political necessity had induced him to consider allying with the German Lutheran princes in the 1530s, he had adamantly refused to accept their confession  of faith or to view them as co-religionists.
During Edward's short reign, England had grown much closer to continental Protestantism and had begun to embrace the nascent Protestant internationalism being fostered by Calvin at Geneva.
Indeed, in the aftermath of Charles V's victory over the Protestants at the battle of Muhlberg in 1547, Edward's England had become the refuge for a number of important refugees, including Peter Martyr and Martin Bucer.
These men had taken up influential posts at the universities and advised the government on the introduction of Protestantism into England.
All such links between the English church and the Protestant churches in Europe had quickly disappeared, of course, once Mary had come to the throne in 1553 and had set about reuniting England to Rome.
Like her father before her, Elizabeth I was also reluctant to accept a split in Europe along religious lines or to identify herself too closely with international Protestantism.
Preferring detente to confrontation, she resisted the pressure from some of her advisers to enter into an offensive alliance with her co-religionists, and in general her policies were conditioned more by political pragmatism than religious zeal.
In the late 1560s, for example, she considered a marriage alliance with the Catholic Hapsburgs as protection against the French, while in the different circumstances of the 1570s she contemplated marriage to a French Catholic prince as a defence against Spain.
Only in the mid-1580s, when the Catholic powers in France had allied with Philip II, was she reluctantly forced into offering active help to the French Huguenots and the Calvinist rebels in the Netherlands.
A number of English Protestants were, however, more ideologically motivated than their queen and campaigned vigorously for the adoption of an offensive Protestant alliance, with the aim not simply of protecting English security, but also of furthering the gospel and destroying the forces of Antichrist.
These individuals were in regular communication with co-religionists abroad, gave help to religious refugees in England, and raised money at home for beleaguered Calvinist communities on the continent.
During 1582 and 1583, for example, they organized a public collection for the city of Geneva, which was under threat from attack by the Duke of Savoy, raising nearly £6,000.
Yet, although the English people were prepared to contribute such large sums at times of real emergency, for most of the time the international Calvinist cause had little real appeal outside a small coterie of radical Protestants, who had important connections at court, but who, as Patrick Collinson has put it, remained ‘somewhat estranged from the generality of society’.
On the other hand, anti-papalism and anti-Catholicism had struck deep  roots within Elizabethan society, and when England was threatened by Spain in the late 1580s the war that followed was viewed by many in England as a glorious life or death struggle for national and religious survival against the evil forces of the counter-Reformation.
None the less, the English Protestant outlook remained essentially parochial and chauvinist, and the ideology of international Calvinism made few converts.
As in much of the previous century, during the early seventeenth century the English church was obliged to define itself in relation to the rival religious power blocs within continental Europe.
Despite the fact that the war with Spain was brought to an end in 1604, the great majority of the English clergy and laity continued to view Roman Catholicism with the same mixture of deep loathing and suspicion as had their Elizabethan predecessors, regarding it as a serious threat to both their national security and the well-being of their souls.
Their pathological hatred of the Roman church continued to be fuelled by the deeply entrenched belief that the pope was the Antichrist, a conviction that was by now accepted without question by conservative bishops and godly Puritans alike.
James I's reign saw the publication of an extensive literature devoted to illustrating that the pope was the Antichristian ‘Beast’ referred to in the Book of the Apocalypse.
Among the titles that appeared were The Mysterie of Iniquity , written by the French Huguenot theorist, Philip Du Plessis-Mornay, and translated into English in 1612; and Antichrist the Pope of Rome , the work of Oliver Cromwell's schoolmaster Thomas Beard, which appeared in 1625.
No less a figure than James I himself also published several works on the subject.
Indeed, so fundamental to the outlook of Jacobean Protestants was this identification of the pope with Antichrist that one contemporary went so far as to define a Protestant as one who ‘can swear the Pope is antichrist and that flesh is good on Friday’.
If most early seventeenth-century English Protestants regarded Roman Catholics as their arch-enemies, a good many also saw their fellow Protestants within continental Europe as natural friends and allies.
An insistence on international support and co-operation had been a central feature of missionary Calvinism from its inception, and during the early seventeenth century it was regarded as essential to the survival of the Reformed faith in the face of the threat from a resurgent counter-Reformation Catholicism.
James, who journeyed down from Scotland in 1603 to take up his new positions as English monarch and supreme governor of the English church, was firmly committed to Calvinist theology and was to take a very active  interest in the ecclesiastical affairs of his new kingdom.
However, his appreciation of the dangers from militant continental Catholicism did not blind him to the threat from the more radical varieties of Protestantism at home, and as Kenneth Fincham and Peter Lake have commented: ‘it is difficult not to be impressed by the skill with which he handled both anti-Puritan and anti-papal stereotypes to create the ideological space within which the royal will could  manoeuvre and policy be formulated.’
The maintaining of links with co-religionists played a significant role in the formulation of James's foreign policy.
In 1613, for example, the king married his daughter Elizabeth to Frederick of the Palatinate, one of the leading figures of European Calvinism; similarly, in 1618 four representatives of the English church attended the Synod of Dort, the conference called to resolve the bitter dispute which had been raging in the United Provinces over the doctrine of predestination.
At the same time, however, like Elizabeth before him, James kept the English commitment to the ‘Protestant international’ within strict limits.
Not only did he share his predecessor's misgivings about aiding any rebels, Calvinist or otherwise, he also had a strong temperamental dislike of all conflict.
Seeing himself as the peacemaker among his fellow monarchs, and adopting as his motto Beati Pacifici (Blessed are the Peacemakers), he repeatedly refused to commit himself wholeheartedly to the Protestant cause.
When in 1618 the Protestant nobles of Bohemia renounced their allegiance to their Catholic Hapsburg monarch, Ferdinand of Styria, and offered the vacant throne to Frederick of the Palatinate, James advised his son-in-law to decline.
Frederick's rejection of this sensible advice and subsequent acceptance of the Bohemian crown sparked off a series of events which culminated in the Thirty Years' War.
However, even though Frederick and Elizabeth were subsequently expelled from both Bohemia and the Palatinate, James resisted the clamour for war from his later parliaments and resolutely refused to agree to military intervention on behalf of his family and faith.
Furthermore, in order to balance out his marriage alliance with the Calvinist Palatinate, he alarmed and antagonized many of his subjects by conducting protracted negotiations with Madrid over the possibility of a marriage between his son, Charles, and the Spanish Infanta.
Following James's death in 1625, the relationship between the English church and the major religious factions in Europe was to be markedly changed by the accession of Charles I and the subsequent rise to power of William Laud and the English Arminians.
Of great importance in this context was the Arminian re-evaluation of the intrinsic merits of English Protestantism.
During the period from 1560 to 1625, many contemporaries, both inside and outside England, had regarded the English church as a pragmatic, if rather unsatisfactory compromise between two purer denominations.
By the early 1630s, however, some Arminians had begun to argue that the English via media was in fact superior both to Roman Catholicism and the more extreme varieties of continental Protestantism.
Such an outlook is particularly well illustrated by the literary work of the Arminian clergyman, George Herbert.
His poem The British Church , for example, displays its author's deep devotion to the English church of the 1630s, which is described as a ‘dearest mother’.
He refers to its ‘fine aspect in fit array’ and ‘perfect lineaments and hue both sweet and bright’.
At the same time he denounces both the ‘painted’ Roman church for its wanton attachment to ritual and relics, and the ‘undressed’Calvinism of Geneva which, he claimed, excluded all decency and decorum from religious observance.
For Herbert and his fellow Arminians, therefore, the ‘mean’ way of English Protestantism was its ‘praise and glory’, which enabled it to avoid all the worst excesses of its rivals.
As a result of this growing self-confidence among the English hierarchy and of the widening doctrinal gulf between European Calvinism and English Arminianism, Charles's church severed most of its links with the international Protestant cause.
During the early years of his reign Charles did intervene actively in the Thirty Years' War by leading England into another war against Spain.
His decision to do so, however, appears to have been motivated more by his belief that he had been personally insulted by the Spanish during the earlier marriage negotiations and by a romantic desire to restore his sister and brother-in-law to their inheritance than by any wish to display solidarity with the Protestant cause, which was crumbling away before the seemingly irresistible progress of the Hapsburg armies.
English intervention was anyway short-lived, for by 1630 the threat of imminent financial disaster at home had forced Charles to withdraw from the European conflict.
Thereafter, relations between the English church and Protestant churches abroad continued to deteriorate.
William Laud, who along with the king directed ecclesiastical policy throughout the 1630s, had little interest in the struggles of his beleaguered co-religionists on the continent, and was far more concerned that money be raised for the repair of St Paul's Cathedral in London than for the relief of Calvinist refugees from the Palatinate.
The only ‘foreign’ Protestant churches in which  Laud took any real interest were those in Charles's other kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, and those that served the American colonists and the English émigrés in Holland.
In the event, his attempt to impose his new conservative orthodoxy upon these churches was to cause disturbance and resistance abroad, and ultimately civil war and revolution at home.
Sharing George Herbert's view of the intrinsic superiority of Anglicanism over both Catholicism and Calvinism, William Laud was opposed to any attempt to draw the English church closer to Rome.
However, despite Laud's personal antipathy towards the papacy, the 1630s did see a growth in the influence of Catholicism over the English government and an improvement in relations between Charles's court and the papal curia, and for the large numbers of English Protestants who were unable to distinguish between Arminianism and popery and who regarded Laud as little more than an agent of Rome, there could be no doubt that the archbishop was to blame.
In reality, these developments came about largely through the influence of Charles's Catholic wife, Henrietta Maria.
From the late 1620s onwards, a significant number of courtiers had begun to attend mass at the queen's chapel and a steady stream of them subsequently became converts to Roman Catholicism.
By the mid-1630s, prominent members of the privy council, such as Francis Windebank, Francis Lord Cottington, and Sir Richard Weston, were either openly Catholic or secretly sympathetic.
Most significantly, and as far as most English observers were concerned most ominously, diplomatic relations with Rome which had been broken off at the Reformation were now restored.
An initial mission by Gregorio Panzani in 1634 was followed by the arrival in 1636 of a fully accredited papal envoy, George Con, whose considerable charm and diplomatic skill did much to further the Catholic cause.
Most committed English Calvinists viewed these developments with growing anxiety and alarm, and by the late 1630s some, like John Pym, had become convinced that Con, Laud, the queen, and possibly even the king, were party to a conspiracy to return England to Rome, if necessary by force.
This paranoid fear of a Catholic insurrection was heightened in 1641 by the news that the Catholic Irish of Ulster had risen up in armed rebellion against the Protestant settlers of that province, and it subsequently became one of the most powerful influences motivating those who took up arms against Charles I in the civil war.
During much of the civil war and Interregnum, the English church was far too preoccupied with its own internal convulsions to concern itself with its relations with Catholic and Protestant communities abroad.
This did not, however, prevent representatives of both these  opposed confessional camps becoming embroiled in England's religious conflicts.
Following the signing of the Cessation Treaty between Charles and the Irish rebels in September 1643, large numbers of Irish Catholics crossed to England to join Charles's royalist army, despite the fact that they faced summary execution if captured by parliament.
In the same year the English parliament agreed a ‘Solemn League and Covenant’ with the Presbyterian Scots Covenanters, and in early 1644 a Scottish army crossed into England to bring much needed military assistance to parliament's northern forces.
The Scots' intervention was motivated almost entirely by religion, the price for their help being a commitment by parliament to introduce a Scottish-style Presbyterian church system into England at the earliest opportunity.
When the subsequent rise to power of the Independent New Model Army in the period following the end of the war prevented the English Presbyterians from delivering this promise, the Scots promptly looked elsewhere.
In the late 1640s and early 1650s, they lent their military support first to Charles and then to his son, the future Charles II, on condition that once the throne had been regained a Presbyterian church would be imposed upon the English.
Many of those who witnessed the execution of Charles I and the founding of an English republic in 1649 must have anticipated that the foreign policy of the new staunchly Protestant state would have a strong religious orientation.
There were indeed many influential soldiers and civilians who believed that the victorious New Model Army should now seek to export its religious revolution, and who in their more ecstatic moods talked of marching on Rome and of setting Cromwell's chaplain, Hugh Peter, upon the throne of St Peter.
One of the earliest military initiatives of the new state — the raising of an expeditionary force to suppress the Irish rebellion — was partly motivated both by security considerations and by the prospect of financial gain, but was also widely seen as a religious crusade; this fact was clearly demonstrated in the autumn of 1649, when Cromwell's soldiers attacked the Catholic inhabitants of Drogheda and Wexford with a savagery which only religious conflict can engender.
Cromwell returned from Ireland in 1650 to lead the English resistance to the threat from the Scots, and by his subsequent victories at the battles of Dunbar and Worcester he thwarted not only those who wished to see the return of the house of Stuart, but also those who sought to impose a Presbyterian church on the English people.
While the English army remained preoccupied during the early 1650s with these military campaigns against the Irish and Scots, the Rump of the Long Parliament was able to pursue a foreign policy  motivated primarily by commercial considerations, leading England into a naval war with her principal trading rival, Protestant Holland.
Following the appointment of Oliver Cromwell as Lord Protector in 1653, religious considerations once more came to the fore, although whether they ever took precedence over the more secular impulses behind foreign policy is doubtful.
Disturbed that the English were at odds with a nation that should have been one of its natural religious allies, Cromwell brought about a rapid end to the Dutch War, and during the peace negotiations he even proposed that in the interests of their common religion the English and Dutch republics should merge to form one united Protestant state.
When these overtures were spurned by the pragmatic Dutch leaders, Cromwell transferred his more messianic aspirations to the Swedes, and for a while dreamed of joining with Queen Christina, daughter of the legendary Protestant hero Gustavus Adolphus, in a religious crusade against popery.
When in turn these fantasies foundered on Christina's subsequent defection to Rome and her successor's preoccupation with challenging his Protestant neighbours for supremacy in the Baltic, Cromwell resorted to the popular policy of war against England's traditional enemy, Spain.
As well as fulfilling the role of religious crusade, this conflict offered possibilities for commercial gain through encroachments into the lucrative Spanish colonies in Central and South America.
In the half-century that followed the restoration of the Stuart monarchy in 1660, the English church and state displayed in turn two very different attitudes towards the rival religious groupings within continental Europe.
During the period from 1660 to 1688, the main orientation of English foreign policy was towards maintaining close relations with the leading European Catholic power, France.
Although Charles II had been restored to the leadership of the Anglican church as well as the English state, his own personal religious preference was for Roman Catholicism, and he was thus keen to maintain friendly relations with the dominant Catholic monarch in Europe, Louis XIV.
Consistently ignoring the many Protestant MPs who advised him to lend his support to the various coalitions which grew up to curb Louis's pretensions, Charles remained a close ally of the French king throughout his reign.
By the terms of the secret Treaty of Dover of 1670, he even agreed to announce his conversion to Catholicism and to accept French military assistance if his parliament offered any resistance to his policies.
Two years later, he joined Louis in a war against Holland, which came close to destroying the Protestant republic.
Louis also gave valuable financial assistance to Charles during the Exclusion crisis which erupted in  1679, assisting the English king to prevent an attempt by a powerful group of Protestant MPs to bar his Catholic brother James, Duke of York, from the succession.
When James did succeed to the throne in 1685, the pro-Catholic and pro-French orientation of foreign policy was naturally maintained, and the new king made strenuous efforts both to return England to the papal fold and to realign her fully with the international Catholic axis.
Throughout the same twenty-eight years, however, a large body of both lay and clerical opinion within England remained deeply suspicious of the papacy and firmly attached to the international Protestant cause.
In 1666, many saw the Fire of London as the work of Catholic conspirators, and a decade later the revelation of an alleged ‘Popish Plot’ to assassinate Charles II was readily accepted as further evidence of the seriousness of the threat posed to the English state and church by international Catholic plotting.
Protestant commentators were very aware that the papacy retained the right to depose excommunicated rulers, and took little comfort from the fact that many English recusants had taken a special oath of allegiance to the crown.
When the Oxford academic Henry Foulis declared in 1671 that ‘Treason [is]the sign of the true Roman religion’, he was expressing an opinion that the great majority of his contemporaries still accepted without question.
In reality this perceived threat from the papacy was greatly exaggerated, for as John Miller has commented, there was by now‘little sign of the satanic, all-pervading fixity of purpose, the dedication to the extirpation of Protestantism, or the Machiavellian unscrupulousness which English Protestants traditionally attributed to it’.
By the 1660s, Rome had given up all thoughts of the forcible deposition of the English Protestant monarchy; indeed, in the 1670s its cautious and reluctant response to the proposed marriage of the heir to the throne James and the Catholic noblewoman Mary of Modena threatened to block the best route for a peaceful end to the English schism, and Rome continued to offer only lukewarm support to James both before and after 1685.
Unaware that the papacy had lost much of its earlier counter-Reformation vigour and that relations between Rome and Paris were far from harmonious, many English Protestants remained convinced that their church was increasingly at risk from the growing ambition of Louis XIV, and made strenuous efforts to divert Charles and James from their pro-Catholic paths.
In 1674, the pressure exerted in parliament by Protestant MPs forced Charles to withdraw prematurely from the war against the Dutch.
A decade later England became the home for many of the Huguenot refugees who fled from France in  the wake of Louis's revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685.
During 1686 and 1687, it was once again representatives of this English Protestant opinion who made overtures to the leading political champion of European Protestantism, the Dutch stadtholder William of Orange, for help in opposing the Catholic policies of James II.
In 1688, William responded to these requests by invading England on behalf of the Protestant cause, and subsequently replaced James on the English throne.
In so doing, he wholeheartedly committed the English nation to the military struggle against Catholic France and inaugurated an important new phase in the international relations of both state and church.
By the early eighteenth century, the Jacobite supporters of the deposed king had become closely associated with popery, and the English church and state had assumed the role of a full and active member of the international Protestant alliance, a role which radical Protestants at home had been unsuccessfully urging on them throughout the previous century and a half.
Religion and popular belief
Many aspects of the religious beliefs and practices of the early modern English laity are notoriously difficult to anatomize, and historians need to employ great care and sensitivity when attempting to dissect them.
The sources that allow us access to the lower orders are scarce, incomplete, and open to varying interpretations.
In addition, what can easily be dismissed as paradox, inconsistency, or even hypocrisy may none the less represent some form of genuine religious commitment.
How, for example, does one categorize the piety of an individual like the Restoration diarist, Samuel Pepys, who frequently attended several churches on a Sunday, but spent much of the time surveying the attractive women in the congregation; and who regularly supervised the daily prayers of his household, but often in a state of extreme inebriation?
Although the early modern period was a time of profound religious and cultural upheaval in England, certain important features of popular belief and religious practice remained largely unchanged throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
During this whole period, conventional Christianity continued to occupy a central position in the lives of the great majority of English men and women of all ranks, except perhaps the vagrants and beggars at the very bottom of the social order.
There is little evidence that the conflicts between Protestants and Catholics produced any disenchantment with religion, or that the speed and frequency of the changes provoked a widespread scepticism or agnosticism.
Nor do the advances in scientific knowledge, which began in Elizabeth's reign and multiplied during the Stuart period, appear to have caused any appreciable weakening of the Christian belief of intellectuals, or to have created a new elite group of educated non-believers.
On the contrary, the researches of historians such as Margaret Spufford and Martin Ingram have revealed that in both rural and urban  areas orthodox Christianity enjoyed an unchallenged predominance throughout these two centuries.
Another feature of popular belief which was consistent throughout the period under discussion was the wide variation in levels of personal piety and individual preoccupation with religion.
At one extreme, some of the more staunch believers, Catholic and Protestant alike, were obsessed with religious questions to a degree which most twentieth-century observers would consider neurotic and obsessional; in contrast, at the other end of the spectrum, there existed a minority of lay men and women who consistently ignored their legal obligation to attend regular Sunday services and remained extraordinarily ignorant of even the most basic tenets of Christianity.
While the exact size of this latter group is unclear, Peter Clark has estimated that as many as one fifth of the population of Kent regularly stayed away from church in the later sixteenth century, and the situation may well have been worse in the peripheral ‘dark corners of the land’ to the north and west.
Of those that did turn up at their parish churches, a good number behaved in a manner that was anything but reverential: talking, joking, spitting, arguing, and catching up on lost sleep.
The minister Nicholas Breton, for example, noted in 1603 that his parishioners ‘came to service more for fashion than devotion’, while the preacher John Angier of Denton in Lancashire believed that his parishioners came ‘for no other purpose but to sleep, as if the sabbath were made only to recover that sleep they have lost in the week’.
Some historians have argued that the period following the Reformation saw a marked increase in both absenteeism and non-attentiveness, as the replacement of the colourful Catholic ritual with long, erudite Protestant sermons reduced the congregation's sense of reverence and awe, and at the same time increased its boredom and restlessness.
Such a view, however, is questionable on several counts.
Absenteeism and lack of reverence in church had been far from unknown before the Reformation; indeed such charges were the most frequent cause of appearances before the Suffolk ecclesiastical courts in the fifteenth century.
Furthermore, many absences from services in the post-Reformation period were occasioned not by apathy or reluctance to forgo a morning's work or relaxation, but rather by ill-health or family commitments; when William Kirke of Stow-cum-Quy in Cambridgeshire, for example, was hauled before the church courts for absenteeism, he informed them that at the time his wife had been ‘lying in childbed and also his children wanted succour’.
Finally, there is a growing body  of evidence which suggests that regular attendance at church and annual participation at communion were actually increasing in the late Elizabethan and Jacobean periods.
Ingram has found that in many parts of southern England the levels of these practices were much higher in the 1620s and 1630s than they had been in the middle years of Elizabeth's reign; and Jeremy Boulton has discovered that between 80 and 98 per cent of all the potential communicants of two large suburban parishes in London were receiving annual communion during the late Elizabethan and Jacobean periods-a very high proportion by any standards.
Few historians would now wish to dissent from the view that the vast majority of the laity of fifteenth-century England were deeply attached to the beliefs and practices of the Roman Catholic church, or to deny that that church exercised an unrivalled influence over the shaping of late medieval popular mentality.
Central to both Catholic doctrinal belief and the public life of the local community was the regular weekly mass, attendance at which was both a legal and religious obligation upon all the laity.
Mass was usually celebrated by the priest alone; taking no active part in the service, the laity viewed proceedings from behind the rood screen, which separated the nave from the chancel.
None the less, despite this lack of lay involvement there is considerable evidence that the institution was very popular on the eve of the Reformation.
In early sixteenth-century London it was customary for the most pious lay people to rush from church to church in order to be present at as many elevations of the host as possible in a single day.
On the feast of Corpus Christi, crowds lined the streets to catch a glimpse of the consecrated host in procession.
Moreover, in addition to attending these public celebrations of the sacrament, wealthy individuals, guilds, and lay fraternities frequently held masses in their own chapels or on portable altars, and numerous chantry priests celebrated thousands of private masses for the souls of the faithful departed.
Many other features of late medieval Catholicism exercised a similarly strong hold over the popular mind.
Holy objects, relics, and talismans, such as the Agnus Dei— a small piece of wax containing an image of the lamb and flag — were widely believed to provide supernatural help during times of crisis; and holy bells, holy water, and candles were thought to give protection against diabolical spirits.
The company of the saints in heaven was considered an additional potent source of assistance; individual saints were identified as especially efficacious for particular problems — there was even a saint of hopeless causes (St Jude)— and large numbers of men and women undertook  long and sometimes hazardous pilgrimages to sites associated with them.
Furthermore, the Catholic church involved itself fully both in the important rites of passage, such as baptism, marriage, and the last rites, that marked an individual's progress from the cradle to the grave, and also in the annual round of celebrations which marked out the changing seasons.
Catholic ritual was, of course, a central element of the major liturgical feasts of Easter and Christmas, but the church also gave its blessing to the festivities associated with other religious and civic holidays; in Canterbury, for example , these included the Corpus Christi processions, the celebration of the translation of the relics of St Thomas à Becket, and the St George's Day procession, which was headed by the mayor and aldermen of the town.
In many other towns, feasts such as Corpus Christi were marked by processions and the staging of mystery plays, the latter providing both highly popular entertainment and an extremely effective means of disseminating the fundamentals of Christian belief to the illiterate.
All these seasonal rituals had important social functions too; they helped to affirm the unity of the civic community, to create good fellowship, and to channel youthful deviant behaviour into socially acceptable misrule.
To the Protestant reformers of the early sixteenth century, many features of this popular Catholicism were hugely offensive.
One of their central objections was that Catholic piety incorporated elements of paganism and rendered religion little more than magic or sorcery.
‘If a man will take a view of all Popery’, wrote the late sixteenth-century Calvinist theologian William Perkins, ‘he shall easily see that a great part of it is mere magic.’
Protestant reformers were strongly opposed to practices such as the wearing of relics and talismans, and the sprinkling of homes and fields with holy water to ward off evil spirits.
Moreover, they equated popery with magic at a more fundamental level, regarding the central doctrinal tenets of Catholicism as blasphemous, superstitious, anti-scriptural, and inherently evil.
Of particular offence to many Protestants was the widespread popular belief in the power of the Catholic priesthood to intercede with God, to exorcise the devil at baptism, and to transform the elements of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ during the mass.
As a consequence, following Henry VIII's break with Rome and more particularly after the accession of the Protestant Edward VI, the traditional beliefs and devotional practices of the English laity came under fierce attack from the reformers.
The Protestant Prayer Books of 1552 and 1559 divested the parish clergy of their sacramental powers; the new communion service bore no resemblance  to the central, sacramental miracle of the mass, and the reformed baptismal ceremony omitted the exorcism and the anointing with chrism.
A whole range of intercessory objects was also outlawed, as were prayers to the saints, pilgrimages, and requiem masses.
Shrines, chantries, and reliquaries were plundered or demolished, and the interiors of churches were denuded of their images, which were now regarded as idolatrous.
Many liturgical festivities were banished from the churchyard as pagan or blasphemous, and most of the mystery plays were suppressed on the grounds that they wrongly mixed ‘scurrilitie with divinity’.
The reformers' wish to separate the sacred from the profane also led to the repression of many of the popular ballads of the day, which combined a godly lyric with a well-known tune.
There is considerable evidence to suggest that Catholic devotional practices remained extremely popular right up until the time they were banned, and there can be little doubt that, following their suppression, many lay people initially felt an acute sense of loss and found the new Protestant liturgy an uncongenial and inadequate substitute for their traditional customs and beliefs.
Certain aspects of the Protestant assault on popular religious culture did meet with a limited degree of success.
Governmental orders forbidding images, chantries, saint worship, and requiem masses, for example, seem to have had an immediate impact on expressions of personal piety.
The researches of Robert Whiting into the impact of the official reformation on the people of Devon and Cornwall have revealed that even in this conservative part of the country, where attachment to Catholic ritual had been particularly strong, statues of the saints began to disappear from churches soon after their condemnation by the Henrician injunctions, and within a short space of time the wills of the laity contained fewer references to images or intercessory masses.
According to Whiting, much of this initial conformity was occasioned either by a fear of and respect for authority, or by the reluctance of testators to throw away their assets on objects and practices which were now proscribed.
As time went by, however, Protestant propaganda did begin to loosen the laity's commitment to saint worship and the other Catholic means of intercession.
When Mary reintroduced Catholicism into England in the 1550s, few of her subjects undertook pilgrimages to the newly restored shrines, and lack of demand prevented the publication of any new editions of the lives of the saints.
Similarly, comparatively few chantries were re-established by pious benefactors, and endowments for masses failed to recover to their pre-Reformation level.
By contrast, the Protestant attack on traditional religious festivals  was far less successful.
Mary's reign witnessed a spontaneous renewal of enthusiasm for the local celebrations banned under Edward, and Corpus Christi processions, Whitsun ales, May games, and the decking of churches once more became as common as they had been in the last years of Henry's reign.
This popular attachment to church festivities persisted well into Elizabeth's reign, the laity demonstrating their affection for them by vociferously opposing the efforts of godly ministers or town corporations to suppress them.
Such protests were quite common and sometimes led to disorder and affrays.
In 1588, several inhabitants of Shrewsbury were imprisoned after physically resisting the attempts of the magistrates to pull down a maypole, and the following year the Mayor of Canterbury was confronted with a protest morris dance outside his house when he forbade maypole dancing in the town.
So popular were the proscribed celebrations that it proved quite impossible to eradicate them completely.
The godly had some success in severing their connection with the church by banishing them from the churchyard, but the old festal calendar survived and the activities associated with it — mumming at New Year, dancing at Candlemas, football and other games at Shrovetide, and maypole dancing on Mayday — were relocated in and around the village ale-house.
While, therefore, the efforts of successive reforming governments gradually weaned the common people from their attachment to Catholic views on images and intercession, throughout the Tudor and early Stuart periods all interference from local preachers and magistrates in the folk culture of the lower orders continued to be widely and successfully resisted.
Protestant endeavours to extinguish popular superstitions and the widespread belief in magical remedies also proved largely futile.
The emphasis that Calvinists placed upon the majesty of God led them to condemn as blasphemous any attempts to tinker with the supernatural, and thus their reaction to calamities was to accept them as part of God's inscrutable purpose — the working out of a divine providence which governed all human affairs.
Personal misfortune was regarded either as a test of faith which had to be patiently endured, or as a punishment for past transgressions requiring deep repentance.
In some circumstances adversity was even thought to be a desirable proof of God's favour, as in the cases of the Old Testament heroes, Job and Jeremiah.
More commonly, however, Calvinists viewed natural disasters as signs of divine anger, requiring appeasement through prayer and public fasting; during the famine of 1586, for example, the Bishop of London commented in a letter: ‘for appeasing His wrath it is convenient  that we fall to earnest repentance, prayers, fasting and other deeds of charity.’
The diaries, memoirs, and letters that have survived from the post-Reformation period reveal that many Protestants found their trust in divine providence to be a source of great comfort and solace during times of public or private affliction.
For a great many others, however, particularly those who made up the largely illiterate and religiously unsophisticated rural masses, it brought insufficient comfort and left them feeling powerless in the face of disaster.
At a time when so many natural phenomena remained both inexplicable and uncontrollable, and when medical knowledge was more often a force for harm than good, many individuals continued to feel a pressing need for supernatural assistance, and to seek it indiscriminately through both Christian prayers and magical charms.
Bereft of the supernatural assistance previously offered by the Catholic priest and unwilling to rely solely on the petitionary prayers favoured by Protestants, they resorted to time-honoured magical charms and remedies to cure sickness, improve the weather, or ward off evil spirits.
Large numbers regularly resorted to ‘cunning women’, who offered to heal both their physical and psychological ills by magical means.
Indeed, in the eyes of some, the clergyman and the wizard continued to represent little more than alternative conduits of a much needed protective magic.
Nor were more educated Protestants totally impervious to the pull of the supernatural.
The great majority of sixteenth- and seventeenth-century English men and women, intellectuals as well as illiterates, were addicted to reports of astrological predictions and rumours of prodigious happenings, such as monstrous births.
Horoscopes were also extremely popular and frequently drawn up for Protestant clergy and laity; even Queen Elizabeth, the head of the English church, consulted her astrologer before deciding on a date for her coronation.
Indeed, the advent of Protestantism gave rise to a number of new superstitious practices, such as the opening of the Bible at random in an attempt to secure divine guidance in the face of problems or dilemmas, a practice that was widespread even among Puritans.
Another more sinister aspect of this predisposition towards magic was the belief in the existence of witchcraft, which once again was accepted without question by educated Protestant zealots as well as illiterate country folk.
From the mid-sixteenth century onwards, a succession of suspects, mainly old and unsightly women, were hauled before the courts and found guilty of practising black magic.
New legislation against witches was introduced in 1563, largely through  the influence of returning Marian exiles who had absorbed the continental belief that witches were the agents of the devil.
During the subsequent forty years, witchcraft prosecutions reached unprecedented heights; in Essex, where there was an unusually high incidence of trials, as many as 163 women were indicted between 1560 and 1600, with roughly half of them being convicted and burnt.
It seems likely that the Reformation may have contributed to this dramatic rise in prosecutions — which some historians have labelled a ‘witch-craze’— both because the new climate of religious strife led to a general heightening of fears and suspicions, and because without the protective magic of Catholicism, many individuals felt themselves more vulnerable in the face of malevolent forces, and thus more impelled to take action against them.
Throughout the early modern period, therefore, English Protestantism was obliged to coexist alongside a wide range of magical beliefs and practices which retained a strong hold over the popular mind.
For most of this period too, between these two apparently opposed ideological systems there existed a substantial penumbra, within which habits of thought from both overlapped.
Only towards the very end of the seventeenth century, as the new explanations of mechanistic science began to gain ground, did religion and magic begin significantly to diverge from each other.
If Protestant zealots were only partially successful in their attempt to sweep away the supernatural aura which had surrounded late medieval religion, their efforts to give the common people some grounding in knowledge of the gospels ‘and a basic understanding of the Reformed theology of grace and salvation also met with only limited success.
Educated Protestants were all too aware of the popular ignorance of the basics of theology.
Thomas Cartwright, the Elizabethan Presbyterian, declared on one occasion that ‘heaps’ of his contemporaries had cast aside the old religion without discovering the new, and the minister Josias Nichols complained in 1602 that only one in ten of the inhabitants of a Kentish parish with 400 communicants knew the basics of Protestant doctrine.
In 1606, Nicholas Bownde commented that many people were still more knowledgeable about Robin Hood than the Bible.
Such widespread ignorance is not difficult to explain, since during the middle decades of the sixteenth century there was an acute shortage of ministers to undertake the uphill task of disseminating the new and intellectually demanding beliefs.
In contrast to the colourful processions, plays, paintings, and sculptures which were employed as teaching aids by Catholics, Protestant  evangelists sought to spread their message through sermons, lectures, devotional books, catechisms, and Bible reading.
They were to discover, however, that a barely literate populace found the abstract word far more difficult to absorb than more concrete visual images, for as one Henrician reformer had earlier noted: ‘into the common people things sooner enter by the eyes than by the ears.’
Until the 1580s, Protestant propagandists were generally prepared to use illustrations to convey their message, and this device was used to particularly good effect by John Foxe in his Book of Martyrs .
Thereafter, however, most refused to countenance the use of any pictorial assistance.
Bibles ceased to have illustrations to enliven their text, and the small number of mystery plays, which had been allowed to continue at centres such as Coventry, Chester, Wakefield, and York, were suppressed.
In essence, Protestantism was a religion of the literate, and although educational opportunities continued to expand during the course of the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, illiteracy, which was commonplace throughout the country and particularly evident in rural areas and among women, continued to exclude the majority of the laity from a full understanding of their new faith.
None the less, while standards of religious zeal and knowledge of the rudiments of the faith continued to fall well short of the aspirations of the most committed reformers, by 1603 England was undoubtedly a Protestant nation.
From the 1570s onwards, even in the conservative south-west of the country, statements by testators which indicate a belief in solafidianism appeared regularly in the preambles of large numbers of wills, although the comments which the same testators made when leaving bequests to charities suggest that many still found it difficult to appreciate that good works could play absolutely no part in their salvation.
From about the same time onwards, Catholic books and pious objects began to be used more sparingly — or at least more discreetly — in most parts of the country.
Anti-papalism was also by now endemic, and a strong link had been forged in people's minds between Protestantism and English nationalism.
Church sermons and public preaching had brought about many conversions, and catechisms had proved useful in inculcating Protestant beliefs.
Most important of all, however, in creating a greater understanding of and attachment to the Protestant message was the regular use of the Elizabethan Prayer Book, which appears to have experienced a gradual increase in popularity as its ceremonies grew in familiarity over the course of the queen's reign.
One of Elizabeth I's primary objectives in devising the religious settlement of 1559 was the creation of a broad Protestant consensus  which would be acceptable to the great majority of her subjects.
Her efforts met with a large measure of success; nonconformity was restricted — in numerical terms at least— to a relatively insignificant role, and the overwhelming majority of English men and women remained members of the established state church.
During the period 1560 to 1640, virtually all these conformist English Protestants shared a set of common doctrinal beliefs, but in terms both of liturgical preference and intensity of commitment it is possible to divide them into two broad and fluid categories: a mainstream Protestant majority which was relatively content with the hybrid character of the Elizabethan church; and a minority, labelled ‘Puritan’ by their contemporaries, which aspired to bring about further reform of that church in the direction of continental Protestantism.
The Puritans — who have sometimes been given the useful alternative title ‘the hotter sort of Protestants’ and are now increasingly referred to by historians as ‘the godly’— did not necessarily uphold different beliefs from the moderates, but their religious activities generally occupied a far greater proportion of their time and energy.
At the core of their religious experience was a deep attachment to the rigours of Calvinist theology, and in particular to the doctrine of predestination.
Many of them had had to wrestle for years with their consciences and suffer agonies of anxiety and insecurity before they could finally convince themselves that they were included within the elect group of saints which was predestined for heaven.
Once this conviction had been acquired, however, it became almost impossible to dislodge it, and they came to see themselves as an elite, chosen people permanently set apart from the majority of their unregenerate contemporaries.
Many Puritans were given to extreme introspection, and regularly committed their innermost thoughts to paper in the diaries and memoirs which they used as spiritual account books.
Other central features of their religious outlook were a deep loathing of Roman Catholicism and the papacy, which they viewed as the epitome of all evil; a millenarian belief that the end of the world was imminent; and a tendency to interpret contemporary experiences in the light of biblical history.
In the later 1650s, for example, Oliver Cromwell came to see himself as a second Moses who, having led his people out of the Egyptian slavery of Laudianism and through the Red Sea of civil war, was now struggling to bring them towards the Promised Land.
Puritans believed that their distinctive religious outlook should inform every aspect of their lives.
A lifestyle involving hard work, charity, abstinence from drink, strict morality, and thrift was deemed  absolutely essential, as it was not only insisted on in the Bible, but was also seen as a sign of an individual's elect status.
Rather than being confined to the church, therefore, Puritan religious life also focused on the household and various voluntary forms of public worship.
At home, Puritans surrendered themselves to study, self-examination, and prayer; they taught the catechism to their children, pored over Foxe's Book of Martyrs , and read devotional manuals for guidance in the formulation of private,ex tempore prayers.
On Sundays, they attended several church services as well as private meetings for prayer, Bible reading, and the singing of the psalms.
On weekdays, they listened to lectures in local churches, and on market days travelled to hear sermons in nearby towns.
Sometimes they journeyed alone, sometimes in groups, singing psalms as they walked.
Periodically they would devote an entire day to a communal fast, praying, reading aloud from the Bible, attending several sermons, and sharing a simple communal meal in the evening before returning to their homes.
Their religious lives thus combined an internalized and private spirituality with the warmth and conviviality of good fellowship, or as they themselves called it, ‘holy sympathy with the godly’.
Puritans found a number of the liturgical features of the established church, such as bowing at the name of Jesus and the sign of the cross in baptism, highly offensive.
They preferred sparse and unadorned church interiors, and objected to pictures and statues on the grounds that they encouraged the worship of images.
The repugnance they felt towards more decorated churches occasionally erupted into violent bouts of iconoclasm.
In addition, from their position on the moral high ground, they repeatedly denounced many of the leisure pursuits of their neighbours, such as drinking, dancing, and theatre-going, which they regarded as occasions of sin and distractions from religious devotion.
Indulgence in such recreational activities on Sunday was especially scandalous to Puritans.
As a result of their ascetic lifestyle and their verbal assaults on their less godly neighbours, they were frequently subjected to ridicule and abuse at the hands of their contemporaries.
As a result, many undoubtedly experienced deep feelings of isolation and alienation, and came to see themselves as prophets in the wilderness or pilgrims journeying through hostile territory.
Richard Baxter, for example, recalled in later life a vivid childhood memory of seeing his father reviled by his neighbours for his strict observance of the Lord's Day, and for ‘reproving drunkards or swearers’.
Puritans also believed it to be their pressing duty to agitate for the  introduction of godly reforms into the church.
Some organized petitions which urged parliament to initiate reform, while most employed their money and influence to promote godliness.
Many left bequests to educational establishments ‘to the maintenance of Christ's holy gospel’; others gave financial support, either during their lifetimes or through their wills, for the endowment of lectureships or the payment of stipends to preachers.
In some areas they were able to further the cause of reform through their positions on the bench of justices.
During Elizabeth's reign, the magistrates of Nottingham, for example, not only provided for a town preacher but, in order that ‘God's glory [be]set forth and the people brought into good obedience’, they also held a weekly assembly of ministers and lay justices for the correction of blasphemy, whoredom, drunkenness, and other ungodly behaviour.
Similarly, the town council of Leicester ordered that at least one member of every household should attend sermons twice a week.
Despite their distinctive lifestyle, Puritans do not appear to have shared any distinctive social philosophy or consistent political outlook.
Few historians today would argue that there was a close link between Calvinism and the rise of capitalism, or between Puritanism and a parliamentary ‘opposition’ to the crown during the reigns of Elizabeth and James.
Nor did Puritans belong to any one socio-economic group.
Included within the ranks of those who ‘gadded to sermons’ and aspired to a higher spiritual plain were peers, gentlemen, clothworkers, cobblers, and humble villagers; according to the Jesuit William Weston, Puritan meetings on the Isle of Ely were attended by ‘men, women, girls, rustics, labourers, and idiots’.
They may, however, have contained within their ranks a higher than average representation of women, and historians have recently begun to recognize the importance of mothers as transmitters of Puritan values from one generation to the next.
In addition, while they were not restricted to any one social class, they did develop a clear sense of identity, fostered by a number of distinctive badges, such as their preference for Christian names of an Old Testament origin or of their own elaborate and didactic construction, such as Sin-deny, Be-Thankful, Praise-God, and Sure-Trust.
The majority of the other group of mainstream Protestants, so frequently castigated by these Puritans, held fast to an alternative religious outlook which, if perhaps more relaxed, was often no less valid or deeply felt.
Although they too nominally subscribed to Calvinist theology, it seems unlikely that the doctrine of predestination ever made more than the most superficial inroads into their  collective consciousness.
Recognizing the complexities and psychological dangers of this awesome doctrine, most non-Puritan clergy played down the Calvinist theory of salvation to such an extent that many of their parishioners were able to continue to believe that their conduct could influence their destination after death.
Thus, when Josias Nichols asked the parishioners of one parish in Kent ‘whether it were possible for a man to live so uprightly that by well doing he might win heaven’, virtually all of them thought that this was so.
For many of these more moderate members of the Church of England the ritual and ceremonial elements of its liturgy, which were so offensive to Puritans, were a source of great comfort and spiritual solace.
There was undoubtedly considerable attachment, particularly among the rural lower orders, to the Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer and to its ceremonies marking both the stages of the agricultural year and the important milestones in the life of the individual.
The celebration of feasts such as Easter, Christmas, Whitsuntide, Rogationtide, and the Harvest Thanksgiving gave the local community a much needed opportunity for a collective expression of its religious values.
Similarly, the regular church-ales — boisterous forerunners of the modern church fete — fulfilled an important role in the social life of the late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-century parish.
Many individuals also displayed a strong attachment to the Prayer-Book ceremonies associated with rites of passage: baptism, churching, marriage, and the burial of the dead.
Baptism was considered an important initiation ceremony, and continued to involve godparents and a number of ‘popish’ rituals, such as the signing of the cross on the infant's forehead.
While marriage was no longer a sacrament, it remained ‘holy matrimony’, and involved the reading of banns in church and the use of the ring.
Those close to death were no longer anointed with holy oil, but a special service was held in their homes and they could make a private confession and receive absolution and communion.
After their demise, the Prayer-Book funeral service provided an opportunity for communal mourning of their passing.
While, therefore, the first generation of English Protestants had found the new Protestant liturgy a pale shadow of earlier Catholic ceremonial, there is every indication that by the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the seventeenth centuries their children and grandchildren had become firmly wedded to the Protestant services of the Prayer Book.
Puritan polemicists frequently scoffed at what they saw as the uninformed nature of this mainstream spirituality.
In his A Brief Discourse of…the Countrie Divinitie , published in 1581, the Elizabethan  Puritan, George Gifford, poured scorn on an uneducated countryman for his lack of theological knowledge.
Similarly, in Microcosmography , which appeared in 1627, John Earle declared that the typical rural Englishman was ‘a Good Christian to his power, that is, he goes to church in his best clothes and sits there with his neighbours where he is capable only of two prayers, for rain or fairweather’.
It is important, however, that historians should avoid displaying the kind of intellectual condescension which lay behind such contemporary statements; the weather was after all a major factor in the success or failure of the harvest, and thus for many English men and women at this time was not far short of a life and death issue.
George Gifford's ignorant peasant also made some valid points in his defence; at one point, for example, he declared: ‘I know men which are no scripture men which serve God as well as the best of them’; and he added: ‘is it not enough for plain countrymen, ploughmen, tailors and such others, for to have their ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer and the belief?’
Moreover, there is evidence to suggest that by the seventeenth century both literacy and Bible reading were on the increase; in the parish of Keevil in Wiltshire, for example, only 4 per cent of testators who died during the decades between 1590 and 1630 appear to have possessed a Bible, whereas during the course of the 1630s and 1640s the proportion rose to 18 per cent .
A similar increase in Bible ownership can also be observed in other parts of the country.
For much of the eighty-year period which separated the Elizabethan church settlement from the civil war, the leaders of the English church made strenuous efforts to accommodate these two very different religious outlooks within its deliberately broad boundaries.
However, as the Puritan and moderate positions were in many ways mutually antagonistic, some towns and villages inevitably witnessed acrimonious and protracted disputes over the character of local worship and divergent attitudes towards what some historians have labelled ‘maypole culture’.
The existence of such conflicts had been acknowledged and deplored as early as the 1580s by George Gifford's non-Puritan countryman, who had commented: ‘I know towns myself which are divided one part against another since they had a preacher, which was not so before…whereas before they loved each other, now there is dissension sown among them.’
As Patrick Collinson has remarked, such communities became polarized between ‘those who gadded to sermons and those who gadded to dances, sports and other pastimes’.
Believing that private meetings were potentially a greater  threat to order than public gatherings for recreation, in 1618 James I's government intervened in these cultural conflicts by publishing the Book of Sports , which enjoined the laity to participate in a range of sporting and leisure activities on Sundays.
Fifteen years later in 1633, James's son Charles, who disliked the Puritans' insistence upon sabbatarianism, reprinted the book and ordered that it be read in parish churches throughout the country.
One community which seems to have experienced a particularly acute polarization along these lines was the village of Terling in Essex.
The researches of Keith Wrightson and David Levine have revealed that Terling was socially and culturally divided between, on the one hand, a godly elite of ‘the better sort’— yeomen, substantial husbandmen, and craftsmen — who attempted to bring about a reformation of manners through their control of local offices; and on the other, an illiterate ‘multitude’ with little or no religious commitment.
Similar divisions existed at Bruen Stapleford in Cheshire, where on one occasion the local Puritan landowner, John Bruen, instructed his servants to pull down a maypole which had been erected on the village green.
Such Puritan zealots and their minor moral crusades were cruelly satirized in the work of the Jacobean playwright, Ben Jonson, and particularly in the character of Zeal-of-the-Land Busy, who appeared in Bartholomew Fair .
However, while cultural and religious conflict was far from uncommon, it is important to point out that many village communities of England managed to avoid the damaging conflicts which existed at Terling and elsewhere.
From his study of several village communities in Wiltshire, for example, Ingram has found that the great majority of villagers did not belong to polarized extremes, but rather adhered to a conventional mainstream Protestantism; furthermore, Ingram believes it was the youth of the parish, rather than the least well-off, who were the most indifferent to religion and most impervious to moral discipline.
After 1640, these religious and cultural conflicts, which had become endemic within some local communities, were subsumed within the wider struggle of the English civil war.
From his investigations into the divisions that the fighting produced within the village communities of Wiltshire, Somerset, and Devon, David Underdown concluded that ‘the distribution of support for the two sides in the western counties shows how strongly Church and King were associated with the old festive culture’.
By the end of the war this culture had been defeated, and the victorious Puritans and their nonconformist allies who had gained control of the reins of central government believed they now had an opportunity to impose on the whole nation the same moral  reforms that prior to 1640 they had struggled to instigate piecemeal at a local level.
Accordingly, they set about the task of reforming the religious and cultural life of the English localities with a vengeance.
In the late 1640s, the pre-civil war church was officially proscribed, and its liturgical ceremonies were replaced by the starker services of the Presbyterian Directory of Public Worship.
The well-established and popular rites of the 1559 Prayer Book were either shortened and simplified, as was the case with baptism and marriage, or abolished altogether, as with the churching ceremony after childbirth.
The London theatres, which had for so long been a particular thorn in the side of Puritan moralists such as William Prynne, were closed down at the outbreak of the civil war and remained shut until the Restoration.
From the mid-1640s, the celebration of Christmas was forbidden, Puritans arguing both that the festival was pagan in origin and also that it gave licence to ‘carnal and sensual delights’.
During the seven-year period 1642 to 1649, parliament also designated the last Wednesday of each month as a solemn day of ‘fasting and humiliation’, which was to be observed by abstinence from food and drink and attendance at a day-long round of religious exercises aimed at producing both personal and national reformation.
Governmental efforts to bring about what amounted to a cultural revolution intensified in the 1650s, when England came under the control of army leaders such as Oliver Cromwell who considered the reform of the nation's morality one of their chief priorities.
Throughout the 1650s, extreme restrictions were placed upon the activities of individuals on Sundays; a strict Puritan sabbath was imposed, and all working, sports, and non-essential travel were made illegal.
Puritans also viewed breaches of traditional, Christian sexual morality in a serious light; in 1650, the Rump Parliament passed an Adultery Act, which sought to punish those convicted of fornication with three months' imprisonment, and those found guilty of adultery with death.
In 1653, church weddings were outlawed, and replaced by a short, secular marriage service conducted by a justice of the peace.
The campaign for moral reform intensified during 1655 and 1656, when the country was placed under the control of Cromwellian major-generals.
Some of these, such as Charles Worsley who controlled the north-west of the country, paid special attention to their moral duties and were untiring in their efforts to close down brothels, gaming-houses, and unlicensed ale-houses, and to prevent a whole range of popular recreations, including horse-racing, cock-fighting, and bear-baiting.
However, despite this frontal Puritan assault, the popular religious  culture of the pre-war period survived.
The Elizabethan Book of Common Prayer continued to be used in many parishes throughout the Interregnum; parents continued to choose godparents for their children, and mothers continued to be churched following childbirth.
Hundreds of couples ignored the new secular ceremony instituted by the 1653 Marriage Act and sought out clergymen to conduct clandestine church weddings for them.
Christmas also proved too durable for its opponents.
Some attended secret Christmas Day church services, while many more continued to celebrate the day with traditional feasting and merriment.
The monthly days of fasting and humiliation were widely disliked and ignored.
Most frustrating of all for the Puritan reformers was the consistent failure of the justices of the peace to prosecute vigorously those who transgressed the new moral legislation of the Interregnum period.
By the end of the 1650s, the Puritan attempt to build a Calvinist Zion in England had foundered on the rock of the nation's preference for its traditional religious and cultural life.
The restoration of the monarchy in 1660 brought about both the return of the traditional festivities of the church year, and an immediate and decisive revival of maypole culture.
There can be little doubt that the great majority of the population were ready to accept the return of Anglicanism and eager to participate in the services outlined in the revised Prayer Book of 1662.
The church was once more fully involved in the traditional festive culture of the people, for the old ceremonies associated with Christmas, Easter, Whitsun, Shrovetide, and Maytide were quickly resumed in all parts of the country and proved as popular as ever.
Indeed, David Underdown has argued that rural sports and recreations became more common after 1660 than ever before.
Unsurprisingly, Puritan opinion found these developments extremely distasteful; one Newcastle Puritan remarked shortly after the Restoration that ‘the reins of liberty are set loose…maypoles and players and jugglers…now pass current’.
By now, however, such Puritans — or ‘fanatics’ as they were generally labelled by their mainstream critics — were once more a powerless minority.
As Charles II's reign progressed, they were gradually to give up their earlier hopes of remodelling the established church into a closer conformity to European Protestantism, and to lend their support instead to the nonconformist struggle for the right to worship outside its boundaries.
After basic religious toleration was conceded in 1689, the dissenters turned their back once and for all on Anglicanism and went on to develop the distinctive spirituality which was to play so dynamic a role in the revolutionary social and  economic changes of the next century.
The great majority of the laity, meanwhile, continued to reject the approach of the fanatics, and remained deeply attached to the conservative liturgy of the Prayer Book.
As a result, by the end of the seventeenth century popular Anglicanism was enmeshed more closely than ever within the social fabric of the English countryside.