

SHOWMEN AND THE NATURE OF THE MOVIES
Motion pictures were to develop into the great mass entertainment of the twentieth century but they had first been shown in the cities of the late nineteenth century and both as an industry and as a social activity they were never to lose characteristics that had been determined at their birth.
What Americans came to call ‘the movies’ and what in Britain was referred to as ‘the pictures’had emerged out of a complex and distinctive metropolitan and urban culture which was very much achieving its quiddity as the nineteenth century came to a close.
The nature of the movies was determined at an early stage and to study film history is to be reminded of the extent to which American and British cultural patterns in the modern era were determined within the context of the late nineteenth-century city.
There had always been cities providing a variety of religious, political, and commercial functions but few contemporaries doubted that the industrial city of the nineteenth century was a new phenomenon.
What was revolutionary was the rate of growth and the sheer size of the metropolitan and urban populations: cities had become dynamic and populous.
Even more revolutionary, though, were the social adjustments that needed to be made to accommodate the new masses.
In almost every respect the new city was shaped by the interplay between elites and key leadership groups on the one hand and the masses on the other.
To a greater or lesser extent all activity became popular.
There was a new pattern of industrial relations, a new range of religious and social agencies, a new democratic politics, and a whole host of leisure-time activities and preoccupations that have been identified by historians as constituting a ‘popular culture’.
The basic framework of that popular culture was fairly obvious for urban workers not only lived close together in distinctive communities but had also begun to pick up the rudiments of an education and they had both savings and time to spare.
They were soon identified as potential customers by tradesmen, bankers, building societies, and insurance companies, then by streetcar and railway companies, by the publishers of newspapers, journals, and cheap novels, and finally by a whole army of showmen whose task it was to inveigle the masses into circuses, fairgrounds, peepshows, roller-skating pavilions, theatres, and sporting fixtures.
For many years serious and respectable citizens had worried about the new masses but now at least entrepreneurs and  businessmen were able to offer them every service, every distraction, and every entertainment that their wages allowed.
It was into this world that the movies, and of course the citizens of the twentieth century, were born.
The movies were something very new and they soon developed a unique and distinctive position within the culture but that position can only be fully understood by reference to that context of nineteenth-century popular culture from which they emerged.
The term ‘popular culture’ is a modern one but it describes what was a readily identifiable reality in the new urban areas of the nineteenth century.
One difficulty with the term is that many contemporaries would never have been prepared to apply the word ‘culture’ to the new preoccupations of the masses.
The initial political and social fears of the masses had always been accompanied by a dread of their cultural impact and by a conviction that civilized values and standards could not possibly survive.
The emergence of a popular culture confirmed many fears and yet there was some compensation in the fact that things might have been far worse.
In general the activities of the masses were though of as mindless but they were at least non-political and in many cases they even encouraged the acceptance of social norms and new routines necessary to urban and industrial life.
Furthermore there was in many of these activities at least a hint of some of the better cultural values.
Sport for example diverted the energy of the masses into activities that could inculcate both useful and attractive qualities.
The content of the new journalism was appalling but at least it indicated that the masses could read and apart from being useful that offered the prospect that readers might move on to better things.
Then there was the exciting development of ‘live’ variety, music-hall in Britain, vaudeville in America.
Much of this was not respectable but at least it showed that popular music and humour could be channelled into the conventions of legitimate theatre.
The cultural value of all these activities was thought to be negligible but at least some useful qualities were being inculcated and above all their commercial basis bound them in to the mainstream organization and values of middle-class society.
Within the culture as a whole these popular activities can be said to have established a limited, unresolved but not entirely unsatisfactory position.
Further objections to the term ‘popular culture’ have come from left-wing or Socialist historians who also question the cultural value of these activities before going on to ask whether the word ‘popular’needs also to be examined.
Certainly they conceded that these activities were popular in the sense that millions of people availed themselves of them but their argument had been that only in a very limited way can we talk of these activities as belonging to the masses: rather they represented the expropriation and packaging of what had previously been popular forms  by middle-class organizations and in most cases by businessmen and entrepreneurs.
What they suggest is that the roots of these activities lay deep in popular or folk culture but that ultimately the new urban manifestation of these activities revealed more about the values of the business classes than they did about the masses themselves.
What left-wing historians regret in particular is that the emergence of this new ‘popular culture’ came at precisely the moment when conditions were favouring the development of a radical working-class political consciousness.
Just as education, literacy and communications were beginning to prepare the workers for new radical organizations their attention and savings were captured by opportunistic entrepreneurs with a very different set of values.
Instead of a new social awareness the masses were given in particular fiction, humour, and music which were apolitical and essentially sentimental in tone.
To historians of the left the new popular culture represented a fatal and quite decisive fragmentation of what should have been a working-class consciousness.
Any examination of nineteenth-century popular culture then necessarily involves confronting the basic cultural and political values that have determined British and American society in the modern era.
To understand the precise position of the movies in this whole process we need first to look more closely at that activity which, at least superficially, seemed to be the direct ancestor of the cinema, that is music-hall or vaudeville.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century these forms of ‘live’ variety seemed to be carrying all before them and they had become almost the symbolic or quintessential entertainment of the new city.
Yet their cultural position both for contemporaries and subsequent historians was complex and again is directly relevant to any understanding of the movies.
The great difficulty with music-hall and vaudeville, and this is a point of crucial significance to movie historians, is that they have earned or been given a very special place in the popular memory and in social history by those who recall with great fondness those heady pre-1914 days.
To understand music-hall and vaudeville one has to fight through layers of myth and romance and one has to undo a whole view of the past that uses nostalgia for pre-1914 as a touchstone.
Not surprisingly it is difficult for us to decide both how good and how genuinely popular all live variety was, let alone its precise relationship to the new entertainment of the movies.
Recent writers have suggested that almost everything about the music-halls and vaudeville theatres has been gilded by memory.
There must have been some great stars and some ecstatic moments in those cosy halls but there must also have been many second- and third-rate performers, constant recourse to stereotypes, excessive repetition, and buckets of sentimentality.
Why is it then that these halls have been recalled with so much pleasure in so much twentieth-century writing?
The answer is surely  that they occupied a very special place in the lives of many young middle-class men and especially in the lives of those of them who were budding artists, writers, or intellectuals, who in short were Bohemians.
To the English writer George Moore the halls were a ‘protest against the villa, the circulating library, the club’ and, we may add, much else that characterized middle-class life.
The halls were hardly respectable and they allowed ‘young bucks’ to escape for a while to an alternative world that offered not only contact with the masses, humour, and song but also drink, conviviality, and sexual opportunity.
The new pattern of variety was an adornment to what Michael Chanan has called ‘the night-time city’, and the whole beauty of the format was that everything took place not in sordid cellars or popular drinking places but in buildings that had much of the appearance and many of the conventions of legitimate theatre.
The Bohemians thought of the halls as catering essentially for the masses but they were delighted that they could take their place beside them as part of what Vachel Lindsay was to call ‘a jocular army’.
The English writer Max Beerbohm spoke of how the music-halls had ‘grown up with reference to nothing but the public's own needs and aspirations’, of how the audience was ‘the maker of the form’, and of how music-hall had always offered ‘a great chance to any student of humanity at large’.
Even the novelist George Gissing, who was ‘no friend of the people’ and who was the most scathing critic of so many aspects of the new popular culture, has his fictional alter ego Henry Ryecroft recalling the pleasures of having been young in London, of the public houses with their ‘pints of foaming ale’and the supper bars with their ‘sausage and mash’, of the theatres where one could ‘roll and hustle with the throng at the pit-door’, and of walking home singing as he went.
For Ryecroft, like so many others who had worried about culture and the masses, had learnt ‘the true instinct of townsfolk’ which was to find pleasure in the ‘triumph of artificial circumstance over natural conditions’.
The ‘artificial circumstance’ of the theatre and of ‘live’variety allowed some middle-class observers a safe glimpse into that ‘tumult and promiscuity’which Arnold Bennett found to be typical of American hotel lobbies and which most respectable people took to be the hallmarks of the new city.
The Bohemians thought that they were glimpsing ‘humanity at large’, the ‘throng’, but more recently historians have questioned whether that was the case.
The theoretical debate has tended to follow Raymond Williams's suggestion that although the urban working-class found in music-hall performers ‘their most authentic voice’ the halls were not full manifestations of working-class culture but were rather ‘a very mixed institution’.
They were mixed because although all the vitality, the song, humour, and much of the idiom came from what E. P. Thompson has described as the traditionally ‘rowdy’ element in working-class  culture these things had now ceased to be spontaneous and informal and had passed into other hands.
In their examination of popular culture Stuart Hall and Paddy Whannel were worried by the fact that music-hall seemed to belong far more to the professional performers than to the audiences and that it was individual stars who actually seemed to have created the stereotypes and much of the idiom.
A more fundamental objection has been that music-hall and vaudeville were essentially controlled by showmen who were of course entrepreneurs.
It was they who controlled the way in which performers, who came largely from working-class backgrounds, developed and packaged popular forms into acceptable acts.
The new variety was a carefully edited version of a more traditional and informal entertainment.
Whatever values and viewpoints were embodied in the acts would have ultimately been those that were acceptable to the promoters.
It was for this reason that the halls were never radical or seditious and that the songs, like everything else that was on offer, were, as Colin MacInnes suggested, ‘too inhibited emotionally, too limited intellectually, too commercial in their intentions’.
To the Marxist historian Michael Chanan the halls were merely ‘tools of commercial exploitation’ but a more balanced view would rely on an appreciation of the way in which ‘live’variety revealed as much about showmen as it did about ‘humanity at large’.
Most social historians have tended to stick with Raymond Williams's argument and have been reluctant to give up the notion that what was most lively and energetic in all that variety came from the working class.
Even Colin MacInnes remains convinced that music-hall was ‘an act of working-class self assertion’ although he concludes his analysis of the music-hall songs with a phrase that should set film historians thinking, for he sees them as a ‘sort of bastard folk song of an industrial-commercial-imperial age’.
The point surely is that music-hall and vaudeville were transitional forms, transitional, as Stuart Hall and Paddy Whannel suggest, between the genuine folk culture of an earlier age and the mass commercialization of the twentieth century.
They were transitional in almost every respect including that of audience composition.
The theoretical debate has concentrated on organization and form but it is only more recently that film historians have actually raised the question of audiences.
The Bohemians thought that in going to the halls they were confronting humanity, albeit on their own terms.
In reality they were confronting those mixed audiences that frequented these theatres.
As Robert Sklar has suggested the music-halls and vaudeville were essentially down-town or city-centre entertainments and would therefore be attracting typical down-town audiences, which would consist of an alliance of regulars, casuals, workers, clerks, parvenus, and Bohemians.
Music-hall and vaudeville belonged not to ‘humanity at large’ but to its audience and that audience was hardly ever an exclusively working-class  audience.
There were working-class regulars but the vast majority of the working class would have been excluded, at least in part by the cost and social ambience of the halls but far more by their geographical location.
Something of a myth has developed about the universality of ‘live’ variety that can be explained in terms of generalizations based on those great centres London and New York, and by the ubiquitous nature of printed sheet music which often used the name of a star as a selling gimmick and which took songs into many pubs and drinking saloons as well as into many homes.
The music-hall and vaudeville were transitional as really was all nineteenth-century popular culture.
Through its entrepreneurs middle-class society had made its first approaches to the masses.
Popular forms were expropriated and then given back suitably packaged.
Everything was aimed at what Henry Ryecroft thought of as ‘the host of the half-educated’ and was therefore of no real cultural value but the compensations were real.
Quite apart from any utility or negative political advantage that came out of popular culture, the important thing was that establishment culture was at least in touch with the masses.
Total disaster had been averted, channels of communication had been established, and there were foundations on which to build.
There was even, as we have seen, the chance of some vicarious pleasure to be gained from some of the new manifestations.
It was into this unresolved but not unsatisfactorily balanced situation that film was introduced, and was immediately identified as something new.
A vital clue in this respect was the attitude of the Bohemians and those other refugees from the middle-class world who had found music-hall and vaudeville such an exciting diversion.
Almost to a man they were against the new phenomenon of the movies and they made no effort to include them in their ‘night-time’ world.
There was to be no mingling with the throng at the movies.
The representatives of the middle classes were quite prepared to leave the movies to the masses.
What had arrived now really was mass entertainment.
From the outset it was the sheer popularity of the movies that struck observers.
The movies had broken through to a vast new public and everything was on a different scale.
Of course the trade papers revelled in hyperbole but the claims that were being made had a greater validity than those that had been made for music-hall.
The Exhibitors Film Exchange spoke of how movies had brought themselves within ‘intimate reach of the great mass of humanity’.
The Bioscope very much approved of the description of the movies as ‘the drama of the masses, and went on to argue that the whole beauty of the movies was that they were for the first time providing amusement, ‘the greatest factor in the life of.the masses’, to ‘the millions ‘who had been ‘passed over for so many years and considered of no account’.
The numbers were vast and  this was very largely because the movies were not just appealing to sections of the masses but to the masses in general.
It was the Bioscope's view that for the person ‘in search of different phases of human nature there is no better place to find objects of study than to visit a bioscope show’.
On every front the movies were cutting into new ground and creating a new audience.
In 1908 one reporter found 
In that same year another reporter described a Los Angeles cinema in which the audience was largely Mexican, Chinese, and Japanese.
Writing in 1928 the American critic Gilbert Seldes summed up the process of how the movies had accumulated their audience as one which 
In short the movies had broken through to the masses and had the power to pull in almost anybody and everybody who helped constitute the masses.
Seldes marvellously captured the great down-town appeal of the movies when he spoke of the irresistible lure of ‘the tinkle of a tinny piano playing a ragtime’ which floated ‘to the street from a darkened doorway’but the point about the movies was that they were not just a city or down-town phenomenon, they were everywhere.
They did not wait for the masses to come to them, they followed the masses and sometimes they were even there first.
What was soon being described as ‘the industry’ boasted that there was a cinematograph theatre in every suburb and in every small town.
One never had to go far in search of the movies; like the masses themselves they were rapidly achieving ubiquity.
The movies succeeded because they had gone to the people and had seemingly bypassed every obstacle.
The Bioscope summed it up nicely: ‘No travel, no expense, every comfort and a splendid program is the motto of electric theatres.’
In those years before 1914 the movies were a craze and there was constant talk of ‘mushroom growth’ and of ‘epidemics’.
In 1907 it had been noted that nickelodeons were opening up  on every American street and it was not hard to account for their success.
It was true that they only charged ‘a nickel, five pennies, a half a dime’.
They really were ‘5-cent theatres’ and therefore very different from the more expensive vaudeville and even more expensive theatres.
What is more, no special preparation had to be made, no time had to be set aside, programmes only lasted fifteen minutes, and one could enter and leave as one pleased.
It was everywhere noted that nickelodeons offered relief to the ‘foot-sore shopper’ and that these shoppers only needed ‘about one minute to find this out.’
The craze hit Dallas in 1907 and it was observed that the first audiences were made up of women and children; only later did men follow.
But people could go on their own or with groups and families.
No special dress was needed and one never had to feel that one was on show or in any sense making a public appearance.
The American critic W. Stephen Bush reflected on how the poor and lowly had only been tolerated in the theatre and all too often forced up into the gallery, but the movies had ‘emancipated the gallery’ and had ‘wiped out for ever the odium and ridicule’that had always been shown towards its clientele.
To go to the movies was as natural as to walk in the streets and indeed the one was just an extension of the other.
The whole process in which cinema audiences were accumulated seemed natural and spontaneous.
In 1928 Pare Lorentz was to put the question ‘Who goes to the movies in America?’ and his answer was ‘Everybody.’
They went, he suggested, because ‘the movie is the most convenient form of entertainment in the world’.
For him this convenience has been largely a negative factor for he thought of America as offering no other comparable diversion; there were ‘no beer gardens — no public concerts’ and the question he asked was ‘Who wants to sit at home and play bridge every night?’
Lorentz's view was that the movies since their inception had offered cheap and comfortable relief; time had to be killed somehow and one could ‘be bored with more comfort at a movie than anywhere else’.
This was a very useful corrective to the hyperbole of the trade papers but on occasions even they expressed surprise at the popularity of their industry and were happy to concede that movies were succeeding for very basic reasons.
They were just pleased that the movies had become a normal everyday activity.
The Moving Picture World was glad to be able to quote the New Hampshire reporter for whom the ‘nickels’ were just like ‘a good strong cup of tea and a bit of a gossip’or ‘a chat with some good fellow over a cocktail — they rest, that's all’.
In a way the sheer size of the audience that the movies had discovered diverted attention away from any discussion of what the movies themselves actually were.
Amazement and congratulation seemed more in order than reflection.
In those early days what seemed newsworthy was what was called the movie ‘fever’.
Cheapness, comfort, and convenience  seemed to be the most obvious explanations of the mass response but this was to ignore the films themselves.
Nevertheless writers and reporters found it difficult to graduate beyond sociological observation.
There were many comments on those women who wore ‘the new hipless corsets’ and who ‘get up in the middle and walk out if bored’; there were frequent references to squalor, aromas, diabolical pianos, and very mixed audiences.
From Los Angeles came a report of a film theatre that shared the same building with an undertaker and where the hall itself was squalid and narrow with grease spots on the wall where ‘delighted spectators have leaned their enraptured heads’.
Whatever the conditions and the nature of the crowd, observers could not fail to see that the movies were being enjoyed.
There was occasional boredom, people came and went, there might be a technical hitch but more than anything there was a fascination with the moving pictures and that, of course, was the essence of the experience.
Once the pictures moved, then, according to the Bioscope 
Quite simply the movies worked.
Wherever they were shown tragedy was greeted with a silence ‘as still as death’ leaving just ‘the whirl of the machine, stifled sobs and suspicious sniffling’.
Comedy produced ‘hearty laughter’, what James Agee was later to describe as ‘laughter as violent and steady and deafening as standing under a waterfall’, and it was the sound of this laughter drifting through open doors that was always the best advertisement for the movies.
The movies worked, they fascinated, and they entertained.
At first they were a novelty and a fad but, perhaps even to the surprise of many in the trade, they were a novelty that did not fade.
There was something about the movies although not too many people stopped to ask what it was.
Analysis only came later.
It was in 1927 for example that Kenneth Macpherson speculated whether those early film audiences had not just been distracted and drawn mindlessly from the streets but rather it might have been a case of ‘the people getting in some dim way the fact that there was something under their eyes, a sense of life and expectancy’.
Whether we take Lorentz's view that the masses were bored and ready to be distracted or Macpherson's notion that they had sensed that the movies were at least hinting at new possibilities, it is difficult to avoid being swept along by the romance of those early days.
It was one of those moments when we can actually see whole new groups of people just  walking into social history.
It all seemed so simple.
The Moving Picture World described how ‘the nickel palace of amusement made its appearance with no greater blare of trumpets than the noise of its phonograph horn and the throaty persuasions of its barker’ and ‘how these came unobtrusively in the still of the night’.
What could be easier than to succeed in this business?
For its readers the paper listed the ingredients of a 5-cent theatre:
Things were very simple and this list made that precise point very well but of course this journalist was being somewhat disingenuous as well as cynical.
The list of ingredients was deceivingly simple.
Storerooms and chairs could be found anywhere but the cinematograph still had to be acquired as of course did the films themselves, which the writer did not even deign to mention.
To stress the simplicity of things in this way was really and almost incidentally to reveal the sheer scope and success of the industry.
The movies certainly mushroomed as everybody noticed, they multiplied ‘faster than guinea-pigs’, but they were not a spontaneous creation, a bolt from the blue.
The movies were ‘for the millions’ but they were given to the millions by showmen.
This was the most fundamental fact about the movies in Britain and America and it was to remain the most important fact throughout the great years of the cinema's hegemony.
It has been said that ‘showmanship is the hallmark of the world of entertainment’ and certainly from the outset it has been the hallmark of film in the English-speaking world.
The triumph of the movies was not an accident or a miracle.
There may well have been something lacking in the lives of the millions but that need had to be catered for and the catering was done by the ingenious and indefatigable army of commercial opportunists whose energy and boldness tell us an enormous amount about that age.
The romance of the movies was to a significant degree an entrepreneurial romance.
The story has often been told.
There was the scientific discovery of the  qualities of film, the perfecting of projectors, and then the marketing of projectors and the organization of places of entertainment first in arcades and then in nickelodeons.
At every stage new groups of showmen sprang up out of the maelstrom of society.
Those who had perfected the machines gave way to those skilled at rounding up the public.
Those earlier showmen who had controlled the music-halls and vaudeville thought at first that they could incorporate film into their little empires but they were swept aside by new showmen who knew that there were vast audiences to be captured and that the old theatrical format was far too restricted.
The new men knew that film could be shown anywhere, in any old storeroom or vacant shop, and even away from the cities in booths and makeshift structures in fairgrounds, on waste ground, and in fact anywhere crowds were likely to gather.
Only gradually did the commercial preoccupation with the projector and the venue shift to a greater interest in the films themselves and then very much the same kind of people who had struggled to control the machines and theatres began to make and distribute the films.
It was a dynamic age, an age of opportunity, and the pattern of population migration, income distribution, and increased leisure and freedom that allowed movie audiences to accumulate had also permitted a largely anonymous host of small businessmen to create a new industry and a new entertainment.
In time consolidation took place but the industry was created by small men who gambled on acquiring theatres or on making films and who spent days on the road.
It was an inexorable social process and almost before the rest of society or history had noticed they had laid claim to the leisure hours of the millions.
They had captured the masses.
Their triumph was complete for they controlled every aspect of the movies.
They had invented a new social custom but they had also annexed a significant part of the working-class experience.
However one looks at the early movies one comes up against the decisive contribution of the showmen, but obviously their role was most noticeable in the way the movies were presented.
The movies succeeded because people could just walk in from the streets but from the beginning everything was done to ensure that as many people as possible were brought in.
Films could be shown anywhere but the early film theatres very rapidly shunned any initial anonymity.
Movies were announced to the world by electric signs, posters, music, and barkers.
Managers and proprietors soon realized that if halls were to be half full they might as well be totally full and so every ingenious method was used to maximize attendance.
As soon as the industry was conscious of itself a whole stream of advice was directed towards proprietors and they were told how to publicize films, how to gain the attention of all kinds of citizens, and how to eliminate all those petty annoyances and irritations that could upset individuals or whole sections.
The new audience was a mass  audience but no previous audience in history had ever been given so much careful attention.
Comfort was the main aim and in this respect ‘fetid air’ was a major problem and one trade paper warned proprietors that ‘unfortunately there is an odoriferous obnoxiousness about a considerable number of motion picture houses that undoubtedly hinders their profitable operation’.
Happy was the proprietor whose cinema was described as a ‘parlour-like place under cooling fans’.
But whatever problems individual proprietors and exhibitors had the industry was there at hand to proffer advice and encouragement.
Very little was left to chance and great attention was given to every detail of publicity so that posters, signs, displays, and press advertisements made the maximum impact.
The most common theme in all the trade advice was the need for the manager or proprietor to make himself known to his customers and to gain their confidence.
The Bioscope explained that ‘the public do not like to be treated in a way that seems to be distant or high-handed’ and so the manager ‘should go among his people and talk to them personally’and he should ‘always appear ready and willing to consider a suggestion however trifling it may be’.
The point was that managers needed to learn what their audiences wanted but the other value of this familiarity was that any vague and general grumblings could be headed off before they became public.
The trade papers not only advocated that managers should take soundings but also practised it themselves and they always encouraged managers to have their own say and to pass on what they had learnt.
The manager of the American Theater in Terre Haute, Indiana, stressed that he kept ‘in direct touch’ with his patrons and that he went into his audiences ‘as the pictures were being shown on the screen to listen to their comments’.
Getting to know the audience was important but so too was the more formidable task of getting to know the potential audience and advice on this was equally explicit.
Early down-town theatres could rely on the casual trade, the ‘droppers-in’, but small-town and suburban halls had to go after their trade and it was essential that managers acquaint the whole community with what was on offer.
The support of the press was seen as being vital and every manager was expected to ensure that he had his local newspapers on his side, but even this was not enough.
The Exhibitors Film Exchange recommends a ‘Neighbourhood Advertising Plan’, the essence of which was that every manager would define ‘the radius or zone’ from which his ‘logical business’was secured and that he should then proceed to go directly to the individuals whose patronage he could reasonably expect.
The manager was advised to start by walking his zone so as to familiarize himself with it, and then ‘scouts’ would be sent out to call at homes whilst ‘reliable boys’could be hired to ‘politely deliver heralds’.
From the earliest days showmen boosted the movies in order to maximize their audience and the whole razzmatazz of salesmanship 
has become an indispensable part of film culture in the English-speaking world.
Because the movies were the first real mass entertainment the showmen realized that the sky was the limit and that there was no possible reason for timidity and restraint.
To attract bigger audiences was not just a bonus, it was part of the whole logic of the industry.
Showmanship was not just the accidental way in which British and American films were distributed, it was the essence of a whole phenomenon and the films of the English-language world can only be understood in this way.
The showmen created an entertainment and annexed an audience in a spectacular initial burst, but, of course, they were not operating in a vacuum and there was one major hurdle that had to be overcome before their victory could be regarded as complete and of permanent rather than fleeting significance.
What had to be done was that motion pictures had to be made respectable.
The great drive for respectability, which was led by the trade papers and various film industry organizations, really took over the whole publicity campaign and again became almost a defining characteristic of British and especially American cinema.
This was a complex story for there were several important reasons why the showmen clambered after respectability.
It was in part a question of their own self-esteem.
Respectable society and intellectuals had shunned the movies because they saw no need to take them seriously.
They thought of the movies as a mechanical novelty, a meaningless and trivial craze which might be allowed to provide a moment's distraction at a music-hall or vaudeville show but which normally belonged to the amusement arcade or fairground.
Film was nothing in itself but what had confirmed its worthlessness was that it seemed the exclusive property of a class of showmen who were direct descendants of the old fairground showmen.
It was the showmen themselves who defined the place of the movies in the formal and respectable middle-class mind.
Their new entertainment was thought of as a slightly hysterical activity organized in a gypsy-like way by men who were, in Bosley Crowther's phrase, ‘hobbled by no preconceptions of the canons of propriety and good form’.
Not surprisingly it was just basic self-respect that forced movie men to improve their image and to state their claim to be accepted members of the business community.
Gradually some progress was made but the personnel of the movie industry in Britain and America have never at any level lost their feelings of inferiority.
Motion-pictures have conquered the masses and created many financial fortunes but they have always been largely the monopoly of cultural and social outsiders.
Self-respect was important but there were other considerations.
There was the matter of box-office takings and in essence the drive for respectability was part of the attempt to build up larger audiences.
The movies had moved from down-town to the suburbs and to small towns and the object now was to capture every section of the masses.
The industry  was launched by the support of the common people or the ‘thick-eared’ as they were bluntly described, but after the initial breakthrough it was soon realized that the only obvious way of increasing audiences significantly was by overcoming the objections and suspicions of the respectable.
Movies had won a considerable audience but that audience would be permanently restricted if the industry remained at the edge of society proper, if it remained a side-show or an underground activity.
The way to greater profitability, then, lay in the direction of bringing in better sorts of people and, to ensure that, a careful eye had to be kept on what was actually shown in the cinemas.
Respectable people rejected the movies because they were thought to be trivial but also because they were thought to be corrupting and immoral.
The whole atmosphere of the movies suggested ‘tumult and promiscuity’.
It was widely assumed that motion pictures would be sexually suggestive and probably explicit, the whole tone seemed secular and irresponsible, and few doubted that children and the weak-minded were being pointed towards crime and degeneracy.
To a degree, of course, respectable opinion was right.
Motion pictures were free to show anything and to suggest anything.
There were no constraints and from the outset the showmen were not unaware that many of their patrons had come in search of entertainment that was not entirely respectable.
In every city there were cinemas which specialized in what the Milwaukee Sentinel called ‘immoral, evilly suggestive and crime-inducing spectacles’.
Just a merest glimpse at the trade papers reveals the extent to which from the start the movies had to fight against their own impulses and their own logic.
They clambered to respectability by continually putting their own house in order, and in a way the battle to bring in not only the middle classes but the religious, the political, and the serious-minded took far more energy and ingenuity than winning that initial mass audience.
The struggle was summed up by the Bioscope , which pointed out that:
The quest for respectability was very much part of the drive to increase audiences generally and to ensure that motion-picture theatres were not confined to any down-town ghetto but it was also part of an even more fundamental question.
Ultimately it was only by becoming respectable  that the movie industry would continue to survive as a free entrepreneurial enterprise.
It was only by convincing political authorities, the religious denominations, and the agents of respectable opinion that they were responsible citizens that showmen were able to retain control of the highly profitable business that they had created.
Given the size of the motion-picture audience it was inevitable that political authorities would become involved in some regulation of the industry even if it was only to be a question of safety and fire regulations, but what made the movies even more into a public issue was that they became a mass activity precisely at the moment when political parties and social agencies were more concerned than ever before with how the masses could be accommodated within cities.
A new and distinctive chapter was opening in relationships between the masses, more numerous, more literate, and better organized than ever before, and middle-class organizations and agencies who were realizing more urgently than ever before that new initiatives were needed to bridge the great abyss of class.
This new era which opened the century in both Britain and America was to be characterized by an increased politicization of the city as political parties widened their hold, by an increased interest in every aspect of city life, and by increased regulation through political and philanthropic agencies.
The movies could not hope to escape, especially as they had accumulated a mass audience in one great swoop that bypassed the schools, the churches, the charities, and all the other traditional agencies of cultural influence.
What was frightening was that this new mass entertainment seemed altogether outside the established auspices of middle-class culture and seemed unconstrained by any of the sanctions of proper society.
At a time when cities were being reformed and regulated as never before it was inevitable that the movies would be regulated.
As mayors, local authorities, government agencies, and social workers made their moves, so there was every incentive for the showmen to put their own house in order.
It was very much a matter of life and death as far as the industry was concerned.
The showmen hated those whom the Cinematograph Year Book always described as ‘the Busybodies and Meddlers’ and thought of their demands in terms of what the Bioscope referred to as ‘Prussianism’but in order to keep control of their own industry the showmen accepted many of the standards of middle-class taste and insisted that what they would provide would be for the most part family entertainment.
The movies as a whole had to be moulded to suit middle-class notions of public respectability but meanwhile local battles had to be won in every town and city as sector by sector the wider public was to be won over.
The essence of showmanship had become the capacity to build up from one's regular audience, to bring in whole families, to attract women and children, to win over religious families who were normally against organized entertainment, to convince trade unionists and the politically  active that a moment's respite was harmless enough, and to convince the respectable and well-to-do that a visit to the movies was not a disgraceful act.
The motion-picture industry survived and prospered because this battle was substantially won in the vast majority of communities and especially in the major cities.
Long before 1914 the great symbol of the social triumph that the showmen had pulled off was the new purpose-built and well-appointed movie theatre, a structure already far removed from the arcade and the nickelodeon.
We know more about movie-going in Chicago than about any other city and this is appropriate for it was in so many ways the symbolic city of those last decades before the First World War.
Certainly the battle to give the movies a new respectability received more attention in Chicago than in any other city.
By 1907 it was estimated that the average daily attendance in the city's nickelodeons was 100,000 and very naturally local politicians, reformers, and social workers were anxious to assess the significance of this statistic.
The showmen followed the debate closely and reacted to every criticism by taking a further step towards respectability and soon the fashionable Loop crowd were as eager to see the movies as were the masses.
Smarter and smarter theatres were opened until in 1915 Orchestra Hall itself, the home of the Chicago Symphony, was refitted as a home for ‘photoplays’.
What was crucial here as far as Chicago was concerned was that it could now boast a movie theatre as good as anything in New York and that the movies had been decisively disassociated from ‘immoral’ ragtime music by now being coupled with the Symphony.
The price range in this new movie venue would range from 10 to 50 cents (10 to 25 cents for matinees) but for this some patrons would also get a twenty-five-piece orchestra.
‘Build up to standard, not down to a price’ was the motto of the Strand Theater Company, who had now so dramatically brought about the movie's coming of age in Chicago.
The same process went on in every town and city; the opening of a prestigious down-town house symbolized a social acceptance of movies amidst the fashionable down-town set but also created new standards and expectations which permeated downwards to other venues and these gradually made it easier for a number of managers to pull in women, children, families, and the respectable classes.
The whole movie industry had become obsessed with achieving respectability by widening the mix of patrons and in the trade papers we see an almost frenetic attention to the small details of improving comfort and achieving the right publicity.
In general respectability was achieved and the consequence of that was that the movies had moved somewhat decisively away from the masses that had helped to create the industry.
The movies had been born in big cities and had depended initially on the attraction that they held for working people who found themselves crowded either as permanent residents or transients in those cities.
Within a few years the movies had added a significant number of other social groups to its audience.
The general social and political advantages of the newly enlarged audiences were obvious but in cultural terms what was really significant as far as the subsequent history of the movies was concerned was that the showmen who made and presented the movies were no longer thinking in terms of a homogeneous or class audience.
Every social, political, and box-office consideration suggested to the showmen that it would be unsatisfactory for the movies to remain a merely sectional entertainment.
Probably everything in the personality of the showmen and in the nature of business activity itself made it likely that the motion-picture industry would go in search of better audiences but this development was encouraged by a strange mixture of attitudes towards that original working-class audience that had helped create the industry.
There was a great fear of the fickleness of audiences, an anxiety that the craze would die and that in particular movies would lose their fascination for precisely those sections of society that had been going to them longest.
As the movies desperately sought new audiences we should not underestimate the part played by a fear that mass working-class patronage was just too good a thing to last.
Nevertheless this fear was gradually being overtaken by the feeling that the well-established working-class audiences could rather be taken for granted.
After all, the kinds of films that they wanted to see and the conditions that they were prepared to accept were now generally appreciated.
The showmen were well aware of the general social structure of their respective countries but they were quite prepared, given the obvious appeal of their films, to rely on the common sense and ingenuity of individual managers and proprietors.
As far as the working classes were concerned all that was needed was managers who could determine the right mix of films and the right range of prices to suit the specific down-town drop-in cinemas and even more the neighbourhood and small-town cinemas that were now increasingly thought of as catering for ‘industrial’ or working-men audiences.
But any thought or consideration given to working men was only part of a larger strategy of appealing to the public generally.
The mass popularity of the movies did not come about because showmen gave no thought to individuating their audiences but rather resulted from an appreciation that the most important thing about the public as a whole was that every section and every group would respond to the appeal of the movies if it could be given access to the right kind of cinema.
At one level this meant giving each town or neighbourhood the cinema it deserved and having a range of cinemas in down-town areas.
Nevertheless there was within this strategy still a special role for the luxury super-cinemas.
The movies tackled society on the broadest front and refused to be confined to any one social zone but for all that one senses from the trade papers and social surveys that the industry had become preoccupied with  its fashionable down-town audiences and that the super-cinemas were thought of as the social cutting edge of the trade.
In attracting the fashionable trade the industry was gaining friends who were socially and politically powerful and it was also nicely building up box-office takings for, whilst the better sort of customers attended less often than the workers, they paid considerably more when they did come.
What was most important, though, was that these socially more distinguished patrons were indeed creating a fashion; they were sanctioning movie-going not only for other less bold middle-class families but also for all that vast number of people caught in the twilight zone between middle-class comfort and the lumpenproletariat.
Families from this range were always in search of respectability and, having followed their betters into churches, lecture rooms, and recreational clubs, they were now being told that a certain amount of movie-going need not necessarily be socially harmful.
The best sort of customers were important in themselves but they were more important as the arbiters of social fashion.
They brought in their wake a whole range of families who might have been socially ambitious but who were certainly fascinated by the prospect of sharing the movies with even more affluent and glamorous folk.
The movies had fought their way out of a corner, leaving saloons, poolrooms, and dance-halls behind, but they had won their way through not so much to middle-class respectability as to classlessness.
The big show-piece cinemas were built to pull in the fashionable trade but they were not designed for the exclusive use of a social elite; rather they were provided for all those groups who were prepared to pay money for the movie entertainment that was being provided as part of the delights offered by the down-town city.
To attract the best patrons the movie-houses had to ape the conventions and the standards of theatres and opera-houses but very quickly the whole industry realized that the appeal of the movie palaces was not unrelated to the fact that all customers had to be treated the same and so they became temples of a new classlessness.
In striving for more respectable customers the exhibitors learnt that it was not just the most affluent who liked to be treated with dignity and style.
The battle for respectability led to better cinemas but it was always conceded that real victory would only come through the production of better films.
It was what would be shown on the screens of the new theatres that would ultimately determine what was always referred to as ‘the tone’ of the movies as a social custom.
The initial mass audience had obviously loved short films and especially comedies but there had never been that much attention given to content as novelty value guaranteed that every film would made money.
The chaos of the early years meant that in Gilbert Seldes's phrase ‘any sort of fly-by-night production company’ became a reasonable venture.
As the fashionable trade came in so more thought had to be given to subject-matter and to technique and  in America this meant that short films had to be replaced or shown in conjunction with multiple-reel films as already pioneered by European film-makers.
This switch to feature films inevitably led to a new preoccupation with fiction and with developing screen fictions that took up the themes and conventions of respectable literary and theatrical tastes.
The prestige audience would be won over by movies that could take their place alongside the middle-class novel and play.
What was crucial, though, was that this development did not mean that a special category of movies was made for a sectional audience but rather that what was thought of as the ‘quality’ taste was allowed to shape the general output of movies.
Certainly economic considerations were supreme and just as it did not make sense to build cinemas just for the rich so it would have been crazy to make films just for the religious, the doctrinaire, and the intellectual.
In 1915 Harry Weiss of Metro Picture Services urged the trade to accept ‘Quality’ as its watchword but what quality meant for the film industry in questions of both architecture and film-making was standards that would bring in the respectable without prejudicing the masses.
The point about quality was that it should not and probably could not be confined.
To offer the best was to set a general standard and to create a wider public expectation.
Once again the movies learnt that it was not only the wealthy and respectable who liked to think that they were being given the best.
The industry built up a new audience not by giving a social elite privileges but rather by suggesting that anyone who had paid their admission price would be given value for money and in particular would be given films that had been made with care and attention.
As quality feature films were produced so the anxieties and introspection could give way to congratulation and to a new hyperbole.
The movie theatres were showing well-made and respectable films to a large public that included many of their erstwhile critics.
The fictional drama that had seemed to appeal to the better classes was now being offered to a mass society.
The industry had responded to the great challenge of a whole era of ‘Busybodies and Meddlers’ by not only cleaning up minor abuses but by becoming itself an agency of social improvement.
For Chicago's Exhibitors Film Exchange ‘the Meaning of the Movies’ was that the benefits and aspiration that had previously been offered by ‘a dozen agencies’were now combined in one form for the motion picture was taking over from painting, sculpture, travel, history and so on.
For the Exchange the motion picture  
Clearly the movies now felt that they could look the reformers of the early twentieth century firmly in the eye and the film-industry boosters were now giving back as good as they were given.
The industry's many critics had made great demands and threatened many a crisis but they had not halted the growth of the movies as mass entertainment.
The challenge of the reformers had been one great reality but the showmen had always been aware of the other reality and that was that very large numbers of ordinary people, and that included the rich and the poor and people from all nations, were fascinated by moving pictures.
They rightly sensed that there was a mass audience waiting to be entertained and so they were given every incentive to hang on to the goose that was laying the golden eggs.
Such was the popularity of film and such was the reforming zeal of that first decade or so of the twentieth century that there must have been every possibility that other agencies would take up the chance of producing, distributing, and exhibiting films in their own halls.
There was constant talk and frequent illustration of the need for film to be used by teachers, lecturers, trade unionists, preachers, and social workers.
The trade papers were always including references to experiments of this sort but it was obvious that these many initiatives came to very little.
There was also some possibility that exhibitors would be persuaded that audiences could be attracted to watch non-fictional films of an informative and educational nature.
Occasionally the proprietors of some of the quality houses would comment on the successful inclusion of travel films in the programme as it was thought that this would impress the casual respectable trade but far more common was the exhibitor who reported a hostile response to short films dealing with ‘industrial’ subjects.
The Edwardian and Progressive eras were rife with ideas of how film could develop but of all the possibilities the only thing that happened was that the showmen hung on to what they had discovered.
They had turned to longer films to attract better audiences and the device of the fiction film not only served to head off the challenge of reformers but also guaranteed an exclusive hold on mass audiences.
No organization had the energy to compete with the showmen.
Certainly no other organization could challenge the sheer size of an industry that had from the outset relied on economies of scale and realized the logic of a mass audience, but neither was there any other organization prepared to rely exclusively on entertainment, which the showmen had identified as the essence of the movies.
It was the turn-of-the-century city that had created the movies as mass entertainment and the movie phenomenon took much of its tone and logic from that milieu.
Paradoxically however the demand for better films saw  the American film industry move away from its natural habitat and take up residence in a suburban section of what was essentially a southern Californian oasis.
There were many reasons why after two decades of activity the American industry should begin to centre on Hollywood but surely Lary May is right to see the move ultimately in terms of the movies seeking to escape from the constant demands of Progressive America.
Industrial America was a pluralistic and highly organized society.
The battle to improve the movies had also been a battle in which the showmen had fought to maintain control of what they had invented.
The fictional film had guaranteed that the showmen would hang on to their audience.
The advent of Hollywood was the symbol of the showmen's victory.
In Hollywood they would be able to entertain their vast worldwide audience in relative freedom.
Showmanship was to remain as the hallmark of the movies.
TOWARDS SIGNIFICANCE IN THE SILENT ERA
The movies had become a story-telling medium, and, as had been the case with earlier fictional forms such as the melodrama and the ‘dime novel’, the stories would necessarily have to be given a recognizable social setting.
The movies, though, had been born into a far more complex and certainly a more highly politicized era than the earlier fictional forms and many familiar themes, especially those dealing with the problems of wealth or with sudden reversals of financial fortune, would have to be treated more sensitively.
The new world was one in which there was an increased emphasis on the social obligations of the wealthy, on the whole question of relations between management and labour, and on the legitimate degree of social and political power that could be exercised by wealthy elites.
If the movies were to give their stories a realistic social setting and especially a contemporary setting, and if they were to draw on what had always been some of the major preoccupations of popular fiction, then they would have to define their position carefully with regard to some of the major issues of the day.
To the movie producers the problem defined itself in terms of having to retain the loyalty of the masses whilst never questioning fundamental middle-class values and of having to show an unease about certain aspects of the distribution of wealth and social power without ever becoming political or radical.
In short the movies had to be contemporary and had to reflect some of the mass anxieties of the age without ever becoming sectional or subversive themselves.
The ‘Busybodies and Meddlers’ along with the new and better audiences imposed clear constraints on the showmen of the movie industry but all the problems that were posed by society were overcome, and were overcome with such decisive ease that they never again had to be confronted.
The solution was relatively easy partly because what was required by society as a whole fitted in very closely with what the showmen believed themselves and partly because the new social awareness was really only a refinement of those old nineteenth-century platitudes that had always underpinned popular fiction.
‘From 1908 to 1914 motion pictures preached,’ argued Lewis Jacobs, but what the showmen thought best to preach was determined without too much difficulty.
A vague belief in the common man and a moral if politically neutral criticism of the abuse of wealth had always been the territory of  popular narrative as exploited by religion, legend, folk memory, and popular fiction and so there were lots of safe and suitable stories at hand for the showmen to tell.
The showmen were men of their time and they knew how easy it was to tell stories that would be sympathetic to the common man, that would condemn all truly evil men and their agencies, and yet at the same time would do nothing other than confirm existing social values.
Nearly everything else was common sense.
There was never any question that the movies would become political or radical as the showmen were as opposed to Socialism and labour unions as their fellow American businessmen and, in any case, they remained firmly of the opinion that what they had to give their public was entertainment.
Movies only needed to be social when the plot demanded it, and even if some kind of political crisis had to be depicted in a particular story then the attitude or position adopted by the movie would be less important to audiences than the logic of the plot.
The movies were telling stories and, of course, there were political values implicit in these stories, but in general the movies were using society rather than engaging it directly.
It was the logic of their medium (the camera filmed what it saw) and the need for stories that led producers to film aspects of their times but in the movies themselves the supremacy of fiction relegated society to a background.
Feature films, whether drama or comedy, quoted society when it was appropriate or relevant.
Society and social issues crept into film as the servant of plot.
It was thus in these early years and it was nearly always to remain so.
The early feature films took up society as the situation required.
In The Quarry Man (1908) a workman is blinded during blasting operations at a quarry; later his wife becomes unfaithful and he is driven to suicide; just in time his wife pulls him out of the river and she now abandons ‘the downward path’.
Another American film of that year,A Workingman's Dream , has a very weary hero who fails to find a job at a factory; he falls asleep and dreams of a Professor Wonderful who offers him instant wealth and a new set of clothes, but he is told that these new gains will disappear if he breaks certain simple instructions; on three occasions he accidentally carries out simple actions which break the instructions and his wealth disappears; he wakes up to see an ambulance taking a worker from the factory — there is a vacancy and this time his application is successful.
Of course these films were not innocent but the ‘messages’ were only a reworking of nineteenth-century exemplars and would not have surprised anyone.
Also in 1908 audiences could have seen Unemployed and Unemployable in which the central character begins by haranguing a crowd; he is dragged off by his wife and given a whole range of domestic tasks all of which he makes a mess of; he accidentally acquires stolen goods and is arrested; the film ends with this ‘lounger’ working at last but in the cells.
The following year brought The Miner's  Daughter in which the heroine deserts her working-man husband for the new mine-owner and his lavish apartment; in time she becomes unhappy but is eventually reclaimed by her husband who storms into a smart reception and virtually throttles the mine-owner.
In Hard Times (1909) an unemployed father with a dying child smashes a baker's window, is caught by the crowd, and is delivered to the police, who proceed to call in a physician; the working-class family is restored to prosperity and the child to health, and the physician becomes a family friend.
All this was familiar territory but as films became more ambitious so there emerged the possibility of fuller social statement.
In 1909 D. W. Griffith directed A Corner in Wheat for the Biograph Company and the New York Dramatic Mirror announced to its readers that ‘this picture is not a picture drama, although it is presented with dramatic force.
It is an argument, an editorial, an essay on a vital subject of deep interest to all.’
The theme, the Mirror went on, ‘is the rising cost of living, the inability of the masses to meet the increases and the part played by the speculator in bringing about this unfortunate condition’.
The paper praised Biograph for ‘having opened up a new vein for motion picture subjects’, argued that ‘no orator, no editorial writer, no essayist could so strongly and effectively present the thoughts that are conveyed in this picture’, and concluded that it was ‘another demonstration of the force and power of motion pictures as a means of conveying ideas’.
A year later Biograph released Gold is Not All , also directed by Griffith, and of this film the Motion Picture World said that it would help in ‘creating a sentiment that will place a true value upon wealth in its relation to human happiness and its influence upon life’.
The reviewer thought that the film deserved ‘the highest commendation’.
Biograph, it seemed, was giving the public a new social cinema and as the years went by it seemed that D. W. Griffith in particular was just taking the main problems of American society as his subject-matter.
Here indeed were ideas and ample evidence that the movies had all the potential to move into a position alongside the press and the pulpit as an agency moulding the ideas and values of the mass public.
The emergence of Griffith as the most important director of feature films in America was related to so many of the forces that characterized the Progressive era.
There was a demand for better films and that meant films that would convince middle-class audiences that the new entertainment could aspire to art and be an agency of spiritual betterment.
The age was sanctioning a cinema of technical virtuosity and social statement.
There were several technical innovations but the spirit of the time made it likely that the man of the moment would be someone in whom technical boldness and artistic pretension would be sustained by the need to preach.
It was also inevitable that such an innovator would come from within the industry and be fully conversant with all its conventions.
What elevated Griffith above his fellow technicians was that his sense of what a camera should record and his appreciation that new dimensions of filmic space could be appropriated were given meaning by their constant reference to central themes of American life.
He appears to be offering a total cinema in which technique, story, social setting, and spiritual values came together.
This was something like the art the Progressive era needed.
What is important about Griffith, however, is that his demonstration that feature films could be both art and social treatise was not inspired by any narrow or specific intellectual or doctrinal position.
Griffith's breakthrough came almost accidentally as he attempted to forge a career in a new industry about which he knew little.
Working alongside other pioneers he was first spontaneously discovering new possibilities in camera technique and then he found that he could equally spontaneously draw on his experiences and his own values.
Griffith had come to the movies quite late in life and he came as a man whose varied experiences and whose accumulated opinions, myths, and prejudices had given him a sense of America and of himself as having a place in it.
He was the product of an actual family experience; his father had fought for the South in the Civil War and there had been some decline from gentility, but he was as much a product of family myth.
The suggestion of a practical background combined with the talk of Welsh and Jewish blood and also with his own striking physical appearance to convince Griffith that he would and should be somebody of significance.
He failed as a writer and as an actor but then discovered that the easily acquired skills of movie-making would enable him to become the artist and prophet for which his background had prepared him and for which Progressive America was so eagerly waiting.
The scene was set for a movie genius but what was important for the history of the movies was that the genius who emerged to push the medium and the industry into a new era was a self-educated romantic whose values and ideas had not been provided by any distinctive intellectual tradition or urban political party but rather had emerged first out of his Southern, rural, Methodist past and then as he had drifted through a rapidly changing America.
The times seemed to sanction important films that would be artistic and socially relevant but America was given films made by a self-made showman with artistic and intellectual pretensions and whose thinking was essentially homespun.
Much has been written about Griffith and his contribution to the movies but the ingredients that made up his genius have never been better identified than in the review Heywood Broun wrote of Intolerance when it appeared in 1916.
To Broun, Griffith was ‘an immature philosopher, a wrong-headed sociologist, a hazy theologian, a flamboyant historian but a great movie man’.
Griffith was seduced by his own myth of himself and by the preoccupations of the Progressive era into  believing that he was a serious thinker, whereas in truth he was an old-fashioned story-teller who had spontaneously discovered how the technology of film could be used to give stories a tremendous power.
There were many traditional features in his films and his whole approach to a story was never far removed from the conventions of melodrama, but what Griffith was able to do was to shift the action of any of his films to whatever chapter of history or social setting that his plot or theme required.
It was his sense of history, part romantic, part Christian, and his sense of American society that gave his films their dramatic and visual power.
His artistic bravura may well have been inspired by his sense of himself and it certainly encouraged him to become increasingly subjective.
His subjectivity, though, was to be his undoing.
Birth of a Nation (1915) and Intolerance (1916) may well have been masterpieces but they were also very obviously controversial and guaranteed to shock sections of the great audience.
For film to travel down that road would be to endanger the whole relationship between showmen and their great monolithic audience.
Safer ground had to be found and in any case with the coming of war the Progressive demands were being replaced by new constraints.
The forces that had called forth a great preacher like Griffith were passing and he needed to be taken out of the limelight.
The motion-picture industry moved instinctively against a man whose message aroused dissent and, as we have seen, there were critics who could see even as the films were released that they offered humbug and prejudice masquerading as philosophy.
What was inescapable, however, was the impact that Griffith's films had made as films.
He was a literary man and he had dreamed of becoming the Shakespeare of the movies, but what he had become in fact was more like a movie version of Dickens.
The Victorian novelist had accumulated a simple but coherent view of society but also the genius to tell stories that needed to be firmly set in a fully created social setting.
The stories were generally shaped by his values and his literary genius allowed every social detail to be authentic and appropriate.
Griffith was never as mature an artist as Dickens and he was the product of the frontier rather than a literary city but he had a social theory of sorts, a gift to embody values in stories, and a mastery of technique which allowed him to make every setting dramatically and socially convincing.
In many respects Griffith was a conventional story-teller and melodrama was always really the framework of his themes.
In A Corner of Wheat the avaricious speculator is showing his friend through one of his elevators when he receives a cable telling him that he has cornered the world's supply but then in his exultation he stumbles and ‘falls to a terrible death in one of his own bins of wheat’.
But before we get to this point Griffith has given us what a reviewer describes as Millet-like scenes of rural labour and urban scenes in which great wealth alternates with  breadlines and poverty.
Griffith's ambition to be both artist and prophet made him elevate melodrama into something fuller in terms of its emotional and social range and the stunning way in which the totally real sense of society sustained his story-line gave his films what appeared to be the power of history and the richness of literature.
He knew American society from his days of wandering and he could recreate it effortlessly.
In a whole series of urban dramas, of which the best known is The Musketeers of Pig Alley , he showed that a society of Dickensian-like authenticity could be created in a film studio.
These were simple little melodramas or lessons of everyday life but what mattered most was bringing these gifts for social detail into play in the grander sermons.
And so it was that a man who had tried his hand at a whole variety of working-class jobs but who was no friend of the labour unions could, as part of his episodic film Intolerance , quite effortlessly recreate a clash between workers and police that is so lifelike as to seem like a newsreel and to suggest that perhaps every subsequent labour riot followed its pattern.
Industrial battles of this sort were almost an everyday event in Griffith's America but here the bloody scenes are staged not as part of a labour or management film but as part of a vast, elaborate, confused, perhaps ultimately nonsensical and certainly eccentric plea for tolerance.
The modern or contemporary quarter of Intolerance would make an excellent film in its own right but even then the industrial scene would only be part of the scene setting and would fade in the memory as the hero passes from scene to scene in the ‘picaresque’ fashion of so many movies.
Griffith's intention was to condemn the hypocrisy of wealthy do-gooders and just by way of illustration he brilliantly made real the experience of industrial warfare.
1 INTOLERANCE: GRIFFITH'S VERY REALISTIC INDUSTRIAL CLASH COMES AS ONE SMALL PART OF HIS GREAT PLEA FOR TOLERANCE.
Griffith's legacy was a complex one.
His great sermons warned of the dangers of being controversial and subjective but confirmed that the movies could greatly increase their emotional power as a story-telling medium by developing a surer sense of society.
It was above all his Dickensian capacity to take in social detail as part of a social sense that need not be political that Griffith really passed on to the American motion-picture industry.
In this respect he was confirming that what the movies did best was to tell stories as effectively as they could without wandering too far from the values of the old nineteenth-century themes.
Of course Griffith was not the only preacher and audiences were given films that were quite forthright in their condemnation of social vices.
One reviewer thought John Barleycorn (1914)‘the most powerful moral lesson ever conveyed in films’ and stressed how brilliantly the ‘selection of types’, the ‘faithful depiction’of ‘the underworld of sea-faring men’, and the very smell of the sea that the movie evoked all helped to convey the ‘dehumanising effects of strong drink’.
Later that year All-Star released The Jungle and a reviewer assured readers that the producing company had spared nothing in order to ensure that ‘this picturization’ would be equal to the novel.
All the salient points of Upton Sinclair's story were dealt with in the film: the struggle of immigrant families, the careless methods in the food factories, the strike and riot following a 20 per cent wage reduction, and above all the main themes of the distinction between employer and employed and the ‘wide and bridgeless chasm’ between rich and poor.
The Modern Picture World reported that this ‘daring’ film was doing well at the De Kalb theatre in Brooklyn and that when it opened on Broadway the ‘socialist’Upton Sinclair would be present at each performance.
All this was indeed ‘daring’ stuff and few moviegoers in that 1914–16 period could have failed to appreciate that the messages were coming at them thick and fast as the motion-picture industry tried hard to prove that it was a mature social agency.
These movie tracts, however, should be seen in context.
Specific lessons were being taught and the abuse of wealth was being condemned but in the vast majority of ‘social’ films the  message usually came wrapped in melodrama.
The companies vied with each other to find new settings for the basic story-lines and messages that they had to put over.
In 1915 Universal Broadway Features released Business is Business , in which an egotistical French capitalist rapidly risen from the peasantry rules over his employees with an iron will until his eventual downfall.
At the same time Lasky offered Out of Darkness in which a young heiress lives off the profits of a Florida cannery in which hundreds of working-girls earned 30 cents for a 13-hour day at the cutting-tables.
The heiress travels to Florida for some yachting but her sloop is run down and sunk by one of her own commercial schooners; she is saved but she has lost her memory; she ends up working on the cutting-tables in her own factory and falls in love with a manager whose previous requests for better conditions she had been happy to ignore.
The Exhibitors Film Exchange found the theme, which has the heiress played by Charlotte Walker learning ‘what life is and what are the actual conditions under which many of her fellow human beings live’, plausible and summed up the photoplay as a ‘strong arraignment of existing working conditions in certain localities’.
A few months later came the California Motion Picture Corporation's Salvation Nell , in which we follow the adventures of a young girl from the New York tenements, where her drunken father kills her mother and where all her associates are drunks or wasters, through to happiness in the arms of a Salvation Army major.
Meanwhile World Films Corporation's The Better Woman has a poor uneducated girl who lives in a mining town cheating her way into marriage with a young engineer and then surviving all kinds of guilt and adventure before proving (in the words of the release summary) that ‘a girl, starting life under a heavy handicap, could be worthy of the highest place in the affection of an educated high-bred man’.
Metro's contribution to this social cinema came in the form of The Bigger Man , which the editor of the Exchange described as a ‘timely’ drama of ‘love and labor…on the pregnant theme of the relation between capital and labor’.
Henry Kolker played the part of a man of the ‘working-class’ who whilst helping to build a bridge becomes interested in the boss's daughter.
During the film the ‘workers’ demands for increased wages are refused and then follow riots, battles with militia, and eventually industrial peace is restored through the efforts of a young engineer who wins his employer's confidence and the love of the employer's daughter'.
The Exchange concluded that the production was ‘pictorially of merit’ but that the battle between strikers and militia was ‘farcical, bearing no relation whatever to an actual conflict of its kind’.
This critic concluded his review by pointing out to his readers what he thought were the real merits of the film for he had thought of it as being ‘neither capitalistic nor laboristic, but a straight-away drama’ not at all‘depending on any propaganda to arouse the spectator's interest’.
We should, of course, widen the context even further for, if in the movies preaching usually came hand in hand with melodrama, this should remind us that films were still firmly in the hands of showmen and they were free to use social comment and social settings as they thought best.
Progressives and reformers never captured the movies; they merely influenced them in a particular direction, a direction that the producers would appear to be following closely whereas in fact they were really using it for their own ends.
The movies were advancing on several fronts and the social theme was but one strand in a more complex whole.
Showmen knew that middle-class critics had to be bought off and that topicality could sell films to certain audiences but they also appreciated that audiences were more likely to go to the movies for spectacle, for adventure, for comedy, for sex, to see particular stars, and to be entertained in the widest sense.
The need for the movies to preach was very evident in some films but the vast majority of films reflected the styles and themes that movies people were working out for themselves in alliance with their audience as a whole.
The young Mary Pickford went into the industry as the Progressive phase approached its zenith, and for Griffith she played criminals and prostitutes; she went on to portray a whole variety of poor hard-done-by girls, many of them immigrants, many of them immoral or pregnant, before in 1916 she played a factory worker in the most memorably titled of all the films of this era The Eternal Grind .
Of course this film was a condemnation of sweat-shop conditions, and of course it was a melodrama in which poor girls have affairs with the boss's sons and in which the heroine brandishes a gun in order to make one son do the honourable thing but above all it was a vehicle for a star who had already become one of Hollywood's hottest properties.
As Lary May has quite rightly stressed a melodrama with a star in the main part is already well on the way to becoming something different.
Necessarily the star passes through difficult situations, escapes from dilemmas, and resolves problems.
We notice the appalling conditions but not as much as we appreciate the energy and vitality of the star.
For Pickford The Eternal Grind was a step towards her true screen self, which she was to discover most fully in The Poor Little Rich Girl of 1917, a film which satirized the rich whilst it confirmed its star as the richest actress in the world.
It also took her a step nearer to Douglas Fairbanks, a former student of a mining school who had strong views of his own on how the movies should depict American society.
Society was there too for the comedians, whose antics were from the very beginning shot against the background of a very recognizable American actuality.
Film comedy developed along a parallel track to the feature film drama: the need for better films made feature film producers more ambitious technically and in terms of story and the same forces helped comedy to graduate from improvised shorts to more substantial  films.
Once comedy was given the incentive to develop it soon leapt ahead of the dramatic film: suddenly there emerged a handful of geniuses and this was not entirely a matter of chance.
The comedians were always to enjoy more freedom.
Like the producers of filmed drama they relied heavily on nineteenth-century models and conventions but obviously mime, pantomime, and other comic traditions by their very nature could adapt to silent cinema even more effortlessly than melodrama and popular fiction.
Once the security of the industry was assured there was every incentive for the comedians to experiment, for comedy relied on movement, gesture, and illusion whilst photography and editing were now opening up all kinds of new possibilities.
From the start the new feature film had been saddled with outside obligations; it had to preach or at least uplift, or if it were borrowing from literature it had to satisfy so many knowledgeable readers.
At the same time the outside agencies were quite content to ignore comedy, so leaving the comedians to develop their own cinema and not surprisingly it developed as a purer cinema.
The comedians then became the classic movie showmen of these early years.
Their cinema was purer because they were often more fully in charge of their product than were other film-makers working on serious movies, because comedy encouraged a more direct relationship between technique and content, and because the films were made not for any sectional audience but for the mass audience itself.
Even more than most movie men the comedians were men of the people and they sensed what the masses wanted.
Mack Sennett had come from a New England working-class background and he had himself worked as a plumber's mate.
Chaplin and Keaton came into movies from a vaudeville background in which they had seen poverty and experienced it for themselves.
Their knowledge of society had taught these men that there was a huge audience that wanted to laugh and that comedians had to strain every nerve and to try every joke in order to release that laughter.
Sennett was the initial genius who taught the others that anything ought to be tried that produced laughter and that the ultimate test was whether any movie actually worked for audiences.
The whole world, the whole of society was there for the comedians to plunder.
Their own experiences allowed them to take up whatever social reference was needed and if anything the demands of Progressives helped for they allowed age-old traditions of humour to be shaped into what could often appear to be social satire.
Comedy had always been anti-establishment but now if the Progressives were happy to see shyster lawyers, pompous and hypocritical capitalists, and venal politicians then so much the better.
The jokes could be played out in a fully contemporary setting and could often concern the adventures of very ordinary downtrodden men.
Throughout his career Chaplin took every care to sustain the idea that his life had been a kind of Victorian romance and perhaps if we allow for  certain embellishments we can accept this interpretation as legitimate.
There seems every reason to believe those 1917 recollections in which Chaplin spoke of how from the moment that he had first seen the light of Brixton he was aware that ‘unkind fate must have struck his knife unto me’ and of how he had been ‘through more hardships and downright poverty than one per cent of the world's worst Jonahs can tell of’.
Whilst recalling his early hardships Chaplin also provided a clue as to how he had overcome them for he spoke of how he had ‘slaved like a nigger to master the difficult steps that formed the routine of the eight Lancashire lads’.
Throughout his early career Chaplin noted the poverty and hardships that were common in society and these observations were fed into his act as he mastered the various techniques of traditional nineteenth-century mime, vaudeville, and clowning.
Convention, technique, and an empathy with the popular mind all went into the perfecting of the Chaplin act and it was these things that enabled him to become Sennett's most accomplished pupil and which allowed him to create the cinema's most appealing and most universal symbol.
It should also be noted that Chaplin had mastered all the skills of being a showman.
He had worked for so many nineteenth-century showmen that he was able to outdo them all.
In later days it became fashionable to see Chaplin as a political rebel against Hollywood's factory methods but he is better seen as the last of the old-style showmen offering a highly polished product to the masses that he felt he knew so intimately.
He was never happy until there had been a ‘successful exploitation’ of every one of his films.
The most striking features of Chaplin's film career were the rapidity with which he became popular outside America and the way in which he very soon became a favourite of intellectuals.
It became a commonplace for novelists like Arnold Bennett and pioneering critics like Gilbert Seldes to talk of how Chaplin had overcome the limitations of cinema and ‘passed beyond the form entirely.’
It is not going too far to suggest that it was the fame of Chaplin that first allowed many intellectuals to even broach the subject of film and certainly he brought back the possibility of ‘slumming it’ that had rather disappeared since the days of music-hall.
Seldes, who was to become Chaplin's greatest booster in America as well as his personal friend, wrote of how ‘you have to go to squalid streets and disreputable neighbourhoods if you want to see Chaplin regularly’.
But more and more intellectuals seemed prepared to take this risk and went on to talk of Chaplin's techniques, his ‘dolefulness’, his sense of rhythm, and his mastery of myth and fancy.
Of course these superior critics disliked the way his films displayed ‘the grossest sentimentality’, but this was the price that had to be paid for his mass popularity and after all, as William Hunter reminded his readers, Dickens had been far more sentimental for very much the same reasons.
In fact, Hunter saw Chaplin as ‘the Dickens of the films’ and so gave another reminder of how the  whole world of silent movies was moulded in the idiom of the great Victorian writer.
What irritated Edmund Wilson about Chaplin's more ambitious films of the 1920s was the inclusion of ‘gags’ and ‘low comedy incidents’as if he were trying desperately to hang on to his old mass audience, the clear implication being that Chaplin had now become the property of a more sophisticated audience.
In all the 1920s writing on Chaplin, however, we find an emphasis on his humanity and on his sheer ordinariness.
To James Agate he belonged ‘to humanity: he is one of us’, he is still ‘a chap’, whilst to William Hunter he represented a universal type —‘the downtrodden vagabond isolated and alone’.
Writing later, in 1937, J. B. Priestley's main concern was to stress the Englishness of Chaplin (though he did concede that the Chaplin symbol was half-French in inspiration) and he talked of him as being ‘the greatest  humourist since Dickens’ and of belonging above all to London's East End and to ‘the swarms of bright-eyed urchins who are thumbing their noses at the nearest policemen’.
Priestley had particular pleasure in recalling that moment in Payday in which Charlie has to walk home through the rain after foolishly spending his pay and after being pushed out of the last tram; he anticipates his wife's anger and the return to short rations and yet not all is hopeless, something might turn up.
Priestley concludes that ‘twenty Marxian treatises about the proletariat would not make you feel a tenth of the compassion for the dispossessed urban masses as this bit of pantomime does’.
In 1936 Robert Wagner had maintained that Charlie's pictures are always ‘proletarian’ but by this time the politicization of criticism had already assured a wider and more varied critical response to Chaplin.
 Priestley was to recall Payday as being a remarkable film but of course it had not been a typical Chaplin film.
It was one of the very rare occasions when Chaplin made himself a worker, a member of the proletariat with all the attendant problems of low wages, of dealing with a foreman, and of sustaining a home and family.
This was a one-off film for Chaplin and he was well aware that to have sustained that role and that theme would have been to sacrifice much of his great following and to have become an artist with a more sectional support.
The classic Chaplin figure was never a worker, never a member of a class and never in danger of being politically motivated and divisive.
Chaplin was too much of a showman and too steeped in ‘showbiz’ ever to fall into that trap.
All the nineteenth-century conventions of comedy pointed to the need for universality and in any case Chaplin's own personal inclinations must have pulled him back from being sectionally committed at a time of class warfare.
His screen creation was often referred to as ‘the tramp’ but as Sobel and Francis have suggested the use of this term is as misleading as to call Chaplin ‘proletarian’.
What Chaplin the showman had done was to create a great screen clown, a clown whose frame of reference was to be emotion  rather than politics.
As Walter Kerr so brilliantly argued, Chaplin's statement was ‘philosophical — not social’.
What Chaplin had needed was a clown whose loneliness, detachment, pathos, optimism, indestructibility, incorrigibility, and vulnerability would allow him to exploit all the  humour and tragedy, love and violence that everyday life offered.
He found the identity for his clown not in the figure of a worker but rather in the form of a man whose sensitivity, grace, almost feminine beauty, charm, clothes, and swagger all hint at a better background and perhaps at social and sexual aspirations.
From his vast knowledge of that swirling urban society in London and New York it was the type that could be swept up and then knocked back down that Chaplin chose to express the emotions of a whole era.
Even then Chaplin avoided being too socially specific, for over and above this there was his own never quite fully adult quality and his essential reliance on mime technique and silence which ensured that he remained a fairy-tale symbol and never became a real-life person.
He had created an essentially social symbol but perhaps not surprisingly some critics in the highly politicized 1930s chose to interpret the outer form of his creation in their own way.
So many critics wanted Modern Times to be a satire on capitalism whereas Chaplin was merely using factory production and the depression as a back-cloth for a series of impish gags.
Such was the confusion that Pravda's critic Shumiatski had to remind his colleagues in the west that all of Chaplin's films had depicted ‘the tragedy of the petty bourgeoisie in capitalist society’.
For Shumiatski the famous scene in Modern Times in which Chaplin accidentally finds himself leading a Socialist demonstration showed the comedian remaining ‘true to himself’ for ‘he is lonely — his path has nothing in common with the path of the masses — it is the path of the external failure’.
One does not have to agree with Shumiatski's aim of revolutionizing the masses to accept these remarks as a nice corrective to those views of Chaplin as a proletarian and whatever the political reasoning they do offer insights into the psychology and social psychology of the ‘little man's’ persona.
Whatever political positions he was later driven into by a jealous Hollywood, Chaplin as a film-maker was never a propagandist or a preacher.
He was always a showman but one whose genius allowed him to become an artist and as an artist he knew that the human spirit was best defended and expressed on the mythic plane.
Film was an illusion and, as Charmion Von Wiegard so convincingly argued in 1936, the art of Chaplin was ‘built entirely on illusion and fantasy’.
Chaplin never used film for some extraneous purpose; rather he fulfilled himself as a cinema artist by using film's own logic and by fulfilling the expectation of that vast audience that had come to accept film as something that worked and as something that offered ‘sure-fire’ entertainment.
2 MODERN TIMES: CHAPLIN'S CLOWN BY CHANCE BECOMES PROLETARIAN REBEL.
In 1924 Chaplin himself asked the question whether ‘the public knows what it wants’ and his conclusion was very straightforward.
He argued that the public did not stand at the box-office window and demand dramas with happy endings or which mixed pathos and humour, nor did it demand comedy made up of ‘slapstick’, ‘gags’ with ‘three or so dashes of serious situation and a bit of irony to top off’.
It struck him that ‘the  public has no such specifications’ and that their demands were ‘negative at best’for it was ‘Entertainment’that ‘they’really wanted.
This was the classic showman speaking and on this occasion he was directing his remarks directly at those intellectuals whom his films had brought into cinemas for the first time.
As they became aware of cinema audiences the vast majority of these intellectuals tended not to see them in quite such a negative way as Chaplin.
Of course the public only wanted entertainment, but the point for intellectual observers was that the public had only wanted it on their own terms and so the story of film was the story of how the masses had dragged it down to their own level.
To Welford Beaton the great weakness of the movie industry was that it had been ‘born without reasoning faculties’ and had failed subsequently to develop any: since birth, he suggested, the industry had ‘allowed the box-office to do its thinking for it’.
To talk of the movies then was to talk of the masses.
To Gilbert Seldes the movie had ‘no fixed form, no standards’ and it was the first form (of art and entertainment) to be developed in the era of universal (that is low-standard) education.
To the English critic ‘HD’ the word ‘cinema’conjured up memories of ‘crowds and crowds and saccharine music and longdrawn out embraces and the artificially enhanced thuds-off of galloping bronchoes’and then again ‘boredom, tedium, suffocation, pink lemonade, saw-dust even, old reactions connected with cheap circuses, crowds and crowds and illiteracy and more crowds and breathless suffocation and (in America) peanut shells and grit and perhaps a sudden collapse of jerry-built scaffoldings’.
Perhaps part of the fascination of movies has always been that they trigger off so many memories but what is interesting about so much film-making in the 1920s is that movies are so closely associated with that age of the masses that had come at the end of one century and the beginning of another.
As Kenneth Macpherson was to note, film always gave evidence of ‘its humble Pier Penny Peep Show beginning’.
For Macpherson everything about the general run of American movies ‘belonged to the 1910 period’ when the industry had alighted on a certain type of narrative film as being most suitable for its mass audience.
What he suggested was that ‘the words nice, nasty, morbid, vulgar, dirty, clean are not words merely, but complete attitudes of mind, complete summaries coded in 1910 language’.
It was normally the practice for writers like Macpherson to stress that the movies had grown directly out of the ‘dime’ or ‘yellow-back’novel.
For Seldes it was contemporary drama that had been to blame, for it had encouraged the young movie industry to take ‘the slice of life’ as its subject-matter.
But for Seldes too it was ‘the times’ that had largely been to blame for the infantile nature of the movies.
The masses were uneducated and the producers had given them rubbish, but what had really ensured ‘the bloodlessness of the American film’ was that with intellectuals alienated and excluded there had been ‘no intelligent body’to shape the new medium.
Speaking for a generation of American and British intellectuals, Seldes condemned American movies for their ‘falseness’ but saw that it was ‘the falseness of the McKinley era’, an era when ‘the moral and intellectual tone — had not yet become infected with self-criticism’.
It was in the 1920s then that criticism developed apace and it became a socially respectable and intellectual orthodoxy to relate the worthlessness of the movies to the immaturity of the masses.
‘Whosoever would have it known that he is not of the common herd’, suggested Clifford Howard, ‘develops a spleen against the Hollywood movies.’
They were seen as an opiate, a worthless retreat from the real world.
The mindless sentimentality and inevitably happy endings were seen as a reflection of the popular will.
‘For the ‘thick-ear’ has set the standard’, said HD; confronted with the screen, ‘mind in some way neatly obliterates itself’, argued Kenneth Macpherson, and Walter Kron identified ‘an absence of taste, conscience, courage and character’.
The star system, that ‘Hollywood poison’, according to Hugh Castle, was seen as yet another concession to the masses, for, as Clifford Howard explained, ‘the crowd (and it is the crowd that supports the movies) cannot appreciate entertainment in the abstract, any more than it can thus appreciate art or religion’.
According to Howard, ‘the public from the very beginning of the photodrama has centered its interests on the personalities of the screen’ because ‘only through personality can the multitude be satisfied’.
The movies had created a false world and what was taken as the ultimate proof of that was the way in which they had failed to deal directly with real Americans and their dilemmas.
Seldes pointed out that no encouragement had been given ‘to the movie which dealt honestly with life, which created tragedy, which allowed itself a grim and unhappy ending’.
What the movies taught Welford Beaton was ‘we are not interested in average things, whether animate or inanimate — we are interested in anything in the degree that it is above or below the average’.
Writing in 1932 the English critic Bryher asked why it was that the real virtues and strengths and diversity of America had never been conveyed in the movies sent across the Atlantic.
The English could have no idea, Bryher maintained, that America had a climate that varied from that of Norway to that of a Spanish summer, that much of America was made up of monotonous stretches of unbroken country, and that there were parts where only Swedish is spoken and others where seventeenth-century English remained almost intact.
The notion that Hollywood produced only rubbish was even more fiercely upheld by British intellectuals than by their American counterparts.
The British had added grounds for resentment as the cinema of their own country had been largely eclipsed by that of Hollywood.
Most critics had little difficulty in associating the faults of the movies with  aspects of the American personality.
To condemn the movies was not only to condemn the masses, but to score a few debating points off Americans.
The movies were sentimental and adolescent because most Americans were sentimental and adolescent.
Occasionally it was conceded that New York had elements of sophistication but it was widely appreciated that film tastes and standards were determined in the populous and philistine Midwest.
Hollywood had captured the British film audience and what was worse was that those English films that were made were all too prepared to ape Hollywood conventions.
The result was that the real Britain was also never seen on the screen.
‘I have never seen Soho on the screen,’ wrote Ernest Betts in 1928 and then he added that he had never seen Southend, Birmingham, Chelsea, Bloomsbury, or London suburbia either.
For Betts the explanation was simple, for the British were ‘afraid to depart from massive but stultifying film values’ which the Americans had already built up, and the situation was one in which ‘every film producer in the world is mortally afraid of losing that Hollywood complexion, ourselves most of all’.
It was the smart thing to do down Hollywood, but it is not difficult to see that the venom and enjoyment that went into those attacks of the 1920s tell us more about the social values of elites and in particular of intellectuals than they do about movies as such.
Many of the critics displayed amazing disingenuousness, not to say hypocrisy.
Perhaps they were justified in recalling early days in makeshift cinemas and perhaps they had to mingle with the masses as they went in search of Chaplin movies, but they must have been aware that prestigious down-town and suburban theatres were now largely being patronized, not exclusively by a lumpenproletariat, but rather by a mix of social classes and perhaps above all by young people who were moving up the social scale into more respectable occupations.
A more accurate guide as to who went to the movies was given in 1928 by Pare Lorentz, who rather patronizingly suggested that whereas most people went occasionally, the regulars consisted of ‘an army of clerks’ who not only went but took it ‘seriously’.
In that same year Welford Beaton argued that it was people like clerks who made up the bulk of the great movie audience and that they went to the cinema for inspiration.
In fact, Beaton suggested, the screen had become practically their only source of inspiration;
In 1922 the manager of the Grand Theater in DeQueen, Arkansas, explained to the readers of the Exhibitors Herald that he was having difficulty in choosing between the easily satisfied ‘masses’, who just  wanted shorts, and the much more difficult to please ‘classes’, who wanted programmes especially prepared for them.
The evidence from elsewhere in America and Britain is that exhibitors increasingly took the masses for granted and were always investing in better and better cinemas so as to hang on to the more respectable lower middle-class audience.
Ben Hall has spoken of how in the 1920s the United States ‘was dotted with a thousand Xanadus’, luxurious cinemas in which people all too concerned with their own improvement could satisfy their curiosity about how other people had succeeded.
Hollywood, said Hall, had already discovered people's interest in the rich and ‘rags to riches was filmdom's bread and butter’.
The content of the films and the increasing splendour of the cinemas both testified to the film industry's improvement.
In 1922 the English critic James Agate was reminded of how totally uneducated the average cinema audience was by the fact that a rendering of Mendelssohn's violin concerto between films received very full attention.
Agate conceded that one occasionally saw cabinet ministers at the movies, but it was obvious to him that this particular audience had never heard the Mendelssohn, whilst his friend was prompted to comment that it was ‘the first time they've ever heard the fiddle’.
Seven years later Agate reported on the opening of a new cinema of ‘almost Babylonish magnificence’ in the London suburb of Brixton, and he drew attention to the running fountain with its goldfish, the marble stairs, the thick carpets, the cushioned seats, the noble organ, and the fact that a full orchestra was to be used.
Cinema audiences in the 1920s expected better and better things and cinema-going became part and parcel of their social betterment.
In 1927 Variety thought Dorothy Arzner's Fashions for Women , starring Esther Ralston, ‘a corking good picture’ and described how ‘lovely gowns are in every foot.
Ermine negligées; bath in milk, numerous underpanties, chemises and other intimate items, all of which look like a million dollars on the svelte Ralston figure, just round enough.’
The picture would, of course, be ‘a cinch for exploitation’ for it would fit in nicely with ‘the usual fashion shows which many of the de luxe houses give in conjunction with the department stores in their cities’; in fact,Variety concluded, it ‘was probably made with that in mind’.
It was all very well for the intellectuals to associate the movies with the mindless masses, but the masses who went to cinemas in the 1920s were rather different from the masses who had so enthused about films twenty years earlier.
The twentieth century had moved on more rapidly than many intellectuals had realized.
Daily newspapers were far more aware of how society was changing and in 1929 London's Daily Express invited its readers to send in postcards giving their own views on films.
This step was welcomed by the Cinematograph Times , which could not resist pointing out that ‘much of the criticism directed against the art expressed in the cinema originates from the small class not yet accustomed to modern  outlook’ who assumes ‘that no art can exist or progress that does not begin with their patronage’and ‘who do not yet appreciate that the masses today are fully competent to judge and to give expression to their own tastes’.
Those who dismissed the movies were also dishonest in the sense that they very rarely conceded that the whole tone of feature films had been moulded by politicians and largely middle-class pressure groups and religious organizations who had ceaselessly clamoured for censorship and for films to be morally edifying and uplifting.
Of course it would have been difficult for intellectuals to admit that it was precisely their own condemnation and neglect of films which had removed the one buffer that the film industry could have used to protect itself from the onslaught of ‘the Meddlers and Busybodies’.
The educated classes had just stood back as the aspiring politician and the over-eager Methodist forced the showmen into a reliance on the melodramatic and the romantic.
Only very slowly did intellectuals concede that the movies had been shaped as much by politics as by the showmen.
‘Never has an art form been subject to such control,’ argued Pare Lorentz in 1930 as he pointed out how the whole industry was ‘ruled by fear’and was ‘the victim of moral racketeering’.
Lorentz wondered whether ‘patrons might be made to understand why the movies are so banal and childish…if every motion picture theatre prefaced its films with the caption ‘This picture has been censored by a minor politician or by his assistants’’.
In 1929 Kenneth Macpherson talked of the ‘doleful and disastrous consequences’ of censorship and dramatically made his point by suggesting that censorship was ‘England's Prohibition Law’.
What was most disastrous about the educated response to American and British cinema was the way in which good movies or movies that had impressed were conveniently forgotten.
Films tended to follow certain broad patterns but the general output was never as standardized as the wholesale condemnations suggested.
Hollywood had carried all before it but even the Hollywood product was fairly diversified.
From the very earliest days of Hollywood there have been reviews by part-time critics and intellectuals praising particular films for breaking away from the usual formulas.
In every year there were one or two very special films which made a real impact outside the regular film audience.
The Griffith films and especially The Birth of a Nation (1915) and Intolerance (1916) were widely debated well outside film circles as, of course, were the films of Chaplin.
In general the silent cinema made its greatest impact with adaptations of literary classics and, as we have seen, critics in 1914 thought that the films of John Barleycorn and The Jungle were in no way inferior to the original novels and felt in particular that the low-life settings were entirely convincing.
Similarly in 1925 there was praise for von Stroheim's Greed , which was a movie version of the Frank Norris  novel McTeague .
Tremendous publicity was given to the circumstances in which this movie had been made and to the way in which the director had shot some forty reels; ‘the eight-hour day for movie fans has not yet dawned’ was the thankful comment of Robert Sherwood, but few critics doubted that the film conveyed much of the anger, ugliness, and brutality of the novel.
Exceptional Photoplays labelled it as ‘an uncompromising film’ and was quite sure it gave proof that ‘motion picture art has by this time attained its majority’.
Literary classics were, of course, a highly attractive proposition to the Hollywood studios.
To film a well-known book was a sure way to impress the respectable classes and to attract new patrons from the reading public and the familiarity of the title generally helped in exploitation.
In particular, the realistic novel had played an important part in shaping Progressive America and the themes of those novels were taken up in Hollywood as the studios struggled to find a formula for fiction films that would be acceptable to the highly politicized cities of the East and Midwest.
This Progressive influence lingered on as a minor theme in the cinema of the 1920s and was an obvious outlet for the continental directors who were drawn in by the glamour and potential of Hollywood.
The story of foreign geniuses at work in California was a strange and sad one; great men were fascinated by the excitement and power of a city devoted to movies, whilst the studios were attracted by the notion of using these aliens to make profitable and prestigious films.
Sometimes the planned movies were never made, nearly always they were botched but nevertheless Lubitsch, von Sternberg, von Stroheim, and Murnau were making films that undoubtedly represented Hollywood's cutting edge into better audiences.
If a director's name or even the tag ‘distinguished director’ brought in patrons then Hollywood's attitude was ‘so be it’.
Hollywood hoped that it would use immigrant directors for its own purposes but whatever the frustrations experienced by these foreigners the mere fact that they were working in the American film industry is a reminder that Hollywood was never as monolithic and stereotyped as its critics implied.
Hollywood advanced on a broad front and one which inevitably allowed diversity.
The main aim was to win new audiences and so there was always room for experiment, especially at the better end of the market.
The overwhelming need was just for more films and so nobody really worried if there were a few strange films somewhere along the spectrum and similarly, as there was a need for lots of directors and cameramen, there was no harm in making films which allowed them to gain experience.
Occasionally these protégés would come up with a one-off prestige film which could be used to show how respectable and serious Hollywood had become.
This is the only way that we can account for the career of King Vidor.
In the early days it had looked as if the directors would be the key men in Hollywood and from all over America men  anxious to use the format to say something had been attracted to the movies.
Nobody became more interested in the fate of these early directors than Scott Fitzgerald, and his unfinished novel The Last Tycoon is essentially about how directors were taken over by producers in the Hollywood system.
Fitzgerald was fascinated by the director type and in his story ‘Mightier than the sword’ he offered a portrait of a man who could well have been King Vidor:
Vidor was a Texan and a Christian Scientist who first started making his own movies whilst working as a projectionist in what he described as ‘the remote part of Texas’.
He was in Hollywood by 1915 in time to see Griffith at the height of his powers, and in a sense Vidor was always to remain a representative of the Griffith era; he was to become Hollywood's token Progressive in a period when the main energies of that phenomenon had been exhausted.
Vidor was to confess that he had started ‘with the definite idea’ that he wanted ‘to make a film that did not simply come to town to play three days or a week and then was forgotten’and it was always his conviction that the proper subjects for such a film would be the beauty of rural America and the fundamental decency of ordinary Americans.
As an apprentice director he quickly defined his own idiom but it took the initiative and the backing of MGM's Irving Thalberg to sponsor his big prestige films.
As a child Vidor had hated the Military Academy at San Antonio and he very much wanted to make ‘an honest war picture’ that would correct the excessive jingoism of the normal Hollywood war film.
Many contemporary and subsequent critics have emphasized the extent to which The Big Parade (1925) is essentially a piece of romantic escapism but it was the film's thoroughly sensible and balanced attitude towards war that earned it respect from discriminating critics in the 1920s.
Robert Sherwood ‘could not detect a single flaw — not one error of taste or of authenticity’ and he particularly appreciated the absence of ‘scenes wherein the doughboys dash over the top carrying the American flag’.
The British critic Bryher regarded the film as ‘the first authentic comment on the War’, praised particularly the depiction of enlistment, and poured scorn on those other British critics who had disliked the film's suggestion that it had been America who had won the war.
With The Big Parade Vidor won new friends for American films  but what had impressed MGM was that the film made money and also pointed to the way in which romance would be coupled with broader themes; there was obviously no harm in indulging Vidor a little.
MGM was not quite as happy with The Crowd (1928), which was held back for a year and temporarily given a happy ending and which proved only to be as Kine Weekly predicted ‘a sound box office success’ rather than a runaway winner.
Not surprisingly this depiction of the humdrum life of a clerk did not capture the headlines in the fashion of The Big Parade but with The Crowd Vidor again forced the educated classes to take note of Hollywood.
Kine Weekly suggested that Vidor's realistic and delightful presentation of ‘the intimate domestic side of suburban married life’ revealed ‘his extraordinary knowledge of humanity’and this was the quality that appealed to so many critics.
Lorentz spoke of the film's brilliance whilst Photoplay suggested that it had come ‘as near to reproducing reality as anything you have ever witnessed’.
Indeed Welford Beaton, like many other Hollywood figures, thought that Vidor had carried ‘realism just a little farther than the public will prove willing to follow’ and he brilliantly argued that films had to give hope and to show a way forward, but he did conceded that The Crowd was one of the best films ever made and he hoped that it would inspire further ventures into realism.
By 1928 Vidor was almost a cult figure amongst movie intellectuals and when he was in Europe in that year all those who hoped for better things listened with interest as he pointed out that independent film-makers and the ‘little theatre movement’ would never compete with Hollywood and would never break through to the large undeveloped market unless they attracted sufficient investment to improve their product.
‘Good films’ bringing in ‘enormous returns’was the prospect dangled before Europe's intellectuals by the one director whom Hollywood had allowed to experiment with using the new feature-film format to broach contemporary themes.
The praise bestowed on the adaptation of literary classics, the films of the foreign directors, and the role of Vidor always stressed the relative realism of these films compared with the standard product and was testimony to the extent to which the feature film had moved away from the era of social preoccupations when it had been felt that social preaching was the obvious subject-matter for Hollywood.
The immediate post-war years had been the last classic period of the film as social sermon and one can almost sense the relief as the studios discovered that social context did not need quite as much emphasis.
Throughout the 1920s filmed melodrama continued to use whatever social setting it required and poverty and urban misery were faithfully reproduced whenever necessary as on occasions were the realities of work in coal-mines, steelworks, and more frequently dockyards.
But the social setting was now precisely that and not a star feature in its own right.
Hollywood had  learnt that attractive and in general successful people were better prospects than unrelieved drabness.
When the Exhibitors Herald described The Song of Life (1922) as being ‘an appealing and forceful story of life's drab realities’ and in particular of ‘the dull existence of a track laborer's wife’it was complimenting worthy endeavour rather than laying the foundation for a blockbuster.
When in the same issue the journal reviewed Why Men Forget we are reminded of just how many social melodramas there were for this film showed a Socialist spokesman being discharged from a factory and ‘denouncing wealth in no uncertain terms’ before inheriting wealth and marrying a society girl and finally deciding to return to the poor folk from whence he came.
‘May interest those who are concerned with the laboring man and his problems’ was the critic's judgement but he also added that ‘the trite story, the indifferent performances of the unknown players and the lack of new and interesting situations are an almost insurmountable handicap’.
The movies had moved away from the slums.
In 1927 Variety's judgement of Rose of the Tenements was that ‘New York's pictorially hackneyed East Side’ had been used as the setting for ‘a drab colourless presentation offering little in either entertainment or box office value’, and that family problems had not been ‘dramatized to an extent where the mob can be made to forget the obvious ordinary scheme of things’.
In condemning these bad films the reviewers were also revealing just how much the movie industry had learnt.
Hollywood had streamlined its own product and in so doing had alienated the intellectuals.
Hollywood's fictional mode seemed worthless to the lovers of the other arts although they were rarely honest about either the problems facing film-makers or their own responses to the diversified output of the studios.
Only very gradually did a small number of educated critics come to see that although quite different from the Russian and European film the Hollywood and Hollywood-inspired film had developed its own qualities and that the great mass audience for that kind of entertainment had been responding quite genuinely to positive influence.
Perhaps after all, some writers were suggesting, Hollywood was on the side of life.
Usually the moment of insight came with Chaplin or with a brilliantly stunning film such as Murnau's Sunrise but perhaps it was the quality of the acting which did more than anything to suggest that the feature film had become significant.
In 1922 James Agate saw Lillian Gish in Broken Blossoms and was in no doubt that ‘this plain little American child’ had given a performance which meant that she ranked ‘with the world's great artists’.
Four years later Agate was surprised that the film version of J. M. Barrie's A kiss for Cinderella was so good and in particular that the acting of the American star Betty Bronson had equalled the stage performance of Miss Hilda Trevelyan for what the latter had done with her voice ‘this little screen actress does with her  eyes, which are the windows of as lovable a soul as was ever born into the world of make-believe.
In 1927 Welford Beaton was left in no doubt that the motion picture was ‘a throbbing, living, human thing’ after Janet Gaynor's performance in Frank Borzage's Seventh Heaven and especially by her grief as her husband left for the war; Beaton had cried at the time and even as he wrote the spell was not broken.
Whether through laughter or tears Hollywood was making its mark and confessions were bound to come.
As we have seen Kenneth Macpherson had felt that the earlier films had been awful but nevertheless he suspected that ‘the people got in some dim way the fact that here was something growing under their eyes’, that the movies had ‘a sense of life and expectancy’.
By what were to be the last years of the silent cinema quite a few critics had become aware of some sense of life in the feature film.
‘It is not the least good pretending any longer that the film is a thing one does not go to,’ admitted Macpherson, the editor of a journal which in 1928 recommended fourteen Russian and European films but at least in a second category included two films by Cecil B. de Mille.
Some contributors to Close Up were prepared to go even further.
Clifford Howard commented on how Hollywood could ignore all criticisms as ‘mere wind’ and ‘envy’for it had made a success of its own business and it had displayed ‘a Yankee genius for sensing the taste of the public and giving the world what it wants’.
Meanwhile Dorothy Richardson had suddenly been struck by the thought that the popular insistence of the happy ending was perhaps, however crudely expressed, ‘the truth of life’ and a tribute ‘to their unconscious certainty that life is ultimately good’.
During 1928 Richardson became intrigued about the impact of film on the small English fishing village where she resided.
She suspected that some aspects of rural life would be lost for ever but at the same time she could see that much was gained.
The ‘yokel’ became ‘less of a lout’, the dairymaid became ‘indistinguishable from her urban counterpart’, and in general these ‘youths and maidens’were becoming party to world-wide conversations'.
They were becoming in short‘world citizens’.
THE SOCIOLOGICAL ‘PUNCH’ OF THE TALKIES
The 1930s was the most crucial period in the whole history of cinema in Britain and America.
What was quite decisively determined in those years was the place of film within the respective national cultures and indeed within the even more extensive world-wide English-speaking culture.
The American film industry took on a more highly integrated personality and its package of entertainment now universally referred to as ‘Hollywood’ moved into a position of cultural dominance in America itself and into a position not far short of that in other English-speaking countries.
Hollywood confidently made stylish films and presented them to an audience that had become larger than ever.
The sheer size of the audience would have made the decade significant but what is of more interest in the 1930s was the way in which responses to Hollywood became more and more complex.
In what was to become a highly politicized era in which the most urgent questions concerned the political and economic significance of the masses it was inevitable that there would be a more intensive scrutiny of the role of film and that more demanding questions would be asked of Hollywood.
If this was a challenge the American film industry reacted to it in a determined and ultimately triumphant way.
This victory was to delight the masses just as it brought little pleasure to the newly energized forces of the political left, but, just as significantly, it was now also an occasional delight to a growing audience drawn from amongst critics, intellectuals, and the more respectable classes generally.
All the while Hollywood was winning new friends and gaining a new legitimacy for its methods and style.
The English-language feature film came of age in the 1930s first because of its singularity as a piece of entertainment and then because it prompted responses which were important in defining cultural positions generally.
The decade had started disastrously and yet it was out of this very disaster that Hollywood's greatest era was to evolve.
What had occurred was an unprecedented box-office slump in which eventually a third of America's movie-houses were to close and giant film corporations were to plunge into debt.
The social historian can now fit this slump into the wider pattern of events that was to add up to the Great Depression but at the time motion-picture executives in production and distribution were more given to introspection than to socio-economic analysis.
The mood was caught by Welford Beaton in a November 1930 report:
The consensus was simply that Hollywood had lost track of what people really wanted but there were also a number of other notions.
Many blamed the coming of sound not only for its enormous expense and for making producers rely on highly conventionalized and, by their very nature, static plots of theatrical origin, but also for taking all the essential fantasy out of film-going.
Some thought that far too many opulent and now half-empty movie palaces had been built for the elusive fashionable trade whilst others detected a more general dulling of the palate as the masses lost their enthusiasm for the old stories and seemed all too ready for something new.
The industry had lost its touch and its nerve.
Once more, as in the early days, movies were charging around in all directions and not really getting anywhere.
The situation in 1932 was best summed up by the exhibitor Ed Kuykendahl who suggested to his colleagues that, ‘under the stress of present conditions, all of us are floundering around trying frantically to create a little business’.
It was out of this floundering that a new Hollywood emerged.
In the midst of despair the movie producers drifted amongst other things into a new realism.
It was very much a drift because there was no one moment of conversion or inspiration and nobody had waved a magic wand.
Hollywood had always been prepared to use social realism in the service of melodrama and especially in the service of making prestige films out of literary classics and this practice remained in evidence during these years and led to such notable films as An American Tragedy and All Quiet on the Western Front .
Now there were new forces at work and they tended to lead towards a less traditional form of realism.
The coming of sound was probably crucial in this respect as it obviously placed a new emphasis on the contemporary American voice and on contemporary settings, which were in any case cheaper than conventional sets.
The new possibilities of sound had been suggested by the great success of that ‘gabby’ medium the radio which was now helping to give American actuality a new urgency and also by the Broadway stage where the great success of Hecht and MacArthur's The Front Page had hinted at the dramatic possibilities of ordinary everyday dialogue.
Whatever the wider influences the producers themselves were just experimenting, trying to cut costs and to standardize production, and trying to whip up some interest by injecting a little sensationalism into  their films by sailing a little closer to the wind.
And so it was that all Hollywood's difficulties led somewhat accidentally to what Ralph A. Bauer has described as a period whose movies ‘were perhaps as varied and intriguing’ as the movies produced in any comparably short period in American history.
All that was needed was for one kind of film to do well at the box-office and a new Hollywood format would be established.
It was suddenly realized that films dealing with contemporary city life were doing well and the new realism was born.
Meanwhile the country was plunging into depression.
Nobody was quite sure what that really meant but if it were to mean that audiences were now ready for films which dealt sensationally with sex, crime, and shady city affairs then that was what they were to be given.
It was never a question of somebody saying ‘we have a depression, let's give them depression movies’ but given the new dispensation it was Hollywood's instinct to come up with just that added edge that the age required in its films.
By 1929 the drift towards a new cinema as being picked up by the critics, who eagerly pointed out both what they liked in the new films and what they thought would be well received by audiences.
Frank T. Daugherty was confident that Cosmopolitan-MGM's The Voice of the City would please audiences anywhere not least because the director's ‘crooks, cops, dips, dope-heads, con-men and gang leaders live and move with startling and entertaining reality’.
He was less keen on United Artists' New York Nights but reassured exhibitors that if their audiences ‘liked jazz, murder, sex and whoopee then this should draw them and satisfy them’.
MGM's Dynamite directed by Cecil B. de Mille was for Daugherty nothing more than a torrid melodrama of conventional silliness but he knew that audiences would love the tremendous cave-in of the coal-mine.
A clear pattern was emerging and in 1930 Daugherty could say of RKO's Framed that it offered ‘cafes and apartments after the presently accepted modern mode’ and ‘police autos whining down crowded boulevards, whoopee scenes, police stuff at headquarters, third degree etc., raids and shooting in equal number and of an equal excellence to many already exhibited’.
In the same year UA released Howard Hughes's Hell's Angels .
Writing about this film thirty years later John Clellan Holmes recalled how as an adolescent he had been initiated into manhood by the momentary revelation of ‘the soft, white trembling curve of Jean Harlow's breast’, but even at the time Welford Beaton argued that it had succeeded at the box-office because more than any other picture we have had, it demonstrates that the true mission of the screen is to supply visual entertainment'.
Jean Harlow, alias the teenager Harlean Carpenter from Kansas City, was doing all she could to pull Hollywood out of the slump but in general the more respectable critics were more prepared at this time to  hand the plaudits to the male actors, who were seen very much as the cutting edge of the new realism.
What Daugherty had liked most about New York Nights was the performance of the ex-Broadway actor John Wray as the gangster Joe Pivaldi and he told his readers that this characterization would stay with them for months.
Wray is first seen being chauffeur-driven in his limousine and from that moment until he lies dying on the floor of a Pullman car with a bullet in his stomach and uttering the words ‘Never call a sucker’ his performance for Daugherty was one in which he never stepped out of character and never eased his ‘taut, cat-like, steel-wire tenseness’.
Meanwhile the silliness of Dynamite was offset by Charles Bickford's excellence as the condemned-to-death miner, and Wallace Beery was very much the real thing in The Champ ; for the most part though it was the newcomers who received most praise.
In 1931 Welford Beaton was greatly impressed with Fox-Movietone's Quick Millions and he guessed it would be big box-office not because it was a gangster picture but because it was ‘a good motion picture’ and what was particularly good about it was the acting.
Indeed for Beaton there had been no suggestion of acting for Spencer Tracy, George Raft, and John Wray had ensured that the movie was ‘peopled with human beings’.
Film historians have spent a good deal of time debating the significance of the gangster films and attempting to relate them to the whole ethos of the Wall Street crash and the onset of the depression.
At the time both critics and audiences were fairly certain that what they liked about these films was their wit, their tempo, their sensational hints of violence and sex, their authentic urban feel, and the utterly realistic acting.
The critics went on praising these qualities but even as they did so they began to have quite serious reservations.
They were all too aware of the renewed public campaign for further film censorship but their only response to that was to deplore Hollywood's all too obviously hasty attempt to wrap its gangster and other city films up in some kind of moral message.
It was felt that whatever dramatic realism had been gained in the sociological breakthrough was now being sacrificed.
In 1931 Dalton Trumbo fiercely denounced the growing trend by first declaring after a whole spate of films such as The Miracle Woman that he was ‘beginning to weary of the Salvation Army’ and then by condemning the practice of sermonizing and adding moral prefaces as ‘bad art, bad taste, bad logic and bad box-office’.
Just as depressing, though, was the general failure of Hollywood to move on from certain basic themes and situations and there was a new realization of the industry's tendency to just go on duplicating a successful format.
Even critics who loved the pace and zest of the new films began to feel that night after night they were just sitting through one long gangster film.
What they pleaded for was further experimentation and what they hoped was that the new  techniques and acting styles could be extended to other types of films.
Their enthusiasm for the gangster film was in part a hope that it would be a transitional form and not an atrophied and unchanging product.
As early as 1930 Welford Beaton was indicating the way that Hollywood should develop:
Even as Beaton spoke one director was doing his best to harness the new realism to a more rewarding type of movie.
King Vidor showed with The Champ that he was very much at home in what Hollywood was now establishing as ‘the city’ but not surprisingly he was also taking up other challenges.
His first sound film had been Hallelujah , which he had made for MGM in 1929.
Many subsequent critics have taken up the point made by radical blacks at the time that this was a romantic and pastoral view of the rural South, but several early critics hailed the film as a brilliantly realistic depiction of a whole section of American society.
Welford Beaton thought that its examination of the progress of cotton from field to factory would be of great educational value and he urged distributors to put the film into every motion-picture theatre in the world.
More realistically, though, he conceded that as beautiful as it was as screen art it nevertheless belonged to that category of films ‘which would not enrich their producers’.
The same was true of Street Scene , which Vidor directed for Goldwyn-United Artists in 1931.
Here again was confirmation for Beaton that Vidor was ‘America's bravest director’, very much ‘a student of the Russian and French schools’, but again his great fear was that the film would be a ‘remarkable achievement’ from every standpoint ‘except that of the box office’.
On this occasion Beaton thought that the movie would join the list of those that had ‘paralyzed the box office’ because Vidor had been forced by United Artists to film Elmer Rice's stage play on a very confined studio set, the implication being that this movie of gossip, family disagreements, sidewalk philosophy, and sociological theorizing needed a more realistic and expansive setting.
There is, however, just a little disingenuousness in this argument.
Other critics praised Street Scene : George Blaisdell for instance liked the way in which ‘simple persons have come into their own’ and Photoplay told its readers that here they would find the ‘humour, the pathos and the gripping drama’which they saw again and again in their own lives and in their own newspapers, but then it went on to ask: ‘Will it be box-office?’
Of course Elmer Rice's play had been censored and toned down before coming to the screen but Photoplay still needed to ask whether ‘the public really wants a true cross-section  of life presented as it actually happens’.
Intelligent independent critics like Beaton and popular magazines like Photoplay knew that Vidor's work was good but they also knew that it was not the answer to Hollywood's problems.
‘We hope it goes big,’ said Photoplay of Street Scene , for ‘big money on this would encourage more really excellent pictures’.
These noble sentiments, of course, were only expressed after the question of whether this was what people wanted had been asked.
The essential hypocrisy that has characterized so much modern film journalism was being established.
Vidor was praised even as he was written off as box-office.
His sort of realism just could not be expected to compete with that of the gangster film and especially now with that being offered by James Cagney.
Just as the critics were beginning to complain about overdoses of city life along came Cagney to inject new energy into the genre and in effect to open up a new era for the movies.
The Public Enemy broke all box-office records and forced the critics to think again about the new sociological dimension of the movies.
Edward G. Robinson had been good in the previous year's Little Caesar and there was to be great acclaim for the explicitness of the following year's Scarface but it was Cagney's 1931 performance in The Public Enemy that occasioned the most significant debate.
The film as a whole was quite remarkable with Jean Harlow giving another of her stunning braless roles and with Mae Clark taking a grapefruit in the face in a scene which film historians have interpreted either as an act of sexual debasement or of sexual equality but which contemporary audiences just found thrilling.
It was Cagney's acting, though, which was immediately identified as the most significant aspect of the film.
Hollywood was just beginning to realize that the old phenomenon of stars might have an added significance in a period of depression and there must have been considerable delight in the studios at the alacrity with which the critics took up the subject of Cagney.
James Shelley Hamilton found Cagney's acting ‘stunning’ and ‘remarkable in its vividness and consistency’.
The London Daily Mail's Seton Margrave liked this Irish, red-headed New Yorker who was dangerous when roused and concluded that ‘in the interests of honesty in talking pictures, Mr. Cagney is welcome’.
It was as early as 1932 that Lincoln Kirstein's subsequently very famous appraisal of Cagney as ‘the first definitely metropolitan figure to become national’ appeared and this particular theme was soon taken up in newspapers through America and Britain.
The Cagney phenomenon was remarkable but it was also very complex and of great long-term significance.
Cagney was an authentic city man with impeccable East-Side Manhattan credentials; he was born on the lower East Side but raised in Yorkville and he was fully conversant with the Irish, Italian, German, Scandinavian, and Jewish idioms of his native city but he was also a professional entertainer who graduated through  vaudeville and song-and-dance routines to being a hard-boiled actor.
Soon after making The Public Enemy Cagney was to publicize his battle with Warner Bros over the roles he was being made to play and it became very evident that he was a shrewd and realistic businessman who perfectly understood his commercial and artistic value to the studios.
On both sides it was understood that Cagney was not just a man off the New York street but rather a remarkable screen performer.
The great virtue of Cagney to the Hollywood set-up was that he could realistically depict anger, violence, and meanness without in any way suggesting that he was personally a worthless villain or that the film in which he was appearing was deliberately condoning these unpleasant qualities.
The truth was that Cagney was marvellously photogenic and the combination of his looks and his relentless energy made him come alive in his every role.
The stunning realism that he offered was not that of any old son of an Irish barman from New York but more precisely his own realism, in part natural and in part perfected by the very conscious application of technique.
Once again the movies were proving that they had their own version of what was real.
What the cameras were now discovering and what audiences were now reacting to was Cagney's own reality, a unique one-off reality or presence, albeit of the kind one hopes to run into whenever entering a New York bar.
Here was a living, walking, strutting answer to Hollywood's prayers, for Cagney's personality served to sanction the suggestions of violence that characterized his films.
In social terms these were tough times and certainly there seemed to be a new excitement in the movies.
A genre that had grown out of the need for sensationalism did seem to be striking chords at a time of economic insecurity when cities seemed places of dislocation and when, if nothing else, there was a curiosity about how law-breakers operated.
Robert Warshow was to argue quite rightly that there must have been much vicarious pleasure in the enjoyment of these films for audiences could watch gangsters break the law, use violence, take risks, and die but were free themselves to leave the theatre safely.
In truth one suspects that audiences quite simply enjoyed these films for their pace and wit but Cagney was certainly adding another dimension.
It mattered little whether the plot put Cagney in the right or wrong or how the movie ended or whether the action was wrapped up in a sermon.
Cagney's impact and the thoughts and feelings that he provoked came directly from his own performance before the camera.
Whatever the story-line there was a hero for a new era.
James Shelley Hamilton described Cagney's role in The Public Enemy as being that of a vicious, cruel, hard-boiled rat and yet he concluded that we end up sympathizing with him and feeling ‘that there was something likeable and courageous about the little rat after all’.
In looking for significance some critics took a sociological line but perhaps psychology was a better guide.
As early as 1932 Kirstein had understood that Cagney was ‘cute, half-boy half-man’ and that he suggested nevertheless ‘the delights of violence, the overtones of a semiconscious sadism, the tendency towards destruction, towards anarchy which is the basis of American sex-appeal’.
Even as he charmed Cagney burnt up a nervous restlessness in a way that would have been very familiar to many of his fans.
3 THE PUBLIC ENEMY: CAGNEY, THE AUTHENTIC CITY MAN.
Hollywood had always been able to recruit actors who could authentically depict urban working men and by the end of the silent era Bickford and Beery had almost achieved perfection in suggesting that kind of independence that grew out of a tough upbringing and an even tougher manhood.
The movies of the depression were not to go after that kind of realism.
Cagney's class credentials were as impeccable as those of Bickford and Beery but he was never really to be a worker; he was a city man and it was the pace, wit, style, and electricity of the city that Cagney now seized on as his hallmark.
Nature had endowed him with exceptional vitality and both Cagney himself and Warner Bros quickly appreciated  how that vitality positively crackled before the camera.
In the midst of the depression and a welter of screen bullets and punches Cagney had given a new definition of realism to the movies and this was a definition that Hollywood was delighted to accept.
Soon Otis Ferguson was praising the star system for coming up with personalities like W. C. Fields, Jimmy Durante, Mae West, and now Jimmy Cagney, all of whom offered ‘the sense of real people’ and who were to his mind ‘the best and most honest Americans’that he knew.
Not every critic was happy with Cagney and one can sense that the very way in which he worked out his screen identity irritated some people.
Frank Daugherty saw Cagney's style as just a logical development from that of other gangster types and identified as the most effective of his ‘tricks’ the way in which he could suggest that he was ‘thinking his own thoughts’and ‘reserving his feelings’.
To Daugherty this trick ensured that the audience ‘automatically became his ally’ and it was all therefore very much ‘a matter of showmanship’.
Of course Cagney was a marvellous showman and that was precisely the point, for audiences had shown a predilection for zest and sharpness and a new kind of urban charm and Hollywood was quite prepared to exploit these qualities in its own way.
What really annoyed Daugherty was that critics were applauding The Public Enemy , a movie which seemed to him to be just a very well-cut and scripted melodrama that would serve as good ‘yokel bait’.
In analysing the new acting Ferguson was nearer the mark when he suggested that the movies were now coming up with richer and more vital people but Daugherty's comments serve to remind us that techniques and styles which should have been feeding into a new cinema of experimentation and realism were being used rather to bolster old conventions of melodrama.
The Public Enemy had been a Warner Bros film and that studio soon went on to consolidate its reputation as one specializing in contemporary themes by releasing I am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang .
It is now generally appreciated that Warner Bros had been particularly badly hit by the depression, largely because of the furious rate at which they had acquired movie-houses in the 1920s.
They were now hugely in debt and the standard MGM joke was that the cheap and badly lit contemporary sets were all that Warners could afford.
There was slightly more to it than that, though.
Most of the theatres Warner had acquired were in what was described as the ‘populous East’ and especially in Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York and it could be claimed that the studio knew and needed to know more about industrial America than some of its rivals.
Furthermore there were men at Warners who fully appreciated that a touch of the contemporary might lead to good, entertaining, and successful films-A deliberate Warner Bros policy to produce some social films had emerged and this was encouraged by Jack Warner himself, by his  chief executives, Darryl F. Zanuck and then Hal Wallis, by a small team of directors and writers, and even sometimes by individual actors.
John O'Connor has described how, following up what was a Zanuck initiative, a Warner Bros team had eventually produced I am a Fugitive , a film that outspokenly denounced the Southern chain-gang system by using a true story that had received a great deal of publicity, the studio's gamble on topicality really paying off when the real-life subject of the story was actually rearrested just a few months after the film's release.
This was realism with a vengeance; a true story had been used to depict a very real penal practice and the whole thing was very deliberately set by the studio in a specific historical context.
Depression audiences were given a hero who first fights in the World War and then finds it difficult to settle back into a factory job; this innocent man is then twice sentenced to a chain-gang, the second arrest coming after a period during which he had succeeded as a respectable businessman; the film ends with him still on the run and having now to depend on crime to keep himself alive.
The popular critical response was probably best summed up by Robert Wagner, who gave his readers fair warning:
More thoughtful critics were prepared to hail the film as a breakthrough.
To the National Board of Review's William A. Barrett the film had ‘performed a service on behalf of the dignity and meaning of the art of the American film’ and, with it,
This is a marvellous example of how the new sociological dimension was giving some films a new prestige and a new relevance and thereby gaining Hollywood new friends.
There were yet other critics who were all too aware of what was really going on.
In his review for Vanity Fair Pare Lorentz argued that all the minor characters in I am a Fugitive were caricatures and that the film had been spoilt by the director's decision to make the fugitive a hero and to tell the story through him rather than making the actual prison system the central focus of the film.
He  contrasted this approach with the methods of the best Russian and German directors, who almost certainly would have made a film in which the characters were less important than the system they would be condemning.
Lorentz returned to this point a few months later when he was reviewing Fritz Lang's German film M .
What Lorentz liked about this dramatization of the notorious Düsseldorf sex murderer was that it had all the feel of a newsreel for ‘there is no acting in the picture….
Never for an instant do you say — ah, what an actor!’
His view was that Hollywood could never make such a picture ‘simply because in all America you could hardly collect a hundred actors and put them in a picture and keep them from acting’.
He still had I am a Fugitive in mind and he recalled how in that ‘job’(in itself a revealing word)‘every man and woman within a hundred yards of camera range is acting his head off, figuring that he is a Clark Gable, or a Garbo!’
Having argued this far Lorentz has to go all the way and he was forced to conclude that there will be no American M until Hollywood goes and until ‘independent companies allow their directors to do away entirely with actors, and (which is the only sensible way to manufacture movies at all) pick types and faces off the streets’.
There were several weak points in this critique and perhaps at the very least it can be argued that foreign films with social themes always appear to be more realistic merely because the subject-matter and personnel are new.
More fundamental is the point that there was an actor, a great actor, in M .
This was Peter Lorre's first film but he had been acting for ten years in a career which had begun with his running away from home at the age of 15 and which bore many similarities to the careers of other American and European actors who had arrived in Hollywood already.
In spite of its loose thinking Lorentz's argument really takes us to the nub of the whole Hollywood system.
Whatever the temptation to make films with what Robert Wagner called ‘a strong sociological punch’ there was never any danger that the studios would move away from what were regarded as the essentials of a Hollywood film.
Society was there as a backdrop to drama, melodrama if you like, and that drama could only be presented in terms of individual destinies which had to be resolved satisfactorily in the film itself.
Whether it was the coming of sound and the new pace and sharpness that had then ensued, or whether it was because there was a new social awareness as the depression deepened, undoubtedly audiences now appreciated what was thought of as realism.
In this situation Hollywood was quite prepared to incorporate into its dramas more realistic settings, more identifiable social problems, and more realistic acting.
What Lorentz objected to in American actors both in Hollywood and on the stage was summed up by a director friend of his who spoke of how ‘they have no humility’.
That was exactly the point.
The essence of Hollywood was that it used actors who became real before the camera; they were not ciphers there to be manipulated by an all-powerful director but they were actors who were able to combine natural qualities and varied skills and techniques in such a way as to create an on-camera identity.
The skill of Hollywood was ensuring that the right actor went into the right story.
If the actor was real then the film was real and it worked.
Peter Lorre had left the home of his Jewish family in the Austro-Hungarian Empire to become a travelling player at a time when in a different part of the Empire another Jewish family were training their son to join them as travelling players.
Paul Muni, though, was to arrive in America some thirty-three years before Peter Lorre and he was to develop his skills in New York's Yiddish Theater.
Muni, like his contemporaries Cagney and Edward G. Robinson, went into movies as Hollywood attempted to give a Manhattan sharpness to their product.
His style was very different from the others but like Cagney he was a very intelligent actor with strong views and sound business instincts with regard to the films that he should make.
In later years many critics were to take up Lorentz's implication that in essence I am a Fugitive was a conventional melodrama centred on a romantic hero.
Contemporary audiences would have understood that the film appealed to them on that level but were also aware that the tragedy of the film consisted of an ordinary innocent American being hounded by external events and being forced into failure and crime.
A European director might have made a film explicitly depicting and condemning the chain-gang system and he almost certainly would have suggested that the system was a metaphor for life itself, but Hollywood had made a more accessible and universally popular film by showing an innocent man hounded by a combination of events and social forces of which the chain-gang was the most obviously dramatic.
The very real tragedy was in the fate of one man and what was needed was an Everyman figure who could carry the story by being charming, innocent, ordinary, and haunted and that is what the skills of Muni could give them.
Of course he was not a man straight off the streets with ‘no humility’ but he was a very proud, ambitious, and professional actor who knew very well how to play haunted men.
Lorentz might have been very aware that he was an actor, but for Hollywood and its audiences it was Muni's acting that made the whole ‘job’ permissible, acceptable, intelligible, bearable, and successful.
So there were critical reservations but in general the sociological film was winning Hollywood new friends and helping to fill cinemas.
But, critics apart, there were other groups in society far from pleased with these new departures, and the growing publicity given to ‘hard-boiled’ films now gave new life to the never-ceasing campaign against the movies.
Soon there were many echoes of the old pre-1914 complaints.
Investigations came hot on the heels of the new sound and realistic films and by the time of The Public Enemy and Scarface things were building  to a crescendo.
Hollywood films were now being produced for a society that was debating the impact of film as never before.
Publicity was given to academic investigations whilst journals and organizations attempted to direct film-going by informing potential audiences as to which films they should attend and which ignore.
Much of Hollywood's mass audience would have been oblivious to this but intelligent and respectable film-goers must have been very aware that society was shaping their film-going.
The Payne Fund had sponsored nine investigations in the period between 1929 and 1933 and these observers were all too aware of the impact of the new sociological films and the dangers inherent in further progress in that direction.
Dysinger and Ruckwick found that films already carried ‘a tremendous sanction’ but suggested that with further innovations ‘an irresistible presentation of reality will be consummated’.
What investigators worried about were the effects on the pre-adult of films depicting ‘an exciting robbery, an ecstatic love-scene, the behaviour of a drunkard, and the like’.
Blumer suggested that the motion picture held before the adolescent ‘modes of living and schemes of conduct’ and in a sense organized his needs and suggested lines of conduct, and that this was possible ‘for too many of the pictures are authentic portrayals’.
The investigators were disturbed by the sheer size of the movie audience, and, thinking of that statistic of 115 million people a week, they asked: ‘When has the globe ever known the like?’ and ‘Who could have imagined a population more nearly, more inclusively, unified by a single agency?’
They were concerned most, however, about one section of the mass audience and that was the hard-core army of regular adolescent film-goers who lived in the disorganized city centres, the so-called ‘crowded section’.
Blumer and Hauser maintained that ‘the influence of motion pictures seems to be proportionate to the weakness of the family, school, church and neighbourhood’ and that ‘persons living in high-rate delinquency areas are most subject to influence by the themes of life treated by motion pictures’.
It was in one of New York City's ‘crowded sections’ that Thrasher and Cressey found that ‘the photoplay of Little  Caesar  seemed to have swept certain groups of boys — like a cyclone, leaving a host of consequences’and came across boys who swaggered, threw mock-punches, dressed, and ‘smiled like Cagney’and who went around repeating phrases like ‘You can dish it out but you can't take it.’
Amidst the verbiage and jargon of these investigations were conclusions that must have reflected the fears of many respectable Americans, but what is interesting is that the reports were not entirely negative about the movies as such.
There was an awareness of the appeal and of the potential of film and a strong stress on the need for film to take up new opportunities by treating a broader range of subjects.
Edgar Dale stressed the ‘narrow range of themes’ in motion pictures and condemned their  preoccupation with the rich and criminal.
He suggested that a world modelled on the screen pattern would be one with ‘no farming, no manufacturing, almost no industry, no vital statistics (excepting murder), almost no science, no economic problems and no economics.
In his study of motion-picture advertising, Charles C. Peters estimated that, in a sample of press advertisements and reviews, adjectives demanding attention, denoting size, and challenging pathos were very frequent whilst ‘adjectives denoting reality’ formed the least frequent of some nineteen categories.
He arranged the pictures used in advertising into some fifty categories and found that whilst a representation of men and women embracing was most common there were no representatives at all of people at work.
The movies, as Dr Dale had suggested, had ‘the entire world as their range’ and yet they had settled for a very restricted section.
Investigators were concerned about the exclusion of the normal world and shocked at the preoccupation with aberrant behaviour, but what frightened them most was the failure of the movies to fulfil a clear moral role.
If Forman was right in believing that the movies were ‘a school, a system of education’, albeit as yet‘unlimited, untrammelled and uncontrolled’, and Charters could believe that the ‘motion picture as such is a potent medium for education’, then it was time that something was done.
What must have really alerted concerned Americans was Blumer's conclusion that for the most part the movies dulled discrimination, confused judgement, and stimulated random and unchannelled emotions.
What Hollywood offered was ‘a medley range of vague and variable impressions — a disconnected assemblage of ideas, feelings, vagaries and impulses’ and it followed therefore that the movies were ‘not endeavouring to provide a consistent philosophy of life’.
What troubled Bumer was that Hollywood was ‘not seeking to establish any definite set of values’.
What Hollywood had been doing was living off its wits and trying to survive as best it could but it now responded to this challenge not necessarily by taking Dr Dale's ‘entire world’ as its range but at least by ensuring that there were values in its films.
Hollywood produced many films but it was a small town and the industry as we know it was controlled by a handful of men.
It was not that difficult, then, for the industry to regain its confidence and composure as certain things became clearer.
Most writers have detected a new sense of purpose in Hollywood after 1933 and have related that to a number of factors.
The new public concern about the social impact of movies led the industry yet again to put its own house in order by establishing a new Production Code.
The inauguration of President Roosevelt and the beginning of the New Deal created a new sense of national purpose and encouraged institutions and agencies to rethink their public role, and however bad things were there was at least evidence that movie-going was surviving as a social activity.
All of these things encouraged the movie moguls to put their faith back into entertainment, to make good movies, and to go out looking for new and bigger audiences.
As Robert Sklar has suggested, there was no such thing as a typical depression movie; rather there were a number of formats and an emphasis on production standards and conventions, but now in this new post-1933 dispensation there tended to be far less experimentation.
The industry was no longer floundering and there was far less chance of an idiosyncratic, sensational, or outspoken film.
With the emphasis switching to control over production, to quality, and to quite massive and well-orchestrated publicity campaigns there was less need to rely on the shock value of a new kind of film.
What had appeared as almost revolutionary in terms of content in films made between 1928 and 1932 would now be controlled and integrated into a smoother package.
Bauer was to describe this process as ‘a counter-revolution’ and Roffman and Purdy have seen it as a matter of Hollywood turning ‘to the Right’.
It remains to be seen whether the changes were that dramatic, but the new dispensation was certainly to mean that sociological themes and realism generally would be handled with more care.
Even in the years of floundering and experimentation, Hollywood had ensured that the use of contemporary settings, themes, and issues had been largely governed by conventional dramatic or commercial needs.
What had really occurred was that the Hollywood style had been updated and a large number of films had been located in a more contemporary urban setting.
There had been publicity for occasional outbursts of violence and bad language or for shocking displays of sexuality, but there had never really been a significant breakthrough in terms of outspoken social statement.
There were obviously some men in Hollywood who wanted to make films with sociological relevance and there was obviously an audience for contemporary films as long as they were made according to the normal dramatic conventions and satisfied more general audience expectations.
Roffman and Purdy list a number of new film genres that developed during these years but the vast majority of individual films mentioned did not move very far from what was becoming a stock depiction of the city with its gangsters, ‘modern’ women, and venal politicians and lawyers.
The mastery of a new urban idiom or style was more important than the specific content of any one film, and, as we have seen, anything that departed too far from tradition was not regarded as good box-office.
No film received as much publicity as I am a Fugitive and that was a film more conventional than most critics suspected and which only attacked corrupt and degrading aspects of the South, a part of the country always regarded as a backwater and therefore as relatively easy game.
The use of the terms ‘counter-revolution’ and ‘a turn to the Right’is therefore a trifle misleading and is certainly to misunderstand what had happened in Hollywood before 1933.
What happened after 1933 is that  sociological and realistic films were now made in a very different Hollywood and national context.
In general there was far less emphasis on the city and its problems of law and order, and that particular genre became just one small part of Hollywood's total output.
Of course the ‘genre’ was somewhat doctored now: the forces of law and order had to be given a more positive and heroic role and there had to be far less suggestion of anarchy.
There had been some good gangster films but the long-term significance of the genre lay really in its impact on contemporary American cinema generally, for it had taught Hollywood the dramatic possibilities of urban life.
Paul Rotha was amongst those who argued that crime films did much to change the whole basis of film technique; now the pace was to be crisper, there was more naturalism, and dialogue was lifted out of the ‘doldrums of the photographed play’.
There were relatively fewer pure gangster films after 1933 but there were a large number of social or ‘social-problem’ films although even they remained as only a small percentage of the total Hollywood package.
What was new after 1933 in respect of these films was that they were being made for a nation that was experiencing a new politicization and by a Hollywood that was equally trying to redefine its role within the culture.
There were obviously men in Hollywood who wanted to use social themes, there were audiences who were willing to attend these films, and there were critics who were prepared to praise and even honour these films.
As always, it was Hollywood's custom to work on as broad a front as possible: there should be films for everyone but only on Hollywood's own terms.
For the next few years American audiences were shown aspects of their society that they could never have expected to have encountered at the movies and it must have struck at least some members of the public that film-going had become a more serious business.
The earlier period had aroused many expectations that America was on the verge of a social cinema, but, as the social-problem films of the post-1933 period came along, critics were to be uneasy about many of their characteristics.
Our Daily Bread was released in 1934 and immediately Otis Ferguson contrasted ‘Hollywood's aversion to social content’ to ‘Mr Vidor's preoccupation with it’.
This time Vidor wanted to take up the notion of co-operatives which he had read about in Reader's Digest .
Thalberg was interested but thought that it was not quite MGM's thing as that studio was moving away from its earlier interest in realistic films towards glossier entertainment, and eventually it was Chaplin who arranged the film's release through United Artists, although Vidor had to mortgage his every possession before firm backing was achieved.
Even then the director had to make changes as the backers insisted that the story of an impoverished farmer galvanizing a group of the unemployed into helping make a success of things was combined with a more conventional sex angle.
As a result we are given one of the most blatant examples of a  blonde floozie being added to a film purely for box-office considerations.
Vidor was always to have a special affection for this film but later film historians have had many reservations.
They have generally responded to its gentle evocation of rural America but have seen the action as being essentially melodramatic and the politics confused.
Roffman and Purdy have quite rightly stressed that Vidor's traditional populism gave him sympathy for the underdog, but prevented him from moving towards any collectivist political situation.
Even in this story of co-operation there has to be a hero.
Critical opinion has divided specifically over the film's most famous sequence: to save the commune the men eventually come together to dig a canal and as they dig tension is built up by drumbeats and speeded-up photography.
To John Baxter this was rather ‘solemn mock-Soviet montage’ but others have more rightly seen it as a very effective expression of that energy which ordinary people had in abundance but which the America of 1934 so tragically left untapped.
The idiosyncratic nature of Our Daily Bread was appreciated at the time of its release and was attributed to the obvious conflict between Vidor's convictions and box-office considerations.
Otis Ferguson thought the only real social comment concerned the unemployed and they were rather haphazardly brought together and in any case upstaged by a boy-girl-siren triangle hung on ‘the back of such an old love nag as even Hollywood might be ashamed to take out for a canter’.
It is interesting to compare Ferguson's reaction to Vidor's film with his reaction at much the same time to the newly released It Happened One Night , which Frank Capra had directed for Columbia.
He thought that the Capra film had made ‘greenish grass grow where there was only alkali dust before’ because it consistently preferred ‘the light touch to the heavy’and used actors ‘who are thoroughly up to the work of acting’.
His final reflection was that ‘such a picture cannot be defined at all until we find a way of describing whatever it is that makes first-rate entertainment what it is’.
William Troy in the Nation was similarly unable to find the right words to explain the greatness of It Happened One Night and he suggested that ‘a good photoplay, like a good book or a good piece of music, remains always something of a miracle’ and that ‘beyond a certain point the mind is forced to bow down before its own inability to unravel and put together again all the parts of the shining and imponderable whole with which it is dealing’.
Troy did, however, use one phrase that went a long way to describe the film's great success, for he spoke of how it illustrated that ‘an honest documentation of familiar American actualities becomes in a Hollywood film more absorbing than intrigue in Monte Carlo or pig-sticking in Bengal’.
Capra's film was to be one of the most successful, acclaimed, and important films in the depression period because it was firmly set in contemporary America, but not in an America preoccupied with social problems.
Whereas Vidor had started out with a theoretical  notion and then wrapped it in a melodrama, Capra had started out with a fairly ordinary story and then breathed charm, wit, pace, sex, and reality into it, not least by harnessing the natural talents and showmanship of Claudette Colbert and Clark Gable.
This was the entertainment and the sense of reality that audiences wanted.
Otis Ferguson had immediately spotted the flair of Capra and in reviewing his next film Broadway Bill he spelt out the lesson that Hollywood was rapidly learning:
Ferguson had alighted on what was rapidly becoming Hollywood's formula for entertaining America through its difficult times.
More than any other film,It Happened One Night had pointed the way forward, but, greatly to the surprise of many critics, problem films kept on appearing.
The greatest surprise came when in 1935 Warner Bros released Black Fury , a movie which depicted in a direct and totally unprecedented way the impact of a strike on a coal-mining community.
Black Fury could only have been made at Warner Bros, a studio which had firmly aligned with Roosevelt and the New Deal and which quite clearly believed that there was a market for films which dealt with topical issues and in particular with matters of social justice.
The impetus for the film to be made came from Paul Muni, who was always on the look-out for suitable social themes.
While playing in Pittsburgh, Muni had met Judge M. A. Musmanno, who had written a book on the murder in 1929 of a miner's leader and of the subsequent charges against policemen.
Muni's interest, however, would have come to nothing if there were not men at the studios who shared his enthusiasm for this potentially explosive subject.
It was Abem Finkel, Muni's brother-in-law, who worked out a screenplay from the basis of a draft by Musmanno and a melodramatic comedy about Slavic miners by Harry R. Irving, but there were other supervisors and writers involved and ultimately the vital decisions with regard to the project would have been taken by Jack Warner and his senior executive Hal Wallis.
A note in the Dialogue File provides a clue as to why Warner and Wallis were prepared to indulge Muni on this occasion, for it describes the film as being ‘a red blooded drama of life in the raw, of men of primitive passions made desperate by hunger and deprivation’, ‘a tale of strife and conflict, of greed and self sacrifice, of love and devotion’, and ‘above all, a stirring plea for human justice’.
Warner and Wallis would have judged that the time was ripe for a film about human justice, that there would be a market for a film depicting  the problems of a strike in a coal-town and in an ethnic community, and that any criticism of the subject-matter would either be good for business or would be offset by popular and critical acclaim for the acting of that increasingly marketable star Paul Muni.
There were considerable dangers in the project, but Warner and Wallis would expect their writers to mould the original story-lines into the Hollywood format and any obvious problems would be worked out with the representatives of the various censoring agents who normally read every script prior to production.
‘Abe’ Finkel and his colleagues carried out what the critic Abel Green described as the ‘canny Burbanking’of the material, but there was still a need for intervention by Breen, who asked Wallis to ensure that the film was not a direct attack on conditions in the mines.
In a letter, Breen gave this advice:
The writers were able to accommodate such suggestions because the film that they had in mind would be far more a social melodrama and star vehicle than a detailed comment on the mining industry.
In their publicity for the film, Warner Bros boasted of the way in which the story had grown out of an actual incident and of Judge Musmanno's involvement in the subsequent litigation, and also of how ex-miners had been brought in to ensure authentic mining scenes.
Mention was also made of Muni's great interest in the fate of the Balkan and in particular Slovak communities.
‘Muni was and is sociologically-minded,’ said the press-book, and ‘he had long wished to bring to the American people the picture of these primitive people who worked hard and who died that the wheels of industry might not be stilled’.
Muni was obviously thought of as a major selling point and the public were urged to see this latest offering of the man who ‘appears in fewer films than any of the big stars’.
These lines of advertising were, however, swamped by emphasis on the melodrama, and the Muni posters told prospective customers that ‘You'll see Muni let Loose a Blast of Dynamite’, ‘Her Kisses Made Him — Damned Him — Redeemed Him’ and ‘They Dug Up Hell Ton by Ton — to Make It’.
Exhibitors were advised to invite ‘Muni-Mimickers’ up to the stage and to exploit the film in the following ways:
Like the writers, the publicity boys had done their stuff but their combined efforts were not enough.
The film was banned in Maryland and Illinois, the New York Board demanded changes, and there was a long debate before it was shown in Pennsylvania, the state that had inspired the film and where Warners had vital outlets.
There were powerful lobbies working against the film and perhaps not surprisingly it was given no further publicity in terms of awards or nominations.
Jerome Lawrence has suggested that Hollywood ‘swept it under the carpet’.
Even Muni's name was not enough to sanction this material.
Warner's only chance with Black Fury would have been if the serious critics had hailed it as a masterpiece and as a great breakthrough, but on this occasion the critics were all too aware of the stresses and strains that had been created by the processing of an authentic theme into a melodramatic format.
Americans knew far too much about the reality of strikes to accept a film in which, in the words of James Shelley Hamilton, ‘the trouble arises not from working conditions but from a professional trouble-maker and is solved not according to any principles but by an act of sheer moronic terrorism’.
It was obviously dishonest and disingenuous to try to cash in on a film dealing realistically with labour problems and then to hang the whole action on the villainy of professional racketeers specializing in encouraging strikes before helping to break them.
It was clear to Hamilton that ‘there was never any intention of making a seriously realistic commentary on strike conditions among mine workers, but merely to use such conditions as a vivid and up-to-date background’ for a Muni vehicle.
As a labour film Hamilton thought that it got nowhere and even as a film about a mining community he thought that ‘everything is too neat and tidy and well-ordered to hint at what actual conditions may be’.
All we are left with in this critic's eyes is the drama of one simple and honourable man created by what seemed at first a ‘carefully studied impersonation’ but what became a very moving performance by Muni.
Most other critics found that it was a case of the novelty of a labour film and the intensity and charm of Muni's acting being overwhelmed by melodrama, but there was at least one critic who saw Black Fury as a step forward.
Otis Ferguson was aware that the film depicted a ‘phony strike’ and that there was no real analysis of labour-management problems but he still felt that it had ‘this air of life whatever we may think of its social content’.
He was struck by the way in which Muni had depicted the suffering, the bewilderment, and the anger of a simple man, by the way in which the atmosphere and pressures of a strike-bound community had been created, and above all by the reality of the violence, which was a thing ‘that shrieks along a man's nerves and  settles in his stomach’.
He was quite prepared to hail this as a ‘great film’, for if critics were prepared to lavish that term ‘on any half-chewed jumble of stills that comes in from abroad, then I am in favour of loosening up with it on the home front’.
With Black Fury Warner Bros had wandered into deep water and there were obviously important lessons to be learnt from the major row that the film had occasioned.
The studio could see that labour-management relations were not a suitable theme for feature films and no attempt was ever made to repeat this particular experiment.
In Men of Iron , released in 1935, Warner Bros attempted to use the steel industry in much the same way as they had earlier used the coal industry.
Again the action focused on a strike but this time the melodramatic story, in which all the trouble was precipitated by the boss's nephews and a socially ambitious foreman promoted above his station, was so farcical as to almost sink the film without trace.
In several respects, though, the fate of Black Fury had confirmed basic Warner Bros notions and they continued to pick up ideas for movies from the daily papers, they went on believing that social melodrama could be profitable, and they had been given further evidence that Muni could win acclaim by projecting himself as a hard-done-by but eventually triumphant saint.
With Black Fury Warner Bros had just gone a little too far by even referring to strikes and labour problems at a time of mounting industrial tension but the popular and critical reception to the movie showed that the company were not wrong to believe that they had the technical ability and the actors to make films whose reality would be appreciated.
The fact that Black Fury had been too controversial and yet too muddled to scoop up the prizes did not mean that it was time for Warner Bros to stop being ‘sociologically-minded’.
Meanwhile other studios were learning much the same lessons, albeit for somewhat different reasons.
If Warner Bros felt some duty to argue for justice in their films there were people in other studios who thought that the vogue for realistic films could be used to condemn radicalism and militancy.
United Artists were tempted to point out the dangers of Communism and released Red Salute , which dealt with the growing appeal of Communism for student leaders.
Of course the message had to be wrapped in a fairly light romantic story but at the time of the opening there was concern that publicity was concentrating too much on the comedy and not enough on the ‘timeliness’ of the film.
One distributor asked for more direct satire to be used and suggested catchlines like ‘She was not as red as she painted herself.’
Contrary advice came in from Nashville where the film was doing well and where the upshot seemed to be that ‘the only way to sell Red Salute is as a gay romantic comedy’.
In many places the film opened to boycotts and demonstrations but several distributors suggested that these could have been avoided by the use of a more innocent title along the lines of It Happened in Mexico .
Meanwhile  MGM went even further and harnessed the considerable talents and appeal of Spencer Tracy and Jean Harlow in Riff Raff , which attempted to show how simple San Francisco fishermen could be led into militancy by a Communist agitator.
Again this film led to boycotts and demonstrations and seemed to confirm that to make propaganda films was to invite box-office coolness and critical hostility.
In 1935 it might have seemed as if Hollywood was moving into a period of labour and political films but such was not the case.
A very tiny handful of totally unrepresentative films achieved a certain notoriety but were in general lost sight of as attention focused on better films and in any case they were to represent a dead-end rather than a way forward.
Conventional Hollywood thinking in the late 1930s was summed up a few years later by Raymond Moley when he was discussing the general ethics of the Production Code.
According to Moley what Hollywood had learnt was that ‘when narrative art ventures on the ideological battlefield, it enters a dark and bloody ground’ and that the safest bet was ‘to stay on the broad highway of pure entertainment’.
The most obvious incentive towards entertainment was ‘the fact that the industry stands at all times in the presence of a high court with unlimited jurisdiction — the people before the box office’ and from that court ‘there is no appeal’.
What had influenced Hollywood, thought Moley, was the ample evidence that ‘the generality of the public takes its movies seriously and is adversely responsive to any effort which offers the least suspicion that they are being used for some purpose other than entertainment’ and that in particular‘nothing hurts a picture's chance of success more than the whisper that it contains propaganda’.
This was the thinking that led Hollywood to move away from labour disputes and political ideas.
For the rest of the decade the working classes were only depicted in a small number of undistinguished films which celebrated or exploited the skills of particular groups of workers.
The urge to cash in on contemporary themes remained, however, and another small group of films attempted to dramatize these issues in a way that would avoid the pitfalls of labour films.
Warner Bros remained committed to social drama and their ideas boys eagerly perused the papers for potential stories.
The evidence suggests that the writers were already considering a cheap grade ‘B’ picture about Ku-Klux-Klan and Black Legion activities when the notorious trial of four workmen in Detroit made executions carried out by such organizations a matter of national attention.
Warner Bros immediately started a press file on the Detroit hearings and the testimony as well as the photographs of the participants were closely inspected.
Legal advice as to what extent the actual iconography and style of the real-life legions could be used was taken at every stage.
The eventual movie Black Legion followed the detail of the Detroit story in many respects although the idea of a member of the jury actually being recognized as a member of the Legion as had  happened in Detroit was dropped.
The authenticity of the film was stressed in all the publicity and much was made of the fact that not only had the trial scenes been shot at the same time as the judge was carrying out the Detroit sentences but the film actually used his own words.
Of course the studio hoped that the film would succeed as melodrama and much of the publicity stressed its entertainment value.
One poster announced that: ‘It screams — it screeches from the screen — the shock-packed sensations that blazed a trail of headlines America will never forget — filmed by Warner Bros with all the fire and fury of G-Men and Fugitive .’
Exhibitors were advised to have hooded figures with torches in their lobby and even to consider on opening day having ‘a comedian carried out of the theatre on a stretcher by two hooded figures, and into an ambulance’, the stunt to be pulled ‘every hour or so,.
Such crassness was inevitable but for all that the Warner Bros team had come up with a powerful film.
The production team, which again included writers Robert Lord and Abem Finkel, had made a film which depoliticized the Legion by making its motive force sheer racketeering rather than political control and by making the violence and executions personal rather than political but nevertheless they had come up with a realistic depiction of how a weak man could be drawn into a recognizably Fascist organization.
The Warner brothers themselves were vehemently against racist organizations and they could be proud of the movie.
The publicity spoke of there being no lesson in the film: Bogart was quoted as saying that ‘if there is one thing that has no place in theatrical show it is an attempt to preach’, but no member of the audience could miss the point of this film.
The depiction of the Legion itself might not have been truly authentic but what gave Black Legion much of its initial impact was that the story with all its political message and melodrama was very firmly set in a very real community of American working men.
The press-book heralded Black Legion as the ‘Truest To Life Film Ever Made’ and if this claim was meant to refer to the actual Detroit trial it was to the settings of the film that the most audiences would have applied it.
In the photograph that the studio had acquired the four men brought to trial in Detroit look out at us almost belligerently announcing their status as ordinary guys; they wear poor suits and no ties, they are unshaven, and they clutch their hats.
The script file described how the movie would show the impact of a coercive group on ‘an ordinary man’ and would be set in what was interestingly referred to as ‘a lower middle-class suburban neighbourhood of an industrial town’.
The synopsis continues:
Robert Lord's basic story-line provided a marvellous portrait of an ordinary worker and a very telling ‘explanation of the roots of political prejudice’ but these details had to be made real on film.
The actual movie starts with a stock all-purpose flash of a steel-mill although the subsequent factory shots are quite obviously a Burbank studio.
More important in suggesting realism is Taylor's neat suburban home and cheap car, which would have surprised British workers and American workers living in coalfields and Eastern industrial areas but which nicely reflect conditions in prospering auto towns.
The home is modestly plain inside with the radio as the only luxury and the Taylor family conversation is punctuated with constant references to the hardships of the depression, the debts that had been accumulated, the struggle to get the mechanic's job in the factory, and the need for Frank to get the foreman's job if there is to be further improvement.
The whole setting is thoroughly authenticated and everything leads nicely into Frank's deep resentment as a worker of Polish extraction gets the promotion that should have been his.
Ultimately, though, all of this setting and development depended on the acting and this is where Warner Bros could really score.
‘We cast for type not names’ said director Archie Mayo and it was this that clinched the film's impact.
Mayo went on to explain his selections:
4 BLACK LEGION: BOGART ENSURES THAT ‘FRANK TAYLOR IS AN ORDINARY AMERICAN WORKINGMAN.’
This was Bogart's seventeenth film (The Petrified Forest had been his eleventh) and one of the first in which he gave some indication of his range.
Perhaps it is hindsight which has allowed us to understand fully the sheer technique that went into Bogart's acting but many people at Warners could see Mayo's point that he was just the type of actor needed to breathe life into the kind of story that the writers were making into a speciality.
It was acting of this quality that brought the company's films alive.
James R. Silke was to refer to how Warners offered ‘heroes made from life’ and Janet Graves has explained how the rigid financial limits imposed at the studio placed a premium on good dialogue and good acting.
It was, she explained, ‘a man's studio, a writer's and an actor's studio’ and out of this combination came that formula that was so ‘stridently American’.
We can add that it was ‘stridently American’ because it was realistically American.
James Shelley Hamilton thought Black Legion was an exceptional film precisely because it was ‘one of the best expositions of what genuine Americanism is and is not what the screen has produced’.
What Hamilton could see was that the talents of Warner Bros had combined to produce a film that was not so much about the Legion as ‘about the kind of short-sighted, uninformed and well-enough-meaning men who have to be given an understanding of what democracy really is so that they will not go on and on providing tools for such legions’.
Warner Bros had once again profitably combined instruction and entertainment but as was so often the case it was the way in which they had used an actor that made the movie work in both respects.
Not that the film worked for every critic.
Otis Ferguson was not entirely convinced by Black Legion as he thought it too gloomy (with appeal only for the ‘O'Neill audience’), too jerky in its action, ultimately too indecisive and somewhat lacking in political specifics.
In truth what really shaped his view was the comparison between Mayo's film and Fury , which was released by MGM at much the same time.
Several films of the 1930s were to deal with the very real and widely condemned phenomenon of lynching and in 1935 MGM had finally allowed their imported genius Fritz Lang to make this story after several years of waiting.
Lang's film was immediately hailed as a masterpiece especially with regard to its frighteningly real depiction of the prejudices and hysteria that lay waiting to be released in a typical Midwestern town.
Even this product of genius was flawed as it trailed away into melodrama but for a fleeting moment Hollywood was shown what could be achieved if its resources were used as the basis for a director's cinema.
Of course Lang's movie was far more interested in psychology than sociology but there were other differences too:Fury was a one-off movie whereas the more pedestrian and less ambitious Black Legion was part of a continuing Hollywood tradition.
The first half of Fury was virtuoso cinema, whereas Black Legion was part of a developing movie culture.
In this respect Ferguson thought that the Warner Bros film was a good indication of what could be achieved by Hollywood when it tackled social problems honestly and he summed it up by returning to one of his favourite points about Hollywood that ‘even half a loaf on the national stomach is at least nourishment taken in’.
Ferguson had developed this notion of ‘half a loaf’ in reply to those left-wing critics who condemned both Hollywood's lack of political detail and its slickness.
What the New Republic was calling for was a fuller appreciation by the left of what necessarily constituted entertainment and of what Hollywood had actually achieved.
The radicals were also concerned about detail whereas Ferguson could see that ‘movie people tend to understand things in surface terms’ and that their ‘command of surfaces is supreme’.
What Ferguson had found and what the left just could not see was that when Hollywood really tried they produced a thing that ought not be pedantically analysed for ‘the thing exists by itself for its moments on the screen, unquestionable’.
For a variety of reasons and motives Hollywood had floundered towards some kind of realism.
That shift of emphasis had created amongst many people an expectation of a more fully developed social cinema.
Throughout the 1930s Hollywood was to make films condemning various abuses and malpractices in the American system and there were always to be films which clung to the conventions of the city film as they had emerged in the early part of the decade.
In general, however, the various studios were happy to move into an era of more varied entertainment.
The political and social context and the popular mood seemed to demand an upbeat cinema but this cinema was not to be a cinema of fantasy or make-believe but rather it was a cinema created in the image of its audiences.
The times had called for a certain mood but it was the genius of American cinema that it could harness the talents of actors and actresses whose every word and gesture rooted the films in the society for which they had been produced.
People went to the movies for many reasons but not least because they wanted to see stories which starred very real and very attractive Americans.
The Hollywood formula guaranteed entertainment but it was essentially the actors who gave film audiences precisely the authenticity and reality that they required.
What ‘sociological punch’ had amounted to was that actors could still make films work.