

The School Framework
A Model to Link Personality Characteristics to a Preference for Science
John Head
Introduction
In recent years there has been a steady accumulation of evidence that personality and allied affective factors play a crucial role in determining subject choice and student success.
Unfortunately, this evidence has tended to be fragmentary, a collection of separate, discrete pieces of information lacking a synthesizing theory to provide cohesion and predictive power.
The few models which have been developed to date may have been correct as far as they go but are clearly incomplete.
For example Roe (1952), Eiduson (1962) and McClelland (1962) suggested that male scientists often experienced a lonely childhood, perhaps suffering social isolation through illness or family circumstances, so that they developed a strong interest in their surrounding material world and a below average interest in other people and relationships.
Maslow (1966) and Hudson (1966 and 1968) saw science as providing an emotionally undemanding activity appealing to boys moving from the calm of latency to the turbulence of adolescence.
Even if these descriptions are valid they still leave open a number of questions, particularly why the same mechanisms do not operate with girls.
Arising from the evidence in the literature and from our empirical studies at Chelsea College it is now possible to offer a model which is compatible with all the evidence and which also has considerable predictive potential.
What we know about persons choosing science
The evidence for an association between personality characteristics and an interest in science has been more fully reviewed by Head (1979).
We need now only take note of the most salient features.
The most obvious one is that of sex differences.
The predominance of males, particularly in the physical sciences and engineering, throughout the Western world can no longer be satisfactorily attributed to cognitive differences, which are too small, nor to institutional factors.
Equal opportunity in education and employment has not made science any more popular with women.
Furthermore, the characteristics of those students who do opt for science show clear sex differences.
Male scientists, both science students and mature, professional scientists, tend to be emotionally reticent, disliking overt emotional expression in others and themselves, and depending upon their partners in personal relationships to take the emotional initiatives.
They will also tend to be authoritarian, conservative and controlled in their thinking.
These differences can be seen quite early on; we have found boys aged 14 years who were opting for science to be significantly more authoritarian than their peers.
Girls choosing science are not particularly emotionally reticent or rigid in their thinking, although they do seem to have low self-esteem in terms of being socially and sexually attractive.
We also know that at about the age of 13 a very high proportion of boys are attracted to science and scientific careers.
Thereafter, there is a steady decline of interest in science and this disillusionment extends right through the secondary-school years and into the undergraduate period.
In contrast, only a minority of girls express an interest in science at any age but there is no obvious swing from science in the middle and late teens.
Some further evidence has come from our use of sentence completion tests with secondary-school pupils as part of our research programme at Chelsea.
Analysis of these responses provides further information on sex differences and between those opting for different subjects.
For example, girls at the age of 12 and 14 years seem to take a more mature attitude to personal relationships, seeing their complexity and reciprocal nature, while boys are more exploitative.
In relation to the sentence stem ‘A girl and her mother…’, girls often produce responses like ‘often go through a bad patch for a year but once they learn to understand each other, become the best of friends’ or ‘can help each other with their problems’.
Similar questions, when asked of boys, tend to produce banal responses or exploitative ones, for example the parent is seen as the source of money.
In contrast, boys seem to have a firmer self-identity and a clearer ambition showing more insight in response to sentence stems such as‘My main problem is…’ and ‘He/she felt proud that…’.
Such findings give us some clues about the characteristics of boys and girls of these ages.
If we compare boys of 14 years of age who opt for science with other boys, we find that the former have very cut-and-dried views on many issues.
For example, they take the view that ‘criminals should be severely punished’ or that ‘anyone who is unpopular deserves his fate’.
To the sentence stem ‘When a child will not join in group activities…’, these boys gave responses like ‘he is selfish’, ‘he must be stupid’, ‘he deserves to be unpopular’.
In contrast, other boys and most girls pondered the possible causes and ways of integrating the child into the group.
The science boys seemed to possess few doubts or uncertainties, they offered clear-cut answers.
It was this evidence which suggested the possible model for subject choice in terms of ego-identity achievement.
Ego-identity in adolescence
This model was originally postulated by Erikson (1965) and then developed by Marcia (1966 and 1976).
Erikson suggests that at different phases of life an individual faces a particular psycho-social problem which needs to be resolved before moving on to the next phase.
For adolescents the acquisition of a clear ego-identity is the crucial task.
At the beginning of adolescence, the individual is a  dependant within the family and the school.
By the end of adolescence he [or she]needs to make choices about career, life-style, personal relationships and ideologies.
The ego-identity of that person is shaped by these choices.
Erikson does not suggest that the development of an ego-identity is a once-and-for-all issue.
Some problems about identity arise with the young child in the context of home and school, and others occur in later life, for example on retirement.
Nevertheless, adolescence is the time when ego-identity development inevitably dominates the personal development of the individual for a while.
The adolescent does not, however, need to achieve a clear ego-identity on all topics at one time.
He [or she]may have a clear identity in respect to his [or her]career but still be unresolved in regard to personal relationships and ideology.
In this article we are concerned with ego-identity achievement in respect to career.
Marcia has put more detail onto the Erikson model and suggests that in going from the initial ego-diffusion condition to that of having achieved ego-identity, two processes are involved:crisis and commitment .
Crisis in this context describes a period of intensive self-examination in which one's beliefs and values are re-examined.
Commitment means that the individual has acquired clear and firm beliefs both about himself [or herself]and the world.
Figure 16.1 indicates a number of possible routes to ego-identity achievements.
A person may undergo crisis and commitment simultaneously and progress by route A. An alternative is to undergo a period of considerable self-doubt and self-examination in which all one's beliefs tend to be very fluid, a period known as moratorium, before acquiring beliefs for oneself and ego-identity is achieved (route B).
A further possibility is that the individual may, at least for a time, hold onto beliefs and values taken without question from others, for example parents, teachers, peers.
This condition is known as   foreclosure.
Eventually these persons might have to face up to a period of crisis, of self-examination, and so achieve ego-identity by route C. However, foreclosure does offer an escape route and an individual might postpone indefinitely any real self-examination by clinging rigidly to his [or her]beliefs and values (route D).
Ego-identity and Choosing Science
We can now make the link between this model of adolescent development and subject choice in schools.
For boys at the foreclosure stage, science is likely to be appealing.
The physical sciences in particular, offer a conventional career choice which is likely to win approval from parents, teachers and peers.
They will tend to regard the overt expression of emotions, including much such expression in the arts, as being soft and feminine.
Science, with its masculine image, makes little emotional demand on an individual and seems to offer clear, precise answers to problems.
Opting for science will permit and possibly reinforce emotional reticence.
For a girl at the foreclosure stage the situation is very different.
There is evidence that girls tend to be socialized into adult roles more through their potential of becoming a mother and housewife than through their career (Douvan and Adelson, 1966).
Furthermore, these girls will tend to go into a career with a feminine image, one which already attracts many girls.
Consequently, very few girls at the foreclosure stage will enter science unless they receive considerable encouragement and a model to do so from their parents and their school.
Neither boys nor girls at the moratorium stage are likely to be attracted to the science that is usually presented in our schools.
They are at a stage when they are likely to be concerned with a variety of complex issues; the meaning of life, the existence of God, ideologies, their emerging sexuality, their future career and life-style — too often science is seen as being purely instrumental with nothing to contribute to these debates.
Science, somehow, seems to be scarcely relevant to the most important issues in our life.
A proportion of both boys and girls at ego-identity achievement stage will choose science.
In fact, most girls entering science are probably at this stage as they will need some self-examination and sense of commitment to make this unconventional choice.
However, only a minority of adolescents will have reached the ego-identity achievement stage at the age when most pupils have to make crucial decisions about subject choice at school.
This model seems to explain our observations.
A large number of boys, particularly at the foreclosure stage, are initially attracted to science but there is a drift away throughout later adolescence as they undergo some crisis.
The preponderance of boys at the foreclosure stage will yield the rigid, authoritarian attitudes often associated with scientists.
The few girls who enter science will not usually show these foreclosure characteristics.
Effects of Curriculum Changes
The real use of this model linking personality development to subject choice is that it allows us to make predictions about how pupils might react to changes in school science curriculum and school organization.
We can consider three possible changes:
1
Delaying subject choice : Britain is unusual in asking pupils to make crucial choices about subject options in the 13–16 age range.
These decisions can only be reversed with great difficulty.
What effect would delaying the choice make?
In the development through the years of adolescence the number of foreclosure pupils will diminish, hence the recruitment of boys into science would be cut.
More boys and girls will have reached the ego-identity achievement stage and a proportion of these will go into science.
Overall there would be a reduction in the number of students choosing science, but those who do so choose will be more likely to stay happily in the subject and to possess more flexible minds.
The quantitative loss would be met by a qualitative improvement.
2
Giving science a more feminine image : It is sometimes argued that science textbooks are sexist in showing illustrations of boys, rather than girls, doing practical work in the laboratory, and so forth.
What effect would a  deliberate attempt to change this image have?
It might make it easier for girls at the foreclosure stage to accept science so recruitment might increase.
Some of these girls might, however, drift away again when they reach their crisis period.
Unless the change in image was immense, boys would probably not be affected, science would still be an obvious, acceptable choice for a boy.
Overall there would be some increase in the recruitment of girls, but no qualitative improvement.
3
Emphasizing the applications and relevance of science : To obtain a major qualitative improvement to recruitment in science with more girls and with students possessing imaginative, flexible minds it would be necessary to make science appealing to boys and girls at the moratorium stage.
In that event science must be seen to be relevant to the issues which concern them.
The probable implication is that science would need to be presented in the context of the needs of society and individuals.
Probably a case-study approach involving the application of science, and the interaction with other disciplines, would be needed.
Our knowledge about the girls' concern with personal relationships suggests that the introduction of some elements of the social sciences into the case studies might prove attractive.
Is it possible to change school science in this fashion and still preserve the essential character of science itself?
Clearly there would need to be some drastic pruning of content.
Perhaps science teachers should not attempt to cover their subjects so comprehensively.
A history teacher is content to cover the history of one country or continent over a few decades.
Perhaps we must make similar choices.
It is interesting to notice that the Association for Science Education (1979) policy statement in Britain and the proposals on school physics coming from the Institute for Science Education (IPN) in Kiel are advocating such changes.
The difference is that we are now offering a formal psychological model to suggest that if we want to reduce the current encapsulation of science, if we want to recruit a different sort of student, then certain curriculum changes are needed.
Girl Friendly Science and the Girl Friendly School
Judith Whyte
Approximately three times as many boys as girls take O level physics and approximately four times as many take CSE physics.
Over 90 per cent of entries in all technical subjects are from boys.
This means that schoolgirls are ineligible for a wide range of courses in further and higher education and for entry to occupations requiring a scientific or technical base.
Female exclusion from science and technology, even if it is apparently by girls' own choice, also means that as citizens their ability to understand and control their environment is limited.
Nevertheless, most schools consider they are already providing equal opportunities by neutral treatment of the two sexes (Bloomfield, 1984).
In effect, ignoring the effects of gender in this way merely reinforces stereotyping because it does nothing to challenge the definition of certain aspects of the curriculum as masculine or feminine.
Girls Into Science and Technology (GIST) was the first major schools-based project addressing problems of sex stereotyping at school, and was an example of ‘action research’ in education; the project simultaneously took action to improve girls' achievement in science and technology and investigated the reasons for their under-achievement.
The project team collaborated with teachers in eight co-educational comprehensive schools in the Greater Manchester area to devise and implement intervention strategies designed to improve girls' attitudes to the physical sciences and technical subjects.
Two other schools were involved as controls where attitude testing but no interventions took place.[…]
The approach was collaborative: teachers were invited to work with the team as equal partners in the attempts both to investigate and find solutions to the GIST problem.
However, very few of the teachers even recognized the issue as one of professional concern at the start of the project, and most of the first  two years was spent in establishing the educational importance of the issue and working towards the development of feasible intervention strategies.
The project and its outcomes have been fully described elsewhere (Smail et al .,
1982; Kelly, Whyte and Smail, 1984; Whyte in press).
GIST had more success in altering children's attitudes than their subject choices, suggesting that it is easier to change attitudes and beliefs than actual behaviour.
Pupils in action schools became markedly less stereotyped than pupils in control schools.
They also had slightly more positive attitudes towards science and scientists and were less likely to define them as exclusively masculine.
Despite some evidence of change in teachers' attitudes and behaviour, they themselves were reluctant to admit that the project had influenced them.
According to an evaluation report this may reflect an unwillingness to admit that in the past schools have been sex biased (Payne, Cuff and Hustler, 1984).
The GIST hypothesis was that female under-achievement in science and technology is at least partly socially constructed by the school, an hypothesis based on research evidence as well as critical feminist analysis (see, for example, Kelly, 1981).
During the project there was a shift away from locating the issue as one of girls' motivation towards attempts to change the nature of school science.
One of the main gains from the GIST project has been the clarification of what is meant by a ‘girl friendly’, science, that is a science which will appeal equally to the interests and concerns of girls as well as boys.[…]
Making Science More Girl Friendly
Several interventions were designed to make science more girl friendly.
Schools and teachers tried curriculum development to build on girls' science interests, changing patterns of classroom interaction, single sex groups and classes.
The largest scale intervention was the VISTA programme, which consisted of women scientists and technologists visiting schools to talk to children about an aspect of their jobs already being covered in the school science syllabus.
VISTA made science more girl friendly in two ways: both boys and girls were offered an attractive image of a competent woman scientist, and talks concentrated on social and industrial applications of science, an element too often missing from science at school.
One school was so impressed by the children's positive reactions that they completely revamped the science work in the first two years to include more social and human applications of science.
The survey of children's attitudes helped here: research such as Ormerod's (1971; Ormerod and Duckworth, 1975) had shown that girls were interested in the social implications of science, but did not tell teachers what the desirable teaching approach might be in practice.
Would science in the home be a starter?
A question from our survey asked children whether they would like to know more about how a vacuum cleaner works; hardly anyone did, and girls were even less curious than boys.
This told us that any simplistic assumptions about featuring ‘female’ domestic interests in science would  probably meet with failure.
The rest of the questionnaire about science curiosity showed that all the children were enthusiastic about learning science, and that girls were keen to know more about nature, the environment and medical science.
Over 50 per cent, and in some cases over 60 per cent said they would like to learn about the human heart, germs and illnesses, how our muscles work, what food is good for you, life in the sea, what makes a rainbow appear and how a record is made.
It was helpful that these topics also interested boys.
At present the science curriculum is structured around physical science interests, on which boys are keener (how motor cars work, atoms and molecules); we were able to recommend that teaching build on the overlapping interests of the two sexes, because girls as well as boys want to know more about human biology and spectacular features of the environment (animals in the jungle, volcanoes and earthquakes, acids and chemicals).
The less immediately attractive parts of science could be approached through these interests, for instance teaching ‘forces’ by beginning with the action of muscles in the human arm, and ‘light’via the dissection of a bull's eye.
When women scientists employ such approaches, and describe their own work, as happened during the VISTA programme, girls are receiving double encouragement.
These examples indicate some of the features of girl friendly science: it builds on girls' interests, not just boys'; it explicitly encourages girls to see themselves as potential scientists, and it includes some of the social and human implications and applications of science.
Other GIST Interventions
All the GIST schools were mixed comprehensives, and at first teachers were most unwilling to separate boys and girls at all, on the grounds that it ran counter to their co-educational comprehensive philosophy.
Then certain teachers were particularly struck by the evidence of large differences in the interests and experience children brought with them to school.
Girls had far less ‘tinkering’ experience than boys and the connection with their lesser interest in topics like ‘how electricity is produced’seemed obvious.
Several special science or craft clubs were organized in the lunch hour for girls only and in two schools teachers planned single-sex teaching.
As we shall see, it was in these two schools that the largest measurable changes of attitude and option choice occurred.
For a more girl friendly science, it seems vital that teachers should come to see that when all the masculine packaging, evident in textbooks and resources as well as teachers' and boys' behaviour in the classroom, is removed, girls can be very enthusiastic about science.[…]
Alison Kelly sees at least four distinct senses in which it can be argued that science is masculine.
First, the pupils, teachers and practitioners of science are overwhelmingly male in terms of numbers; second, school science is packaged and presented to appeal to boys, not girls; third, classroom behaviours and interaction operate to reconstruct science as a male activity, and  finally it has been suggested that ‘scientific’ thinking embodies an intrinsically masculine world view.
The GIST interventions described above relate to three of these: VISTA women, albeit briefly and temporarily, redressed the numerical balance by offering female role models of practising scientists; VISTA and the curriculum development which followed involved a limited ‘repackaging’ of science to remove its exclusively masculine appeal, and the single-sex classes and classroom observation showed how science comes to be defined as ‘masculine’in the mixed school.
The fourth point, the idea that science is intrinsically masculine, can be sustained only by clinging to an irredeemably narrow conception of science and scientific thinking.
The industrial and social impact of science on health, on people, on the environment, a focus on the beauty and complexity of the natural world, are notable omissions from the school science syllabus.
Girls are not uninterested in science, they are bored by the limited version of it they meet in school.
One of the purposes of an extended period of single-sex science teaching might be to let teachers see how girls approach scientific matters, and to discover, what may well be the case, that girls are just as capable of ‘scientific thinking’ as boys.
Margaret Spear, in a different study from the one reported in this volume, found that for identical work boys were marked higher than girls for supposed understanding of principles, aptitude for science and O level suitability (Spear, 1984).
Outcomes
Children enjoyed the VISTA visits according to the questionnaire returns in the third year; they liked meeting scientists and learning about a range of jobs.
Girls were slightly more positive than boys.
Overall, the attitudes of children in the action schools where all the interventions took place became noticeably more liberal, especially on sex role and occupational stereotypes and the ‘masculinity’ of science.
In general, attitudes to science itself became more negative.
This is a universal phenomenon (Gardner, 1984).
Children begin secondary school with high expectations of science, but become disillusioned and uninterested, especially in physics.
However, the decline in science interest was less marked in GIST action than in control schools, indicating a possible causal effect of the VISTA visits and other interventions, and on boys as much as girls.
It appears that if girls' interests are catered for, if teachers become aware of the need for careful classroom management to ensure girls' participation, if the social and human implications of science and technology are stressed, girls will respond positively.
There will continue to be problems if science teachers are personally doubtful about girls' ability to do science well; even if their doubts are not voiced (and anecdotal evidence suggests they sometimes are), girls are unlikely to respond unless teachers show they believe that girls have something to offer science as well as the reverse.
The significant difference between action and control schools concerning attitudes was not matched by an action/control difference in option choices.
In most schools the percentage of girls choosing physics in the GIST cohort increased in comparison with previous years.
However, the increase in control schools was as large as in the action schools!
The girl friendly school
Unfortunately the pattern of option choice and attitude differences is not perfectly matched within each school.
That is to say, certain action schools were successful in changing attitudes, while others were successful in shifting option choices.
Only one school was successful on both counts.
The implication is that pupil attitude change is not sufficient on its own to ensure that pupils will actually make non-traditional option choices.
Presumably the major mediating factors are the teachers, and the school, concerned.
Teacher Attitudes
[…]
The most interesting aspect of the teachers' response is their unwillingness to admit to any change of attitude or practice as a result of GIST.
Yet both the field notes and the evaluation report provide clear evidence that the staff had become much more aware of, and informed about, girls' under-achievement in science and technology and the possible actions which schools could take.
Many mentioned the practical steps they had already devised: altering curriculum materials, deliberately avoiding the use of stereotyped language, studying patterns of classroom interaction and thinking of ways to increase girls' participation.
The evaluators noted the grudgingness of teachers to admit to changes in their own beliefs or practices and ascribed it to an unwillingness to accept the implied criticism that previous practice had, even unintentionally, discouraged girls.
A national survey of teachers' attitudes to equal opportunities found that men were more likely to be opposed to promoting equal opportunities than women, but that differences in subject taught were more important than the sex of the teacher in determining his or her attitude.
Teachers of maths, physical science and crafts were the least in favour of greater equality (Pratt, Bloomfield and Seale, 1984).
Spear also found in a study of teachers' attitudes to girls and technology that the most sex-differentiated replies came from science teachers (Spear in this volume).
On both counts, of sex and subjects taught, the GIST teachers were the least promising group which could have been chosen to promote sex equality.
Alison Kelly worked with some of her students to carry out a minor evaluation of changes in GIST teachers' attitudes in comparison with a national sample (Kelly et al .,
1984).
Women again proved to be more emphatic about  sex equality than men, and London teachers were more feminist than others.
GIST teachers were slightly less traditional and more in favour of equality of the sexes than other teachers.
Teachers in GIST schools were also slightly more likely to agree with statements suggesting that girls ‘lose out’ in classroom interactions and receive less encouragement in science than boys.
This is likely to be an effect of the classroom observation work carried out with GIST teachers (for a full account see Whyte, 1984).
However, the GIST teachers of physical science were less convinced than their colleagues elsewhere of the importance of finding ways to encourage girls in their subject.
It may be that their experience of GIST has given them a better idea of the amount of work and energy involved in trying to change things (Kelly et al .,
1984).
School atmosphere
Whatever may be the attitude of any individual teacher, if s/he does not receive adequate support from the school in implementing change, s/he is likely to give up, or decide that the innovation is not worth the extra time and energy required.
[…
]The extent to which GIST was successful in particular schools appears to have been less dependent on the team's efforts than on the existing school ethos and whether it was consistent with responding to the demand for genuine equality of opportunity.
In other words, the project probably did not change schools, but change may have been most likely to occur in schools which were open to the innovation and to the ideas of equality presented by the project.
Closer study of between-school differences (see Kelly et al .,
1984; Whyte in press) shows that attitude change was most marked in three action schools.
In one, Moss Green, there had also been an increase in the percentage of girls opting for chemistry, physics and technical crafts.
In the other two, Edgehill and Meadowvale, there had been an increase in at least two of these.
These schools appeared to have several things in common: first, each could be characterized as an ‘innovative’ school in some sense.
Moss Green was a custom-built community school, with a commitment to multicultural education and a staff who were used to implementing innovations such as open-plan classrooms, and, more recently, an alternative curriculum for fourth and fifth years.
At Edgehill, the science department was divided into biological and environmental sciences, instead of the traditional biology, physics and chemistry; the head teacher was a conscious advocate of innovation in comprehensive schooling; in the third school, Meadowvale, the science department had decided to redraft its entire first and second year science curriculum, in part because of the children's response to the VISTA visits organized by GIST.
The least successful schools were those which implemented the minimum programme asked for by GIST: administration of questionnaires to children, allowing women visitors into the school and piloting, more or less reluctantly, teaching materials devised by the team.
The successful schools, in contrast, took up more GIST suggestions more enthusiastically, or even developed their own ideas for interventions.
For example at Edgehill, a GIST pack for discussion of sex roles —Gender in Our Lives — was used in the personal and social education lessons, with teachers talking honestly and openly about their personal experience; as it happened they found themselves in the middle of a discussion about fathers being present at childbirth, and the children were obviously fascinated by this new view of their teachers as emotional beings.[…]
Willingness to talk directly to pupils about the aims of GIST was another feature of the more successful schools.
Despite requests from the team to discuss the issue with children, few teachers revealed the purpose of the project to their classes.
Some teachers told the evaluators that they did not feel justified in talking to pupils about the girls and science problem, and gave the impression that they felt to do so would be tantamount to propaganda.
At Moss Green, GIST was called in to address the second-year class before they made craft mini-options, to stress how important it was for girls to consider getting a grounding in technology.
Far greater numbers of girls opted for technical subjects than had ever done so before.
The school also ran single-sex clubs.
In comparison, there was no visible explicit discussion of sex roles at either of the two least successful schools.
The GIST workpack,Gender in Our Lives , was used at another school, but a senior member of management had effectively insisted they use it, and some teachers did so with considerable reservations, afterwards reporting almost complete failure to alter children's prejudices.
We had looked for some impact from the presence of women in senior positions in school, but the highest percentage of women at Scale 4 or above in any school was 35 per cent.
In the more successful schools, women held relatively more senior posts in the science department or in the school.
In the two least successful schools it is notable that the proportion of senior women was lowest, in one case despite the fact that the head teacher was a woman.
In summary, the most successful schools appeared to have the following characteristics:
teachers who planned and implemented their own interventions;
teachers who were prepared to discuss the GIST problem with children, rather than simply accepting VISTA and other interventions and hoping that an implicit message would get through;
staff, especially at a senior level, who had a positive commitment to the aims of the project;
a progressive ethos which fitted comfortably with the equal-opportunity aims of GIST;
a relatively higher proportion of women staff at senior levels.
[…]
The third element, the innovative practice advocated, became refined during rather than before the project.
The use of questionnaires fed back to teachers revealed the base of interest and enthusiasm for science too often missed by schools concerned to promote a curriculum informally based on male interests.
Observation in labs and workshops highlighted the depressing effect on girls' performance of the boys' claim to science as their subject.
We are much clearer now than at the beginning about how to approach science in a more girl friendly way (see Smail, 1983, 1984), and the clarity is due in part to the way we have worked with teachers.
The conditions for a girl friendly school may be more difficult to bring about, for it would seem that teachers must be openly and visibly concerned about equality before pupils will change their choices; schools with traditional norms, limited or formal communication channels, and with few women in senior positions will be much slower to adapt to changed female expectations.
Conclusion
[…]
Teachers were always busy, and many schools put GIST on a rather lower priority than dealing with the impact of unemployment, school reorganization, discipline or curricular problems.
It was often difficult to get schools to provide even basic information such as the breakdown of subject choice by sex, and members of the team frequently had to extract the information themselves from school data.
Oddly enough, the control schools, where no interventions took place, were more co-operative and efficient in returning questionnaires than action schools.
Similarly, the impact of GIST may have been as great in schools which had no contact with the project at all, because of the changing climate of opinion in which girls' under-achievement in science and technology came to be seen as a serious educational issue.
Acknowledgement
The GIST Project was funded by the EOC/SSRC Joint Panel on Women and Underachievement with additional support from the Department of Industry Education unit, the Schools Council and Shell UK Ltd.
I am grateful to these sponsors and to my colleagues on the project, Alison Kelly, Barbara Smail and John Catton.
However, they do not necessarily share the views expressed in this chapter.
My thanks also to Sandra Burslem and Sue Thorne who kindly lent me their word processor.
The Social Nature of the Curriculum
(a) Three Curricular Traditions and their Implications, Ivor Goodson
Since the nineteenth century ‘academic subjects’ and written examinations have become closely interconnected.
The alliance, whether viewed as divine or malign, was formally enshrined in the School Certificate examination defined in 1917.
Since that date certain material implications have followed for those subgroups and school subjects promoting or representing the academic tradition.
Questions of theoretical base or methodological perspective have often been subsumed by or channelled into the construction of acceptable written examinations.
For the groups and associations promoting themselves as school subjects, and irresistibly drawn to claiming ‘academic status’, a central criterion has been whether the subjects' content could be tested by written examinations for an ‘able’ clientele.
Acceptance of the criterion of examinability affects both the content and form of the knowledge presented but carries with it the guarantee of high status.
The academic tradition is content-focused and typically stresses abstract and theoretical knowledge for examination.
The utilitarian tradition is conversely of low status, dealing with practical knowledge sometimes not amenable to the current A level mode of written examination.
Utilitarian knowledge is related to those non-professional vocations in which the majority of people work for most of their adult life.
The low status of utilitarian knowledge also applies to the personal, social and commonsense knowledge stressed by those pursuing the pedagogic tradition.
Whilst all school knowledge has at least an implicit pedagogy this tradition places the ‘way the child learns’ as the central concern in devising subject content.
These traditions are viewed as three ‘centres of gravity’, in the arguments about styles of curriculum.
They do not represent a complete list of the ‘traditions’ in English curricula nor are they timeless entities; they simply represent three clear constellations of curriculum styles which recur in the  history of the school subjects under study.
In this sense they are perhaps best viewed as strategic clusters employed to help in the scrutiny of curriculum changes and conflicts.[…]
The existence of academic, pedagogic and utilitarian traditions in school curricula has its origins in the separate sectors of the educational system which preceded the comprehensive era.
The continuance of these traditions and the continuing dominance of the academic tradition bear testimony that the fundamental structures of curriculum have withstood comprehensive reorganization.
As in the tripartite system so in the comprehensive system, academic subjects for able pupils are accorded the highest status and resources.
The triple alliance between academic subjects, academic examinations and able pupils ensures that comprehensive schools provide similar patterns of curriculum differentiation to previous school systems.
For the teachers who have to cater for all kinds of pupils this concentration on a particular kind of pupil and a particular kind of educational success poses the same dilemma voiced by the rural studies teacher in response to the promotion of academic examinations in his subject; ‘Once again we can see the unwanted children of lower intelligence being made servants of the juggernaut of documented evidence, the inflated examination.’
This conclusion summarizes the continuing choice:
True education is not for every man the scrap of paper he leaves school with.
Dare we as teachers admit this?
Dare we risk our existence by forcibly expressing our views on this?
While we pause after the first phase of our acceptance are we to rely on exams for all to prove ourselves worthy of the kindly eye of the state?
The deep structures of curriculum differentiation are historically linked to different educational sectors, to different social class clienteles and occupational destinations, to different status hierarchies.
Differentiated curricula and the social structure are matched on very firm foundations: by building on these foundations comprehensive reorganization has had to accept the antecedent structures which contradict its stated ideal.[…]
The legacy of differentiated status for the academic, utilitarian and pedagogic traditions draws on tripartite patterns of educational organization.
In considering curriculum change it is vital to understand that this tripartite hierarchy of status has been reproduced not only in the respective parity of esteem between different categories of subject but also to kinds of knowledge within subjects.
At the later level, scrutiny of ‘what counts as education’ is necessary.
For instance, much of the debate about teaching craft and technology as a way of reinstating practical curricula has missed this point.
Given the status patterns discerned one might expect that even if technology were to achieve high status and acceptance the version which would ‘count as education’ would be academic and theoretical and therefore stand in contradiction to more practical objectives.
The differentiated status of academic, utilitarian and pedagogic traditions pervades both the type of subject and the  internal form of each subject.
Curriculum reform needs to address both of these levels of differentiation.
The differentiated status of the three curriculum traditions discerned and their link with the way finance and resources are allocated and pursued is confirmed by a number of studies already undertaken.
Banks' study of parity and prestige in the English secondary system ends by stressing ‘the persistence of the academic tradition’ throughout that period of the system's existence.’
Hanson's study of art education and Dodd's work on technology offer similar evidence.a The latter speaking of the Crowther Report noted that they had shown how ‘an alternative route to knowledge’ lay through practical subjects which did not destroy the intellectual curiosity of the pupil in the way associated with the ‘academic’ones.
Dodd notes that ‘the problems lay in the status of practical subjects by tradition second class….
Discussion on its own is insufficient and it requires legitimization by those institutions who hold this facility (universities, examination boards, employers and society at large).’
As we have seen, the legitimizing institutions together with established and indeed aspiring subject groups share the vested interest in the belief that ‘a scholarly discipline’ is needed if a school subject is to be granted high status.
The stranglehold of the academic tradition has seldom been seriously threatened by its overwhelming need to shun ‘practical utility’.
The theme which Dodd points to was just as common when the 1904 regulations were established.
A contemporary noted that the school curriculum was ‘subordinated to that literary instruction which makes for academic culture, but is of no practical utility, to the classes for whom the local authorities should principally cater’.
The dominance of the academic tradition is patently supported by the major vested interest groups within education and the broader society.
Yet the very need for academic subjects to escape from allegations of ‘practical utility’ may yet lead to irresistible pressure for change in the period of economic malaise which we currently confront.
(b) The Schooling of Science, Michael F. D. Young
Science emerged later as a branch of education and its assimilation into the existing institutions and structures was not achieved without some noticeable exercises of accommodation.
This view of the incorporation of natural science into the school curriculum is taken by David Layton, who offers us a valuable account of this process of ‘accommodation’ in the late nineteenth century, complementary to his earlier study of the demise of ‘the science of common things’.
In particular he describes how one conception of ‘pure’ laboratory science was established which enabled school science to be justified in terms of the prevailing tradition of liberal education and its devotion to ‘the discipline of the mind, the attainment of habits of controlled attention and the exercise of reasoning powers and memory’.
Thus Chemistry and Physics could comfortably claim a place alongside the Classics and Mathematics.
Likewise, the purpose of introducing science into the secondary schools was never in doubt to such leading advocates as H. E. Roscoe, the first President of the Association of Public School Science Masters (the precursor of our Association for Science Education); school science was, for Roscoe, as Layton quotes him, to be ‘the means of sifting out from the great mass of the people those golden grains of genius which now are too often lost amongst the sands of mediocrity’.
A consequence of this accommodation was, as Layton puts it, that ‘the application of science to everyday life had (by the 1870s) disappeared…the learner [of course only those learners who experienced any science teaching at all— M.Y.]
was slowly inducted into the ways of the scientist — a particular type of scientist also — the ‘pure’’ researcher’.
Largely through the method of government recognition and financing of laboratories, the separation of school science into separate ‘subjects’, physics, chemistry, and biology, became firmly established before the end of the century, as did for quite other reasons the exclusion of geology.
Furthermore, the models of ‘subject’ teaching which dominated (and in many ways still do) experimental work were part of this process.
As Layton describes it, school chemistry became the ‘easily organized and easily examined exercises in qualitative analysis…[in which]packets of powder were sent out [to the schools]and packets of paper were returned when the pupils had completed the routine of taking the solution through the charts’; if anyone asked ‘why?’, ‘training of the faculties of observation and reasoning’ would doubtless have been the reply.
Likewise in physics pupils were offered ‘a starvation course on the precise measurement of physical quantities…[for, as an influential text of the time began]‘Physics is essentially the science of measurements’’.
Of course, many things have changed, but even in the Nuffield era ‘the emphasis has remained on abstract…‘technically sweet’ science, dissociated from its applications and implications’.
Before turning to the attempts to revitalize science teaching which have emerged since the early 1960s, it is important to ask the question ‘Why did school science emerge in the way it did?’
Is it adequate to see it as an accommodation to existing educational structures, as Layton does?
I suggest we need to try and grasp both the innovations Layton describes and the structures they confronted in terms of their wider political and economic significance.
Alternative traditions of science education in which scientific knowledge was conceived, among other things ‘as an instrument in the pursuit of political independence and social emancipation’, had, Layton writes, become ‘casualties in a process of natural selection as the educational environment had become progressively more sharply defined’.
The problem with this kind of social Darwinist view is that it treats a social process, selection, as natural , rather than as an outcome of certain activities and interests in particular historical contexts.
This is indicated in Layton's references to the views of science on the one hand in terms of‘the disinterested pursuit of truth’, and on the other, particularly by those involved in the Great Exhibition, as ‘the producer for the industrial market place (so that science was to be studied for the economic benefits it would yield)’.
The question of economic benefits of science points to a concern with the character of the economy at the time and to the importance of considering the demise of the attempts to implement a science curriculum ‘as practice’ and the success of the science curriculum ‘as fact’in the context of changes in Victorian capitalism.[…]
Science education was envisaged, as David Layton tells us, by some early nineteenth century radicals like Richard Carlile as undermining dogma and leading to social emancipation.
The process and practice of the schooling of science, for all its changes, has become almost the opposite —‘necessarily dogmatic’ according to Jevons and many others, and producing technological domination rather than emancipation.
This paper has largely been limited to the processes within education — the ways they have been part of a wider process of economic and political domination have been little more than hinted at.
Inevitably oversimplifying, I would summarize what I have tried to say by suggesting that the schooling of science has produced three kinds of people, whose interrelations have up till now led to opposition to any attempts to realize the emancipatory potential Carlile saw.
They are:
(a)
‘Pure scientists’, whose relations with nature are at best those of abstracted understanding.
This is not to deny the discoveries that have been made, but to state that the purposes that have given meaning to the scientists' pursuit of truth have been success in and the sustaining of the scientific establishment.
(b)
The ‘applied scientist’ whose identity is fundamentally pragmatic — given something to be done, he [or she]will work out how to do it.
Ends are given, but no one asks by or for whom.
Just as the pure scientist, from his [or her]early training, absolves himself [or herself]from the uses to which  his [or her]discoveries are put, rather than seeing that the discoveries themselves are inescapably linked to an economy on which he [or she]depends for support, so the applied scientist accepts that others define the goals that he [or she]has to achieve rather than seeing that his [or her]own means or technology itself presupposes a social order, set of priorities or goals.
(c)
The identifiable failures of school science — the anti-science anti-technologists who can see science only as domination rather than that science as domination is itself a historical product, and the mass of people whose schooling teaches them that science is a specialized activity over which they neither have nor could have any control.
(c) The Curriculum and National Identity, Chris Brown
It is no coincidence that mass schooling was invented at roughly the time when nation states had come into existence and the need arose to instil in their citizens the idea that the new entity had first claim on their loyalties.
The more social cohesion was rendered problematic by the existence of cleavages in relation to ethnicity, language etc. the more important was an efficient schooling system.
The example of the United States is well known:
…each American school has a national flag flying outside the school and usually a flag in each classroom.
Also, the national anthem is regularly used in school assemblies and sporting events: and paintings of George Washington, Abraham Lincoln and other historic American figures are prominent in schools.
(Nelson, 1978, pp. 145–6)[…]
In Britain it is the curriculum which bears the main burden of transmitting the national idea.
History may be cited as an example, not least because in the post-Falklands era several leading figures, including Sir Keith Joseph and Professor Hugh Thomas, have singled it out for special mention in connection with‘understanding the shared values which are a distinctive feature of British Society’.
Despite developments such as Schools Council history and a growing interest in African, Caribbean and Indian history, school history is unlikely ever to escape the grip of nationalism.[…]
Could one envisage a curriculum without history?
Many people would feel that if children grew up to know nothing of their ‘heritage’ this would be a serious threat to national identity.
People may not remember whatever detailed analysis was developed for them as schoolchildren, but certain models or ‘general sketches’…do remain, and they inform everyday thinking closely, especially as they are exercised over and again by politicians and the media seeking to make public sense of current events.
If an example is needed to make this clearer one can be found in the special place occupied by the Second World War in public consciousness in Britain and, more particularly, in Margaret Thatcher's increasingly deliberate manipulation of Churchillian sketches over the period of the Falklands crisis.
(Wright, 1984, pp. 49–50)
Unlike history, the ‘new’ geography would appear to have rid itself of imperialist associations.
However, quite apart from the persistence of a great deal of ‘geography of the British Isles’ syllabuses, the new scientific and conceptual geography has not appeared in schools because of some intrinsic merit.
On the contrary, its growth coincided with the collapse of empire.
So long as the world was politically, and militarily, if not economically, permeated with British influence, school geography could safely and fruitfully explore even the most unlikely regions.
In a world where British influence is conspicuously waning it might not be in the interests of a secure national identity to throw it open for young Britons to gaze on.
History, on the other hand, can be continually re-written to buttress the national ideal.
There is little point in reviewing every curriculum subject.
Historical and sociological studies of the curriculum have shown us that school subjects are not simply rationally selected for explicit educational aims but are reflections of larger social and political forces.
Not all subjects contribute equally to fostering national identity.
Nor do they all function in the same way.
Science for instance makes its contribution by studiously avoiding social and political comment: it thus misses the way that it is inextricably bound up with dominant values, amongst them attitudes which assume ethnocentric and nationalistic positions.
Even modern languages may be detached from their respective cultures and contribute to the unspoken notion that other societies are slightly queer.
The point is that in nation-states, education systems are provided by the state authorities and will thus inevitably have the net effect of focusing positive views of the nation they serve.
Britain may not need to flaunt nationalism in the way characteristic of the United States but its education system can no more ignore the task of sustaining the national identity than education systems in any other nation-state.
(d) Contrasting Models in School Geography, Rob Gilbert
Differences between explaining physical processes and human action make impossible a unified society-environment study based on a single explanatory paradigm.
Explanatory models which serve for one cannot serve for the other.
The dominance of the traditions of environmental and economic determinism are a handicap to further profitable application of geographical knowledge to human affairs.
As one geographer has pointed out:
…until subject matter theories with different epistemological characteristics have been formulated, the focus of our spatial planning must continue to be on supermarkets, roads and airports, and not on the needs and desires of those individual human beings that the facilities allegedly are constructed to serve.
This tradition and its inherent contradictions have been noted before, as when an historian of the discipline wrote almost twenty years ago:
Many geographers have never been deeply concerned with ultimate objectives of social character, and some would sincerely regard efforts to provide directives for human action as presumptuous and arrogant.
But sooner or later writers ask whether geography really is a human study at all, possibly because some writers on human geography appear to have studied almost everything except the people.
That environmentalism may be superseded in schools, as it appears largely to have been in universities, by the locational analysis school is no guarantee of a more appropriate form of explanation.
For, as has been suggested in the texts reviewed, the old paradigms may merely be replaced by a new form of determinism, this time based on space.
Here again the results of human activity are explained without recourse to conscious human agents or social contexts.
The locational analysis school can be said to have
reified ‘the spatial’ as the basis of the subject matter of the discipline.
At the same time it diverted attention away from the underlying structural explanations of society and economy, as part of a general process of ‘mystification’ whereby surface manifestations are confused for root causes.
Thus statements in the text material which attribute spatial differences to ‘different kinds of people’, or government planning, or factors of location such as the availability and stability of a labour market, have arbitrarily stopped the causal chain at a point which omits social, economic and political  considerations.
To claim that explanation in geography can go no further is only to say that it is inadequate to its task, and ignores the fact that many geographers are going further:
Geographical differentiation is a detail — albeit an important detail — and a result of the operation of social systems.
It is not a fundamental property of such systems.
The space-economy for example is simply the spatial pattern of organization created by the industrial economy; it is not an independent variable.
This point has been clearly demonstrated by recent reconsiderations of, for example, the nature of uneven regional development and economic under-development which show that both processes, whilst creating spatial patterns are, more fundamentally, outcomes of the operation of the economy rather than the result of autonomous geographical factors.
To concentrate on the latter is not only superficial, it is also incorrect.
The images of human nature and society built into the explanatory paradigms which dominate school curricula and texts are inadequate.
They restrict the extent to which human action can be understood, substituting explanations based on a plastic model of the individual and a narrow and amorphous model of social relations and structure.
In focusing on concrete outcomes of social activity, and explaining them through natural causal models, geographers have disguised the social origins of these outcomes and the political assumptions and implications of their theories.
Olsson, in his analysis of urban geographical theories and their usefulness, concludes that:
the explanatory power and potential planning applicability of geographic theory does not depend on the employed and usually specified spatial axioms but rather on the unspecified axioms about individual and group behaviour.
Until these underlying images of individual and society are recognized, and their study given the explicit attention it deserves, the significance of geographical knowledge for social practice will not be realized, nor the constraints it currently imposes overcome.
(e)‘Political’ Differences in English Teaching, Margaret Mathieson
As it has been seen to touch upon every aspect of pupils' lives, most particularly the emotional, English has become increasingly diffuse.
Moreover, there are within it, more than most other subjects, marked political differences between the leading figures in the field.
As they relate to decision-making about priorities and responsibilities in the classroom, these differences must affect many English teachers' sense of purpose and professional confidence.[…]
Before examining conflicting views about priorities within the four main activities within English — literature, creativity, discrimination, and classroom talk — it is useful to consider the term ‘political’ in reference to definitions currently being made by leading figures concerned with English in schools.
Within the last ten years, during which time interest had shifted to the curriculum of the average and below-average child, widespread dissatisfaction has been expressed with the traditional grammar school education.
Its specialist, academic, authoritarian elements have been persistently criticized, partly because they ignored progressives' demands for children's activity, participation and development through discovery, and partly because of the perceived irrelevance of this education to the lives of working-class children, the majority of whom have failed to benefit from it.
Progressives, and radicals supporting reorganization of the schools and the introduction of non-streaming, are carrying their attack upon the grammar schools' élitism into the curriculum, dismantling the traditional subjects by rearranging them through interdisciplinary work, projects and themes.
As this relates to English, the central concern of which has been the dissemination of liberal culture throughout society, it has undergone considerable revision.
Literature, usually the major part of English in the grammar schools, has received the most severe overhauling, but because of the current unacceptability to many educators of a ‘middle-class’ curriculum for all our pupils, every activity in English has been given a different set of emphases.[…]
Recent anxiety about the grammar schools' perceived responsibility for reinforcing divisions between the middle and working classes, and about the wastage of talent which their continued existence perpetuated, has brought their traditional curriculum under severe attack.
In addition, as far as English has been concerned, others besides progressives and radicals have questioned the value of academic approaches for working-class pupils.
G. H. Bantock and David Holbrook, who are very concerned about exploitation by commercial culture of working-class pupils, have argued that the watered-down grammar school curriculum has failed to affect the lives of the great majority.
Although not wishing to disturb the present social system in any fundamental way, they, like the radical educators, have proposed the revival of popular culture.
Instead of set books, periods of literature and preparation for examinations, they propose more mime, dance, poetry reading and writing, an affective  education for pupils unreceptive to the academic, and susceptible to the commercial.
Thus, both radicals and élitists have severely shaken the early certainty about the worthwhileness of attempts to disseminate liberal culture as widely as teachers' skills and school conditions permitted.
And within recent years, the question of which culture is for whom is being raised in connection with every one of their activities.
If literature and its related activities are tainted with ‘middle-class’ exclusiveness and, it appears, that teachers engaging pupils in these are ‘imposing’alien values upon working-class pupils, it follows that they must move into the lives of working-class pupils to encourage that culture which, up till now, the largely irrelevant curriculum has ‘stifled’[…]
After surveying the general scene it is useful to look at existing differences between educators about each of the four main activities.
The teaching of literature has been the activity most profoundly affected by these conflicting views.
Pupils of Leavis continue to support his concept of the centrality of the literary experience, denying its identification with middle-class culture and the charge of imposing alien values upon working-class children.
Although G. H. Bantock and David Holbrook attack the ‘watered-down’ curriculum for secondary modern children, they insist upon the value of literature in the school experience of all pupils.
They suggest approaching the average and below-average children through mime, dance and personal composition.
Nevertheless, the proposed stimuli are myth and folk song and, hopefully, these are meant to lead on to the poetry of Blake and Shakespeare.
Like Arnold and Leavis these writers, concerned above all with what Holbrook calls the children's ‘humanity’, believe that this can be touched and sensitized by engagement with great works of art.
Today, Holbrook and his supporters, opposing the shift of emphasis to ‘relevant’ social or environmental studies, simply disclaim the accusation of endorsing middle-class values; they insist upon the universality of the literary experience which, if neglected, will mean severe imaginative deprivation for children continually exposed to what, they argue, are the banalities of the mass media.[…]
The unwillingness of some English teachers to teach literature stems from their convictions about the neglected richness of working-class culture.
While the Language in Use team wish to order priorities differently and the Humanities Project's teachers wish to rearrange literature to illustrate relevant social issues, there is an extreme form of resistance to literature on the grounds that it is part of the ‘syllabus of established middle-class culture’.
In This New Season , a book about English teaching in Stepney, Chris Searle expresses his belief in the validity of working-class culture and the English teacher's responsibility to encourage children's pride in their own identity.
Literature, apart from a reference to the Liverpool poets, is excluded from his working-class pupils' experience of English in school.
Instead, Searle proposes stimulation of pupil's personal writing about their feelings and environment.
Having identified the academic curriculum with competitive  examinations and the status-seeking of the middle  classes , Searle excludes all works of art from the classroom except the pupils' own creations and those which reflect their lives.
Although their reasons differ and their perspectives on literature conflict, the élitists like Bantock and Holbrook and a radical like Searle face English teachers with proposals based on similar assumptions.
Arguing that the curriculum of the working-class pupils should be specially chosen to suit their environment, experiences and abilities, they indicate their lack of interest in the question of academic achievement with its possibility of pupils' upward social mobility.
Bantock and Holbrook seek no reorganization of the social structure, investing their hopes for greater happiness in the power of creativity and great art to bring self-awareness and fulfilment.
Searle, and teachers with his views, reject the present social system, recommending that ways be found to give working-class pupils confidence and pride in their cultural identity.
They do not propose to enter into work in school which makes achievement in competitive examinations possible, having judged this to be highly undesirable.
Turning to the field of children's creativity we find that the area of agreement is far larger than that about literature.
So strong have been the influences here — of progressivism with its romantic view of childhood's vision, of anti-industrialism, of egalitarianism which has democratized art in every form, of therapy — that the great majority of educators wish to encourage pupils' growth through creativity.
Disagreement is mainly about whether great literature or the children's own environment and experiences should provide the stimuli for this work.
It is a debate which reflects the overall political dispute about the role of high art in the classroom.
While Bantock, Holbrook, Inglis and those English teachers who support the ‘élitists’, recommend the employment of stimuli drawn exclusively from the music, painting and literature of high art, and make it clear that they view creativity partly as a way back into appreciation, a radical teacher like Searle rejects this culture completely.
Unlike the élitists, many of whom wish to compensate for working-class children's loss of traditional agricultural satisfactions through a mainly affective curriculum, Searle recommends creativity to strengthen working-class children's confidence and pride in their own identity.
The severest critics of exclusively personal, creative writing are the Language in Use team, who argue that such work does not help pupils achieve social competence.
[…]. The charge is that exclusive concentration upon the personal can, in its effects, be socially divisive.
Unless working-class children are given linguistic means of control over the disciplines of the curriculum, and situations in the outside world, they are unlikely to stand much chance of being upwardly mobile.
What this criticism draws attention to is the bitter truth about teachers' exclusive concentration upon creativity with working-class pupils.
Whether this is stimulated by the myths and ballads proposed by David Holbrook, or is a reflection upon the living conditions of society's victims suggested by Searle, teachers' limitation of the pupils' work in English  to ‘personal’ writing can be interpreted as giving their support to the status quo of the social system.
Since this decision relates, in English, to what has come to be accepted as a key element in children's potential to achieve at school, that is their linguistic competence, the English teacher has a heavier responsibility when he [or she]attempts to resolve it than staff concerned with other parts of the curriculum.
He [or she]has to decide whether it is more in his pupils' interests for him to accept the existence of the present social structure and to give them help to advance within it, or for him to have rejected it, on their behalf, as stifling, competitive and exploitative and to encourage them to find fulfilment within themselves and their environment.
It will be appreciated that these decisions within English teaching, as they are seen as likely to affect pupils' future working and leisure conditions, might be poignantly uncomfortable to resolve for working-class teachers.
Having achieved professional status by means of success in competitive examinations, they are likely to feel a sense of obligation to working-class pupils to equip them in a similar way.
It is unlikely to be easy for them to decide, on their working-class pupils' behalf, that personal fulfilment derives solely from their inner selves and their environment, unrelated to questions of higher social status and improved working and leisure conditions.
What is certain, however, is that currently English teachers are being urged by the majority of voices in their midst to concentrate upon encouragement of their pupils' creativity.
And as discussion moves on to include the other major activities within English — critical discrimination and classroom talk — it becomes clear that the central difficulties remain.
[…]There are firmly held opposite views on where the main emphases should be placed.
The crucial question of ‘standards’, of teachers' commitment to what have traditionally been accepted as cultivated or educated taste and speech, recurs in connection with both these activities with disturbing persistence.
(f) Changes in School Mathematics, Barry Cooper
[…
]In the 1950s, secondary school mathematics was clearly differentiated by ‘ability’ and, to a lesser extent, by sex.
The main boundary was between what I have termed selective and non-selective school mathematics but there was also differentiation within these, especially the latter.
There was not, however, a one-to-one correspondence between these two subject subcultures and the selective and non-selective school sectors.
As the 1950s passed, more and more pupils were being entered by the secondary modern schools for the GCE and, as a consequence, the most ‘able’ pupils within these schools were being brought into contact with the selective mathematics tradition.
Broadly speaking then, at this time, two versions of mathematics were being taught to two  different categories of pupil, largely in different types of school, by teachers who, again broadly speaking, had been educated in two different types of post-school institution: the university and the teacher training college.
The latter teachers were more likely to be non-specialists.
On this basis, it can be suggested that the two mathematical educational subcultures existed both at the level of ideas and at the level of social relations.
The first, the selective, was a part of [the]‘public school tradition’; the second, the non-selective, of [the]‘elementary tradition’.
It was also shown that the pedagogical perspectives held by mainstream mathematical educators, broadly ‘psychometric’, were such as to legitimate the broad outlines of a curriculum differentiated by ‘ability’(but not so clearly its differentiation by sex).
A discontinuity of both content and approach existed between selective school mathematics and some currents within university mathematics, especially pure mathematics.[…]
In the case of the Mathematical Association, many of the older school-based members will have constructed their careers in terms of existing definitions of school mathematics and […]will have had an interest, all other things being equal, in resisting changes which might be seen as leading to the relative devaluation of their ‘knowledge’.
Some university mathematicians, on the other hand, especially those pure mathematicians teaching the post-1800 algebras, were beginning to express some concern over the nature of school mathematics.
[…]This might be seen as an expression of concern by university mathematicians about the subject socialization of their potential students.
For several reasons, it might also have been expected, and will be seen later to have been the case, that some of the younger teachers in the higher status selective schools might become allies of those in the universities beginning to press for change.
This would be expected because, first, they would have been socialized into a version of mathematics nearer to that of the university ‘modern’ pure mathematicians than that of their elders and because, secondly, they would have had a potential interest in changes that could, within schools, challenge the seniority of their elder colleagues or, at least, they would have had less of a vested interest in current practice.
[…]By mid-1959, other pressure groups external to the schools, in the form of an alliance of university mathematicians, representing mainly the applied segment of the subject, and employers of graduate labour had also invested some of their considerable resources of time, money and status into conveying to teachers from the selective sector (who prepared their students and employees) their ‘requirements’ of the school curriculum.
They legitimized these by reference to the nation's ‘needs’ for scientific and technological manpower.[…]
More generally, it is important to stress that the active interest developed by major companies in the 1950s in mathematical and scientific education […]represented a major shift in the resources potentially available to those promoting various missions within mathematics.
Not only was money now  possibly available, but, as a result of the conferences, ‘authoritative’ statements supporting curriculum reform had become available from an influential source.[…]
During the same period, however, a group within the leadership of the ATAM was beginning, partly under the influence of the ICSITM, and using resources generated by developing the Association's membership in arenas relatively untapped by the Mathematical Association, to argue for the introduction of post-1800 algebraic ideas […]into school syllabuses.
The leadership also continued to campaign for pedagogic changes, partially legitimizing both elements of its mission in terms of improving the child's ‘understanding’ of mathematics.[…]
By mid-1959, therefore, there existed, scattered throughout the selective schools,[…]a number of teachers, partly in contact with one another through the associations and conferences, interested in the possibility of changing the nature of school mathematics and aware of possible sources of support for this mission.
Others, less directly committed to change or worried as to how their institutions would cope with its demands, would, nevertheless, have been finding it increasingly difficult to regard school mathematics as fixed and unchangeable.[…]
While there clearly was an ‘objective’ discontinuity of subject perspective between selective school mathematics and the practice of some segments, increasingly dominant within some countries, of university mathematics, and had been for some years, it again required interested actors, utilizing the climate of ‘crisis’resulting from the campaign on teacher supply as a major resource, to enter various arenas in order to persuade others of the ‘need’for change.
Such actors, especially the university pure mathematicians, with their followers in the ATAM, and the applied mathematicians, with their industrial allies, did have considerable success in convincing school teachers of the ‘need’ for change in school practice, while fending off attacks ‘from below’on their own curricular practices.
In both cases the success of the university sub-disciplinary segments can be seen as having partly resulted from their having found allies outside of their own organizations.
The supporters of modern algebra within the ATAM, who had come into contact with the pure mathematicians in various European-wide meetings, such as Royaumont and the ICSlTM conferences, gradually made ‘modern mathematics’ more acceptable to many school teachers by combining it with those elements of their original mission concerned with Piagetian ideas, and proposing ‘intuitive’and ‘experiental’approaches to its study.
The applied mathematicians found themselves able to claim that ‘industry’ also approved of ‘modelling’, numerical methods and so on, as well as being able to derive resources of personnel and money from companies with which to further the promotion of their version of ‘mathematics’.[…]
By late 1961, therefore, the ‘need’ to reform school mathematics was seen as legitimate by actors in a number of arenas, including the industrial and  political.
In this climate, various groups of individuals who had been involved in the conferences and activities of the preceding few years were to move into the drawing up of detailed proposals for curriculum development and the search for funds with which to implement these.[…]
Both SMP [originating in the boys' public schools]and MME [originating in state secondary schools]produced proposals for the redefinition of school mathematics that were clearly orientated to the demands of various powerful, i.e. resource-controlling, extra-school groups.
Hence, they might both have expected to receive considerable support from such sources.
In fact, initially, SMP received major, and MME only minor, financial backing.
Accounts of SMP's ‘success’ from within the subject have tended to underplay this difference, stressing instead individual and organizational factors.[…]
SMP's ‘success’ relative to such projects as MME must be understood, at least partially, in terms of the differential availability of such resources as status, academic legitimacy and finance, and not merely in terms of such factors as ‘flair’, something SMP members themselves seem to have well understood.[…]
The very success of SMP, in ensuring its diffusion ‘downwards’, brought a curricular selection originally developed within the prestigious independent sector of the selective subculture, and only modified by teacher-writers experienced with ‘less able’ children, into contact with many teachers whose subject and pedagogical perspectives derived from within the non-selective subculture in which criteria for selecting mathematical content differed considerably.
This, together with the dissatisfaction of members of various university disciplines and sub-disciplines ensured that SMP would be continuously subject to criticism.
Glossary of terms
ATAM Association for Teaching Aids in Mathematics
ICSITM International Commission for the Study and Improvement of Teaching Mathematics
SMP School Mathematics Project
MME Midlands Mathematical Experiment
(g) Patriarchy in School Textbooks, Marion Scott
I examined numerous texts (English, social studies, history, geography, maths and science) which were used mostly with the fourteen plus age group to locate some of the sexist trends in curriculum materials.[…]
Social studies teachers and departments have been placed in the vanguard of progressive teaching, ostensibly because social studies is seen as a context in which individuals can develop their consciousness and understanding of society.
Their curriculum materials, however, stand in sharp contrast to this rationale, and their texts are no less open to criticism than those of other  subjects.
There are some issues within social studies itself which are interesting.
There is a continual debate as to whether the role of the social studies curriculum is to describe things as they are (in this case, to show a sexist world without necessarily singling, out that sexism for comment or criticism) or whether it should adopt a critical perspective.
To my mind the answer is simple: when a critical approach is accepted as a legitimate element of social studies teaching (and surely a critical approach is not one which is to be avoided) then textbooks will be obliged to present alternatives , rather than just describing the sexist norm and failing to evaluate it.
Social studies texts (or sections of them) fall into three categories which are crudely sexist.
1
The derogation of women In these texts women are relegated to a subordinate role or else portrayed through grotesque cartoons.
They also present women serving primarily a ‘decorative’ function.
2
The invisible woman These books do not focus on women at all.
3
The insignificance of women These books treat women inadequately and are the most common genre.
It should be stressed that since the subject of social studies is society, and particularly individuals and social groups within society, it is difficult to accept that women as a group can be of little concern to its practitioners.
Surprisingly perhaps, while blatantly sexist material in the form of caricatures is not common, and usually used with critical intention, it is fair to say that many social studies texts produced for examination classes frequently neglected women, though there were some exceptions.
(There are, it must be said, changes taking place at the level of examination syllabuses and question papers where the role of women appears with increasing frequency.)
In both general texts and volumes dealing with special topics, I found that women were often invisible.
Books about leisure, crime, courtship, education, advertising, general introductions to social studies and sociology, all showed weaknesses here.
[…]Where books were inadequate it was usually a result of their sketchy approach to a subject.
Many books deal with women at work, perhaps focusing briefly on their dual role at work and home, or looking at housework, but not exploring the extent to which women work and contribute to the work process.
I am not arguing that the lack of feminist analysis makes the accounts unsatisfactory, but rather that indisputable facts are actually withheld and half of society is virtually ignored.
I need to emphasize two points here: firstly, most textbooks represent a misleading view of reality in which women are neglected or treated in a cursory manner and this is their ideological function.
Secondly (and this is a more subtle and complex point), I would suggest that while some writers may believe that they are presenting reality, they are, in effect, reinforcing stereotypes and patriarchal relations.
While we know that more men at present work in certain jobs, as engineers, in factories and so on, we still need  to see and read that women can also do these jobs .
As with so many books, social studies texts are often more reactionary and stereotyped than life itself.
[…]So much of the curriculum is weighted in favour of males, and if such inequality is to be redressed, then curriculum materials must move towards ‘positive discrimination’ in favour of women.
Geography, as a subject, tends to concern itself with what is done, in what manner and where, especially when it looks at industry and resources.
Its focus is not so much on the individuals who work and produce as on the production process, and this rather impersonal and abstract approach makes it difficult or even unnecessary to look for any exclusion of women, although this occurs.
For example, a text which adopts a general, objective style can often create the wrong impression through its use of the pseudo-generic ‘man’.
Although the written text may be very general and refrain from referring either to men or women, the illustrations make a definite point for the majority contain male figures.
Where women are illustrated the results are often less than desirable for they frequently seem to be included for their decorative or ‘selling’ power.
Among the geography texts I examined there were two particular sexist tendencies.
The first was in terms of the invisibility of women who were ignored, or under-represented.
For example, in Third World countries women play a crucial role in farming but this was certainly not the impression which would be gained from the books.
The second tendency is the desire to simplify (or avoid) any analysis (a rather ironical position) which of course makes distortion almost unavoidable.
Examples of this were discussions of population growth which made no mention of birth control and figures on the distribution of the sexes through occupations which were offered without explanation or analysis.[…]
History textbooks also provide interesting documentation for even among highly qualified history scholars the centrality of women in history is not yet accepted.
Since school texts so frequently seem to depend upon the received knowledge of at least one intellectual generation before them, children will be condemned for some time to reading about the exploits of men.
History as an intellectual discipline now includes social history which looks at how people actually lived within the limitations of the economic and political events.
Labour history too has developed into a recognizable historical research area and women's history is following suit.
These approaches have a preoccupation with the activities of ordinary people rather than with important figures and are concerned with providing an alternative perspective on our past.
Women's history has yet to take root within our universities and so must wait even longer before it makes an impact in the classroom despite the availability of many histories of women produced in the last decade or so, which could provide starting points for a better balanced approach to history.
More social history is being taught but examination syllabuses still focus on political and economic history which conventionally excludes women.
I looked at several texts directed at the upper half of secondary schools and  roughly the same categories emerged as for social studies.
Typical was a view of the past which left women invisible.
A book on the First World War made no mention of women's contribution to the war effort at home or abroad.
A book on Britain since 1700 ignored the nineteenth-century feminists and the birth control movement; books on political and economic history were almost exclusively about men.
There was even a chapter in one book entitled ‘The Home’ in which the focus was on the man, portrayed relaxing after some ‘Do-it-Yourself work.
There are modern history books which ostensibly focus on periods of great social change but the reader could be forgiven for reaching the conclusion that there have been no social changes which have involved/ affected women.
There are, of course, history books, or rather sections and chapters in books, which do focus on women.
Generally these are inadequate, non-analytical and sometimes almost caricatured.
Historians’ treatments of the suffrage movement are a case in point: the coverage is frequently brief and uninformative.
Sometimes discussion which starts well descends into trivia, such as a discussion of women's part in the labour market in the twentieth century which ends in an uninspired discussion of fashion.
I also noticed a tendency to assume that by the twentieth century women had overcome most of the problems of inequality.
Mention is made of the Equal Pay and Sex Discrimination Acts but there is no attempt to question their ultimate effectiveness.
One book included a comment that Hitler had a ‘mystical appeal’ to women, but fails to discuss why or how, and suggests that Hitler's views on the home as women's place seem old-fashioned to us today, something unfortunately far from the case.
Another book claimed that by the end of the First World War much of the old prejudice against women having an equal place with men in society had gone.
I found, too, an assertion that fashion today is a sign that women's emancipation is well underway — a claim that cannot go unchallenged.
The lack of feminist perspective is emphasized by statements such as: ‘There can be no doubt that women and girls have failed to make full use of the opportunity now open to them’, which implies an ideologically and materially unfettered equality of opportunity.
Another historian notes that women have not come to rival men, despite the equality established through legislation (!), but needs to add a critique of such legislation and society if he is to understand its failures.
What is required in history, if girls are to have equal opportunity with boys in school, is both a full investigation and exposure of women's past — recorded and documented in special women's history books —plus an integration of women and their contribution to history within existing accounts.
This means studying the women who were great and important (‘heroine history’) as well as the ordinary women.
The two sexes are not experiencing equal educational opportunity while the only version of the past they are presented with looks almost exclusively at males and has been recorded almost exclusively by males.
Science and mathematics, because of their subject matter, necessitate the  adoption of a different approach.
This is not the place to explore arguments which characterize the scientific mode of thought as in some sense masculine (though this may have a vital role to play in our understanding of the science of our culture if it is so: see Kelly et al .,
1979).
I intend to analyse the sexism in such texts on a more immediate, if mundane, level.
Questions which can be posed include: what impression do we get of the ‘mathematical world’ and way of thinking; what does maths connect with; who might it concern; who are these books directed at?
(The same questions could also apply to chemistry and physics.)
Sensible of the fact that maths is not a popular subject among children in general there is often an attempt to show how the ‘everyday’ can be viewed mathematically.
However, the ‘everyday’, according to these texts, is a world of football, cricket, men driving cars and traditional boys' hobbies whether the topic is statistics, measurement or velocity.
The world of maths is male and this is reinforced in several books by the number of questions which revolve around men and boys doing things susceptible to mathematical calculation.
Occasional gestures towards the girls being included in maths are made, typically, via a girl sipping tea or standing decoratively posed in a mini skirt in a phone booth.
The School Mathematics Project books are more abstract than many, depending less on pictures.
But even in these boys feature more through their visibility in the questions and examples.
A supreme example of sexist attitude can be found in the early pages of one SMP volume demonstrating the use of flow diagrams (Book F; 4–5).
A flow diagram discriminates between girls and boys, directing the girls to consider a flow chart dealing with a knitting process, while the boys are to examine a flow chart of a cement mixing operation.
The two sexes are told exactly what they should be interested in, and all in the name of mathematics.
It would be a short sighted solution to try to remedy this bias by showing mathematics operating in the domestic realm to the same extent as it operates outside it, just to draw girls' interest.
The main point is that even when examples could be non-sex specific , these books make them sex specific .
No attempt is made in any of the books I looked at to integrate girls into the world of engineering or technology.
Chemistry and physics books revealed the same patterns.
The male predominates in the pictures, examples and the questions.
One very lively looking book provides typical examples of the features I would criticize: a focus on the history of the science dealing with the main discoverers who all seem to be men; a use of the pseudo-generic ‘man’ and ‘he’when the reference is to men and women; more pictures of men than women; a series of cartoons in the margins which portray boys more frequently than girls to illustrate some concept or show active participation in scientific experiment.
But we should note that the process of deterring girls from science begins well before they enter secondary school.
It takes the form partly of encouraging them to relate to the personal and subjective while boys begin to grapple with the impersonal and objective.
Our school textbooks present a biased, distorted and sometimes explicitly sexist view of the world and there is no doubt that they could be improved.
THE SOCIAL FRAMEWORK
Introduction
As the last extracts indicate, schools and teaching exist in a social framework.
That framework shapes the broad conditions in which they operate and more specifically lays down both what is expected of them and under what circumstances and with what resources they go about achieving those goals.
Those are the kinds of broader social issues raised in the articles in this Section of the Reader.
A good example of the changing social framework within which schools exist, and, equally important, an exposition of the background to one of the key contemporary issues, is Ali Rattansi's ‘Race, Education and British Society’.
This traces the black presence in Britain and its historical and present outcomes, with special attention to current debates on so-called ‘black underachievement’.
The broad social framework underlies the specific problems which education policy attempts to tackle.
While specific expectations of education vary, they tend to do so around three key expectations, that the education service will support the national economy, make good citizens and enable young people to make the most of their various talents.
A moment's thought, however, demonstrates that these three main aims are not necessarily mutually complementary; they could even be mutually contradictory.
At any rate, it seems difficult for them all to be given equal emphasis all the time.
In recent years we have been witnessing an attempt to place more emphasis on the first two purposes of education to redress what is considered an imbalance in favour of the third in the three decades following the 1944 Education Act.
Now the explicit policy aim for schools is much more a directly vocational one, and the article by Moore traces out some of the connections between education, qualifications and the labour markets young people are seeking to enter.
Not all of his conclusions are what might be expected given the current stress on the importance of vocational education and training.
Another contemporary issue, though in this case an old one taking on a new form, is the provision of more equal educational opportunities for girls, and for young people from ethnic minorities.
We have already alluded to this problem in the General Introduction, and the paper by Williams amplifies and develops the issue.
She looks at national and local policies for mitigating the educational effects of gender and ethnic differences.
She shows that these are very distinct sets of problems, which have received very distinct sets of answers, with rather different implications for teachers.
Moving from what is expected of the education system, the next three  articles look at aspects of the circumstances in which schools attempt to meet these aims.
The paper by Fitz, Edwards and Whitty examines the philosophy and operation of the Assisted Places Scheme.
This not only reminds us of the existence of a non-state section of education (which as we write in mid-1987 seems set only to increase in size), but also in drawing attention to the relations between the state and non-state sectors, points out features of the conditions under which the former operates that are frequently taken for granted.
One aspect of this operation over which state schools, at any rate, have minimal control is the pupils who come to them.
These pupils are shaped by many other factors than their schooling, and the extract from Coleman's The Nature of Adolescence considers some of the main features influencing adolescent development and their relation to school.
Another factor affecting the way schools work is the way they have always worked.
There are certain fundamental, seemingly inevitable, features of schooling in this society which persist, irrespective of changing aims and resources for education.
Features like these are best located through comparative or historical analysis and Brian Simon's ‘Why No Pedagogy in England?’ provides both.
It also provides valuable substance on the nature of teaching methods and their relationship to psychological theory as well as to the overall aims for education.
One of the most dramatically changing aspects of the context and content of education recently has been the expectations and especially the control of teacher's work.
This appears very likely to culminate in some form of official appraisal of their work.
The process leading up to this and its likely consequences for teaching are discussed in detail in the article by Walsh.
A central question addressed in this section is ‘what is schooling for?’
We have already considered the varying aims for schooling, and the circumstances under which it is carried out.
One major aspect of the question which often gets overlooked, however, is not so much the outcomes of schooling for young people in terms of qualifications, etc., but what part it plays in their overall development into adulthood.
Much of what is written about education seems to assume, with the best possible motives, that only what they get from their schooling, influences, or can ‘make’ or ‘save’, young people.
The extract from Clarke and Willis takes a different view, arguing for multiple transitions from youth to adulthood, and examining the place of schooling in that process, especially for working-class young people.
Finally, we have thought it worthwhile to reprint, yet again, Basil Bernstein's classic, ‘Education Cannot Compensate for Society’.
Although not far short of 30 years old, written in social and educational circumstances far different from those that prevail now, and in response to specific problems that no longer have a major place on the agenda for schooling, its basic message remains inspirational.
‘Race’, Education and British Society
Ali Rattansi
The purpose of this chapter is to provide some part of the conceptual clarification and social and historical background that is essential to an analysis of the nature of ‘race’ as an element in British education and society.
Teachers and other educationalists cannot be expected to come to an adequate understanding of recent trends in multicultural and anti-racist education, nor can they develop an independent critical judgement on recent controversies in this area, without some grasp of the deeper structural and ideological issues that  underlie the racial dimension in education, politics and the economy.
Cultural Diversity in Society and Education
The immediate context for the discussion of ‘race’ in British education is provided by the development of the multicultural and anti-racist educational movement in recent years.’
However, although ‘multiculturalism, as an educational movement dates from the 1970s and is primarily a response to the post-Second World War migration of black communities to Britain, it is important to recognize that multiculturalism is a perennial social issue, for all but the simplest of societies are characterized by cultural diversity.
It could be argued, therefore, that good education ought always to be based on multi-cultural principles.
Cultural diversity is a central feature of modern British society.
It has long been recognized that a variety of structural divisions have generated more or less distinct cultures and sub-cultures, whether based on class divisions, age, gender or religion.
Moreover, British society has been characterized by significant ‘sub-national’ cultures — Scottish, Welsh, Irish — which are interwoven with linguistic and religious differences.
Taken together, these forms of differentiation have produced a highly complex pattern of cultural diversity, although the existence of this cultural pluralism must not be taken to imply a basic equality of power and influence between the various groups.
On the contrary, many of the cultures and their interrelationships are deeply  marked by relations of discrimination and subordination stemming from structural inequalities.
This is most obvious in the case of social class-based cultures, but the more recent resurgence of Scottish and Welsh nationalism and the ‘troubles’ in Northern Ireland have underlined that the dynamics of regional and ‘sub-national’cultures in Britain also need to be understood in the context of material inequalities and patterns of cultural domination, subordination and conflict.
This is a point that becomes even more acutely relevant when considering the relation between black and white cultures in modern Britain.
The cultural diversity of British society has, of course, been much enriched by successive waves of migration into the country.
Earlier British history is characterized by settlement and conquest by a wide variety of foreign groups, including the Romans, Vikings and Normans.
In the Middle Ages Jews, Flemings and Italians were prominent in the economic life of the country.
The nineteenth and early twentieth centuries saw the arrival, of amongst others, the Irish, especially in the 1840s during the great famine (Walvin, 1984, pp. 48–60; Miles, 1982, pp. 120 — 50) and Eastern European Jews, fleeing from racist persecution in the period from 1880s to the First World War (Walvin, 1984, pp. 61–677).
The Origins and Early Development of the Black Presence in Britain
Many of the features which characterize the formation of the British nation are generally known, although until recently there has been a widespread failure to draw the necessary conclusions about the heterogeneity of cultures in British society and the real complexity of British ‘national identity’.
There is, however, considerable ignorance about the deep historical roots of the black presence in Britain, using the term black here to refer to African, Afro-Caribbean and South Asian communities.
Although references to the presence of black people are available from the Roman period onward, especially in the early sixteenth century, the most famous of the early documented references is the arrival in 1555 of a group of five Africans, brought here by a merchant to be taught English so that they could return to Africa to act as interpreters for British traders.
The significance of the date is well underlined by Fryer in his magnificent history of black people in Britain: ‘It was the summer of 1555 — before we had potatoes, or tobacco, or tea, and nine years before Shakespeare was born’(1984, p. 5).
It was in the second half of the eighteenth century that the presence of black people in Britain began to give rise to recognizable black communities, with a total black population of probably around 10,000, although some historians have produced even higher estimates.
The black people of London were particularly well-organized, meeting together regularly at clubs for musical events and celebrating christenings and weddings.
Scores of black people played a prominent part in British public life in the nineteenth century, often as members of radical organizations and participants in some of the major political events of the times.
One of the better known is William Cufay, an important figure in the Chartist movement who was exiled to Tasmania in 1849.
Another is Mary Seacole, the Jamaican-born nurse whose extraordinary abilities and dedication in caring for the wounded and sick during the Crimean war won her a reputation, at the time, equal to that of Florence Nightingale but who was soon forgotten, until the more recent attempts at reconstructing the history of the black presence in Britain.
The nineteenth century witnessed too a growing Asian presence in Britain, developing from earlier groups of servants, sailors and traders, and several Asians were also prominent in British politics, the most famous being Bombay-born Dadabhai Naoroji who, apart from championing the Indian cause in London, also entered the House of Commons after winning Finsbury Central for the Liberals in 1892 and supported women's suffrage, trade union rights and Home Rule for Ireland (Visram, 1986, pp. 78–92).
Racism, Slavery and Imperial Domination
Black people found themselves on the receiving end of racism in all manner of forms from the beginning of their arrival in Britain.
Queen Elizabeth I, her penchant for black servants and entertainers notwithstanding, took the opportunity to ‘scapegoat’ the black communities, and attempted to expel them without compunction when there appeared to be political advantage in doing so for managing her economic difficulties.
Even at this early stage of contact between white and black in Britain, it is clear that she would have been building on already existing racial caricature and prejudice rather than creating an artificial tide of hostility against black people.
For one thing, the negative associations of blackness with impurity, evil, misery and dirt had already become established in the English language, partly through the colour symbolism of Christian doctrine (James, 1981; Dabydeen, 1985a).
Travellers' tales, especially from traders, had in addition begun to circulate fictitious images of African peoples with bizarre physical features (no mouths or noses!); accounts of the supposed promiscuity and general beastly immorality of African societies mingled with more accurate descriptions of the wealth and refinement to be found on the continent (Walvin, 1973; Jordan, 1974; Husband, 1982).
Britain's growing involvement in the highly profitable slave trade from the middle of the seventeenth century gave further impetus to the spread of racist caricatures and subsequently to the developments of the more systematic racial classifications and doctrines of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which added a pseudo-scientific legitimation to earlier myths (Banton and Harwood, 1975).
The significance of these beliefs in creating a commonsense culture of taken-for-granted racism in Britain is difficult to underestimate, although widespread illiteracy may well have protected the subordinate  classes from the level of immersion in racism experienced by the upper classes who were fed a growing diet of racist mythology in fiction, newspapers and missionary tracts (Lorimer, 1978; Miles, 1982, pp. 118–19).
However, the significance of the slave trade, and subsequently the establishment of British colonies in the Caribbean and the imperial domination of India, lay not merely in their ideological impact on the growth of racism at home, but also, and some would argue more importantly, in their economic impact on Africa, the Caribbean, India and Britain.
Slavery and imperial domination have been crucial social forces in the emergence of a modern world order, characterized by the striking inequalities which provide the essential backdrop to an understanding of the post-Second World War migrations of black communities to Britain, and which continue to generate migratory pressures on peoples from the Third World.
To put it slightly differently, it is important to understand that the poverty of the Third World and the wealth of the West are the outcome of an interlinked process in which the rapid and massive growth in Western prosperity has occurred and continues to do so at the expense and underdevelopment of the Third World.
Consider, first, the impact of slavery on Africa.
It has to be remembered that prior to the arrival of European traders of any kind the African continent had a large number of flourishing economies and civilizations which had food surpluses, extensive trade networks, cities, complex technologies and craft products, and elaborate political systems (Davidson, 1974, pp. 67–174).
Over a period of some three centuries, the European slave trade deprived these societies of anywhere between 15 and 60 million people — exact figures are inevitably difficult to calculate.
Some of these died in captivity while being brought to the coast from the African homeland, and even more lost their lives in the brutal conditions on board the slave ships during the notorious Atlantic crossing or ‘Middle Passage’.
One recent estimate suggests that of the scores of millions that Africa lost, some ten million survived to undertake forced labour and to endure dehumanizing captivity in the Caribbean and African plantations (Curtin, 1969).
For some of the societies of West and Central Africa the loss of such large numbers of able-bodied young men and women was catastrophic in several respects.
First, there was the simple fact of depopulation which diminished the general size of the market and the level of demand for indigenous manufactures, and no doubt thereby arrested the economic development of the whole region; second, the depopulation affected agriculture, reducing some previous food exporting regions to starvation levels by the nineteenth century; third, African production of cloth, metalware and other handicrafts was severely affected, not only by the loss of so many of its producers, but also by the fact that in return the slave traders penetrated the markets of the coast and hinterland with European cotton and manufactured goods; and fourth, as the demand for slaves multiplied and as many African kings and merchants became even more dependent on European trade, war raids for the capture of potential slaves from neighbouring societies became even more frequent, injecting political instability, consuming precious economic resources, and creating a vicious spiral in which rival kingdoms became ever more dependent on the slave trade to acquire the fire arms necessary for capturing more slaves and in turn defending their slaves against slave-hunting raids from neighbouring kingdoms (Rodney, 1972, pp. 104–23; Davidson, 1974, pp. 206 — 10; Inikoria, 1982).
The ties of dependence that originated during the period of slavery became even more extensive in the period of the formal colonization of Africa, and after dependence too, creating economies substantially dependent on a limited range of cash crops and raw materials required by the metropolitan economies which retained control over major sectors of production, pricing and the flow of profits (Brett, 1973; Leys, 1975; Howard, 1978; Rodney, 1972; Davidson, 1974).
A major destination for African slaves was the Caribbean islands where British settlers had begun to generate a huge demand for forced labour on sugar, cotton, coffee and tobacco plantations.
The form of slave production and exploitation and subsequent colonial development of the West Indies has also ensured for most of the islands a fate similar to that of many modern African states: a form of ‘peripheral’ development in which individual economies are dominated by a very small number of cash crops, often the same as those cultivated under the original system of slavery, the income from which is dependent on world commodity prices subject to considerable fluctuation and open to manipulation by metropolitan powers (Beckford, 1972).
A fuller understanding of the international economic order and modern migratory pressures also requires an analysis, inevitably a very brief one in the present context, of the British impact on the Indian states that came to form one of the centrepieces of the British Empire and the so-called ‘jewel in the crown’.
British colonial policies offered both food and industrial production.
A rapacious British land taxation policy was partly responsible for a series of famines in Bengal in the second half of the eighteenth century, while elsewhere in India the staple foods of the poor such as millet and pulses were displaced by the production for export of grains and commercial crops (Bagchi, 1982, pp. 79, 84, 86).
The process of de-industrialization in India under colonial rule began with the deliberate destruction of the cotton manufacturing industry and the opening up of Indian markets to British cotton manufacturers; from a net exporter, India was reduced to a major importer of cotton manufactures, most of these from Britain, and indeed India was forced to become the single largest importer of British cotton manufactures, sometimes taking as much as 40 per cent of British exports.
A variety of other industries were also ruined by British policy: silk goods manufacturers, for example, were compelled to restrict themselves to the production of raw silk, while gun making was seriously affected by a restrictive licensing policy and other means (Bagchi, 1982, p. 82).
Economic development in India was also thwarted, as in other colonies, by forms of racist discrimination which excluded locals from engaging in entrepreneurial activity.
Even the railway  system constructed under British rule can now be seen to have had an ambiguous role in relation to the Indian economy, for its benefits have to be set against its encouragement of export-based production and its role in opening up India to the inflow of manufactures, mainly from Britain (Bagchi, 1982, pp. 85-.6).
However, while slavery and colonialism contributed to the ‘underdevelopment’ of Africa, the Caribbean and India — and similar processes were at work in other colonies, often under other colonial powers, although not in the white Dominions of Australia, New Zealand and Canada — Britain obtained significant economic benefits from its imperial domination.
To continue with the example of India, it is well documented that there was a massive economic ‘drain' which transferred substantial export surpluses of goods and bullion to Britain.
For the period 1757–1822 it has been calculated that the aggregate drain was approximately £250 million, while it has been pointed out that for the period from the 1850s to the First World War surpluses from the Indian economy were crucial in allowing Britain to balance its deficits with Europe and the USA (Bagchi, 1982, pp. 81, 88).
The Indian economy was made to contribute heavily during the First World War, including a gift payment of £100 million.
The fortunes made out of slavery and the allied triangular trade in sugar, tobacco, cotton and other commodities produced in the Caribbean islands and America also played an important part in British economic development.
The enormous growth and prosperity of both Bristol and Liverpool in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were almost wholly due to the slave trade.
Some indication of the fortunes made out of slaves, sugar and cotton can be obtained from the size of estates of the traders in Bristol and Liverpool and London.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries those who had climbed to prosperity on the back of the slave trade were regularly leaving property and assets worth anything between £16,000 and £1 million.
They began to acquire for themselves important political positions, especially in Parliament, and the ‘West India lobby’ became a powerful political force (Fryer, 1984, pp. 40–50).
Of course, the fortunes were not spent or invested in the Caribbean.
Instead they funded the rapid development of Britain into a major industrial economy and formidable international power.
A substantial portion of the surpluses generated out of slave labour and the trade in cotton, sugar and tobacco was channelled into banking operations and undoubtedly provided one important element in the emergence of Britain's banking system, with most of the major banking corporations of today tracing some part of their profits to earlier banks set up with finds derived from the triangular trade (Fryer, 1984, pp. 40ff).
The exact significance for Britain's economic development of the surpluses generated out of the triangular trade and Britain's imperial domination of India and Africa will no doubt continue to be debated.
However, although it is very likely that the British industrial revolution would have occurred without these funds, it is difficult to imagine that Britain would have achieved the kind  of scale and pace of industrial development that it did without access to these funds and to the markets provided by the colonies.
In turn, as pointed out earlier, British domination contributed to the underdevelopment of the colonies by the drain of surpluses, destruction of indigenous industries, and other means.
Again, the precise effects of British imperial domination are inevitably matters of dispute (Kumar and Desai, 1983) and it is important to emphasize that the claim here is not that the level of present development of the regions of the Third World in question is simply the outcome of their colonial experience, but that it is difficult to understand the nature of this underdevelopment and the continuing exploitation of these countries within the international economic order without a grasp of the imperial impact.
In other words, without it one cannot explain why at the present time there is a maldistribution of world wealth and income such that the countries of the Northern hemisphere contain only 25 per cent of the world's population but obtain 80 per cent of the world's income, while the countries of the South contain 75 per cent of the world's population but obtain only 20 per cent of the world's income.
This profound asymmetry in the structure and evolution of the world economic system provides the essential background to the more recent migrations of black communities to Britain in the post-Second World War period, for one of its main effects has been the creation of pools of under- and unemployed workers in circumstances of poverty and restricted opportunity in the Third World, who find themselves having to undergo the painful dislocation entailed by migration and travel thousands of miles in search of work.
The Post-War Migrations to Britain
Poverty and restricted opportunities for employment as a result of under-development are usually regarded as so-called ‘push’ factors in the explanation of patterns of emigration from less developed countries, and in the case of the Indian sub-continent and the Caribbean Islands have operated powerfully throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in compelling sections of their populations to find work abroad, very often servicing the economic and military needs of the British Empire.
The Indian presence in far flung outposts of the Empire, for example, from Malaysia to East Africa, can only be understood in this context, and it is important to note that a tradition of emigration from Jamaica had already developed in the nineteenth century, with 2,000 Jamaicans migrating to build railways in Panama, followed by well over 80,000 who went to work on the first attempt at constructing the Panama Canal in the 1880s.
As the above examples illustrate, migration depends not merely on ‘push’ factors such as poverty and unemployment, but also the ‘pull’factors of employment opportunities in other regions or countries, coupled with favourable political climates and legal frameworks which enable and encourage  movement.
These ‘pull’ factors operated with particular force in the post-Second World War period as many of the European countries began to reconstruct and expand their economies at a rapid rate and found themselves suffering acute labour shortages which could only be relieved by the employment of foreign workers.
Labour shortages, especially in iron foundries, textiles, vehicle production, construction and food processing; in service industries, such as transport, catering and hotels; and in the state sector, in the growing National Health Service, provide the essential backdrop to the increase in black immigration to Britain in the post-war period.
Moreover, in all these sectors, shortages were particularly experienced in jobs involving unskilled and semi-skilled work, low pay, shift working, unsocial hours and unpleasant working conditions (Smith, 1977, pp. 64–81).
Initially, an attempt was made to fill the labour shortages by allowing over 100,000 Poles to stay on in Britain and by encouraging immigration from other European countries, but soon it was felt necessary to look to other sources of cheap labour, and immigration from the Caribbean and the Indian sub-continent was encouraged.
Indeed, organizations such as London Transport, the British Hotel and Restaurants Association and the National Health Service directly recruited workers in the Caribbean, although most black immigration to Britain during this period was not planned and regulated in this manner.
Nevertheless, there was a very close relationship between employment opportunities and trends of immigration, especially from the Caribbean; Ceri Peach's research demonstrates that throughout the 1950s periods of economic expansion led to a rise in immigration while periods of recession led to a decline (Peach, 1968).
Immigration to Britain from India and Pakistan has followed a slightly different pattern, with the real increase coming in the early 1960s, and later in response to the threat of the immigration controls that were eventually enshrined in a series of Immigration Acts, beginning with the 1962 Act (Robinson, 1986).
Immigration patterns have been substantially affected by the Acts.
While before 1962 most immigration into Britain consisted of men, temporarily migrant and unaccompanied by families, the post-1962 period has been one of permanent settlement with workers and their families (Braham, 1985, p. 112).
The irony has often been noted that the imposition of legislature controls actually resulted in a dramatic increase in immigration from the Caribbean and the Indian sub-continent, as people attempted to beat the ban, this severed the previously close connections between employment opportunities and migration to Britain.
Black immigration into Britain in the post-war period should be seen in the context of overall patterns of migration in relation to the United Kingdom.
That is, it is important to remember that for every year from 1966 to 1983, only two years, 1979 and 1983, were characterized by net immigration; in all other years more people left Britain than entered (Gordon and Klug, 1985, p. 22).
As a result of the various Immigration Acts there is now virtually no  ‘primary’ immigration from the New Commonwealth; most settlement comes from the close relations and dependents of those already resident in Britain (ibid.).
There are now about 2.4 million black people in the UK, comprising 4.3 per cent of the total population.
Over 40 per cent of these are born in the UK (Gordon and Newnham, 1986, p. 6) and a very substantial proportion of Asian and Afro-Caribbean children in British schools are now British born.
Thus it makes little sense to refer to ‘immigrant’ communities; what we now have are minority black British communities, that have already made a very substantial contribution to the growth and prosperity of the British economy.
The Post-War Economic Boom: the Contribution of Migrant Labour
It cannot be doubted that the post-war black migrations have been of considerable economic benefit to Britain, just as the migrations from North Africa, Turkey, Greece and Italy have boosted the economies of Western Europe.
Several economic advantages can be identified.
First, black workers were recruited for precisely those jobs, usually poorly paid and involving unpleasant working conditions, which the indigenous white working class was able to reject at the time of economic expansion, thus preventing the development of bottlenecks in production and permitting higher levels of capital accumulation.
Second, several surveys have concluded that the importation of foreign labour was an important factor in constraining wages and controlling inflation (Castles, Booth and Wallace, 1984, pp. 27–8).
Other economic benefits of migrant labour include the recruitment of migrants to particular jobs at lower wages than indigenous workers, partly because job titles and grades could be invented to cover up the fact that job content remained the same, and also because of the threat of repatriation and other forms of intimidation; the enhanced possibilities for the introduction of shiftwork and piece-work, deskilling, and the slower introduction of safety measures; the avoidance of national insurance payments by the recruitment of illegal migrants; and the ability to shed and recruit with relative ease, thus avoiding the costs of labour hoarding (Paine, 1977; Fevre, 1983).
The recruitment of migrant labour has also had what one might refer to as a series of indirect benefits, especially in the earlier phase of immigration, because Britain and the other importing countries were able to avoid the costs involved in actually producing the immigrant labour power, from the birth to the maturation of the workers concerned, and because of the lower demands on the welfare state of economically active, healthy, single, young men and women who nevertheless paid the same rate of taxation as other workers (Gorz, 1970).
Racism, Power and Inequality
The previous discussion has emphasized that black workers were recruited for particular types of jobs in specific sectors of the British economy.
This has also produced very distinctive geographical concentrations of black communities in Britain as well as specific locations within the urban conurbations where they have settled.
And it is crucial to recognize that widespread racial discrimination has been an important factor in reproducing these patterns of employment and settlement and, as we shall see, also has a significant role in explanations of levels of achievement by black pupils in British schools.
High levels of direct racial discrimination in employment have been repeatedly demonstrated by national and local studies, both at the level of initial recruitment and in relation to promotion.
The most recent studies suggest that more than a third of employers discriminate against black applicants for jobs, and that levels of discrimination are the same for Asian and Afro-Caribbean applicants, for men and women, and vary little between job categories, although previous studies have documented higher levels of racial discrimination in relation to unskilled manual jobs (Brown and Gay, 1985; Smith, 1977).
The latest report on the employment of black graduates also concludes that they experience greater difficulties than white graduates in obtaining employment; in addition, the jobs obtained appear to be inferior to those gained by white graduates (CRE, 1987).
Given the original form of recruitment of black workers and the operation of racial discrimination it is not surprising that a much larger proportion of black employees are manual workers than the white population in Britain.
A recent Policy Studies Institute investigation reveals that while 83 per cent of Afro-Caribbean men and 73 per cent of Asian men are manual workers, the proportion of white male manual workers is 58 per cent.
Also, larger proportions of Afro-Caribbean and Asian manual workers are in unskilled and semi-skilled work, and larger proportions than white manual workers engage in shift work.
Moreover, while 5 per cent of Afro-Caribbean men and 13 per cent of Asian men are in professional and managerial occupations, 19 per cent of white males are in such jobs; but it is important to note that the ‘Asian’ category conceals significant material differences, with 25 per cent of African Asians being in the professions and managerial employment, and nearly 70 per cent of Bangladeshi workers occupying semi-skilled or unskilled jobs (Brown, 1984).
For women workers there is a different pattern: 47 per cent of Afro-Caribbean women and 52 per cent of Asian women are manual workers, while 37 per cent of white women are manual workers; and 1 per cent of Afro-Caribbean women as compared to 6 per cent Asian and 7 per cent of white women are in professional and managerial occupations.
The largest proportions of all women are either in low-level non-manual work or in semi-skilled manual work (Brown, 1984).
Moreover, as Gordon and Newnham (1986) recently emphasized, ‘Black  people who do find jobs consistently earn less than white people and are in lower level jobs, even when differences in qualifications, work experience and language difficulties are taken into account.
These differences can therefore only be explained by racial discrimination’(p. 16).
Black youth has also experienced high levels of racial discrimination when applying for work or training (Troyna and Smith, 1983).
An investigation into the Youth Training Scheme, for example, points out that a much smaller proportion of young black people were obtaining places on the Mode A schemes, which offered better chances of permanent employment, and in larger proportions found themselves placed in Mode B schemes, with worse prospects (CRE, 1984).
Given the well-documented existence of widespread discrimination against black job-seekers it is hardly surprising that levels of unemployment within the black communities are substantially higher than those for white people.
In 1984 the unemployment rate for the latter was 10.6 per cent, but it was 23 per cent for Afro-Caribbeans, 34.6 per cent for people of Pakistani and Bangladeshi origin, and 15.2 per cent for those of Indian origin.
Black youth suffers particularly high levels of unemployment: in 1983, for example, when unemployment rates for white young people were 30 per cent for men and 23 per cent for women, the levels were 46 per cent and 50 per cent respectively for Afro-Caribbeans and 35 per cent and 47 per cent respectively for Asians.
As many as 65 per cent of Afro-Caribbean youth in Handsworth, Birmingham, were unemployed in 1985 (Newnham, 1986).
Although much of the racism that black job-seekers experience is of a direct and overt kind, it is important to recognize that a variety of indirect forms of discrimination also operates against black people in the search for employment, ranging from common employers' practices like recruiting relatives and children of existing workers to the operation of particular conceptions of the ‘good’ worker which militate against the employment of workers thought to be different in manner or appearance (Lee and Wrench, 1983; Blackburn and Mann, 1979; Jenkins, 1986).
Moreover, research in this context has demonstrated the existence of misleading stereotypes of the abilities of black workers, with images that are often contradictory as between employers, and which reflect a willingness to generalize about ethnic characteristic on the basis of very limited experience (Lee and Wrench, 1983; Jenkins, 1986).
The racism which manifests itself in employment is only one, albeit crucial, part of the general experience of discrimination and subordination that black people have had to confront in Britain.
In an introductory discussion of the kind undertaken in this chapter it is simply not possible to discuss comprehensively the various forms, spheres and agencies of racism that operate in British society, for example, those deriving from the state's implementation of increasingly tighter immigration controls as well as nationality legislation, or We activities of some sections of the police (Dummett, 1982; Gordon and Klug, 1985; Benyon, 1986).
Moreover, there is the extremely serious issue of  harassment and physical violence directed against black communities which  in some urban areas takes places on a routine basis with highly distressing and in some cases fatal consequences (CRE, 1979; Home Office, 1981; CRE, 1981; Klug, 1982).
However, the question of housing does require more extended treatment, both for its centrality as a material resource in the pattern of life chances of black people and for its possible role in understanding black pupils' achievements in British schools.
Widespread racial discrimination against black people in the availability and allocation of housing has been extensively discussed in a range of surveys and investigations.
In the private sector a large number of estate agents, landlords, accommodation agencies and building societies have been found to operate discriminatory registers, refusing to let or sell or lend to black individuals and families, while direct and indirect discrimination in many local authority housing departments has led to black tenants being allocated inferior council housing (Gordon and Newnham, 1986).
For all forms of tenure, black families are more likely to be in property that is older, more crowded and in areas that are likely to suffer from a variety of disadvantages in relation to environmental and other conditions (Brown, 1984, pp. 66–127).
There is evidence that the high incidence of unemployment amongst black people will make housing conditions, especially overcrowding, worse as young unemployed people are finding it difficult to move out after marriage and set up their own homes (Brah, 1986).
Sociologists have often pointed out that the various processes and outcomes of racial discrimination referred to above have produced a very distinctive location for black people in the British class structure.
Rex, for instance, has argued that most black people form an underclass in British society, occupying the most disadvantaged positions in employment, housing and other areas relative even to the white working class (Rex and Tomlinson, 1979), while Miles refers to the formation of a distinct black ‘fraction’ of the working class (Miles, 1982).
Moreover, this distinctive structural location has been remarkably resilient to change and it is commonly argued that schooling plays a big part in the reproduction over time of the position of black people in British society.
More specifically, it has been suggested that the ‘underachievement’ of black pupils in schools has played a significant part in ensuring that second and third generation young British black people continue to find themselves suffering the ‘disadvantages’encountered by their parents and grandparents.
However, as we shall see, the issue of black ‘underachievement’ in schools is rather more complex than might first appear to be the case.
Black ‘Underachievement’ in British Schools: Some Critical Questions
There has been widespread concern in the last 20 years that children from Afro-Caribbean and Asian communities are underachieving in British schools  and, therefore, are at a disadvantage in entering further and higher education, acquiring professional and technical qualifications and in finding employment.
Investigations carried out by ILEA in the 1960s tended to bear out this anxiety (Little, 1975), as did a variety of other surveys (for a useful review see Tomlinson, 1983, pp. 27–59).
Much of the concern came from the black communities: in 1971 Bernard Coard, a black teacher, published an influential document entitled How the West Indian Child is made Educationally Sub-Normal in the British School , while Afro-Caribbean parents and local teachers in Redbridge, frustrated by the relative lack of research and support, conducted their own investigation and in 1978 published disturbing evidence on the school performance of black children.
A national inquiry was eventually established, initially under Anthony Rampton and then Lord Swann.
Both the Rampton Report,West Indian Children in Our Schools (1981) and the Swann Report,Education for All (1985) appeared to confirm earlier anxieties.
A survey of six LEAs conducted for Rampton revealed that only 3 per cent of Afro-Caribbean school leavers gained five or more O level passes or CSE grade ones in 1978–79, compared with 18 per cent of Asian pupils, 16 per cent of other school leavers in these LEAs and 21 per cent of all school leavers from state schools.
Furthermore, at A level, only 2 per cent of Afro-Caribbean students obtained one or more passes, compared with 13 per cent of Asians, 12 per cent of other school leavers in these LEAs and 13 per cent of all leavers from state schools.
However, the evidence on ‘underachievement’ that is now available from this and other investigations should be treated with considerable caution.
One important issue here concerns the comparability as well as the validity of measures of achievement.
For example, although Rampton and Swann rely on public examinations, other studies have based their conclusions on a variety of other measures, including teacher assessments of reading or mathematics; moreover, many of these tests are likely to contain cultural bias or be affected by the fact that they were administered by white teachers or researchers (Hegarty and Lucas, 1979; Bagley, 1975).
It is also questionable whether research undertaken in the 1960s and 1970s is relevant today, for the achievements of Afro-Caribbean and Asian pupils are constantly improving.
When the six LEAs in the Rampton survey were studied again for the Swann Report, a larger proportion of Afro-Caribbean pupils were obtaining academic qualifications: the percentage of such pupils obtaining five or more higher grades at O level and CSE and those obtaining one or more passes at A level had doubled in the period from 1979 to 1982.
Most studies focus on school achievement, but this may be misleading because there is evidence to suggest that Afro-Caribbean and Asian students are more likely than white students to stay on in further education and some do manage to obtain academic qualifications that had eluded them at school (Craft and Craft, 1983), while one investigation suggests that young black people in inner city areas had gained better academic qualifications than white  youth in the same areas (Roberts, Duggan and Noble, 1983), a finding borne out more generally by some other studies (Brown, 1984).
Blanket comparisons between white, Afro-Caribbean and Asian pupils of the kind prevalent in most investigations can be highly misleading.
For example, although Rampton-type surveys suggest that Asian pupils are performing as well as white pupils, there is growing evidence of wide variations in school achievement within the Asian communities: in particular , children of Bangladeshi origin appear to be achieving at much lower levels than other Asian groups (House of Commons Home Affairs Committee, 1986).
Undifferentiated comparisons which ignore parental occupations and educational backgrounds and environmental conditions like housing are also of very limited value.
In other words the dimension of social class needs to be considered.
However, few studies of relative achievement have taken social class into account and this is very unfortunate as there is now overwhelming evidence of a strong relationship between social class and educational achievement (for a recent overview see Mortimore and Blackstone, 1982).
It is hardly surprising that the studies that have taken account of the social class background of white and black pupils tend to reveal that the dramatic differences produced by simple comparisons tend to diminish, often considerably (Bagley et al .,
1979).
Thus, the achievements of white working class pupils — children whose parents are manual workers — are much closer to those of Afro-Caribbean pupils, and it is arguable that the findings of Rampton, Swann and similar investigations can be explained by the fact that a larger proportion of Afro-Caribbeans than whites are working class, and are likely to be earning less and living in worse housing than whites, as documented earlier in this chapter (Brown, 1984; Reeves and Chevannes, 1981).
Similarly, the poorer progress of Bangladeshi children could in part be accounted for by the fact that Bangladeshi communities suffer from the effects of poor housing, poverty and high rates of unemployment (House of Commons Home Affairs Committee, 1986).
Indeed the continuing higher levels of poverty and unemployment amongst all the black communities are likely to further affect the educational chances of black children, not least because of the implications of material deprivation and unemployment for the physical and mental health of both adults and children (Arnot, 1987; Taylor, 1987; Townsend, 1987,; Brah, 1986).
It is also important to differentiate between boys and girls.
Some of the few studies that have taken account of gender suggest that Afro-Caribbean girls are achieving higher levels than boys at school level, partly because they are pursuing different strategies, which are necessary in order to survive in the context of high unemployment and low wages for black male workers (Fuller, 1983; see also Riley, 1986; Driver, 1977).
Little systematic evidence on Asian girls is available at present, but it is emerging that their educational achievements are continually improving and it is clear that the common image of the docile Asian girl uninterested in education and ‘torn’ between western and  Asian cultures is a gross stereotype (Brah and Minhas, 1986).
In addition, it is likely that unlike other girls they have a more positive attitude towards the sciences (Amos and Parmar, 1981; Fuller, 1983).
Much previous research, in ignoring the social structural features of class and gender, has tended instead to focus on a variety of other factors in explaining supposed patterns of ‘underachievement’, most of which are now regarded as highly dubious.
The five most common explanations have been: Afro-Caribbean family structure; lack of parental interest and support for black pupils; low self-esteem; differences in IQ; and language difficulties.
With regard to the first, it was often argued that Afro-Caribbean family and child-rearing patterns harmed the intellectual and educational development of black children, but the misleading assumptions about these patterns and consequences have now been effectively contested (Cross, 1978; Reeves and Chevannes, 1983).
Moreover, all recent evidence suggests a high level of interest among both Afro-Caribbean and Asian parents in their children's schooling and records high aspirations for their children's performance (Tomlinson, 1984).
The third common explanation suggested that growing up in a white racist society and with few positive black public images created low self-esteem and self-concept in black children which in turn led to poor performance in schools.
However, the evidence on this has been vigorously contested, especially by Maureen Stone, who argues that ‘no body of research has ever demonstrated unequivocally that the children of the working-class as a whole, poor children or black children in particular, suffer from poor self-image or self-esteem’(Stone, 1981, p. 8), while Milner concludes that there are now higher measures on tests of black self-esteem than in earlier studies because of the rise of black political movements in both the USA and Britain which has fostered positive black self-images and consciousness (Milner, 1983).
The idea that the educational achievements of black students can be explained by genetically inherited lower intellectual ability relative to whites, as measured by IQ tests, has been even more vigorously challenged, with Kamin providing one of the most effective critiques (Kamin, 1977).
A recent review of the IQ debate, commissioned by the Swann inquiry, concluded that the largest variation in IQ scores was caused by the social and economic conditions under which children grew up and pointed out, ‘If, therefore, we wish to affect the IQ scores of children from ethnic minorities, or indeed their school performance, we might make a start by improving the social and economic circumstances of their families’(Mackintosh and Mascie-Taylor, 1985, p. 148).
Finally, with respect to language issues, a variety of debates are still in progress and it is premature to draw firm conclusions; however, there is some evidence to suggest that bilingualism may actually enhance educational performance (Houlton, 1986), that in the case of Afro-Caribbean pupils there may well be ‘dialect interference’, although it is clear too that some of the problems here may derive from the negative attitudes of teachers towards Creole (Edwards, 1979), and that in the case of some Bangladeshi pupils lack  of familiarity with English may be an obstacle to academic achievement (House of Commons Home Affairs Committee, 1986).
Racism, Teacher Expectations and ‘Underachievement'
The Rampton Report, in particular, emphasized the role of both intentional and unintentional racism in the school context in depressing the performance of black pupils.The committee of inquiry found that many of the teachers they met held the view that Afro-Caribbean pupils ‘inevitably caused difficulties’ and were unlikely to achieve in academic terms, although they had high expectations of their potential in sport and the expressive arts (Rampton, 1981, p. 13).
Other studies have also shown that many teachers express stereotyped and often contradictory generalizations about black pupils, with some teachers tending to regard Afro-Caribbean pupils as lazy and withdrawn while others thought them to be aggressive and disruptive; a common stereotype of Asian pupils among teachers is that they are passive and industrious but they and their parents are over-ambitious (Brittan, 1976; Giles, 1977; Verma, 1982; Lee and Wrench, 1983; Swann, 1985; Eggleston et al .,
1986).
Although research in this area is limited, what there is indicates that teachers' negative conceptions of their black pupils often translate themselves into discriminatory practices in a variety of school contexts.
For instance, it is difficult not to see a connection between the prejudiced views of heads and teachers involved in ESN-M referral processes and the overrepresentation of Afro-Caribbean children in special schools (Tomlinson, 1981).
Green's research reported in Swann (1985) demonstrated that intolerant teachers gave least time and attention to Afro-Caribbean boys and Asian girls, while a major investigation,Education for Some , documented that academically able Afro-Caribbean pupils were finding themselves relegated to lower bands and were being entered for examinations below their abilities, with teachers perceptions playing an important part in the discriminatory misallocation (Eggleston et al .,
1986).
An inquiry into the referral and suspension of Afro-Caribbean pupils from Birmingham schools recorded that they were almost four times more likely to be suspended from secondary schools as white pupils; even when the main reason for expulsion was common to both white and black pupils, the latter were more likely to be suspended and the inquiry alluded to a considerable level of hostility, mistrust and ‘cultural misunderstanding’ as between black pupils and white teachers (CRE, 1985; see also Driver, 1979).
Afro-Caribbean and Asian children are indeed painfully aware that many teachers view them negatively and some studies have documented reports of routine racist remarks by teachers (see for example Wright in this volume).
It is arguable that teacher expectations and behaviour could be creating an interactive process of low expectations, low achievements and black pupil  resistance, although it is important to recognize that teacher expectations do not automatically translate themselves into self-fulfilling prophecies (Short, 1985).
Equally important may be the ‘institutional racism’ embedded in various taken-for-granted features of the school.
For example, the curriculum may ignore or devalue black cultures and achievements and may also ignore racism as a structural phenomenon and as part of the daily experience of black pupils.
Assemblies, dress requirements, school meals provision and links with parents may be insensitive to different cultural backgrounds and linguistic diversity.
There may be few black teachers in the school and fewer in senior positions.
This is why the emphasis in multicultural and anti-racist education is now towards ‘whole school policies’, involving a fundamental reappraisal of the assumptions, practices and outcomes, intentional and unintentional, of school life (Straker-Welds, 1984; Arora and Duncan, 1986).
Thus, on closer inspection, the issue of the ‘underachievement’ of black pupils in British schools turns out to be rather complex.
Given the inconclusive nature of the evidence on patterns of performance and the negative connotations of ‘underachievement’ it is time to drop the term and refer instead to relative levels of achievement .
It should also be clear that future investigations and policies must take account of class and gender and be sensitive to possible differences between minority black communities.
Conclusion
Indeed one of the major conclusions to be drawn from the historical and sociological discussion in this chapter is that a proper analysis of the operation of ‘race’ as an element in British society and education requires an understanding of its interrelationship with the structured and cultural divisions which derive from class and gender relations, in the context of an understanding of Britain's past imperial domination and its continuing legacies.
However, it is also important to appreciate that the dynamics of ‘race’ and racism as dimensions of British society and education are now significantly affected by the ‘racialization’of British politics and the accelerated decline of the British economy in the context of recession and very specific state policies, some of which bear down particularly hard on black youth.
The ‘racialization, of British politics throughout the last 20 years has ensured that most areas of public debate — law and order, the welfare state, unemployment, youth, education, the inner cities, the family — now have a racial dimension and often one in which black communities, but especially black youth, appear as threats in a wider demonology of scroungers, shirkers, muggers, drug pushers, school failures and inadequate parents (Hall et al .,
1978; CCCS, 1982).
The decline of British manufacturing industry has had a devastating impact on the inner cities where such a large proportion of the black population live and this has been exacerbated by racial discrimination by employers to yield high levels of  black youth unemployment (Martin and Rowthorn, 1986; Newnham, 1986).
Insensitive and often racist policing have fused with inner urban decay to create a climate of both despair and rebellion in which black (and white) youth's sense of injustice has on several occasions provoked urban revolt (Benyon, 1984; West Midlands County Council, 1986; Gifford, 1986).
Schools may feel powerless to alter a situation in which wider economic and political forces have such a crucial influence.
But to ignore these issues would be a serious abnegation of their responsibility in combating racism and giving black communities a fair opportunity to make their rightful contribution and participate on equal democratic terms as citizens.
Some schools and LEAs have already begun to construct multicultural and anti-racist policies; it is up to the majority of institutions that appear not to have grasped the urgency of the issues to follow their lead.
Education, Employment and Recruitment
Robert Moore
This chapter will consider the way in which educational qualifications are actually used in the labour market in the recruitment of young workers.
In general, recent studies have found that the use of qualifications varies significantly between different sectors of the labour market and is subject to considerable regional variation.
Non-educational criteria almost invariably have priority in recruitment over educational ones and employers tend to have only the vaguest notions as to what particular qualifications entail or imply.
These factors are differentiated by sex and race and also work to reproduce gender and racial differentiation in employment (and unemployment).
The findings to be considered here (and the broader body of research of which they are typical) suggest that the link between education and occupation is much more tenuous than is often supposed and call into question many of the assumptions currently held about employers’ attitudes to young workers and to educational standards.
This is particularly significant given the place of these assumptions within the occupationalist rhetoric of the present assault upon education and liberal education in particular.
Qualifications and Recruitment
A number of illuminating pieces of research have been published recently which look in detail at the way in which qualifications are used by employers in the process of the recruitment of young workers.
Cumin, for instance, traces a group of school leavers from school, through the labour market and into employment.
He notes a sharp contrast between the expectations of pupils, parents and teachers about the importance of qualifications and their real significance (Cumin, 1983).
A study by Jones (Jones, 1983) provides detailed evidence on the almost complete lack of communication between examination boards and employers and on the uninformed and arbitrary way in which employers use qualifications.
Ashton et al .
(1982, 1986), in an extremely thorough investigation of the relative positions of young workers in  contrasting local labour markets, define a number of different recruitment strategies in which qualifications vary in significance, are used in different ways and are almost invariably of secondary importance relative to other factors.
It is precisely the subordinate role of qualifications which is the striking feature of this type of detailed work.
(a) Expectations and Practice
The study by Cumin follows a group of school leavers from their college in Leicestershire out into ‘the world of work’.
The purpose was to discover precisely how important qualifications were in determining their occupational chances.
The study begins by noting the high expectations that the pupils, their parents and their teachers had in this regard.
Fifty-seven per cent of pupils and 62 per cent of parents thought that qualifications would be very important , and 98 per cent and 96 per cent respectively thought they would be either very or fairly important.
After examining what happened in practice, Cumin concludes that these expectations were not ‘based upon actuality’(p. 58).
The study found that 56 per cent of the jobs taken by the young people in fact had no formal educational requirements attached to them.
In the end, only 15 per cent of the school leavers considered that their qualifications had been essential to their getting jobs.
Cumin makes the significant point that employers appoint school leavers to posts before examination results are known in any case.
It is very rare for young people recruited on that basis to be sacked if they subsequently fail to pass the exam or gain a certain grade.
Obviously the simple non-availability of the result must severely limit the significance that employers can place on exam-passing per se .
However, the limitations upon examinations in shaping recruitment practices are not restricted to the effects of this particular practical exigency.
Employers in the main seem to see little direct relevance of education to specific job requirements.
This would seem to be the general conclusion of research in this area, and Cumin's conclusion that:
In terms of the overall needs employers had of young people, it was clear that non-academic criteria, attitudes to work and personal characteristics, and basic skills, essentially those of reading, writing and arithmetic, were far more important to employers than academic qualifications.
(ibid, p. 57)
is one widely echoed elsewhere.
(b) Employers and qualifications
The study by Jones (op. cit.) provides information on the use of qualifications by employers in three English regions (London and the South East, the West Midlands, and Yorkshire and Humberside) and also includes some comparisons with other European countries.Fifteen hundred establishments were surveyed, ranging in size from employing less than 25 to more than 500, and spanning lo sectors of the Revised Standard Classification of Industry.
Five  categories of workers were defined:professional and managerial, technician, clerical and sales, skilled manual and operatives .
These categories were represented to varying degrees in the various sectors.
Employers were found to use five main selection devices:application forms, academic qualifications, school references, performance in aptitude tests , and interviews .
The relative importance of academic qualifications varied between categories, being more significant for non-manual than for manual workers.
In all cases the interview was the most important device with qualifications coming second for non-manuals.
The level of qualifications varied according to the level of employment.
There was particular emphasis upon English and Maths.
Jones concludes her detailed investigation by saying that:
These figures suggest that employers, at least with the present education system, largely feel that basic knowledge in a few subjects is all that they find useful for their purpose.
Case study experience further suggests that even this use is questionable.
Observation…suggest(s) that employers' expectations of the subject content and skills are often very wide of the mark.
This appears especially true of Maths.
Physics and English, the most frequently required subjects.
(ibid, p. 22)
The report shows that employers tend to have only extremely vague notions as to what examinations in particular subjects actually involve.
There was virtually no direct communication between employers and examination boards.
Out of 22 GCE and CSE examination boards, only 8 (all CSE) gave out information specific to employers and only 9 (8 CSE and i GCE) actively disseminated information to employers.
At the same time, only 11 boards (8 CSE and 3 GCE) reported ever having received requests for information from employers.
Only 3 boards (1 CSE and 2 GCE) had an interest in researching employers' views.
Given this, it is probably not surprising that even where qualifications were stipulated, the requirement was not rigidly enforced.
Jones found that although a reasonably high number of employers thought that qualifications were desirable, less than half thought them to be essential.
Even where they did, there was a fair degree of flexibility.
Interestingly, ‘very few ’ employers saw examinations as essential for specific jobs (ibid., p. 23).
Rather, they were demanded most rigorously where further training involved FE or professional courses where the educational qualification was an entry requirement .
In other words, the educational qualification was related to further educational needs, not to the needs of jobs as such.
Jones concludes that ‘These results support the…assertion that desirability of certain qualifications is not closely related to actual job performance.’
(loc. cit.)
(c) Recruitment strategies
The findings of Jones's work are very much in line with those of Ashton et al .
(1983).
Only half of the employers interviewed in Leicester, Sunderland and St Albans thought that qualifications were useful as ‘yardsticks of a candidate's  ability ’(ibid., p. 55).
Twenty-three per cent of them thought that ‘they could possibly be of some use with certain reservations ’ and 27 per cent of them considered them to be of no use at all.
Forty-five per cent of the first group (i.e. 45 per cent of 50 per cent) thought them to be a true measure of ability and a third saw them as useful indicators of attitude.
In the second group, 69 per cent thought that other factors were more important than qualifications, and in the third, 75 per cent ignored them altogether or considered them meaningless.
Ashton et al .
found that employers adopt a range of recruitment strategies in which educational qualifications are combined with other attributes to varying degrees.
The most common approach was that where ‘the balance between academic and non-academic criteria shifts in favour of the non-academic ’(ibid., p. 52).
It is important to note that the educational qualifications are not being treated as an index of non-educational attributes (e.g. docility).
The other factors which employers take into account (self-presentation, attitude to work, interest in the job, family background ) are seen as independent from education.
The authors define five recruitment strategies which can be summarized as follows:
1
educational qualifications perform a determinative function.
Here the qualification is the most important criterion in recruitment although other factors might be considered in the interview stage, though in a subordinate role;
2
educational qualifications perform a screening function.
Qualifications are used to pre-select the sample of candidates.
A minimum level is set and those at or above that level are then selected by non-academic criteria.
Qualifications above the minimum bestow no advantage;
3
educational qualifications perform a focusing function.
They will be waived if a candidate possesses the appropriate non-academic criteria.
This is the point at which non-academic come to take precedence over academic criteria.
4
educational qualifications are functionless .
Recruitment is based on personality or physical attributes which are seen as having nothing to do with education;
5
educational qualifications have a negative function.
Qualifications disqualify the person from being considered (e.g. on the grounds that they will become easily bored or might become a trouble maker).
It is, of course, being assumed here that there is some kind of relationship between the qualification level and the nature of the work.
In this study ii was the third strategy which was most commonly used (53 per cent) followed by the fourth (39 per cent ).
Hence non-academic criteria have a clear priority over the academic.
The use of strategies varied according to the occupational category: at the professional and managerial level, 82 per cent of employers used strategy 2, and at the technician level it was used by 74 per cent.
Strategy 3 was that  most used for clerical and sales (57 per cent) and for skilled manual (60 per cent ).
At the operative level, strategy four is most common (see ibid., Table 49).
The use of different strategies relates to the size of the firm.
In general, larger firms tended to make more use of qualifications (possibly reflecting the existence of a trained personnel staff who themselves owe their position to qualifications).
More reliance was placed upon O than A levels.
The study found that 72 per cent of employers in the top size band saw qualifications as useful as against only 30 per cent in the smallest, where 49 per cent saw them as not useful compared with only 12 per cent in the largest (see ibid., Tables 46, 48 and 50).
The size of the establishment could reasonably be expected to affect the number of young people being exposed to the different recruitment strategies (although the relative numbers of small employers would also have to be borne in mind).
However, it was found that many large companies took on very few young people (20 per cent of those employing above i, 000 recruited fewer than ten per year (ibid., p. 47)).
Hence, ‘the relationship between the size of the employing unit and the number of young people recruited each year was not as close as might have been expected’(ibid., p. 47).
Ashton et al.'s extremely detailed studies indicate the dangers of generalizing about the education/production relationship.
Their more recent work emphasizes the very considerable regional variations which reflect relative unemployment rates.
The complex variations and interactions between factors such as recruitment strategies, size of firm, sector, area and local industry mix introduce a wide range of contingencies into the situation which are further complicated by gender and race.
Employers, Educational Standards and Young Workers
A central plank of the current attack upon education and the teaching profession (and one which has grown since Callaghan's Great Debate speech) is that of employers' dissatisfaction with educational standards and with the quality of young workers.
This alleged ‘failure’ on the part of teachers is a main feature of the rhetoric which legitimates the changes which are being imposed.
Consequently it is important to critically examine its basis in reality.
The type of detailed empirical research reviewed above suggests that scepticism is to be strongly recommended.
Employers, in fact, appear to be not only ill-informed about education but relatively arbitrary in the uses to which they put it.
Given the crucial role that the Manpower Services Commission has played in the undermining of education and the construction of its current occupationalist surrogate, its contribution to this debate deserves close scrutiny.
It is ironic that the (MSC's) Holland Report was published in the same year (1977) as the Shirley Williams' Green Paper on   education which followed on from ‘The Great Debate’.
The Holland Report looked explicitly at the issue of employers' dissatisfaction with young workers and presented its information in such a way as to support the idea of education's failure in this area.
I have suggested elsewhere that their presentation of their evidence benefits from closer examination.
The Report discusses employers' evaluations of young workers relative to older ones in terms of thirteen ‘essential attributes’.
In the case of unskilled/ semi-skilled young workers (i.e. the YOP/YTS target group), 81 per cent of the employers listed ‘willingness/attitude to work ’ as the most important attribute.
The second most popular one was ‘good level of general fitness' , mentioned by 47 per cent, followed by ‘appearance/tidiness ’(39 per cent ) and ‘specific physical attributes ’(36 per cent ).
The first specifically educational attribute (‘basic 3Rs ’) appears fifth, being mentioned by only 21 per cent of employers.
The rest of the thirteen essential attributes range between a mention by 20 per cent for ‘mature/stable ’ down to a mere 2 per cent for ‘specific educational qualifications ' (!)
The discussion which follows in the Report for young people in general is  based mainly on a rating which is established by subtracting the number of employers who think that young people are worse than older workers from those who think that they are better on each of these attributes.
On this basis they come out very badly with negative marks on nine out of the thirteen attributes.
However, inspection shows that there are in fact three employer positions:(1)young people are no different/noncomparable , or, if they are different, are (2)better or (3)worse .
The rating on which young people do so badly is derived only from that fraction of employers who say they are different .
It is a simple arithmetical exercise to reconstitute the original figures.
When this is done, a rather different picture emerges.
In fact, young people come out worse overall on only three out of the thirteen attributes relative to older workers.
Two of these are directly age related —‘past experience’(worse: 59 per cent ), and ‘mature/stable’(worse: 55 per cent ).
The third is ‘good written English/literate’(worse: 51 per cent ).
Ironically, the attribute on which young people do best relative to older workers is specific educational qualifications which actually comes bottom of the employers' list of essential attributes, being mentioned by only 2 per cent of employers!
In fact, employers give all the educational attributes a low priority.
The data corresponds precisely to the situation described by Ashton et al 's recruitment strategies with non-educational criteria taking priority over educational ones.
The top four attributes are each of this type.
If we take the attribute which employers most often saw as ‘essential’,willingness/attitude to work (mentioned by 81 per cent), we see that the MSC's poor rating of — 32 in fact reflects a negative judgement by less than half of employers (53 per cent said that young workers are different in this respect and 43 per cent of those said they were worse ).
In fact, this represents the precise opposite of the MSC position —the majority of employers think that young workers are either no  different or better !
Interestingly this figure is consistent with that most often encountered in the literature in this area where usually between 70 per cent to 80 per cent of employers are favourable to young workers.
Ashton et al .,
for instance, say that:
Despite the many grumbles and adverse comments, 70 per cent of all employers interviewed claimed to have been satisfied with the standard of work of young people taken on by them in the previous two years, and only 14 per cent expressed dissatisfaction.
Indeed, of the respondents in the 60 establishments employing over 5,000 workers, all but one expressed satisfaction.
(Ashton et al .,
1983, p. 56)
The probable significance of all this is that it is mistaken to attempt to generalize about employers' attitudes to young workers.
Clearly many are dissatisfied and feel that they can point to declining standards (e.g. in the numeracy of engineering apprentices), but this situation is more likely to reflect changing social patterns of recruitment rather than a real decline in ‘educational standards’.
Paradoxically it could result from an actual general improvement in standards combined with expanding opportunities in further and higher education.
The ‘type of lad’ who once became an apprentice now goes on to take an engineering degree and is replaced at that qualification level by a different category of young person.
In earlier times the former had been underachieving educationally whereas the latter are now near the peak of their attainment level.
If these complex changes over time in the relationship between general improvements in attainment, social bases of recruitment and expanded further educational opportunities are not taken into account, the general improvement can appear from the fixed position of an employer as a decline in standards.
Work experience
As the examination of the Holland Report data indicates, the problem which young people have in the labour market reflects the age-related issue of lack of experience .
It is this rather than defective education that disadvantages them.
An examination by Richards (1982) of the factors employed in the recruitment of apprentices in the East Midlands illustrates some of the problems in this area, especially in relation to the current occupationalist assertion that young people will benefit from a more ‘vocational’ education in order to counteract their lack of experience.
Richards asked employers about the factors they took into account when recruiting apprentices.
The percentages of employers mentioning the following were:evening classes (92 per cent),holiday jobs (85 per cent ),Saturday jobs (84 per cent ),hobbies and interests (77 per cent ),paper rounds (73 per cent ),membership of clubs and social societies (68 per cent ),school work experience schemes (52 per cent )(Richards, 1982, Table B, p. 7).
The poor showing of school work experience is striking.
The reasons for this are illuminating.
The contrast between work experience schemes and  informal work experience lies in the fact that the latter is taken by employers as evidence of initiative, an interest in earning money and the ability to sustain regular work discipline (getting up early, etc.).
Paper rounds in particular were seen as significant in these respects.
Work experience, on the other hand, was seen by employers as part of the school's discipline and as giving little information about the pupil as an individual.
Richards says that:
The features that impressed these employers about the spare/part-time jobs of young people applying for apprenticeships in their firms were mainly elements which were absent in WE schemes.
WE schemes did not involve the ‘initiative’ involved in going out and finding your own part-time job.
This was all done by the school following DES and LEA guidelines.
The element of ‘reliability’(getting up early consistently for a substantial period of time etc.) was also absent.
(ibid., p. 9)
Where employers did see value in work experience schemes, it had to do with information about career choices .
They felt that such schemes allowed young people to have direct experience of engineering rather than relying purely upon second-hand information (from teachers or the media).
If they then still chose to seek engineering jobs, this could be seen as evidence of commitment .
This is a central feature of the employers' view.
Richards found a preoccupation amongst employers with the image of engineering.
They were very concerned that pupils, and the ‘bright’ ones in particular, should be given a positive view of the industry and be attracted to it.
This was the main value they attributed to school work experience rather than seeing it in any direct sense as preparation for engineering work.
Richards's conclusion is that:
According to these employers it was teachers who needed WE more than pupils, so that they could get a picture of what engineering was really like (as opposed to media misrepresentations — strikes, redundancies, etc.) and so put across a ‘good image’ of engineering, hopefully attracting the ‘brighter pupils’into the industry.
(ibid., p. 11)
As far as the actual content of the education was concerned, the employers wanted no more than a solid, old fashioned grounding in ‘the basics’ and that ‘bright pupils’should be positively encouraged to seek jobs in the industrial sector rather than in the academic world or public services.
The major problem was seen to be the hostility of teachers towards industrial and commercial values and the way in which this deflected ‘bright’,traditionally educated pupils away from industry.
It was not direct preparation for production that the schools should be providing but image building .
Furthermore, this exercise should be aimed at the ‘bright’ pupils.
Richards says that:
Some writers went on to argue that attracting high ability youngsters into manufacturing industry was one of the conditions for a regeneration of the British economy.
Employers making these connections between the  ‘ignorance’ of ‘our brightest children’, WE, the entry of these youngsters into manufacturing industry and the rejuvenation of British capitalism were clearly not interested in the notion that WE was essentially concerned with ROSLA or the ‘average and below average ability ranges ’(ibid., p. 16, my emphasis).
We can say that the problem being defined here is not so much that the pupils are getting the wrong education (though they might be getting the wrong teachers) as that industry is getting the wrong pupils !
The ‘high fliers’ go elsewhere.
This reflects the antipathy towards industry and commerce from traditionally educated, liberal-humanist teachers.
It is they who need to be changed.
Richards argues that employers' attitudes imply a dual system of work experience —image building for the high-fliers and realism for the rest.
In the case of the former, it is a traditional rather than a vocational education which is required, and as to the latter, the evidence suggests that employers are really indifferent to their education.
Given that so much of the occupationalist initiative in education and outside (YTS, etc.) is aimed at the lower academic ability bands, it is useful to emphasize certain points:
1
the evidence strongly indicates that employers are not especially concerned with the educational attainment of young workers in those sectors of the labour market in which such individuals tend to seek employment.
Non-educational criteria have a clear priority in recruitment strategies;
2
in part this reflects the fact that occupational skill levels are of such a low order that they present no real requirement for educational preparation.
Indeed, even training is problematical — as the Further Education Unit, for instance, has conceded.
Where extended education or training is provided (e.g. in response to youth unemployment) it tends, consequently, to stress so-called social and life skills or personal effectiveness rather than technical skills.
This has the important implication of presenting these young people as personally and socially deficient and incompetent .
3
significantly, pupils of this type tend to have acquired significant degrees of work experience through part-time and spare-time work and also to possess the social skills of network membership which facilitate grape-vine recruitment (of course, both of these things are affected by local unemployment levels).
These issues will be looked at in more detail below.
It is important to stress that (a) this type of work experience is precisely that welcomed by employers, and (b) such young people are socially competent members of labour market social networks.
Recruitment and the problems of youth
If young people are not deficient in the ways that current rhetoric suggests, then what is the explanation for the high levels of youth unemployment?
The view that they lack work experience is contradicted by a substantial body of  evidence.
A study by Finn (1987), for instance, illustrates the tendency for non-academic young people to have comparatively more such informal work experience.
Lack of conventional school success cannot be seen, in any straightforward way, as indicative of problems in coping with working life.
I have suggested elsewhere that difficult behaviour at school can, in fact, reflect a readiness for work and the resentment at having that ambition frustrated (Moore, 1984).
Clarke, in a review of the literature on the transition to work, says that it tends to support the view that the ‘majority of early leavers adjust fairly painlessly to working life’(Clarke, 1980, p. 10).
She concludes a section on young people ‘at risk’ with the statement that:
This suggests, rather unpalatably, that apart from bright children who do well at both school and work, it is those children who are apathetic about, or even alienated from, school who adjust best to work.
(ibid., p. 11)
The major problem that young people suffer is simply that they are young .
The re-presented Holland Report data showed how young people are judged to be ‘worse’ by employers on age-related attributes.
Obviously, however much informal work experience young people may have acquired, it cannot compete with that of older workers.
However, there is a more significant factor.
The Holland Report states that:
Whilst a little over a third of employers thought there was no difference, those employers who did state a preference were, in almost all cases, more likely to prefer other recruits to young people.
This was especially true when young people were compared to up-graded existing employees, those recruited from other firms or women returning to work.
(Holland, op. cit., p. 41)
Employers' preference for various categories of older workers reflects, in part, the importance of on-the-job training and experience over that of formal education (especially in relation to recruitment within the firm's internal labour market ).
But it also reflects the fact that older workers are, by virtue of their life situation,more reliable .
The significance of attitude to work has been highlighted by numerous studies.
It is important to note that this is not simply to do with naturalistic notions of ‘emotional maturity’.
Blackburn and Mann, on the basis of their extensive study of the labour market for semi and unskilled labour in Peterborough, say that:
The ideal worker is male, around thirty, married with small children, related to other employees and with a stable educational and work history.
He is not necessarily cleverer than other workers, but his commitments are less likely to make him jeopardise his job.
(Blackburn and Mann, 1979, p. 13)
What is significant about the ‘ideal worker’ has nothing to do with his (the female ‘ideal’is usually somewhat different) education per se .
It is simply that he is a married man, around 30, with wife and children, a car, a mortgage (?) etc., etc.
Employers' preferences refer not to personality characteristics developed by a specialized, occupational socializing agency —the school — but to life-cycle characteristics .
The difference between the young and the adult worker reflects their different positions on the trajectories of (common) social career paths.
It is not ‘the dull compulsion of the labour market’ which disciplines the worker through the brute necessities of basic subsistence, but the more developed range of needs and commitments which trap them in, what Blackburn and Mann call, ‘the life cycle squeeze’(ibid., p. 108).
The ideal model helps to differentiate the workforce (by age, sex and colour) according to how far different groups approximate to the model and can be seen as representing its exemplary qualities of commitment and reliability.
This kind of division in the labour market between youth and adults jobs was also investigated by Ashton et al .
(1986).
In a similar fashion, changes in opportunities reflect the development of the social career.
Age barriers also served to structure the young adults' experience of the labour market.
This was particularly true of the unemployed.
They were too old for most of the jobs which provided training and which only recruit school or college leavers, and too young for many of the adult jobs which required recruits to be over 21, and where employers preferred those who were married, with a family and a large mortgage .
(Ashton et al .,
1986, p. 104, my emphasis)
Equally it is the case that the lack of opportunity to participate in employment blocks the development of the social career.
Occupational and social careers are mutually facilitating in this respect.
Unemployment does not only deny an adequate income, it can create deep crises of social identity.
Recruitment and the Meaning Process
Investigation of recruitment strategies indicates that the role of education in occupational allocation is much more contingent than is often allowed.
The relationship between qualifications and jobs is attenuated by the complexities of labour market segmentation and this itself is subject to local diversification.
The importance of labour market segmentation is emphasized in Ashton et al.'s most recent study (1986).
This work stresses the fact that there is no simple hierarchy of jobs (matched by a corresponding hierarchy of educational qualifications).
The segmentation of the occupational system effectively creates discrete spheres of employment which exhibit radical discontinuities in terms of their structures, processes and possibilities.
These in turn are associated with distinctive entry requirements, varying uses of qualifications in recruitment and career development (where career development occurs at all), differing pre and post entry orientations to work by young workers and differential effects by age, sex and ‘race’.
Ashton et al .
also stress the importance of local labour markets and argue that their variations can have more significant effects than social class  differences.
They conceptualize these differences in terms of‘separate local labour market cultures’(ibid., p. 104).
A particularly significant feature of these ‘cultures’ in respect of occupational recruitment is that of social network or grapevine recruitment.
This informal method was found to become increasingly important as individuals moved into second and subsequent jobs.
This reflects, the authors argue, an ‘increasing awareness of the ways in which employers recruit’(ibid., p. 84).
Job-search, on this basis, is seen as ‘more efficient, in that it is more closely aligned to employers’ recruitment methods' (loc. cit.).
At the third job level, between 25 per cent and 60 per cent of recruits found their position through ‘word of mouth’.
Granovetter (a pioneer of the study of this dimension of recruitment) has argued that sociologists and economists have seriously neglected this aspect of ‘the matching process’, i.e. the actual process whereby individuals come to get the jobs they do (Granovetter, 1975).
He stresses the rationality and efficiency of network recruitment for both employers and prospective employees.
It is a cheaper and more reliable way of getting information about jobs or workers.
Furthermore, my empirical work suggests that the signal chosen in the usual models — education — is not actually the main conveyer of information in labour markets.
It is true that most jobs have clear cut educational requirements, such that employers assume workers lacking them to be ipso facto unqualified.
This is, however, a crude sort of screen indeed, and if used alone would leave the employer still with a large and unmanageable information problem.
On paper, there are few jobs for which large numbers of people are not qualified; in practice, employers use a more refined and differentiated signal than educational qualifications: they use the recommendations of people personally known to them and prospective employees.
Similarly, prospective employees know better than to rely on landscaping or other signals put out by employers and attempt, instead, to find out the inside story from their contacts.
(Granovetter, 1981, p. 25)
He points out that processes of this type are difficult to accommodate within orthodox economics because they are not amenable to ‘costing’ in the standard economic sense.
Because of this, and despite their obviousness to commonsense experience, they have been excluded from formal analysis.
Granovetter's original sample of Professional, Technical and Managerial workers in the Boston (Mass.) area indicates that these processes are not restricted to either élite ‘old boy networks’ or to tight-knit working class communities such as dockers or printers.
The basic rationality principle of their greater efficiency holds across the occupational system.
There is, however, a further dimension to network recruitment which goes beyond the basic exchange of information.
This has to do with the way in which network membership involves possession of the social skills and reciprocal relationships which that membership entails.
Grieco, in a fascinating and detailed series of ethnographic studies of  working-class networks in this country, has pointed to a number of advantages which workers and employers gain from ‘the network’:.
Firstly, employee referrals provide the cheapest method of obtaining labour.
Secondly, employee referrals provide an efficient screening mechanism.
Thirdly, recruitment through employees acts as a form of control since responsibilities and obligations hold between workers so recruited: for if the sponsored antagonizes the employer, the reputation of the sponsor himself will be damaged; thus, the new worker is constrained by the interests and reputation of his sponsor.
(Grieco, 1984, p. 30)
A number of significant points emerge from these studies:
1
network membership supplies not only information, but also the tacit skills which enable individuals to become competent and accepted members of occupational groups.
2
membership provides a means of social control in the workplace both because those recruited have an obligation to preserve the reputation of their sponsors and also because, in some cases, family authority principles can be transferred from the home to the job, e.g. as with a ‘dads’ lads' recruitment system.
3
membership also provides a source of social support in the workplace while a newcomer learns the ropes and the tricks of the trade, e.g. network members will make up shortfalls in production while the newcomer settles in.
People without access to these support mechanisms can be severely disadvantaged.
4
Grieco's work has also pointed to the wider social importance of women in maintaining and enforcing the system of network reciprocity, even when not themselves in work.
She also stresses the strategic,collective role of the network in maintaining employment opportunities and a ‘family’ income.
This has important implications for current trends in thinking about the role of the family (and the extended family) in the occupational system of advanced societies and for certain feminist approaches to the issues of women in the labour market which tend to operate from an essentially middle class paradigm of the individualized career and salary and the consequent marginalization of women in the domestic context.
Although it is possible to see networks as a mechanism through which workers exercise some ‘degree of control over their labour market, it is important to acknowledge the extent to which they are, by definition,discriminatory .
Lack of access to network membership can be a major limitation upon employment opportunities and, consequently, a major source of labour market differentiation.
As Jenkins and Troyna (and other contributors) have pointed out (in Troyna and Smith (eds), 1983), this has a particular impact upon ethnic minority groups.
First, in an organisation with an all white or largely white workforce, network recruitment will help to ensure that this stays the case, particularly at a time when large numbers of white workers are unemployed and prepared to re-enter the comparatively poorly paid and less pleasant jobs they deserted in the past few years.
At best, this will help to ensure that black workers remain in those employment sectors they entered in the boom years of the 50's and 60's.
Secondly, and the reasons for this are unclear, there is good reason to suggest that West Indian workers are more likely to use formal or official job-search channels than are whites or Asians, who use informal channels to a comparatively greater extent.
(ibid. pp. 14–15)
This indicates a powerful way in which labour market factors can effectively negate educational advances, e.g., in changing the pattern of ‘racial’ or gender inequalities in attainment.
It is striking how even when certain minority groups tend to achieve mean levels of attainment above those of the white majority, they still remain heavily disadvantaged in employment terms.
A similar point about the way in which labour market structures and processes limit educational reform can be made in relation to gender.
Crompton and Jones (1984) have highlighted the significance of the relationship between pre-entry academic qualifications and post-entry professional qualifications in shaping the gender inequalities in white collar employment which emerge as occupational careers develop.
In their study, young men and women were very similar in their academic qualifications at O and A level at the point of entry into work.
As a result of the bi-modal pattern of female involvement in paid employment (reflecting the demands of child rearing), women tend to be absent from work during the period in which men tend to acquire the post-entry professional qualifications which are required for promotion.
This points to the importance of the relationship of education to the articulation between social and occupational career paths and to specific labour market structures such as Internal Labour Markets.
It also suggests that educational reforms will be of limited success unless complemented by policies such as contract compliance which act directly upon demand-side institutions.
A general implication of the material considered throughout has been the limitation of supply-side analysis.
Conclusion
The material reviewed in this chapter indicates that the manner in which educational qualifications are used in employment is both highly variable and subject to a wide range of contingent factors located in labour market structures and processes.
Specifically, the following points can be made:
1
Employers have tended to be extremely ill-informed about the content of educational courses and the significance of qualifications.
2
Little direct relationship is seen to exist between specific qualifications and actual job requirements.
3
Qualifications are invariably used alongside other criteria and these usually take priority in recruitment.
4
Employers tend to use a range of recruitment strategies employing a number of devices.
Their use and the relative significance and the role of education varies according to sector, size of firm, level of recruitment and local conditions.
5
Given employers' lack of knowledge about qualifications and the relatively arbitrary way in which they use them, it is difficult to give credence to the widespread notion that they are dissatisfied with the educational levels of young workers.
The evidence suggests that they are often indifferent to their educational attainment and are interested in only a narrow range of basic skills or in traditional education for the ‘high-fliers’.
In general, employers seem to be satisfied with those young workers they employ.
6
This is consistent with the findings which indicate that young people tend to adjust relatively easily to working life and that the less academic tend to do so more than others.
7
Young workers are disadvantaged in the labour market mainly by age itself and the view that, because of their lack of family commitments, they will be unreliable.
Evidence suggests that jobs are often distributed according to age-life cycle criteria.
The material considered emphasizes the importance of labour market structures and processes in mediating the relationship between education and production and between qualifications and work.
It also suggests that they create radical discontinuities between the educational and occupational systems which are a major limitation upon the effectiveness of educational reforms.
This both attenuates the force of the current occupationalist attack upon the liberal education tradition and suggests that occupationalist objectives will do little more than merely dilute the quality of the education which pupils might otherwise have received.
It also suggests that teachers should oppose their critics on educational grounds rather than being forced continually onto the sterile terrain of vocationalism.
More generally, it can be suggested that the social reforms which have been pursued through educational reform in the post-war period, prior to collapse of the liberal consensus and its political constituency, need to be approached through a direct assault upon the structural sources of inequality in demand-side institutions.
Anti-Racist and Anti-Sexist Education: Why are Women and Black Students Educational Problems?
Jenny Williams
Introduction
One of the most difficult questions which teachers ask themselves throughout their professional lives concerns the nature of the differences between pupils.
How can pupils be categorized and what are the consequences of perceiving, labelling and responding to pupils in certain ways?
The processes through which questions such as these are framed and the answers which seem acceptable are already determined by a whole range of social factors outside the control of teachers; by the nature of the social hierarchy, and the distribution of resources in society, by a general set of assumptions current among those who take political and economic decisions, and by the way in which education is institutionalized and so schools are organized.
Thus the economic, political and organizational contexts within which teachers work determine which pupil categorizations they take for granted, which they question and dispute, and what those categorizations are.
This social creation of significant labels can be demonstrated by noting how the salience of labels changes over time.
Some differences, such as those based on sex, have for decades simply been taken for granted as natural and unproblematic.
The majority of teachers in state schools accepted as inevitable that boys and girls would behave differently in school, would find different forms of knowledge congenial, would achieve differently and aspire to differing occupations.
The past three decades have seen such assumptions challenged.
Sexism is a term used to refer to a whole range of justifications which supposedly make acceptable the inequalities in income, in job statuses, in promotion chances and in access to power, for example, from which women suffer.
Differential treatment and discrimination is condoned and made to appear normal.
Attempts to highlight and remove differing forms of sexism, sexual inequalities and discrimination in schools have led to a range of policy statements and strategies from local education authorities and individual schools.
These policy initiatives have been variously labelled as Equal Opportunities, Girl Friendly Schooling and anti-sexist programmes (see Arnot, 1986b).
The emergence of such policies illustrates the dramatic shift that has occurred within a relatively short space of time in the social interpretation of sexual differences and inequalities.
‘Race’ and ethnic origin are also accepted labels, attached to pupils to describe who they are, their meaning taken for granted by politicians, administrators and teachers.
The emergence of ‘race’ and racism as political and educational issues and the consequent range of educational policy responses are outlined in the article by Ali Rattansi in this volume.
He illustrates the ways in which differing policies, summarized by the terms multi-culturalism and anti-racism, focus upon different dimensions of black experiences and white behaviour.
Both policy forms are, however, concerned with inequalities, discrimination, and differential treatment based on colour and the forms of racism which are used as justifications for such behaviour.
Thus inequalities based on sex or ‘race’, both within the whole social system and within schools, provide the context for the emergence of particular educational policies.
This article focuses upon these educational policies.
It asks why pupils have been categorized in terms of their sex or ‘race’, why girls and black pupils have been defined as problems; what is meant by racism and sexism within policy initiatives and it asks what are the consequences for teachers of labelling and categorizing problems in particular ways.
In trying to provide some answers to these questions I shall demonstrate the ways in which anti-racist and anti-sexist policies frequently mirror each other in rhetoric and analysis.
At the same time they contain both obvious and hidden differences which also need exploring.
Race and Sex as Categories
The emergence of educational policies which focus on the school and college experiences of black and female students necessitates the use of ‘race’ and sex as significant categories, labelling students in such a way as to highlight both specific aspects of their identity and group membership and particular educational problems.
Girls and boys, women and men, black and white students are differentiated and polarized.
Girls' educational experiences are shown to compare unfavourably with those of boys; similarly, black students' experiences are contrasted with those of white students, or West Indian and Asian students are contrasted with white students.
These are taken-for-granted groupings which assume some form of unity within each category without ever clearly identifying the source of this unity.
Is it biological, cultural or material, or is it the result of some aspect of personal and social experiences?
It may appear that male and female students are polarized on the basis of biology.
But the emergence of the term gender to signify social arrangements consequent upon, but not determined by, biological differences, highlights the complex relationship between biology and culture.
The term gender will be used to refer to the social construction of sexual differences.
The first task in scrutinizing educational policies, therefore, must be to examine their implicit categorization and labelling.
Are they based on some notion of ‘inherent’ differences?
In other words do they assume that biological or cultural categories are unproblematic?
Do they suggest a neat and straightforward relationship between biology, culture and differential educational needs?
Why and how are these categories used?
Most educationalists, teachers and politicians probably accept that there is no biological basis for the notion of ‘race’.
Nineteenth century ‘scientific racism’, with its discrete, hierarchical and inherited categories has been significantly challenged, even if not eliminated, from popular consciousness.
Ancestral origins from different geographical regions, however, are still assumed to be important in understanding pupil needs.
‘Asians’ and ‘West Indians’, for example, are labelled by their country of origin, even those third or fourth generation resident in this country.
They are commonly referred to as belonging to different ‘races’, and the relations between Asian and West Indian communities and the white British population are referred to as ‘race relations’(cf the Race Relations Act).
There is, however, little recognition of the cultural origins of such terminology.
We conveniently forget that these divisions and the classification of people as ‘races’, have been historically and politically created.
Indeed in post-1945 Britain it is the political creation and solidification of such categories, enshrined, for example, in legislation for immigration control, which provides one crucial context within which educational policies emerge (see Sivanandan 1982, Carby 1982, Troyna and Williams 1986).
How, then, has the acceptance and understanding of racial differences been perpetuated and built into policy discussions during the past 40 years?
The most obvious way, clearly demonstrated in educational literature, has been to associate the label ‘race’ with some notion of cultural unity, encapsulated in the term ethnic group .
It has become commonplace in educational debates to assert that schools should reflect cultural differences, that the divisions within the school population are cultural ones, represented in different ethnic identities.
The confusion between the labels ‘race’ and ethnicity allows an outmoded biological determinism to be replaced by an implicit cultural determinism.
Each ethnic group is portrayed as homogeneous and possessing a culture that is fixed, static and unrelated to the changing social and economic circumstances of their lives.
If we are not very careful black and white children in schools are seen as in need of a different education simply because of the culture they are expected to belong to.
But we must question which cultural attributes define groups of people as different.
How homogeneous is the culture of white children?
How fast are the cultures of different black groups changing?
How can schools reflect cultural differences without reinforcing the notion that those differences are unchanging and inherent in particular groups.
A very similar discussion concerning the need for educational reform takes place round the notion of gender , though frequently in a less explicit and straightforward form.
Again we can ask whether the special needs of girls are attributed to their biology or to a notion of femaleness which implies some form of cultural unity?
Gender has been used historically as a basis of the organization of educational provision, whether in terms of separate schools or separate curricula (David, 1980).
It was seen as the most ‘natural’ division given the separate roles of men and women in society.
Biological differences were seen to give rise to different needs, interests and abilities.
Cultural differences resulting from the division of labour into productive and domestic forms provided a commonsense justification for separate educational provision, focusing for girls on child care and domestic science.
Gender divisions were an obvious and convenient division for teachers to use and one that was not contentious during most of the twentieth century.
During the 1970s and 1980s the problem became redefined.
For some feminists the ‘problem’ was the masculine culture of mixed schools, which made them problematic for girls (Spender and Sarah, 1980).
Within this framework one solution is to incorporate some aspects of the less valued ‘female’ culture into the curricula.
‘Femaleness’ has been used by radical feminists as a justification for more co-operative, less competitive forms of learning, as if these were inherent in all female cultures.
One justification, therefore, for using ‘race’ and sex as significant divisions is that these designate important cultural differences as educationally relevant.
Unfortunately, it also encourages the use of a concept of culture which is highly problematic, particularly when used in policy discussions.
An alternative classification, used by some researchers and policy makers, is that which distinguishes pupils on the basis of some aspect of their social and educational experiences.
It is suggested that the way women and black citizens are treated in society and in schools provides for a unity among female students on the one hand and black students on the other.
Such experiences are summarized in the terms racism and sexism.
The ILEA documents (1983, 1985) provide a clear example of this alternative approach.
New educational policies take their justification from the experiences of racism suffered by black citizens.
There are certain routine practices, customs and procedures in our society whose consequence is that black people have poorer jobs, health, housing, education and life chances than do the white majority.
(1983, p. 6)
Similarly, girls and women suffer from living in a society in which sexism
is based on and perpetuates a notion of male superiority.
Greater value and  status is more often given to traditional male pursuits and occupations than female ones.
This places men generally in a position of power over women, whether at home, at work or through the political, social and economic systems and institutions which govern our lives.
(1985, p. 4)
ILEA also brings the issue of race and gender together by stating that ‘sex and race inequalities are linked through the experience of discrimination, prejudice, stereotyping and powerlessness’(1985, p. 5).
A whole range of examples of sexism within education are given, including textbook biases, differential teacher expectations concerning pupil abilities, differential teacher behaviour with regard to discipline and attention, sexual harassment, assumptions concerning the leadership qualities of males and the monopolization of power by males.
This list is mirrored very clearly in discussions concerning racism in schools, where equivalent differential experiences can be found.
All aspects of education are included and the experiences of black and female pupils are seen to be qualitatively different from that of white male pupils.
That males and whites are not homogeneous groups, and that many school experiences are similar for all students tends to be ignored.
As Lynn Davies (1978) graphically puts it:
it is rather like highlighting the lion's view of captivity, it implies that this is demonstrably different from the tiger's view, and this draws attention away from the significant fact of captivity.
(p. 103)
By focusing on particular school experiences, crucial though they are, other differentiating variables tend to be ignored.
For example, during the 1950s and 1960s social class inequalities in terms of access to different forms of education, in educational experiences and in educational achievements were documented in sociological studies and Government reports.
But recent educational research initiated, or selected as deserving attention, by policy makers rarely allows for ethnic or gender issues to be placed within a social class context.
The presentation of educational data, which forms the justification for most policies, is documented in discrete and unrelated forms.
In ILEA (1983), for example, social class, sex and ‘racial’ achievements in education are documented in separate sections.
The relationships between the three sets of data are hardly explored.
Few references are made to the social class distribution of West Indian and Asian parents found in other studies, and no supporting evidence is offered for the following statement:
our ILEA studies suggest that only about half the difference between reading scores of children from West Indian homes and their white counterparts may be accounted for by socio-economic factors.
(p. 17)
There are suggestions that the differences within the group labelled Asian are large but here again no details are provided.
The Rampton Report (1981) had used the same processes of data collection and presentation, comparing only overarching ethnic categories such as West Indian, Asian and White with no discussion of sex differences within each.
In spite of receiving sharp criticism of this practice from researchers such as Reeves and Chevannes (1981) the Swann Committee repeated this model of data collection.
Research by Craft and Craft (1983) which includes a division between middle and working-class black groups is reported in Swann (p. 60) but little interpretive use is made of these data.
What must always have been clear to perceptive teachers, and what is now being documented in some detail in research, is that racism and sexism are experienced in numerous different ways, depending upon the groups concerned and the educational context.
Clarricoates (1980), for example, illustrates the relationship between different constructions of masculinity and  femininity within the classroom and the social class composition of the school catchment areas.
Lynn Davies (1984) describes the ways in which, within one largely working-class comprehensive school, differing versions of femininity interrelate with differing levels of academic achievement.
Racism, similarly, is a complex phenomenon.
Not only does the level of racist abuse or harassment vary in different schools and localities, but teacher stereotypes and the labelling of black children vary according to pupil, age, social class, and the demographic distribution of ethnic minority groups.
The responses of black students to these different forms of racism have been shown to result in a range of black male and female identities in different settings (see, for example, Fuller, 1982; Riley, 1985; Brah and Minhas, 1985).
Initial research suggests, for example, that black students in Further Education colleges may view education in a utilitarian manner, placing more emphasis upon the credentials available within FE than upon their culturally specific or anti-racist provision (FEU, 1985a; Reeves, 1986).
Such research emphasizes the importance of defining the experiences of black and female students as multi-faceted, of documenting how they perceive and respond to racism and sexism within society and education in many different ways.
This section has raised two questions concerning pupil categorizations implicit in certain policy developments.
The first question concerns the basis of the categorizations.
Do policies which focus on girls or black pupils imply, even unwittingly, a biological or cultural unity among females or ethnic minority groups?
If this is so, what are the implications of this for practice in schools?
The second question concerns the extent to which it is possible and desirable to prevent an oversimplification of the divisions created and reinforced within education.
Colour, ethnic and gender divisions interweave with social class and achievement hierarchies in different ways in different geographical areas and institutional contexts.
How can this complexity be acknowledged when policies are formulated?
‘Race’ and Gender as Educational Problems
Built into most policy development over the past four decades, even anti-sexist and anti-racist initiatives, has been the assumption that girls and black pupils are ‘problems’; that they either have problems or pose problems that  are different from other groups of pupils.
In this section I intend to focus on the way four of these problems have become interlinked, namely those of underachievement, the concern over indiscipline, and the need for social integration and the employability of particular groups.
Each of these themes can be found in ‘race’ and gender debates illustrating very clearly both the similarities and differences in the way these pupil groups are defined as educational problems.
The ‘problem’ of underachievement illustrates this particularly well.
As far as female students are concerned:
Statistics show that girls' academic achievement is at least as good as boy's' and that more girls than boys are entered for all levels of public examinations.
The relative position of girls and boys becomes sharply divided only when we look at two factors behind the generalized statistics:(1) subject choices;(2) post-school experiences.
(ILEA, 6, p. 5)
These two aspects of gender differences provide the context within which policy makers frame the discussion of female educational experience and achievement.
In particular, attention is focused on girls' differential engagement with, and performance in, certain scientific and technical subjects (see, for example , The Further Education Unit, 1985b; The Schools Council Project on Reducing Sex Differentiation in Schools, 1983; Brent LEA, 1982).
The Girls into Science and Technology and Girls into Craft, Design and Technology projects and the DES (Orr, 1985) all focused their attention on female subject choice and career aspirations.
The MSC in both the YTS and TVEI programmes takes the view that the perpetuation of sex differentiated subject and skill areas is a major problem, at least in those areas where there is a shortage of skilled male labour.
At the level of rhetoric much concern has been expressed about female underachievement even if the reference is generally to the experiences of white girls.
Underachievement, however, means something rather different when the focus of educational concern is black pupils.
Here the issue is one of general educational failure, as measured, for example, by reading age, CSE and O level passes, entrance to Higher Education, etc. (see, for example , Little, 1975; Tomlinson, 1986; Rampton, 1979; ILEA, 1983; Swann, 1985).
The research which underpins current understanding of black underachievement, and the political and professional reinterpretation of it, rests upon ethnic categorizations.
‘West Indians’ are grouped together and contrasted with ‘Asians’and ‘Whites’.
Avoiding a black/white categorization which might have revealed the impact of racism, this oversimplified ethnic categorization results in an association  between black educational underachievement and a notion of ‘West Indianness’.
The two frames of reference within which the problems of female and black underachievement are located therefore are quite different.
The central issue for girls is one of employability within a changing job market where there are specific skill shortages and taken-for-granted assumptions concerning future  labour demands.
‘Science’ and ‘technology’cover a very wide range of occupations, and in practice policy makers may have little idea of either the extent of skill shortages or how to redirect girls' energies towards these.
Nevertheless, arguments about the current failure of schools are put forward; for example:
by still preparing many school girls for a sheltered life with the emphasis upon ‘suitable’ female skills we may ‘educate for incapability’— that is, for frustration, unemployment and second-class citizenship in a technological society.
(FEU, 1985b, p. 16)
Here the imagery of traditional female occupations contrasted with high status technology is representative of most of the policy documents of gender inequality in education.
The passivity and conformity of girls, their lack of assertiveness and ambition, their refusal to study ‘hard’, rational subjects are defined as the problem.
From such a perspective girls frequently appear as victims of the sexism in education apparent to others (Brah and Deem, 1986).
On the other hand, girls' lack of femininity or their ‘masculinity’ may be seen as more of a problem than that of underachievement.
Girls' subject choices, their lack of competition with boys, their restricted career choices, etc. can be interpreted as self chosen, rational (even if misguided) responses to the position of women in society.
In contrast, the problem of black underachievement is almost never interpreted in this manner.
The relationship of underachievement with employability is constructed through an assumption that it is the lack of academic achievement which renders black students unemployable (Scarman, 1981).
Black pupils need to achieve academically in order to enter the labour market even at the lowest level in spite of evidence that qualifications do not necessarily lead to jobs (see Brennan and McGeevor, 1987, for example).
The concept of black underachievement provides an even greater contrast when it is associated with ‘trouble’, defined as indiscipline and truanting, and results in suspensions and local ‘law and order’ problems.
Teacher assumptions concerning the classroom problems exhibited by ‘West Indian’ students have been documented for the past 20 years (Brittain, 1976; Rampton, 1981).
Key statements in many LEA policy documents show a concern for ‘harmony’ and ‘stability’, which is never the case in sex equality policies or statements on girls' education.
It is significant that most formal policies on ‘race’ and multicultural education have been formulated after 1981 when the ‘riots’forced the issue of inner city youth on the political agenda (Troyna and Williams, 1986; Solomos, 1986a).
Since the 1950s an association between low school attainment, the problems of classroom discipline, and delinquency has been accepted as a male, white and predominantly working class phenomenon.
Now the problems of black male youths in schools have adapted and adopted this ‘law and order’ language, and its associated imagery of violence, discontent and public  concern (Fisher and Joshua, 1982).
One consequence of this scenario is that black underachievement is portrayed as meaningless, destructive and irrational (Solomos, 1986b).
In contrast with the analysis of female underachievement, there appears to be a refusal to even consider that black underachievement (and disruption) could be a collective, rational, response to a discriminatory social system (John, 1981 is an exception).
It is quite clear from these contrasting analyses of underachievement, employability and disruption, that the differential experiences of black girls are given minimal attention.
Stereotypes associated with black girls have been constructed along ethnic lines, and cut across the more general male/female, black/white images (see Allen, 1982; Carby, 1982; Brah and Minhas, 1986; Riley, 1986).
As Brah and Deem point out, Afro-Caribbean young women are stereotyped as ‘pushy’, but achieve better in schools than their male counterparts.
Asian young women are seen as passive, meek, ruthlessly oppressed by their families (1986, p. 73), not being allowed to take courses and jobs commensurate with their abilities and achievement.
Such overgeneralizations are clearly ridiculous.
What they highlight very sharply is the importance of very careful scrutiny of the ways in which girls and black pupils are portrayed as problems.
Explanations of Educational Problems
In order to gain acceptance for their interpretation of educational problems, researchers, administrators and politicians usually find it necessary to ‘explain' the problem; to pinpoint the processes which appear to have led to it in such a way as to make the remedy appear obvious.
In other words there is little pay off in providing an explanation which implies nothing can be done.
(The term ‘academic’ is often used as a pejorative label to describe such explanations.)
Interestingly, the accepted explanations for the problems that female and black pupils pose for schools, and the suggested remedies, are remarkably similar.
They follow earlier frameworks developed to explain social class disparities in educational achievements which are summarized by Flude (1974) as (i) cultural deficit (ii) cultural difference (iii) teacher labelling and stereotyping and (iv) discrimination.
I shall very briefly consider each set of explanations in terms of‘race’ and gender.
(i) Cultural deficit theories
Very many educational reports over the past few decades have portrayed black pupils as having special needs because their cultural background is inadequate (e.g. Rampton Report, 1981).
Examples may focus on differences in the structure of their language or parental relationships or the lack of parental knowledge of child development.
Schools, therefore, are expected to compensate for these supposed deficits.
Interestingly, anti-racist proposals very often assume whites suffer from a cultural deficit, i.e. from racist attitudes which are simply a legacy from imperialism and colonialism (Swann Report, 1985); an  unfortunate ignorance which schools can remedy.
Lyn Yates (1985) suggests that this type of deficit approach, which in effect blames the victim, is also the most common approach to girls' schooling.
Teachers are asked to develop an alternative female culture of achievement and independence which will compensate for the romanticism, dependency and passivity found amongst women in society.
Theories of compensatory education rest on certain important assumptions.
First, deficit cultures are portrayed as irrational, as based on ignorance.
There is little, if any, analysis of why particular attitudes and behaviours have developed, of the ways in which cultures are related to and continuously reinforced by the wider structural position of particular groups; the ways in which cultures can be a rational response to the social position of groups at a particular time.
Secondly, a change in the overt and hidden curriculum is presented as a solution which will lead to changed attitudes and behaviours, irrespective of other changes outside the control of the school.
(ii) Cultural difference theories
Notions of cultural deficits frequently have been replaced by an emphasis upon differences with apparently no pejorative connotations.
It is argued that cultural discontinuities between homes and schools do exist, are inevitable and are to be celebrated.
This results in an explanation of gender and ‘race’ problems in schools in terms of teachers' inability to use these cultural differences.
Teachers lack the skills necessary to incorporate and transform ethnic or gender cultures into a form which is educationally relevant.
The solution, again, is to retrain teachers, to enable them to understand, interpret and incorporate cultural differences which do exist into their teaching and to reflect these back to pupils in a way which leads to high achievement and satisfaction within schooling.
Again the relationship  between curriculum and culture is oversimplified.
Which aspects of black or female cultures are or could be incorporated into high status knowledge?
Some black and female writers can be brought into English literature classes, or O or A level Punjabi can be developed, but other aspects can just as easily reinforce low academic status and perpetuate differences and segregation.
Classes on child care, personal health and beauty or African music are currently only likely to be options for those with few alternative examination subjects.
We must therefore question very carefully indeed why schools should, and how they could, reflect the different cultures of the local community.
(iii) Teacher labelling and stereotyping
In the third explanatory framework, teachers' attitudes rather than their knowledge are described as crucial.
Teachers' expectations, stereotyping and labelling are seen as the mechanisms by means of which membership of an ethnic or gender group results in ethnic or sex disparities in achievements or in particular types of classroom behaviour.
The Rampton Report argued:
that teachers had stereotyped or patronising attitudes towards West Indian children which, when combined with negative views of their academic ability and potential, may prove a self-fulfilling prophecy.
(1981, p. 70)
Stanworth documented very clearly the differentiated assumptions which teachers held about male and female pupils including:
the implicit assumption that girls' capacities for efficiency and initiative will be channelled into nurturant or subordinate occupations, rather than into other, less traditional, spheres.
(1981, pp. 30–31)
The solution, again, focuses upon re-educating teachers, to reduce if not remove racial and sex stereotypes.
Discrimination
The final explanatory framework is quite different.
It pinpoints direct and indirect discrimination both within and outside education (Wright, 1984; Spender, 1982).
The labels, racism and sexism, are used as summary terms for a very wide range of attitudes, behaviours and institutional processes which result in unequal access to material resources and personal dignity and choices.
Remedial policies again tend to focus upon the school, upon unintentional and institutional discrimination within education.
But there are attempts to link educational examples with key political and economic processes in the wider society, such as the institutionalization of racism within the Nationality Acts, with the differential occupational recruitment of women and black pupils, or the lack of child care provision which limits the realistic achievement of female career options.
Thus the remodelling of teachers and schools is linked to wider social and political changes.
‘Race’ and Gender Policies
Stemming from the differing interpretations of the educational problems posed by black and female pupils outlined in the previous section, a range of alternative policies may be introduced into schools.
In this article I shall only be able to illustrate the policy consequences of the fourth interpretation, that of discrimination.
Most LEAs and schools that have introduced explicit policies to combat sexual and ‘racial’ inequalities label them as anti-racist and anti-sexist.
The following table illustrates a range of initiatives which occur in schools.
Though in this form the list looks a long one, it must be remembered that only a limited number of schools have introduced more than a few changes.
It is possible to distinguish three, slightly different, elements within anti-racist and anti-sexist policies.
A linked range of innovations focus on white racism   or male sexism and so introduce school policies which attempt to overcome racist and sexist attitudes and beliefs.
A second type of development sets whole school policies within a wider framework which encompasses the needs and rights of parents and local community groups.
The emergence of a set of strategies which encompass the whole institution can be developed at the same time as local links and local issues are given some priority.
The third focus sets particular inequalities inside schools within the context of unequal life chances and access to resources generally.
The issue of power brings a thread of coherence to what appear to be divergent reforms.
Teachers, pupils, parents and community groups all need access to power.
An inspection of the table reveals overlaps between the three trends, and clearly they should not be seen as mutually exclusive.
The table simply illustrates the range of policies which have been introduced.
It is a useful exercise to look in detail at a particular school with which one is familiar and ask how much of current practice would have to change for the policies listed to be implemented.
Could they be introduced as token, surface changes or do they necessitate a fundamental reorganization of the way the school operates?
Comparison of Anti-sexist and anti-racist Policies
On the surface anti-racist and anti-sexist educational policies are in tune with each other.
The early anti-racist initiatives of the 1960s and 70s were school based and developed by teachers drawing their strength and legitimacy from both their professionalism and their identification with local community issues (e.g. ALTARF, 1980, 1984).
Anti-sexist initiatives were also likely to be ‘bottom-up’ developments initially (Taylor, 1985).
However, by the early 1980s some LEAs began to adopt more prescriptive approaches, insisting on school policies fostering racial equality within given time limits (e.g. ILEA, Brent), prescribing aspects of headteacher behaviour to ethnic minority parents (e.g. Bradford), making certain forms of racist behaviour a disciplinary offence (e.g. Manchester) or establishing central mechanisms to decide upon school suspensions and so removing power from Heads and Governors (e.g. Birmingham).
Similarly a few LEAs stepped up pressure on schools to implement anti-sexist policies, asking for school policies within a particular time limit (e.g. Brent, ILEA) pressuring heads to implement change; organizing inservice courses (Humberside, Brent) replacing text books and appointing Advisers/Inspectors.
There are, however, quite important differences of emphasis.
There appears to be far more concern in anti-racist policies to alter the behaviour and attitudes of white personnel, compared with the attention devoted to altering male behaviour in schools.
In contrast, the issue of separate provision is suggested by anti-sexist policies, which might prioritize the creation of girls-only classes, women-run support groups, assertiveness training, etc.
(Weiner, 1985).
It is not a usual part of anti-racist strategies to create black only classes  within ordinary schools to prevent unfair competition with white pupils who get more than their share of teacher attention.
Black pupils are given more attention by teachers only in terms of discipline and punishment.
Black teacher groups are becoming more common, and supplementary schools exist in many cities, but support groups for black students within schools are not usually on the list of policy priorities.
Also whilst Women's Studies, particularly in Higher Education, appears to have achieved a certain respectability and is flourishing, Black Studies is on the decline and receives little public support from those concerned about racism.
In short, there is no clear anti-racist equivalent of girl-centred schooling, or indeed girl-friendly schooling (see Weiner, 1986 for the distinction between these two approaches).
The creation of specialist hierarchies of teacher advisers, curriculum centres and school working parties is common to both policy arenas.
But again certain differences are clear.
Sex equality policies are not widespread, yet they do relate to mainstream education practice and funding: for example policies concerned to alter ordinary timetabling processes, counselling systems and resource allocation.
The Technical and Vocational Educational Initiative, a nationally funded, vocationally oriented programme, has been able to incorporate some anti-sexist aspects as part of its normal aims and activities, even if the implementation of these aims is limited.
In contrast, Section 11 grants available since 1966 to some authorities to provide funding for the special needs of ethnic minority pupils, have tended to marginalize spending on black pupils.
The existence of this funding has been the key factor in LEAs' development of specialist appointments and experimental initiatives.
The effect on mainstream education and ordinary professional practice has been minimal (Troyna and Ball, 1985).
Single-sex schooling is clearly an issue within the state sector of education.
Although the numbers of single sex schools have declined dramatically during the past three decades, girls-only schools have been supported as a desirable alternative to  coeducation in some LEAs.
Political campaigns have been organized to preserve existing single sex schools when under the threat of closure.
In contrast most debates concerning black schools have centred upon voluntary supplementary schools or private religious provision (with one or two exceptions).
As far as official policies are concerned, assumptions concerning integration have been based on the acceptance of white majority schools as both normal and desirable.
Demands for some form of separatism on grounds of religion, for example, have been perceived as a threat to mainstream education (see Ball, 1986; Swann, 1985).
When particular ethnic groups have campaigned to preserve single sex schools, because of compatibility with  cultural norms, this has been perceived as a form of cultural imposition and indoctrination and even sexism.
Thus separate schooling for white girls, while not generally accepted, is seen as a legitimate demand, linked with high academic achievements, and mainstream educational issues.
When such demands become part of a debate concerning black issues, it is marginalized and perceived as a threat to harmony and integration.
Conclusions: Policy Rhetoric and Structural Realities
In this article I have tried to tease out the underlying assumptions of educational policies concerned with ‘race’ and gender.
Two particular themes have guided the analysis.
The first is an exploration of the language of explanation and the language of reform and policy change through which particular educational issues come to be debated and understood.
The second theme concerns the similarities and differences in these understandings when focused upon ‘race’ and upon gender.
I have tried to show where explanations and policies are similar and where the rhetoric of analysis reflects similar concerns; but also where there are deep and crucial differences.
I have suggested that official LEA policies on ‘race’ and gender reflect each other and contain similar kinds of rhetoric; significantly local policies in both areas have ignored social class inequalities, and have both tended to isolate education from wider debates concerning inequalities.
Policies on ‘race’ and gender often work within a compensatory model of education.
Both also work with polarized categories, black/white, male/ female, which by implication if not design, make other forms of inequality acceptable.
Thus at this level of problem analysis, of political and administrative policy formation, anti-sexist and anti-racist initiatives appear to mirror each other.
However, behind this surface similarity lie the deeper conflicts and contradictions which have been illustrated earlier.
These differences are inevitable given the distinct economic, political and professional contexts of such policy formation.
In general both black and female workers are recruited to the unskilled or semi-skilled area of the economy and are currently suffering high levels of unemployment, particularly among the younger age groups.
But the similarities must not be overgeneralized and the differences need to be acknowledged.
For example there is a higher chance of a white woman attaining professional or executive position (even if on the lower rungs and with less promotion chances than white men) than a black person of either sex.
Sex segregation in the labour market is remarkably resistant to change and most women are channelled into ‘appropriate’ areas.
But these appropriate areas cover the social class range of occupations, so that socially and educationally ambitious girls can be accommodated, at least initially.
‘There is ample literature to demonstrate that qualified women have not attained full equality with men, but nonetheless they do have considerable economic and occupational advantages compared with less qualified women’(Bonney, 1986, p. 17).
It is later in their careers, when seeking promotion, that direct and indirect discrimination becomes more visible, and women's domestic position impinges most directly on occupational participation, and the monopolization of power by men is starkly evident.
In contrast, discrimination against black students occurs at the initial entry  stage into the labour market.
The concentration of black workers within manual occupations is being consolidated rather than eroded (Newnham, 1986).
The association of colour with particular low status, low paid occupations continues with generations born in this country (see the Swann Report, 1985, Ch. 15 on Liverpool's blacks, for example).
The quite different nature of the female labour market means that it is easier to introduce measures in schools and colleges which will improve the initial occupational choices of some female students, particularly middle class or ‘academically able’ girls.
The changing labour market and economic structures therefore allow a certain ‘space’ for gender reforms even within an overall operation which reinforces existing patterns.
The nature of this ‘space’ is much more limited for black students.
Attempts to improve occupational mobility for them may concentrate on a few professional openings where their colour is defined as an occupational advantage (e.g. race relations advisers) or on employers (e.g. local authorities) with positive action policies, or self-employment (small businesses).
Another major factor we need to consider for black citizens in the UK is the way in which black groups have been defined politically over the past four decades.
Their presence in this country and the meaning of their citizenship is continually questioned.
The Nationality Acts and the revision of entry rules and procedures for example perpetuate the association between blackness and ‘alien invaders’ bringing unnecessary social problems with them.
Finally, and briefly, the professional contexts within which policies are generated and implemented differ.
There are clearly far more women teachers than black teachers, some in influential positions, yet promotion remains limited and the working environment is controlled by men.
Therefore it is in women teachers' own interests, as well as those of their female pupils to initiate or support anti-sexist reforms.
In a recent study of all Higher Education Institutions it has become quite clear that the main impetus towards Equal Opportunity Policies has come from female members of staff or particular unions representing female members (CRE, unpublished).
This is certainly not to argue that all female professionals are active in anti-sexist developments, or that implementation of policy is easy.
Many women teachers have faced strong opposition, even ridicule, when attempting to change school policies.
Rather the professional context again provides limited space where reforms can be articulated, particularly if their aim is to change one particular institution.
With so few black professionals in post, most pressure for anti-racist reforms has to come from a variety of sources, from white politicians or administrators or black pressure groups working in particular localities in conjunction with anti-racist teachers.
It is interesting to note the changing nature of anti-racist reforms and opposition to them when black professionals and politicians gain more influence in particular localities (Brent LEA, for example).
Over most of the country, anti-racist reforms within schools have had to rely on the political commitment of white teachers.
It is less likely that  any significant number of such staff will be persuaded that it is in their own interests to initiate sweeping reforms.
Widespread and gross inequalities and discrimination on the basis of colour and sex, and the beliefs which justify these activities, exist in society and in schools.
Policies which address such issues are an urgent necessity.
Clearly pupils cannot be treated as identical, assumed to be already equal, as though racism and sexism did not exist.
Yet the formulation and implementation of such policies is not an easy task.
A careful scrutiny of existing policies and their implicit and explicit assumptions should do two things; it should enable choices to be made at the level of general strategies, as to what is most conducive to equity or equality, it should also enable individual teachers in individual schools to compare their circumstances with those of others and learn which innovations seem to suit what circumstances and to take heart from the struggles and successes of their colleagues.