

AND WHAT DO YOU BELIEVE?
METHODS AND PERSPECTIVES IN THE INVESTIGATION OF RELIGION Eileen Barker
Introductory remarks
The sociology of religion was a subject of primary concern for the ‘founding fathers’ of sociology — most notably for Max Weber and Emile Durkheim.
Following these giants, and until about twenty years ago, however, there was a ‘dark age’ during which sociologists tended to ignore the subject.
One reason for this may have been the conventional wisdom that secularisation had made the subject well nigh irrelevant, another reason may have been that there are few areas in which the methodological problems are as acute as they are in the investigation of people's beliefs and/or the assessment of the effect that these have upon the rest of society.
It can, indeed, be argued that the sociology of religion is one of the most difficult and challenging areas of study in the social sciences.
It forces the researcher to take seriously questions that may be relevant to other fields of enquiry, but which are not always so sharply focused.
During the last decade or so, however, an interest in and recognition of the importance of religion in society has re-emerged.
Many of the methodological problems persist, but a number of new techniques and theoretical approaches have helped to advance our knowledge of the subject.
Questions that had been submerged (such as whether the world is becoming more secular) have re-surfaced and been rephrased to take account of the complexities of religious beliefs and practices, and their relationship with both  the individual and the increasingly complex wider society.
Fresh questions have arisen in response to such phenomena as the emergence of the new religious movements or ‘cults’ and the rise of new forms of orthodox religions of the right, such as the Ayatollah's Iran, or Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority in the United States.
Areas of study reflect both the old and the new concerns: they range from head-counting to Grand Theory; they cover religious organisations and their power structures; they examine processes such as conversion, apostasy , institutionalisation, bureaucratisation, the growth of charisma and its rationalisation; typological distinctions are drawn (such as those between church, denomination and sect); the relationship between religion and other areas of society (the family, education, economy and, especially, politics) is examined from a number of angles at a number of levels; and there is also developing an increasing number of specialist ‘sub-disciplines’— such as the sociologies of Catholicism, secularism, the ministry, gender and religion, and new religious movements.
There has, at the same time, been some fruitful cross-fertilisation between sociologists of religion and scholars in other areas of sociology (such as deviance and political sociology) and, indeed, in other disciplines, such as history, anthropology, social psychology and (even) theology.
Definitions and classifications
Like all sub-divisions of sociology, the sociology of religion has its own internal battles over definitions and classification.
Some of these are fruitful; some are excessively arid.
A question that often arises is: what is a real religion?
The answer to this question has not a few repercussions in the social world that sociologists study — often for purely secular reasons.
For example, the Church of Scientology has fought in the courts of Australia to be defined as a religion in order to be able to claim tax-exemption, while The Science of Creative Intelligence (Transcendental Meditation) has fought in the courts of the United States to be not given religious status so that it can be taught in the public (State) schools — a practice denied to religious organisations by the First Amendment of the United States' Constitution.
Sociologists of religion are not in a position to say whether or not a particular movement is or is not ‘really’ a religion.
They can say that if one takes belief in a God or gods as the criterion of a religion, then classical Buddhism cannot be classified as a religion.
If, on the other hand, we take a functional definition, perhaps like the one that Durkheim offers us, then we might call ideologies such as Marxism or Nationalism religions.
It is true that many sociologists of religion have suggested definitions of their subject matter, but there is no clear agreement and it can be argued that if we were to stick to only one definition then we would not be able to ask — let alone answer — some of the questions in which they are interested.
Of course, in any particular study it must be made quite clear what we are talking about — what is being compared with what.
Like Weber's ‘ideal types’, definitions in the sociology of religion are not either true or false, but more or less useful.
One classificatory device that has been used frequently draws distinctions between church, denomination, and sect and cult.
The types have also been used to describe processes such as denominationalisation, in which a sect becomes less inward-looking and world-rejecting as it accommodates to the rest of society.
Bryan Wilson (1970) has contributed some very useful sub-divisions of the sect category and various sociologists have tried to classify the new religions that have emerged during the second half of the present century in an attempt to find some order in the enormous variety of beliefs, practices and organisations that are manifested in these movements (eg Beckford, 1985; Wallis, 1983).
Statistics
Head-counting
At a fairly basic level, sociologists of religion will be interested in finding out how many people are members of the different religious faiths (or of none); how many people attend a place of worship (and with what frequency); how many people are joining (or leaving) the ministry; how many churches, synagogues, chapels, temples, mosques there are.
But even the comparatively simple task of head-counting is fraught with difficulties.
Think, for example, of some of the problems of asking churches to supply their membership figures.
First, comparisons between different faiths can be misleading because different criteria are used to define membership.
People whose parents baptised them into the Roman Catholic Church will probably be counted as Catholics all their lives — even if they never go to church; for people to be counted as Baptists, however, they will have to have expressed a strong commitment to their faith and to have undergone adult baptism.
Secondly, many religions have several tiers of membership that represent varying levels of commitment to the beliefs and/or dedication to a religious life of devotion.
The monk, nun or vicar could, for example, be described as a more involved member than the old lady who attends Matins each Sunday; she, in turn, is more involved than those who go to church only at Christmas and Easter; and they are probably more committed than the sailor who, when he fills out C of E on a form, is more likely to be making a cultural than a religious statement.
Thirdly, even within a particular denomination, the official figures may not be strictly comparable over time.
Clergy at one time might, for example, claim as many members as possible, forgetting, perhaps, to remove from the list those who have died or moved to another parish; a subsequent introduction of ‘potential giving’ or per capita assessment for a  maintenance -of-ministry-fund could result in their rapidly removing any ‘dead wood’in order to reduce the costly membership figures to an absolute minimum.
Cross-tabulations
There will also be an interest in breaking down the numbers according to such familiar variables as age, sex and socio-economic status, and there will be a curiosity about whether (and, if so, how) religious affiliation or observance correlates with other kinds of behaviour.
Do Protestants or Catholics achieve more in the educational system, for example; or are Catholics more likely to end up in prison than Protestants?
Control groups
Unlike the relatively straightforward reporting to be found in journalism, the sociological method requires a more sophisticated examination of statistical data.
If a particular group is disproportionately represented in prison, are there other, independent variables that could account for the correlation?
Might it be, for example, that members of a particular religion are more likely to be of a certain age, or a certain class, and if these variables are taken into account (‘held constant’) does the relationship still look the same?
In other words, although social scientists certainly want to make sure that the information that they are gathering is accurate , this is only a necessary — not a sufficient — goal.
It is also necessary to make sure that the evidence is balanced , rather than selective.
In order to do this, a control group has to be examined as well as the group that we are studying.
The control group is one in which as many characteristics as possible are ‘matched’ with the known characteristics of the group under study — except, that is, for the variable or characteristic in which we are interested.
Let me try to illustrate the potential danger of selective bias when we report merely some perfectly true statements, without recourse to comparison with a control group.
Consider the possibility that 2 per cent of the members of a notorious ‘cult’ commit suicide in a year.
Because such religions are of more interest to the media than are more ‘ordinary’ religions, it is quite likely that whenever the tragedy occurs we shall be treated to the headline Cult Member Commits Suicide .
We are very unlikely to come across a headline telling us that a member of the Anglican Church has killed himself (unless, perhaps, it is a vicar)— in fact, the Anglican's religious affiliation is one of the last things likely to be mentioned in a report.
The constant visibility of cult members committing suicide is likely to lead us to think that there is something about the cult that causes people to take their own lives.
But what if we find out that 5 per cent of people of a similar age and background to the cult members commit suicide in the same year?
We may then want to ask whether there might not be something about the cult that reduces the likelihood of its members killing themselves.
Of course, it does not follow necessarily that it is the cult that is responsible for the lower rate of suicide.
It may be that  it is those least disposed to commit suicide who join the cult in the first place, but at least the systematic comparison of variables has led to the question being raised.
Correlation is not causation
We must, in , be constantly aware that correlation, a systematic relationship between two variables X and Y, does not imply causation; it may be that a change in a characteristic or variable X causes a change in another variable Y, it might be that a change in Y causes a change in X, it might be that they both affect each other, or it might be that neither affects the other, but that a change in a further variable, Z, is responsible for the changes in both X and Y.
Meanings
But the sociologist of religion is interested in far more complicated questions than merely who would call themselves Methodist, Muslim or Mormon — or the proportion of each faith that attends a place of worship each day or week or month, or commits suicide in a particular year.
It also wants to find out what (if anything) religion and religious concepts mean to people.
Plenty of surveys have been conducted, asking respondents whether they believe in God, in Heaven or the Virgin birth.
The results of such investigations are interesting, but they also tend to be confused and confusing — we find, for example, that some people believe in both reincarnation and the resurrection of the body; others believe in the efficacy of prayer, but not in God.
Some of these apparent anomalies are due to the fact that people do happen to hold contradictory beliefs.
(Curiously enough, it is often those who accept a belief system that the majority of the population considers bizarre or incredible who tend to have the most internally consistent systems of belief.)
But sometimes the problem lies in our assuming that religious concepts have the same meaning for different people, when in fact there are grossly different understandings, even within Christianity, of who or what is meant by God — to take only the most basic example.
Some people's  conception of God is simply of the old man with a beard in the sky; others have a more sophisticated vision, but still see Him as a person, subject to feelings and emotions in the same way as human beings are; yet others conceive of Him (or, occasionally, Her — or, even, It) as a creative force.
For some, God is remote and transcendent; for others God is immanent, God is within us and we are within God.
For some, Satan is a person; for others he is the force of evil; for yet others he does not exist — except, perhaps, in people's minds.
There is a large number of further possible conceptions, but I hope enough has been said to indicate that a question such as‘Do you believe in God?’ may not be easy for the respondent to answer, and that, without further information, the answer is likely to be difficult for the researcher to interpret.
Even more difficult to assess is the extent to which and in what ways religion might be important to people.
Just to ask them whether or not religion plays an important part in their life does not get us very far.
If the answer is ‘yes’, does this mean that they pray every day, that they attend a place of worship, that their morals and/or their life is ruled according to religious precepts — does the respondent think about God all the time, or does he behave in a ‘godly’ fashion?.
A further difficulty is that, within a particular culture or sub-culture, religion will have a socially defined image, so that in some circumstances respondents might feel they ought to say that they are more ‘religious’ than they really are, or, in other circumstances, that they are less so.
One way of trying to overcome such problems is to ask people for a ‘life-history’ during an unstructured interview, and see whether and in what contexts religion or  religious ideas or behaviour are mentioned.
It is always possible to raise questions concerning religion at a later stage, but, as a general rule, it is probably always safer (assuming one has the time) to ask the more general questions first, and see if specific answers come up.
When, for example, I was interviewing Moonies, I would ask them to describe their childhood and see whether religion was mentioned, then ask about the place of religion in their lives and see what kind of response I received before posing more specific questions about church going, belief in God, confirmation, the religious beliefs and practices of their parents — and so on .
In other words, I was trying to establish whether religion had been important enough in the  interviewees' childhood (at least, as it was now remembered) for it to be mentioned, without any prompting on my part; and then, I would try not to prejudge what the interviewees thought was involved in religion, but let them decide what aspect would come out ‘naturally’— whether they would talk about the institutionalised churches, private prayer, a personal relationship with God, a way of looking at the world or the ultimate meaning of their existence.
The sociologist of religion does not, however, want to stop with what happens to emerge in the relaxed situation of apparently normal conversation.
Let me take the example of religious experience.
In our society, it is not always very easy to talk about religious experiences — it is often far easier to discuss the previously taboo subject of sex.
None the less, research has shown that a surprisingly large proportion of the population has not only had an experience that could be called religious, but that, for many, this experience consequently affected their lives in some quite important way.
Yet many of these people had never told anyone about their experience(s) — until they were asked point-blank by a sympathetic researcher (Hay, 1982).
A science of religion?
It is sometimes argued that a science of religion is a contradiction in terms.
In some senses, this is, of course, quite true.
The sociology of religion certainly cannot tell us what we ought to believe — or even whether any particular belief is true or false — except, perhaps, in so far as the belief makes empirical claims or predictions — but, even then, we must remember, religions do deal in miracles, and they do celebrate paradox.
Reductionism
Sociologists of religion frequently appear inexcusably reductionist to those whom they study.
The convert may, for example, be quite convinced that his conversion experience was due to the fact that God, or the Holy Spirit, spoke to him.
On the other hand, someone else may be quite convinced that the same convert has been tricked by Satan.
Sociologists have absolutely no way of telling whether  any supernatural (or sub-natural) Person or force was responsible for the conversion.
As social scientists, they can note only that the convert's actions have changed as a result of the belief that God has intervened in his life.
They must remain ‘methodologically agnostic’ about non-empirical happenings; neither God, the Holy Spirit nor Satan can be called upon as an independent variable in a sociological explanation.
Sociologists may, however, note that if God is converting someone to a particular belief, past experience indicates that He is likely to use a social means to achieve His end.
Christians do not appear to become devotees of Krishna without a social introduction to Hinduism.
Even if the convert claims to have had a dream or religious experience, it is likely (although perhaps not inevitable) that it fitted in with a world-view with which he was previously acquainted (through either the written or the spoken word), or else, that his experience will be interpreted by a believer in his new world-view.
Even if it is true that God has guided someone into a particular religion, there is no reason why the sociologist cannot study the social processes involved in the person's conversion; and, conversely, even if it is not true that it was God who was responsible, that does not mean that the sociologist cannot study the belief and the (possibly very considerable) consequences of that belief for the individual concerned and for society.
Limits of religious verstehen 
It can be argued that only believers can give a proper account of their religion.
When researchers want to understand what it is like to be, say, a Moonie, they can submit themselves to the sorts of conditions that a Moonie experiences — so far as these are social; but the real Moonie can, quite legitimately, protest that if the researcher does not have a personal experience of God or actually know in their heart that it is the Unification Church which has discovered the best way to live, they cannot really understand what it is like to be a Moonie.
On the other hand, it can be argued that real believers are incapable of distancing themselves sufficiently to carry out an objective study of their own (or perhaps even of someone else's) religion.
In fact, several believers have done excellent sociological studies of a religion in which they themselves  believe (eg Smith, 1982; Hornsby-Smith, 1979), or to which they converted during the course of their study (Jules-Rosette, 1975, or, as an example of a partial conversion followed by a withdrawal, Rochford, 1985).
Curiously enough, however, these are among the very people who tend to shy away from any kind of subjective description of what being a believer is like, and one frequently finds an empathic researcher who does not believe and may even be unsympathetic giving us a greater insight into what it is like to be a member of a particular religion (see, for example, Cashmore, 1983; Judah, 1974, Westley, 1983 or Lofland, 1976).
Covert or overt research?
Sometimes it is argued that even if researchers do not really believe in the religion that they are studying, they will get more information if they pretend to do so — if, in other words, they use covert, rather than overt, methods of investigation.
This raises a number of issues.
First of all, there is the very real ethical problem: is it morally permissible for a social scientist to get information through false pretences?
Secondly, there can be considerable psychological discomfort in having to pretend to beliefs that one does not really hold, or perform actions that one would not normally want to do.
This is not a problem that is confined to the sociology of religion, but it is one that arises frequently when students wish to study ‘closed’ sects or new religions which they believe (probably quite correctly) would not allow them to carry out their research — there is an unmeasured but, I suspect, strong relationship between the theological conservatism of a religion and the distrust with which its believers view sociologists.
It is, however, perfectly possible to carry out overt studies of some of the more sectarian or ‘closed’ groups.
I have enjoyed the co-operation of Biblical Fundamentalists (who do not accept the theory of evolution, but believe that the world was created exactly as described in Genesis I).
And, despite the fact that the movement was then extremely suspicious of any outsiders, let alone sociologists, I was granted permission to study the Unification Church on my own terms (independent funding, a complete list of the membership and access to all members)— albeit after a lengthy period of negotiation.
The main reason that  I was allowed to do the research was, I learned later, because their press was so bad the Moonies could not believe that someone who would listen to what they said could possibly come up with worse stories than those already in the media.
Another point which is not always recognised is that covert research can itself impose severe restrictions on the kinds of questions that one may legitimately ask and the sorts of people to whom one may have access.
If the covert researcher is not to arouse suspicion, then he or she must behave like a believer, not stepping out of line by questioning or exhibiting too much curiosity about the functioning of the organisation.
Many underground investigators have become highly frustrated because they are unable to pursue the sorts of questions that an acknowledged researcher could pursue (see Bulmer, 1982 for a relevant discussion).
Some of the disadvantages of being treated as a believer rather than a researcher were experienced in a rather dramatic fashion by a sociologist who, while studying a Hindu sect, underwent a perfectly genuine conversion.
At the time, she imagined that this would help her study immeasurably.
She found, however, that once she had been formally initiated into the movement, she was expected to spend all her time with other female devotees and could no longer speak to, let alone question, the leaders (who were all male).
On the other hand, overt researchers are not only expected to ask questions that could seem impertinent coming from anyone else, but they might also find themselves sought out and given confidences that the believers want to share with a ‘stranger’ who has some understanding of their beliefs, but is not actually part of the official organisation.
A case study
In my own work with the Unification Church, I was interested in describing and trying to understand a number of different, though interrelated, facets of the movement, its members and its relationship with the wider society.
It seemed to me that there were two types of variations that I wished to explore, and there were a number of different methods that I would have to employ to  resolve some of the problems that arose once I started to ask questions about these variations.
First, there were what I thought of as variations at the ‘horizontal’ level.
These arose because different people saw the movement from different perspectives.
The Moonies, for example, thought that the Unification Church was a godly institution that was going to save the world from its problems by restoring the Kingdom of Heaven on earth.
They felt that through joining the movement they had been liberated from the ills of modern society and that they were at last free to make the world a better place and themselves better people.
Many of their parents, on the other hand, saw the Unification Church as an institution that was itself one of the evils of the world and which had ensnared their sons and daughters, taking away their free will.
What I wanted to do was to understand why these (and other) views of the one phenomenon could differ so dramatically.
Second, I was interested in different ‘vertical’ levels.
I wanted to understand the phenomenon at an individual, a social and a sociological level.
In other words, I wanted to study the members (and their parents and other persons) as individuals; I wanted to study the kinds of interactions that took place when they took account of each other(Weber, 1947, p. 88); and, at a more abstract level than most of the participants would be aware of, I wanted to note sociological phenomena such as power structures, communication networks and the unintended consequences of the beliefs and practices of the movement.
Interviews
I used three main methods: interview, questionnaire and participant observation.
Altogether I probably interviewed about five hundred persons (members, parents, deprogrammers, anti-cultists, media etc), but not all these interviews were conducted in a systematic way — that is to say, they were with people with whom I happened to make contact, and may not have been representative of the Unification population as a whole.
I was, however, systematic about the 30 or so in-depth interviews that I conducted on a random sample basis by allocating each member of the movement in Britain a number which had an equal chance of being selected  from a book of numbers especially prepared for such purposes.
These interviews were tape-recorded and usually lasted for eight or nine hours (although one mammoth sitting lasted for twelve).
During this time I was able to develop some understanding of the sorts of backgrounds my interviewees came from, what their hopes, fears, values and experiences of life had been like before they joined the movement and how these might have changed since.
Questionnaires
The interviews gave me plenty of insights, but there was no way in which I could tell in what ways the Moonies might differ from other people of a similar age and from a similar background.
This is where the importance of the control group emerged.
In order that I could test a number of hypotheses, I gave all the British (and a considerable number of other European and North American) Moonies a 41-page questionnaire, and then I reproduced many of the questions in a 36-page questionnaire that was distributed to non-Moonies who were matched for age and social background with the Unification membership.
I also sent a 6-page questionnaire to people who attended Unification ‘workshops’— the majority of whom did not join the movement, although they had learned quite a lot about it.
I had expected to find that the control group was ‘ordinary’, those who attended the workshop ‘slightly pathetic or suggestible’ and the Moonies themselves the ‘most pathetic or suggestible’.
To my delight, this hypothesis was proved wrong.
It may sound strange to be pleased to discover that one has made a mistake, but it is, in fact, one of the most exciting things for a social scientist to discover — one really feels that one has found out something that went beyond what one might have expected through ‘common sense’ reasoning!
It also reminded me of the importance of Popper's definition of scientific statements as those that are, in principle, not confirmable, but refutable (see Popper, 1963, Chapter 1).
Participant observation
Neither interviews nor questionnaires can tell you how people  behave in a social situation.
In order to observe this and to try to understand something of what life in the movement was like at first hand — and, of course, to try to observe the operation of sociological variables such as social control — I lived for several periods of a week or so, over a span of six years, in Unification centres and participated in various of their functions.
I also attended a number of the introductory workshops to which potential recruits are invited.
I found, in retrospect, that my participant observation had a ‘career’ that seemed to proceed through three stages: passive, interactive and active.
At the start of my study, I tried to intrude as little as possible.
I rarely spoke, and when I did ask questions I did not question the answers.
I tried to find myself work (such as washing dishes or mending clothes), where I could observe without being too noticeable.
Later, when I was more familiar with the beliefs and practices of the movement and had ‘learned the language’, I would interact with the Moonies as though I were one of them, and, although I never pretended that I accepted their beliefs or that I was anything other than a sociologist studying the movement, members who did not know me would mistake me for a member — the Moonies themselves were no longer‘translating’ for me when we were interacting.
In the final stage, I was much more aggressive.
I found myself questioning many of their beliefs in a way that I would not have dared to do at the beginning of the study; I could question them in their own terms and in doing so, test the boundaries of their beliefs.
I was now able to test responses to questions such as‘Why is it that if you want to create an ideal family as the basis of society, Unification husbands are often expected to leave their wives, and mothers are asked to leave their children while they are sent to work on a mission, possibly thousands of miles away?’
On the whole, I was surprised at the extent to which the Moonies were willing to discuss such questions with me.
Far from creating a feeling of dissatisfaction, the opening up of such discussions frequently seemed to give them an opportunity to face questions that had been suppressed, but none the less niggling at the back of their minds.
Field-notes
Throughout the whole period of study, I kept detailed field-notes, not only of factual occurrences, but also of my subjective reactions to what was going on around me.
These notes were invaluable when I came to write up the results of the study.
There was little point in my merely presenting a Moonie world-view — the Moonies themselves can do that — but I did want to try to make their religion and its effects comprehensible to others who wanted to understand how well-educated and intelligent people from ‘good homes’ could lead the kind of life they did because they had come to believe that a strange Korean was the Messiah and must be obeyed.
Ordering the data
What was I to do with all the material that I gathered?
The sociologist of religion (usually) does not just plonk down a whole lot of data and let the reader make what he or she will of it.
Questions have to be phrased, abstract concepts ‘operationalised’, and a model or framework within which to answer the questions constructed.
One of my main questions arose from the constant accusations that have been made that Moonies (and other new religions) actually brainwash their ‘victims’— this being the only explanation that seemed plausible to many of the parents and friends who had observed the often radical changes in behaviour wrought in those who joined the movement.
How was I to address this question — how could I, as a sociologist, come to a conclusion that anyone, whether an admirer or an opponent of the Unification Church, would have to agree was as objective and unbiased as possible?
How could I phrase the question so that I could distinguish between free choice and manipulative coercion?
I had to construct a model that would lead me to a series of questions that would have empirically testable answers which would allow me to deduce an answer to my original question.
As part of the process of clarifying what might be meant by brainwashing, I proposed a working definition of what it might mean to make a choice:
a choice would involve reflection (in the present), memory (of the past) and imagination (of possible futures).
A person would  be an active agent in deciding between two or more options when he could anticipate their potential existence and when, in doing so, he drew upon his previous experience and his previously formed values and interests to guide his judgement.
Barker, 1984 p. 137.
I then isolated four variables that would be crucial in deciding whether or not a choice was being made:(a) the individuals in question (the potential recruits) with their existing predispositions (interests, values, hopes, fears, etc.);(b) and (c) the alternatives (life in the Unification Church or continuing in the wider society); and (d) the social context within which the decision was reached (the Unification workshop).
I then worked out a series of possibilities in which each variable would be more or less important in deciding the final outcome, and used the model that this produced to order the data.
When, for example, I discovered that 90 per cent of those attending a workshop did not become Moonies, it seemed clear that any brainwashing techniques that the movement was employing were, to say the least, not very efficient.
There is no space to detail further the model that I used to pursue the problem that I had set myself.
The point to be made, however, is that although this was something that had to be thought out in my head, rather than in the field, it was a very central part of the methodology with which I approached the research.
Concluding remarks
In this paper, I have tried to suggest briefly some of the questions posed by the study of religion from a sociological perspective.
As I mentioned at the beginning, many of the methodological problems are faced by other social scientists, and, of course, sociologists of religion will also employ other sociological methods and techniques that I have not specifically mentioned (it was, for example , important to use a pilot questionnaire to test my questions for ambiguities and so on ).
The sociology of religion does, however, present the researcher with an unusual variety of challenges at a number of different levels in its attempt to understand some of the  most powerfully held beliefs and most powerfully motivated actions to be found in the social world throughout its history.
RESEARCHING CHILD ABUSE Steve Taylor
Child abuse as a moral problem
In recent years, the abuse of children by those charged with their care and protection has come to be seen as one of the major social problems of modern societies.
How can sociologists contribute towards understanding it?
One understandable response is anger and indignation.
Media reports of child abuse cases often express this sense of moral outrage.
Here, for example, are some of the headlines that followed the sentencing of Andrew Neil for the murder of his small daughter, Tyra, who died from massive brain damage, her body covered in 57 bite marks and a mass of bruises:
The Brute Gets Life (Daily Mirror 26.7.85)
The Monster: ‘Cannibal Kid’ Gets Life for Murder of Little Tyra (Daily Express 26.7.85)
Animal Gets Life (The Sun 26.7.85)
This is an example of a moral model , or approach, to child abuse.
The perpetrators are held to be responsible for their actions and there is an emphasis on retribution, not only against the murderer or murderers, but also against the social workers who, it is claimed, failed the child.
‘Solutions’ are seen in terms of harsher punishments, a ‘tougher’attitude on the part of social workers, and more legal power and controls over some families.
Sometimes, child abuse and other forms of deviance are seen as symptoms of a more general ‘moral decline’ in society.
Child abuse as a technical problem
The experts who study child abuse — most of whom come from the medical and psychological professions — tend to adopt a rather different approach.
They see it as a scientific rather than a moral problem.
But what do these researchers mean by ‘scientific’?
They argue (or implicitly accept) that a scientific approach to a problem involves separating ‘facts’ from ‘values’.
While religion and philosophy, for example, deal with values and morals, science deals only with facts.
A scientific approach to child abuse, therefore, means eliminating subjective and value judgements and concentrating on the ‘known facts’ about the problem.
This approach could involve studying the statistical distribution of child abuse, or comparing a group of known child abusers with a non-abusing control group, in order to try to identify and isolate some of the factors that make it more likely that some parents will abuse their children.
Such research has purported to show that abusing parents are more likely to have, for example, personality problems (Loss and Glancy, 1983; Kokkevi and Agathonos, 1987), low IQ (Oliver, 1977) and have been the victims of abuse themselves (Kempe and Kempe, 1978).
It has also been shown that reported child abuse is not distributed randomly, but is far higher among the most socially deprived groups in society (Creighton, 1984; Krugman, 1986).
This approach likens child abuse to a disease.
It is assumed that it is ‘natural’(ie healthy) to love and protect children.
Failure to do so is ‘unnatural’(ie sick), and this unnatural behaviour is caused by psychological and/or social factors, the influences of which are largely outside individuals' control.
The solution lies, therefore, not in more punishment and law and order, but in discovering the underlying causes of child abuse in order to eliminate, or at least control, them.
It is essentially a technical rather than a moral problem.
One of the most influential proponents of the disease model was Kempe, who coined the term ‘battered baby syndrome’(Kempe et al, 1962).
Kempe claimed that it was possible, even a short time after a child was born, to identify those children who had a higher risk of being abused.
This information could be used to help  practitioners — such as doctors and social workers — predict which children were most at risk from abuse, or further abuse, and target their intervention in the appropriate places.
(Kempe and Kempe 1983; Browne et al, 1988).
Child abuse as a sociological problem
There has been relatively little research by sociologists into child abuse.
There is, unlike the sociological study of social class or religion for example, no established ‘research tradition’ to build upon.
As I have already observed, issues surrounding the identification and causes of child abuse tend to be dominated by medicine and psychology, and the management of child abuse cases takes place within a legal framework.
Indeed, my own interest in the problem came, not through sociology, but originated when, as a law student, I studied the legal powers available to the state to protect children at risk from abuse and neglect.
As I read into the subject, it was apparent that, although the ‘clinical’ and ‘legalistic’literature was full of problems of identifying and managing child abuse cases, the concept of child abuse itself was not treated as problematic.
A whole range of questions stemming from why one form of parenting is seen as acceptable and another unacceptable, or why the same form of parenting is acceptable in one context but not in another, had received little systematic analysis.
This included sociological work.
Most of the sociologists who had studied child abuse had simply tried to build more ‘social factors’ into the dominant disease model (cf Araji and Finkelhor, 1986).
At this time (the late 1970s), I was teaching courses in the sociology of deviance to degree and social work students, and it seemed to me that certain key ideas and insights from this work could usefully be applied to the study of child abuse.
The ‘newer, perspectives on deviance — whether interactionist, Marxist — radical or structuralist — shared common criticisms of the positivistic assumptions underlying the supposedly ‘scientific’ approach to crime and deviance (cf Taylor et al, 1973; Taylor, 1982).
It is not that these writers were necessarily against the idea of a science of society, but they did argue that the idea and practice of social  science is not as straightforward as positivism would have us believe.
They were especially critical of the assumption that one can explain a form of behaviour simply by observing its incidence and correlating it with other variables.
They argued that categories such as crime and mental illness (and they could have added child abuse) do not occur naturally, but are products of social definition .
The meanings that these categories come to have for people in given situations cannot be taken for granted, but is a subject for sociological study.
It is important for the sociologist to try to explain the social processes by which members of a society or social group come to define, or ‘see’, things the way they do.
A useful distinction in this context is that which is sometimes made between social and sociological problems.
(Berger, 1968).
Social problems are simply what members of a society feel is a problem at a given time.
Sociological problems are concerned with trying to explain how societies, or specific institutions in societies, work in the way they do.
The sociologist is interested in what members of a society feel are social problems, but this does not define, for him or her, the scope and limits of enquiry.
Amongst other things, the sociologist is interested in how and why some things come to be seen as social problems.
A sociological perspective implies exploring the relationship between what is perceived as ‘good’(or ‘healthy’) and ‘bad’(or ‘unhealthy’), rather than focussing exclusively on the latter at the expense of the former.
From this position, sociologists of deviance have argued that the ‘societal reaction’ to deviance cannot be taken for granted, but is itself a problem to be explained.
Crimes, mental illnesses, or cases of child abuse for that matter, are not simply ‘waiting’ to be recognised and managed by various officials and then explained by ‘experts’.
They are socially constructed .
That is, their meanings are not ‘given’ by some set of facts, but rather by the way in which these facts are interpreted by observers in a form that makes them recognisable as crimes, mental illnesses or cases of child abuse.
This, then, commits the sociologist, not only to studying the ‘known facts’ about deviant behaviour, but also the conceptual categories and interpretive procedures by which these facts become intelligible.
Adopting this approach to the study of child abuse involves asking rather different questions from those usually asked by  researchers.
The disease model simply asks why child abuse occurs and how can it be prevented or reduced.
In contrast, the sociological model outlined above, is also interested in why certain forms of behaviour come to be seen as abuse of children, and how certain individuals come to be labelled as child abusers.
In other words, it treats as problematic what both the disease and moral models take for granted.
The scope of study is, therefore, widened from exclusive concern with parents and children (the defined) to include study of the social workers, doctors and others who are charged with the identification and protection of children at risk (the definers).
This does not imply that this sociological approach would not be interested in the influences which inhibit some parents from looking after their children in a manner which lives up to the standards set by the rest of society.
However, it does suggest that the issue of how and why children come to be labelled as abused is a problem in its own right, and one which may well be prior to questions of cause and control.
It was from this perspective that I undertook a research project aimed at exploring how members of a variety of professional groups from medical, social service and legal agencies came to recognise, or suspect, that some children are being abused, and how decisions are taken about those children.
I shall discuss some of the results of this work, and their possible implications, at the end of this chapter, but I shall look first at some of the general problems for the sociologist who wants to engage in this type of investigation.
Research setting and methods
The central problem in this research revolved around exploring how labels such as‘child at risk’, ‘abused child’ and ‘child in need of care’, were applied in practice to particular cases.
There are a series of formally laid down rules and procedures which medical and social service workers are expected to follow in child abuse cases.
For example, doctors are taught to recognise the type of injuries in children that may well be ‘non-accidental’.
Junior doctors in hospital casualty departments were expected to refer all such suspicious cases to a more senior doctor — a consultant  paediatrician — with expertise in child health.
Similarly, social workers were issued with handbooks and directives about the correct procedure to follow when investigating cases of suspected abuse.
Finally, if a local authority wishes to take a child into care, and perhaps assume custody, there are a series of legal rules which specify the grounds for such an action.
Clearly, these various formal, procedural rules are very important.
They help to shape and define the limits of the context of child care work for professionals in much the same way as the rules of a game do for the players.
Obviously, an important part of the research involved becoming familiar with these rules and, in some respects, being a lawyer as well as a sociologist was helpful.
However, these rules and formally laid down procedures tell only part of the story.
Sociologists have shown in a variety of bureaucratic and semi-bureaucratic contexts that, beneath the surface of formal rules and procedures, lie structures of informal rules — some of which the participants themselves may not be consciously aware — but which they, nevertheless, use to interpret and make sense of their more formal obligations and duties.
In the field of child abuse, there is no existing body of research work or official data on how this is accomplished by the professionals involved.
In such circumstances, the sociologist has to gather his or her own ‘raw’ data from direct observation and participation.
This is known as an ethnographic, or field work, approach (cf Rose, 1982, Chapters 8 — 9).
Data for my research was obtained from four main sources: detailed interviews with ‘samples’ of front-line workers, such as social workers and health visitors; a participant observation study of how a sample of new cases were investigated and managed; examination of files and records; attendance at case conferences, which are the meetings of professionals with relevant knowledge of a particular case to decide whether child abuse has taken place, and what course of action is in the best interests of the child, or children, concerned.
Adopting an ethnographic approach typically raises a number of specific problems for the researcher and it is useful to divide these into problems which are essentially practical and those which are more theoretical.
In the following sections, I shall look at a few examples of each type of problem with some illustrations from my own work.
Field-work: some practical issues
Usually, the first practical problem is simply gaining access to the organisation or social group you wish to study.
Child abuse is a highly sensitive topic these days and my research proposals were subject to the scrutiny of a number of people, ranging from the local authority's research officer through to the director of social services.
As a result of these negotiations, some of the original proposals had to be modified and, of course, I had to give a guarantee of absolute confidentiality to everyone involved, directly or indirectly, with the research.
It seemed that a major factor in being granted access, was that I was able to convince the deciding parties that the research would be ‘useful’ for practitioners.
I believed this was true, but it was important to ‘market’ the research in a particular way.
I have already outlined the importance of the distinction between ‘social’ and ‘sociological’problems.
However, in asking for finance for research, or trying to persuade an organisation they would benefit from your work, it is sometimes necessary to describe the work more in ‘social problem’ terms.
Once the researcher is inside the organisation, there are problems of developing and maintaining relationships with the subjects of study.
For example, some people are uncooperative — one specialist in community health refused to be interviewed because, I later discovered, she was angry that I had not gone to interview her first — whilst others are sometimes over-cooperative, extending one-hour interviews to three hours!
A problem in researching child abuse is that social workers, in particular, are consistently subjected to complaints about their work.
There are complaints when they do not take a child into care and there are complaints when they do.
Sometimes these complaints reach the national media and then there are demands for an independent enquiry.
With rising case loads and diminishing resources, it is hardly surprising that social workers often feel they cannot win.
As a researcher, it was very important to be sensitive to these problems and consistently reassure social workers that I was not undertaking any semi-official enquiry, and not looking for particular cases that ‘go wrong’.
Recording observations can also create problems for the ethnographer.
While formal interviews can be taped with the permission  of the interviewee, there are clearly situations where subjects would have been inhibited by the sight of the tape-recorder.
On the other hand, scribbling in a note-book, or rushing off somewhere to scribble in a note-book, could easily ‘kill’ a piece of action.
The solution I arrived at was to go around ‘wired’ with a micro tape recorder in my pocket.
This enabled me to record my impressions quickly and, I hoped, unobtrusively.
Obviously, the recorder was neither used to ‘eavesdrop’ on subjects nor in situations, such as the court-room, where its use was expressly forbidden.
The micro recorder did, however, cause a few problems.
On one occasion it jammed and made a loud buzzing  noise which I hoped I managed to conceal with a loud burst of coughing.
Another time, I was using the tape in private to record some of my own thoughts and observations.
I had been happily chatting away for some time to my ‘invisible’ recorder before I realized I was not alone.
One of the social workers had come into the office and was looking at me very strangely.
In fact, she continued to look at me a bit strangely during the remainder of my stay in that department!
It is also important for the observer to try to remain as objective as possible.
There will probably be tensions and conflicts of personality in an organisational setting.
The researcher must try to resist the attempts that will almost certainly be made to get him or her to ‘take sides’.
While it is important to be friendly and cooperative, the researcher should also try to avoid making friends (or enemies) of those he or she is studying.
There is always the danger that over-involvement and over-identification with certain individuals or groups, will tend to effect the researcher's judgement.
However, this is not to imply that the observer simply has to remain ‘detached’ as opposed to‘involved’.
The position is rather more complex than that.
As a student of child abuse, I regularly encountered forms of cruelty to children I hardly thought were possible.
I watched, amazed, as children who had been brought into care because they had been abused, ran with open arms to hug the ‘abusing’ parents who had been allowed to visit them.
I have seen social workers and police having to drag screaming children away from their parents.
While a ‘lay’ person witnessing such scenes would probably react emotionally, the professionals regularly involved in such work remained detached and unemotional.
It was almost  as if nothing that happened to children could surprise them any more.
Neither of these reactions is suitable for the sociological observer.
On the one hand, the researcher should try to take nothing for granted, but rather be surprised and intrigued by what is observed, as if trying to make sense of foreign culture.
On the other hand, while it is impossible to keep values out of research, the more you let your own values and feelings ‘take over’, the more you will write about your own values and reactions, and the less you will see of what is going on around you.
Field-work: some theoretical issues
In the context of sociological research into child abuse, it is important to consider what is likely to be distinctive about a sociologist's ethnographic account.
After all, sociologists have no monopoly over observing people and asking them questions.
How, for example, might a sociologist's account of ‘reactions to child abuse’ differ from that of a well-informed journalist?
Before trying to answer this question, it is worth noting that there may well be some overlap, and this should not cause sociologists too much concern.
Sociologists can, and should, learn from (some) journalists' professionalism, and a good journalistic account of something is better than a bad sociological one.
The main differences between the account of the journalist and the sociologist come from the different orientations that each brings to the subject of study.
The journalist is constrained by the ‘news value’ that determine what is, and what is not, a ‘good story’.
The sociologist's approach is shaped by the general aims of sociology and by the particular perspective within which he or she is working.
The journalist is interested in the unusual and the dramatic, while the sociologist is looking for general patterns and regularities within institutions.
Journalistic reports are written in terms of the immediate situation, while sociologists are more interested in how things evolve and develop.
Journalists tend to ‘explain' things in terms of the actions of ‘key personalities’ who do ‘right’or ‘wrong’things, whereas sociologists are more inclined to focus on social processes and structures.
Finally, sociological  accounts should be more objective, systematic and potentially verifiable.
Any account, whether by a journalist, sociologist or anyone else, is necessarily a selective reconstruction of, or abstraction from, real events.
Selection is governed, partly by the availability of material and partly by choice.
However, while the journalist, or the politician for that matter, tends only to select things which are in accord with some preconceived view or set of values, sociologists try to go beyond this by using clearly defined theoretical concepts, representative samples and writing research reports in such a way that they can be examined, tested and, perhaps, modified by others.
In approaching the identification and management of child abuse cases as a journalist my attention would probably be focussed on a few ‘sensational’ cases, where something has gone dramatically ‘wrong’and which are subject to an enquiry.
I would place a great deal of emphasis on my own impressions, the comments of people in authority and I would focus on the key personalities in the ‘drama’.
However, as a sociologist, I was interested in observing routine cases over a period of time in order to look for regular and recurring patterns of action and interaction that might allow certain generalisations to be made.
The emphasis would be less on workers and families as individuals and more on the roles they play, and how these roles are constrained by certain formal and informal rules.
There are also some important differences between ethnographic work and more formal techniques of sociological research.
While survey or statistical research is often geared towards testing some specific hypothesis or, at least, examining the relationship between clearly defined conceptual categories, ethnographic research rarely proceeds so smoothly (cf Rose, 1982).
Obviously, the researcher will have some pre-defined ideas of what he or she is going to look at, but usually the experience of working with an organisation or group will suggest new possibilities, new questions to be asked and pursued.
This occurred in my research.
Originally, as someone interested in medical sociology and medical law, I wanted to see how medical evidence becomes translated into appropriate legal terms in child abuse cases, and how it is balanced against other evidence (Cavenagh, 1975).
While I did not lose interest in this problem it  became clear, after observing a series of routine cases, that medical evidence was often far less important than I had previously imagined.
Some of the implications of this observation, both for my own research and for the dominant disease model of child abuse, I shall discuss in the following section.
Discovering child abuse
The previous sections suggested some of the ways in which sociology may be able to provide some distinct insights into understanding child abuse and illustrated some of the problems of undertaking such a study.
In this section, I shall use some observations from a part of the research into the work of social services in order to illustrate some of these ‘ideas in action’, and some possible implications for policy and practice.
Social workers have a key role to play when someone suspects that a child is being abused.
They have a legal duty to investigate such complaints and legal powers, if necessary, to remove a child to a place of safety and apply to a court for a ‘care order’.
How do social workers go about investigating these complaints, and what leads them towards deciding that a child has been abused?
Obviously, each enquiry is slightly different depending on the facts of a particular case and the majority are complex, often involving repeated consultation with members of other professions, such as teachers, doctors, police, nurses and solicitors, as well as parents and children themselves.
The sociologist must study this complexity and try to understand it, but — and this is an important point — it is not the sociologist's job to try to reproduce it.
Rather, the sociologist tries to clarify the complexity of the real world.
The eminent French sociologist Raymond Aron (1968) explained this in the following way:
In the context of these investigations, I used the concept of danger clues to describe any piece of information that would tend to alert a social worker to suspect that child abuse was taking place.s An important source of danger clues was obviously to be found in the condition of the child, particularly its physical state and behaviour.
For reasons that will become clear below, we called these primary danger clues .
The expert literature tells social workers (and other professionals in the field) that there are certain types of injuries to, and behaviour from, children that tend to be indicative of child abuse (Thompson, 1981; Johnson, 1985).
However, the participant observation research showed that, despite ‘common sense’ and the media suggesting to the contrary, these primary clues were only rarely sufficient in themselves to produce a clear and unambiguous decision that a child had been abused.
This was so even when a child had been submitted for expert medical examination.
Either the medical report was inconclusive, or (as illustrated by the sexual abuse controversy in Cleveland in 1987 — 88), medical opinion was divided as to whether or not a particular clinical sign was necessarily indicative or child abuse.
With this observation, I became increasingly interested in what other sorts of evidence alerts social workers to possible child abuse.
My research assistants and I conducted another round of interviews, re-examined case records and studied the investigation of particular cases with this question in mind.
Suspicious evidence relating to things other than the condition of the child I called secondary danger clues .
A great deal of social work attention was focussed on the parents and the social and economic situation of the family.
For example, parents who did not show proper ‘bonding’ with their children, had trouble accounting for their child's condition or behaviour, and who appeared ‘hostile’and ‘uncooperative’, increased social work suspicion.
Another important source of secondary danger clues came from the parents' life histories: for example, parents who had certain ‘personality traits’, had been abused or ‘in care’ themselves as children, had been in  regular ‘trouble’as children or/and as adults, were seen as being more likely to harm their children.
The structure of the family, the ‘lifestyle’ of its members and its social and economic situation were also seen as important.
Unstable family units, deviant behaviour from family members and poverty, bad housing and other socio-economic problems were all seen to create pressures which made child abuse — particularly physical abuse — more likely.
The participant observation studies and documentary evidence from case records revealed the importance of such ‘secondary’ information in the investigation and decision-making process.
Informal discussions about cases and the more formal case records, were full of references to parents' ‘histories’, ‘stability’, ‘maturity’, ‘coping abilities’ and so on.
In short, in deciding whether or not a child was being abused (and what course of practical action to take), social workers were not simply relying on clinical and other sources of more objective evidence, but were being asked to make value judgements about the kinds of situations in which child abuse is most likely to occur, and the ‘types’ of people most likely to engage in it.
The conceptual distinction between primary and secondary clues made this much clearer than it would otherwise have been.
Some of these value judgements — for example, the working classes, tend to be more physically violent than the middle classes — are woven into the fabric of our culture, but the more specific ones made about child abuse are ‘transmitted’ to social workers and other ‘front-line’child abuse workers through a ‘professional culture’of child abuse.
There are increasing numbers of experts in the child abuse field.
They make observations and draw certain conclusions about child abuse (cf Browne et al, 1988).
These are then collected, distilled and passed on to social workers and others in basic texts, training manuals, child abuse courses and conferences (cf Moore, 1985).
For example, I attended several courses and conferences where experts taught social workers how to predict the kinds of people most likely to harm their children.
These ‘values’ about child abuse do not merely exist as debatable academic ideas; some of them have become ‘institutionalised’into the official procedures of child abuse work.
For example, the ‘child abuse manual’ in one of the areas in which we worked, unambiguously tells social workers that:
Young, isolated, immature parents are vulnerable, particularly those who experienced deprivation (either active or passive) in their own childhoods.
Marital strife, early, abnormal or unwanted pregnancies, anxiety, depression or drug  dependency can compound the risks of parents abusing their children.
The environmental factors which cause stress should not be underestimated — financial difficulties, often associated with unemployment, inadequate housing, social and family isolation.
‘X’ town child abuse manual.
In summary, the sociological perspective outlined earlier in this chapter orientates us towards examining the social construction of ideas about child abuse.
This is not to deny that child abuse is a ‘factual’ phenomenon or thing, it is to argue that facts only take the form they do because they are interpreted within given contexts of meaning.
This, then, directs the sociologist toward exploring those contexts of meaning.
In the case of child abuse there is first, the examination of the changing cultural ideas that lead to definitions and re-definitions of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour towards a child.
These standards vary both between cultures and within a culture over time — part of the sociologist's (and the historian's) job is to try to find out why.
Secondly, there is the question I addressed in my research of how notions of child abuse are applied to particular cases.
Here, attention was drawn to the dominance of a sub-culture of child abuse expertise into which many professionals working in the field are socialised in different ways.
The research suggested that this resulted in professionals identifying child abuse in terms of a series of value judgements about parents and families.
Of course, it could be argued that what I have called secondary danger clues correspond to the facts about child abuse discovered by a number of studies within the disease model.
However, the investigation described in this section suggests an alternative explanation for the same discoveries.
Much expert knowledge about child abuse is derived from data produced by the observations and decisions of social workers and others.
These front line workers, like the rest of us, have certain taken-for-granted ideas about ‘good’ and ‘bad’parenting, and they are also given expert knowledge that tells them some of the factors to which child abuse is positively  related.
The research into investigation of possible child abuse cases demonstrated that these ideas did tend to influence the kinds of questions that were asked, and the way in which ‘evidence’ was interpreted.
The circular and mutually reinforcing nature of the social production of facts about child abuse can be illustrated diagrammatically.
See Figure 4.1.
1
Social services investigate cases of suspected child abuse.
2
They use certain key criteria (‘danger clues’) to help them decide whether or not a child has been abused and/or is in danger of abuse.
3
Experts compare samples of ‘abuse’ cases with ‘non-abused’control groups.
4
The knowledge gained from these studies is ‘transmitted’ to practitioners who are taught to recognise key ‘danger clues’.
Conclusion
Although sociologists try to go beyond working within what they see as a narrow ‘social problem’ framework, this does not mean that  their research cannot provide insights and suggestions potentially relevant to practitioners and policy-makers.
For example, even the fragment of the research described above suggests that some of the taken-for-granted ideas about the sorts of people most likely to harm their children be subjected to much more critical scrutiny and scepticism.
Case conferences should, as a matter of routine practice, make a much clearer distinction between more and less ‘objective’ evidence than they do at present.
It also suggests that, given the inevitably subjective nature of much decision making within this area, proposed changes to child care law and procedure should take more account of family rights and due process of law than is the case at the moment.
In this chapter, I have outlined how a distinct sociological perspective led me into asking particular questions about child abuse, some of the ways in which these questions were explored and some of the insights yielded by such an approach.
While this perspective was offered as an alternative to the moral and disease models of child abuse, which tend to dominate ‘lay’ and ‘expert’thinking on the subject, it is only one of a number of possible sociological approaches.
Societal reaction theory directs research towards the ideas and beliefs that give child abuse meaning in given contexts, but it is also quite clear that child abuse is not reducible to those beliefs.
There are other important questions, such as the general characteristics of behaviour that tends to get identified as child abuse and the social conditions that tend to make such behaviour more or less likely.
As sociological interest in the problem grows and develops, we are likely to have more understanding of these questions.
YOUTH Claire Wallace
The situation facing young people today is radically different from that of ten years ago.
Over one million of those under the age of 25 are now unemployed and over 300 000 are engaged on the Youth Training Scheme (Youthaid Bulletin 26).
Instead of leaving school and entering work directly, young people are now more likely to enter an array of training and other schemes.
Consequently, rather than earning a wage, they are likely to find themselves claiming a range of benefits, grants and allowances.
These changes have served to redefine what youth is: rather than being ‘young workers’ many are now more likely to be ‘young trainees, or without jobs at all.
A comparison with the position of young people at other stages in the post war period helps to put this in context.
There has been a corresponding shift in studies of youth and in the kind of questions asked by sociologists.
These have moved away from a concern with what young people did in their spare time and the transition from school to work towards looking at unemployment and state policies.
This chapter will trace some of the changes in the position of young people over the post war period and some of the ways in which sociologists have accounted for them.
Young people and leisure
In the initial post-war period, young people were a relatively  ‘affluent’ group who were able to earn more from the 1950s onwards than they had done previously, thus creating the phenomenon of the ‘teenage consumer’(Roberts, 1984).
The pop music and fashion industries were geared specifically towards the young and magazines flourished in order to promote these trends.
New kinds of leisure outlets such as dance halls and ‘discos’ appeared which served to mark off youth from other age groups.
These were seen by teachers and some parents to be a dangerous and decadent influence at first.
The Albemarle Report in 1960, for example, hoped that Youth Clubs would be able to tempt young people away from frivolous commercial leisure pursuits and encourage them to take up more ‘improving’ pastimes instead.
Young people also created their own leisure styles known as ‘youth sub-cultures’.
To begin with there were ‘teds’, dressed in Edwardian-style drapes and suede shoes, followed by the more respectable ‘mods’ and the more rowdy ‘rockers’.
Later there were skinheads, hippies, punks, new romantics, rude boys and so on.
Each developed a distinctive dress style, distinctive argot and followed particular kinds of music.
Many of them attempted to challenge mainstream or ‘dominant’ culture.
Youth sub-cultures
One way of interpreting these sub-cultures was provided by the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies (CCCS) at Birmingham in the 1970s.
Using a marxist framework, Stuart Hall (1976) and his colleagues developed a concept of ‘youth sub-cultures’, one derived originally from studies of deviance and crime.
They demonstrated how these sub-cultures represented different class groups.
According to the CCCS the hippies, for example, were a mainly middle class sub-culture; the skinheads, originating in the East End of London, represented the ‘rough’ working class, whilst the mods, with their attention to appearance, represented the upwardly aspiring working class and lower middle class.
Youth cultures were therefore a ‘metaphor for social change’.
In other words, we could look at youth culture as a way of understanding social changes taking place in society.
Youth cultures were also the means by which young people made  sense of their situation, for they represented symbolically the struggles, anxieties and aspirations of the parent culture — that is, the culture of their class.
Parent cultures were in turn subordinated to dominant culture — that of mainstream middle class society.
Thus, the skinheads tried through their gang solidarity and exaggerated working men's clothes — braces, boots and jeans — to symbolically recreate the dissolving community spirit of the old East End of London.
Whilst their families were moved into tower blocks or disappeared to the suburbs, skinheads tried to ‘magically’ reclaim this lost solidarity of the parent culture.
Moreover, since the class groups which most of these youth represented were the working class — those most marginalised by dominant middle class culture — these sub-cultural activities could be interpreted as a form of rebellion, a way of fighting back.
In their work, the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies tried to combine the view of the young people themselves — gathered through ethnography — with a more global picture of changes taking place in contemporary capitalism.
We can see that the CCCS presented a different picture of youth leisure styles than did the Albemarle Report.
Whereas the Albemarle Report had seen them as shallow and frivolous, as examples of young people being manipulated by commercial interests, or even as hooliganism, the CCCS saw them as important and creative in their own right — as young people expressing their own point of view.
However, we might question to what extent youth cultures really did represent the struggles, anxieties and aspirations of the parent culture.
Perhaps this is reading too much into them?
Were youth cultural participants really symbolic class rebels?
Or were those who studied these sub-cultures romanticising their role?
Also, it is arguable that too much attention had been focused upon the spectacular and exciting youths.
What about the ordinary young person?
Finally, all these studies described the point of view of the male participants.
Nearly all the participants described in these accounts were male and nearly all the studies were undertaken by male sociologists who had some difficulty communicating with young women.
It leaves us wondering that if this is the way in which young men made sense of their situation, how did young women do so?
Was their situation the same as that of young men?
To some extent these problems were ones engendered by the  methods which had been used.
Those who studied youth cultures, influenced by the study of delinquent street gangs, had focused upon conspicuous youth cultures and ignored other youths who were perhaps more difficult to find.
Also, they were perhaps inclined to adopt the world view of their respondents at the expense of other perspectives (such as those of young women for example)— something for which ethnographers are often criticised.
The transition from school to work
Studies of the position of young people between school and work have likewise shifted.
During the post war period there have been a number of studies of the transition from school to work.
Initially, in the early 1960s, these were concerned to test the social-psychological assumption that young people's entry into work could be explained by the idea of ‘occupational choice’.
This assumed that young people embarked upon a particular ‘career’ because they had ‘chosen’it: that it was a product of their own internal decision-making processes.
Studies such as that by Ken Roberts (1968) however, indicated that such ‘choices’ were largely illusory for in practice young people entered a very narrow range of occupations.
He argued that the kinds of jobs which young people eventually did were determined not so much by the development of their inner drives, as by the structure of opportunities by which they were surrounded — the kinds of jobs which were available for them to do in the labour market.
Others demonstrated that people's post-school careers were also dependent upon their social class background .
Dave Ashton and David Field in their book Young Workers (1976) constructed a model by which school careers and labour market destinations were all related to the occupation of the young person's father.
Those from an unskilled manual working class background left with few or no qualifications and emerged into manual jobs with a ‘careerless’ orientation.
Those from white collar and skilled manual backgrounds benefited rather more from education and emerged to do clerical and apprenticeship training with a ‘short term career’ orientation.
Those from professional and managerial backgrounds benefited most from education and went on to more extended  training with a ‘long term career’ orientation.
This model demonstrated how parental expectations, teachers' expectations and the needs of the labour market for different kinds of workers all reinforced one another.
The only people who had trouble in adjusting to work were those who for some reason deviated from this model — either by going up the social scale or by going down it (social mobility is more fully discussed by Geoff Payne in this volume).
The rest had been so well prepared for work by their previous sixteen years of socialisation that they found few problems.
Hence, these studies emphasised the essential continuities between home, school and work.
Official concern was focused mainly upon the bottom forty per cent— those who left school at the minimum age and entered ‘dead end’ jobs.
Reports such as the Newsom Report (1963) were concerned to find ways to encourage young people to aspire to better jobs and television programmes tried to encourage them to set their sights higher.
However, it was only thought necessary to encourage young men to set their sights higher.
The Newsom Report argued that young women should be prepared for their future roles as wives and mothers.
These studies tell us about the broad pattern of movement between school and work.
However, they do not tell us about the complex subjective processes which this involved.
Learning to labour
One way to explore this was by doing ethnographic research with young people.
Paul Willis (1977) from the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies applied their approach to looking at young men at school and afterwards.
He posed the question: how do working class kids get working class jobs?
He was concerned to explain how they came to accept jobs which to the external observer appeared to offer them only a lifetime of poorly paid, insecure and even dangerous work.
How did they come to see such jobs as desirable?
The study focused mainly upon a group of twelve ‘lads’ in a school in Birmingham whom Willis followed around school and outside.
He tape recorded their conversations, made  notes on their behaviour and in doing so identified a small ‘sub-culture’.
It was evident that the ‘lads’ experienced school not as a process of enlightenment, but as a source of oppression.
They reacted by inventing ways of avoiding teachers' authority, escaping from supervision and doing the things which they valued most: smoking, drinking, swearing and wearing their own variation on the school uniform.
There is an aimless air of insubordination ready with spurious justification and impossible to nail down.
If someone is sitting on the radiator it is because his trousers are wet from the rain, if someone is drifting across the classroom he is going to get some paper for written work, or if someone is leaving class he is going to empty the rubbish ‘like he usually does’.
Comics, newspapers and nudes under half-lifted desks melt into elusive textbooks.
A continuous hum of talk flows around injunctions not to, like the inevitable tide over barely dried sand and everywhere there are rolled-back eyeballs and exaggerated mouthings of conspiratorial secrets.
Willis, 1977, p. 13.
Whilst for the teachers these lads are ‘trouble makers’, the lads have their own interpretation:
Joey:…they're able to punish us.
They're bigger than us, they stand for a bigger establishment than we do, like, we're just little and they stand for bigger things, and you try to get your own back.
It's, uh, resenting authority I suppose.
Willis, 1977, p. 11.
One of the lads is proud of the fact that he has managed to avoid doing any writing for the past year or so!
These infringements of school rules were seen as triumphs.
They despised the rest of the school population who passively did as they were told and called these the ‘ear'oles’.
They looked forward to starting work where they could do more of the things which they valued and join the adult community of men.
Some might think that those who do badly at school fare badly at work.
Instead, Willis found that his lads were very well prepared for work in factories where they could use the same ‘survival’ techniques as they had learned at school.
They saw factory work as a source of pride rather than low status, and in this way they inverted the ideas of the teachers and other more powerful groups in society.
Willis' account, relying upon Marxist interpretation of the data, portrayed the lads as expressing a kind of rebellion, for in doing so they had developed an awareness of their class position.
Other aspects of their behaviour were less appealing however, for the ‘lads’ helped to cement their peer group solidarity by expressing abusive attitudes towards black people and a savagely sexist contempt for girls.
Thus, they saw the female population divided into two groups.
On the one hand there were ‘good girls’ who were potential wives because they cooked and cleaned, were faithful and submissive.
On the other hand there were ‘whores’ who were sexually available but despised.
Girls were classified according to their sexual status.
What the girls felt about the ‘lads’, we are not told.
Criticism which could be levelled at this study was in many ways similar to that of youth cultures.
How could a small group of 12 lads be taken as representative of ‘the working class’?
How should we account for their racism and sexism?
Once more, we are given only a masculine point of view.
Was Willis reading too much into their behaviour by seeing their ‘resistance’ as leading to an awareness of their class position?
Whatever the force of these criticisms, Willis had introduced the role of the sub-culture into the transition from school to work and had shown how this was developed within the group — something which large scale surveys with their pre-structured questions and their questioning of individuals in isolation had been unable to do.
He also brought young people's own views to the centre of the stage.
Learning not to labour
All these studies of the transition from school to work discussed so far had assumed that there was work for young people to enter.
Indeed, young people's wages had risen in the 50s and 60s because there was a labour shortage .
From the 1970s this began to change.
The recession in the early 1970s caused the highest unemployment   since the ‘Great Depression’ of the 1930s, and this increased dramatically from the late 1970s onwards.
Now only a minority of school leavers have ‘real’ jobs to go to.
It became evident that young people were a particularly vulnerable group and that in times of economic hardship, firms cut back on training places.
Figure 5.1 indicates the destinations of school leavers in 1983/4.
It can be seen that 17 per cent altogether were employed, including 6 per cent with part-time study and 11 per cent without (this is an overestimate as it is a category which also included the ‘unclassifiable’— not all of whom were in work).
Fourteen per cent went on to do some study in Further Education and 25 per cent joined YOP (Youth Opportunities Programme) or YTS (Youth Training Scheme) schemes.
Whilst previous research had analysed how the workforce was reproduced — how young people became young workers — the problem now was to explain the consequences of Government schemes, new kinds of training and the responses to unemployment.
The sociological models described so far needed to be recast.
My own interest in this began in the late 1970s as the situation was beginning to worsen.
I was concerned to understand what it was like to leave school and grow up in a world with little work.
How did young people adapt to this?
What were the differences between young men and women in these circumstances?
I found that by 1979 there was now no longer a smooth transition into work (see For Richer, For Poorer , Wallace, 1987).
Rather than finishing school and entering work, young people were as likely to enter training schemes, temporary college courses, part time and temporary employment, odd jobs of all kinds or to find themselves unemployed as they were to find jobs directly.
Furthermore, they were not prepared for this by socialisation at school and at home.
The kinds of survival skills which they now required were not ones they could learn from teachers, parents or Careers Officers.
Only a minority entered the kinds of jobs for which they had originally hoped and the rest had to take what they could get.
In this job market, the qualifications for which they had been encouraged to strive at school were often of little use to them outside where ‘who you knew’ was often more useful than ‘what you knew’.
Moreover, much of the apprentice and other training which their parents had hoped they would enter had disappeared.
‘Dead end’ jobs were now some of the only kind available for most people.
Willis had emphasised how his young men had welcomed the opportunity to do factory work like their fathers, yet many of my male and female respondents were not happy with the jobs in which they found themselves — they often resisted by leaving them.
Their ‘choices’ were even more limited than before — for many it was a ‘choice’between what they perceived as ‘shit jobs’and temporary schemes.
Thus recent studies have emphasised the discontinuities between home, school and work rather than the continuities.
The effects of unemployment
Furthermore, young people themselves do not respond uniformly to unemployment.
In his work in Northern Ireland in the late 1970s, Richard Jenkins (1983) found that responses to unemployment depended upon the social group to which a young person belonged.
These were more numerous and more complicated than the two groups of conformist and non-conformist boys identified by Willis.
He described a number of potential ‘life-styles’ in his field work.
One of these was that of the ‘lads’ who were much like Willis' ‘lads’, in the sense that they were concerned to express themselves through symbols of adult masculinity and debunked most forms of authority and ‘respectable’living.
These adapted themselves to a life in and out of work since they had a strong street culture with which to identify.
At the other extreme were the ‘citizens’ who were respectable, church-going young people who rejected the ‘rough’living of the lads.
They aimed for higher status jobs and felt humiliated when they were unemployed.
They were also more isolated under such circumstances, lacking the strong street culture of the ‘lads’.
However, Jenkins also identified a far larger third group ‘ordinary kids’ who fitted neither of these two extremes and developed a range of survival strategies in and out of work and a pragmatic acceptance of their position.
In my own study, experiences of unemployment were tempered by the fact that many respondents were also critical of the jobs and schemes which were the alternatives to unemployment.
Some even adopted ‘anti work’ images such as that of being a punk.
However, this seemed to be more a short term way of preserving individual pride rather than a long term alternative: ultimately they wanted to enter mainstream society, have a job and ‘settle down’.
Despite such findings of sub-cultural adaptation to unemployment, the conclusion of all the studies of youth unemployment carried out so far is that young people ultimately wanted real jobs and wanted the money and status that came with ‘proper’ jobs.
Government special measures
The state response to the problem of rising youth unemployment  was to introduce the Youth Opportunities Programme (known as YOP) in 1977.
YOP was only intended to help the unemployed and those who had difficulty in finding jobs — the disadvantaged.
It was replaced in 1981 by the ‘New Training Initiative’, a package of measures which included the Youth Training Scheme (known as YTS).
This introduced a period of extended vocational training as a permanent bridge between school and work.
It also had the effect — along with other schemes — of lowering teenage wages, a response to the argument put forward by Government and employers that they were ‘pricing themselves out of jobs’.
This means that the earnings of 18 — 20 year olds have fallen from 74 per cent to 69 per cent of adult wages since 1979, and these statistics exclude those on wages below £35.00 per week — the situation of many young people on Young Workers Schemes or Youth Training Schemes and the increasing numbers in part-time jobs (Youthaid Bulletin 27).
Taken altogether, this means that young people in the 1980s have to live on incomes much lower than their predecessors.
In the Holland Report in 1977 it was argued that young people were no longer employed because they did not fit employers' needs.
The schools were blamed for this and new courses — such as TVEI (Technical and Vocational Educational Initiative) and CPVE (Certificate of Pre-Vocational Education)— were introduced into schools themselves as well as into the gap between school and work.
Special measures were concerned to mould young people to fit the so-called ‘needs of industry’ rather than to fulfill their own needs.
Concern was once more focused upon the bottom forty per cent who were likely to be, in the words of one report, the ‘Untrained, Unqualified and Unemployed’(National Youth Employment Council, 1974).
The problem now was to get them to lower their sights and accept the ‘dead end’ jobs for less pay.
Why did young people suddenly become of such concern for the Government?
One answer was that the riots in 1980 in Bristol followed by others in Toxteth, Moss Side and Handsworth in 1981 and Tottenham, Handsworth and Bristol in 1985 showed that young people could be a very real threat to the social order as well as just a symbolic one.
Furthermore, there was anxiety as to whether Britain was producing a generation of unemployable youths — were they losing the will to work?
Finally, by focusing upon the deficiencies of the  young unemployed — their lack of training, their lack of qualifications, their lack of job search skills — it appeared that they had caused themselves to be unemployed.
It can be seen that this was a way of ‘blaming the victim’: it seems as though the young person had failed to find a job because they had not filled in the application form properly or were too untidy, rather than because there were not enough jobs.
Television programmes during the day time encouraging grooming and self-presentation at interviews also helped to reinforce the idea that it is the individual's fault.
The solutions focused upon changing young people rather than changing the situation they were in.
Such arguments were not altogether new.
The Newsom Report in 1963, for example, had argued that a better (male) workforce would serve to create jobs, and that Britain's economic fortunes were impeded by undertrained workers.
Only when unemployment rose, however, were policies of this kind put into practice and this was at a time when there were insufficient jobs.
Furthermore, not all youth training leads to jobs and the quality of training is very variable.
Despite massive advertising to promote the YTS and penalties for those who do not complete their scheme, many young people still refuse to go on it and others drop out before the end.
It appears from my own and other research at present that in some schemes young people are used as cheap substitutes for regular workers and in others the content of the ‘training’ is very limited — leading to jobs otherwise classified as un- or semi-skilled (Davies, 1986.
Youthaid have also published a number of reports on this).
The motivation of trainees is often low in such schemes.
However, other schemes, including those which replaced the old apprenticeship training, do lead to jobs for which preliminary training is required and in these motivation can be very high.
Although according to the Manpower Services Commission 2 out 3 people get jobs after the Youth Training Scheme, this varies again between schemes and between regions.
It would appear then, that there are a number of levels to the Youth Training Scheme and preliminary research suggests that the experience of trainees is variable.
Some may find it surprising nevertheless that in a time of cut-backs in state spending, thousands of millions of pounds have been spent on youth training since 1981.
A package of measures were introduced to provide young people with the kinds of skills which  were allegedly needed.
Bernard Davies (1986) has argued that this amounts to a more effective means of disciplining and controlling young people, particularly working class young people, for this training ensures that they conform to the ‘correct’ kind of behaviour.
This meant that sociologists have had to look more closely at the idea of ‘skill’, at the kinds of skills which were being introduced, and at the effects of the Youth Training Scheme upon both the labour market and upon young people.
Race
Just as much of the discussion of youth had excluded female youth, they were also almost entirely about white male youth.
When black youth did appear it was often because they were seen to be a problem.
For example, the Holland Report (1977) had argued that the YOP should serve to help disadvantaged school leavers — such as black school leavers — in the labour market.
It thus offered a form of compensatory training for them and made no attempt to try to alter the racist structures and attitudes in the labour market by which they were disadvantaged in the first place.
One of the most systematic surveys to be undertaken was that by the Policy Studies Institute (Brown, 1982).
In this survey they looked at the different kinds of training and jobs undertaken by black people and found that they were likely to be doing worse jobs than white youth irrespective of their qualifications.
Indeed, black workers had originally been brought in in times of labour shortage and ended up doing the kinds of ‘dead end’ jobs which allowed white workers to set their sights higher — to a great extent they are still found in these same jobs.
Furthermore, even within the Youth Training Scheme, they tended to filter into the schemes least likely to lead to permanent jobs.
They were also much more likely to be unemployed — whilst 30 per cent of the white 16 — 19 year olds were out of work, 46 per cent of the West Indians and 35 per cent of the Asians in the same age group were.
Furthermore, they found that different sections of the black population were employed in very specific sectors.
Although in general, their wages and job levels were lower than those of white workers, West Indians and Bangladeshis tended to be even more disadvantaged than other ethnic groups.
The riots in 1981 and 1985 were thought by some to be a product of racial tension.
They occurred in deprived inner city areas where a combination of social problems were concentrated.
There was high unemployment, poor housing, a combination of ethnic groups and often poor relations with the police as groups of young black youths spent their time on the streets where they were subject to frequent questioning and  harassment by the police.
The circumstances of these riots are described by Muncie (1984) and it is evident that a number of them were sparked off by reactions to incidents in which police actions were interpreted as racist or by other racist attacks.
This brought the issue of youth and race relations into prominence as the ‘new problem’ of the 1980s.
However, it is evident that this was a development of old problems of racism, racial disadvantage and poverty exacerbated by unemployment and particular styles of policing.
Gender differences
Thus far, I have indicated that youth are divided by traditional factors such as class and by newer factors such as access to employment.
Since the late 1970s feminist sociologists have increasingly drawn attention to gender as a dividing principle too.
They pointed out that nearly all the studies have focused upon young men and that far less was known about the sub-cultural activities and work careers of young women.
Not only were women to a large extent excluded, but the very concepts and models themselves embodied a masculine view of the world.
Hence for example, studies of youth employment and unemployment often defined ‘work’ as something which people did only outside the home, thus excluding housework from serious study.
Marriage and the family were only thought to be relevant in considering young women's careers, not young men's.
This has tended to reinforce dominant assumptions that employment is of lesser importance to young women because they will only get married and have children later and consequently that young women were of lesser importance to the sociologist.
Some studies stated quite explicitly that they had chosen to study young men only because they felt that as male ethnographers they could only portray the male point of view.
Others, did studies of ‘youth’ generally, but it is evident from their writing that they were really only talking about male youth.
If you look back at some of the studies described here you will see what is meant by this.
Hence, Angela McRobbie and Jenny Garber (1976) in their discussion of sub-cultures argued that sociologists had taken on board many of the sexist attitudes of their respondents and portrayed girls as peripheral members of sub-cultures, or as ‘tarts’ and ‘groupies’.
In other words, they saw these sub-cultures from a masculine point of view — as happened in Willis' study.
They asked: were there really no girls in youth cultures and street gangs or had sociological accounts made them invisible?
In order to compensate for this, some studies such as those by Deidre Wilson and Leslie Shacklady Smith (1978) undertook studies of girl delinquents and found that girls joined gangs and participated in street life in the same way as boys.
When they did so, however, they were seen as ‘unfeminine’ or as sexually promiscuous ‘slags’.
Hence, their role had been concealed: they had indeed been made invisible.
McRobbie and Garber put forward a different explanation.
They argued that most of girls' lives were not conducted on the street in any case, and that it was necessary to study them in their homes instead.
Indeed they argued that girls developed sub-cultures which were more passive and marginal than those of boys and involved doing things such as sitting around in their bedrooms worshipping pop stars.
Christine Griffin (1985) looked at a group of girls in the same way as Willis had looked at the boys.
She found that domestic life imposed more constraints upon girls than upon boys, for they were expected to stay at home and help with housework.
Even outside home, their behaviour was more carefully controlled than that of boys, for no-one wished to be sexually labelled as a ‘slag’.
Indeed, this sexual labelling had less to do with actual sexual practices than with the extent to which young women's behaviour conformed to the popular ideas of ‘femininity’— for instance by the use of swear words or loud behaviour,(this is more fully discussed in Sue Lees, 1986).
Griffin showed how girls often had particular perceptions of a ‘good job for a girl’ and hence many of them wanted to do ‘feminine’jobs — such as shop work or hairdressing — yet these jobs would later lead to less money, less security and less status than  boys' jobs.
Those who wanted more ‘masculine’ jobs had difficulty in being accepted.
Even their experience of unemployment was different, for they might still have to ‘work’ at home instead of being idle.
However, young women were also often very critical of the way in which they were treated differently to young men.
They did not always think that it was fair.
Griffin further argued that it was wrong to attempt to explain girls' experience by trying to fit them into models derived from studies of male youth.
New concepts — such as patriarchy as a form of oppression — were required.
Young women were not only constrained by their class position and by unemployment, but also by their male peers and by their position within the family.
This was one reason why feminists such as Griffin have argued that studies of girls should be done by women and they have often preferred the use of qualitative methods such as in-depth interviewing or ethnography.
They argue that this puts the researcher on a more equal footing with the people being interviewed and a flowed the interviewees' own feelings to be expressed.
Finally the criticisms of the sociology of youth by feminists raised the issue of gender in a new way.
Feminist sociologists' arguments showed that ideas of ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’which had been taken for granted as natural were in fact social in origin: these roles had to learned by young people.
The earlier feminist critics such as McRobbie and Garber argued that girls learned their roles partly through romantic fiction and girls' magazines.
As a result of reading such nonsense, it was implied, they were encouraged to become obsessed with their appearance and with finding the right man.
They did not ‘rebel’ in the way that young men did, but rather used this kind of fantasy material as a source of escapism.
Later studies however, such as those by Lees (1986) Griffin (1985) and myself have presented different explanations.
Firstly, we have tended to see the ideology of romantic love as playing a more complex role in the lives of young women.
In many respects they were not deceived by the images of life portrayed in women's literature but had a very realistic idea of what married life held in store for them.
Secondly, it was evident that young women did have a number of strategies of resistance.
They could either resist by rejecting dominant models of femininity — by dressing down and by going out like boys, for example— or  they could use their femininity as an oppositional weight at school — by wearing make-up and clothes which were forbidden, for example .
Thirdly, these studies have emphasised the importance which jobs held for young women — as a source of status and independence both outside and within the family.
Marriage and motherhood was not their only goal in life.
This leads us to ask: what part does unemployment play in gender roles?
If young men are not able to find regular jobs does this mean that they will lose the sense of masculine superiority described by Willis and others?
Will young women become more powerful if they are the ones earning the money?
In my own study it seemed that young women are becoming more critical of ‘traditional’ gender roles, but young men are not.
These are issues which future studies may seek to address.
However, the feminist critique should not encourage us only to look at girls.
The implications of this discussion is that we should go back and re-evaluate all aspects of the sociology of youth — youth cultures, popular music, education, employment, unemployment, training — in terms of the kinds of assumptions that are being made.
Conclusion
It is evident that although studies up until the 1970s looked at youth in terms of class divisions, it is now also important to bring in unemployment, gender and race as further dimensions of disadvantage — dimensions which affect young people in particular ways.
Whilst discussion of these issues leads us to draw in groups — such as women and young blacks — which have hitherto been neglected in studies of youth, it also means that that many of the original ideas and concepts need to be re-thought.
At the beginning I suggested that changes in employment have resulted in ‘youth’ being socially and economically redefined.
The extension of the YTS into a two year scheme and making it compulsory for those not in education through removing entitlements to other benefits, means that in future there may be no such thing as a ‘young worker’ or a ‘young unemployed’under the age of eighteen.
Furthermore, the Social Security Act presented to  Parliament in 1986 attempts to redefine youth as all those under the age of 25.
Young people below that age will receive less benefits and will be encouraged to depend upon their parents for support.
When this happens, the assumptions which developed during the 50s and 60s of the young person as an independent, affluent wage earner and consumer, assumptions which have already been challenged by the changes I have described here, will have to be finally cast aside.
STUDYING TEACHERS' WORK: THE CASE OF FEMINIST TEACHERS Robert R. Burgess
Teachers and teaching are subjects that most people claim to know something about, based on their own school experience.
However, this assumption is not shared by sociologists of education who have only begun to study teachers and teachers' work in recent years.
As a consequence there is much that we need to find out about teachers and teaching.
During the early 1980s I was engaged in a re-study of a co-educational Roman Catholic comprehensive school that I called Bishop McGregor School.
Here, I decided to focus my attention on teachers and teaching with a view to extending our knowledge about their appointment, their jobs, their careers and their work.
I was examining teachers and teaching in one school using such methods as participant observation, unstructured interviews and documentary evidence.
This chapter, therefore, examines some of the ways in which I conducted this work by focusing on teachers' appointments and teachers' work in Bishop McGregor School.
However, it was important to begin by placing my work in context.
The statistical context
We have already noted how teachers and teaching are well known to most people.
The result is that there is a danger of familiarity with our topic of study.
For example, many of you who read this chapter will be able to recall specific teachers you have met and  particular lessons that you can remember — probably because of some incident associated with the teachers or the lesson.
The problem for the sociologist is that the situation is too familiar and is far from representative.
As a consequence, we need to ask questions that help us to conduct a sociological analysis of teachers and teaching.
As a starting point for my research I decided to find out about the numbers of teachers who worked in secondary schools, the posts that they held and the distribution of men and women teachers to various posts, together with their qualifications and salaries.
The data were obtained from Department of Education and Science statistics for education in the United Kingdom (1984) that included data on the distribution of full-time teachers in maintained secondary schools at the time of my study as shown in Table 6.1.
On inspecting this table we can begin to raise questions about the balance of men and women in secondary school teaching; especially as far as teaching particular age groups are concerned with more women teaching the younger pupils in middle schools than teaching in comprehensive schools where the complete age range is present.
However, a further set of questions need to be posed about the relationship between posts and the sex of the post-holder.
Again? such data could be obtained by further inspection    of the same set of statistical data that can be obtained from the Department of Education and Science.
In Table 6.2, the distribution of men and women in posts in secondary schools is provided.
Here, the picture becomes much more clear.
The number of teachers employed in state secondary schools was such that while women constituted 45 per cent of the teaching force? they only held 15 per cent of the headships and only 0.7 per cent of women were heads.
Indeed, it is evident that women were also under-represented in senior posts and concentrated in the lower posts available.
But how have these trends occurred?
How can sociologists begin to examine these trends?
What social processes contribute to these trends and result in these appointments?
To what extent does low status influence the work of women teachers?
At Bishop McGregor School I found a similar picture with men outnumbering women as shown in Table 6.3.
In addition to the full-time staff there was also a part-time staff of ten women teachers.
There were few women in senior positions in the school and it was widely rumoured that being Catholic and male were important factors in staff appointments in Bishop McGregor School.
Furthermore, many women teachers indicated that they   had difficulty gaining promotion within the school (see Burgess? 1988a) and talked about the ways in which they experienced sexism and oppression in their day to day work.
If this topic was to be systematically explored I needed to build up a series of case studies of the appointment procedures associated with women teachers.
In particular, I needed to gain access to teachers' appointments panels within the school where it would be possible to observe appointments procedures, collect documentary materials such as copies of application forms? curriculum vitaes ? references and job descriptions and follow up my investigation by interviewing candidates who had applied for posts after their interview had taken place.
With this kind of work in mind, I obtained permission from the headteacher and the governors to sit in on all appointments that occurred in Bishop McGregor School during my fieldwork between 1983 and 1985.
The data that were obtained resulted in a number of case studies of teacher job interviews.
In this chapter we examine two non-Catholic women teachers' job interviews where factors associated with religion, feminism and gender differences were involved.
In turn, I subsequently followed up some of the issues raised in the job interviews in the teachers' day-to-day work.
In particular? these two teachers' job appointments and day-to-day activities highlight aspects of gender and feminism and the way this operates in interaction with religion to influence their work.
Two case studies of job interviews
Case 1: the case of Valerie Lambert-Way
In 1984 Bishop McGregor School was designated a community college.
With the designation came additional finance which was used to support a number of initiatives including a series of two term temporary posts for McGregor staff to engage in some pilot planning work.
The first set of temporary positions were offered in December 1983 for the spring and summer terms in 1984, while further positions were made available for the autumn term 1984 and the spring term in 1985.
These posts were worth one additional scale point so that a teacher on a scale two post would occupy a temporary scale three post for two terms.
These posts were internally advertised to all staff in a general notice posted in the common room:
Following the receipt of positive approval [from the LEA]of the suggestions for temporary one point contracts? the following 4 are offered to all members of staff.
Applications should be addressed to the Clerk to the Governors, c/o the School Office, before midday on Monday 24 September.
Interviews will be arranged between 26 and 30 September.
Letters of application should be 2 — 4 paragraphs long, and should indicate clearly which of the 4 the applicant is interested in.
It may be necessary to exercise some form of shortlisting if the numbers for any particular post exceed 3 or 4.
The four posts that were advertised were for planning activities for disadvantaged groups, for communications, for any idea that would ‘assist in the development of McGregor Community College’ and for home/school work.
The home/school post was advertised in the following terms:
A point contract in respect of work in home/school related fields with respect to working with parents in their approaches as individuals and in groups to school/staff — transfer from primary to secondary — option explanations — membership of PTAs — trouble at school.
Whenever posts were internally advertised rumour was rife as staff were quick to identify whose experience came nearest to the job  description to make them a likely candidate for the post.
In this case, Valerie Way, who had been engaged in home/school links work, was widely tipped as the ‘hot favourite’ for the post.
However, this view was not shared by Valerie Way, especially when she discovered that the head was not on the interviewing committee.
She summed up her feelings by saying:
The head was away and that was dreadful because he was one of the few people that knew what was going on because the community adviser told him that home/school links was an area that we should think about; that is the school.
Half the other people on the interviewing committee didn't know what it was.
I thought I bet they still won't give it me.
I'm the only applicant and if it's a choice between me and nobody, they'd give it to nobody.
Although Valerie had not been present for any of the discussion among governors and teachers on the appointing committee? her remarks were not all that far removed from what had transpired.
Valerie Way taught English in the school and held a scale two post.
She was a non-Catholic and a committed feminist who made her feminist views very clear.
Indeed, this had not gone unnoticed by those on the governing body as one person remarked that she ‘had the clenched fist on the side of the car’ although this had not been mentioned at the interview.
Yet the symbol of feminism was perceived as a direct challenge to Catholicism and Catholic values.
It was this background knowledge that influenced the way in which Phil Barlow, the deputy head responsible for the curriculum, perceived the post and the appointment, as he explained to me:
P.B. We [himself and Gill Davies, a Deputy Head responsible for pastoral care]were also very sceptical about the position.
It was very explicit.
She was going to visit the primary schools, right?
R.B. Mmm.
P.B. They might have changed their tune, they might have changed their job description, but the job description was she was going out to primary schools.
R.B. Who's the ‘they’?
P.B. Ann Thomas [the community adviser]and Chris [Deputy Head Community]and Lesley [the Bursar].
That was the  job description, no two ways about it.
We?
Gill and myself, did not think that she was an adequate representative of this school, to visit primary schools.
R.B. You made that point.
P.B. Yes.
No way could that be put knowing that…
Mary O'Dowd [Head of Year]was already doing the job quite adequately.
We were also quite concerned that a lady who in fact was known as Miss Way, became Mrs Lambert Way? became Ms Way? did not wear a wedding ring.
He continued:
P.B. All of this, which would go I think contrary…much of it would go contrary to the basic Catholic belief.
That we could not condone, and Gill Davies insisted that I go over there[to the interviews]and make the point, which I did very forcibly I thought.
R.B. Oh, you did that (laughs).
Yes I can definitely subscribe to very forcibly'.
P.B. Yes, the trouble is in doing it that way Bob, you invariably do some damage to yourself.
Yet, despite the apparent damage that Phil Barlow thought he might do to himself, he did on the day the appointments were made, challenge several aspects of the interviews.
As the head was absent Phil and the Deputy Head Community, Chris Cousins, were present with the governors to interview candidates.
To begin with an attempt was made to involve another member of the senior management team in the interviews for community posts.
The Bursar, Lesley Webb, had on her appointment been told that she was a member of the senior management team.
Indeed, her job description clearly stated she was:
a member of the senior management team within the school and community college.
Prior to these interviews, the Bursar had insisted on her right to interview candidates for community positions — a situation that Phil Barlow had opposed.
He explained that the Bursar had said to him:
P.B. ‘I'm going to interview the candidates.’
I said, ‘No I'm sorry Lesley your job is specifically for the community.
You're the Bursar, you can have some input for school from the Bursar's side.
If you want to interview people you  will interview the secretarial staff and the community staff that are on JNC basically.
You've got no input whatsoever to the actual appointment of members of teaching staff.’
R.B. You're saying you think it would be appropriate for her to interview JNC staff?
P.B. To be, part of an interviewing team, yes.
I don't mind that.
But I did object to her being in an interview for those people who were basically teachers? they were professionals.
But unknown to me, Lesley had approached the Chairman of Governors to insist that she as senior management (because Lesley sees herself as senior management) should be all owed to interview staff.
Already it is apparent that divisions are being drawn between school and community, with distinctions being made between the staff who were appointed to community positions? their qualifications, and their professionalism compared with teachers.
Inevitably, this position was challenged by Chris Cousins, the Deputy Head Community, as Phil Barlow explained:
P.B. Chris was saying that she should be in on the interviewing.
I was saying ‘No’, I'd put all the arguments as to why she shouldn't be there.
The Chairman of the Governors asked me was there a precedent in a flowing her to come into the interviews, and I said ‘No, the precedent has already been set and that she wasn't in on the other appointments.’
Members of staff have actually come to me and said they didn't want her in on the interviews.
She knew nothing about the particular thing.
If she had a particular experience or some expertise, fine.
In the end the Chairman of Governors went with me.
Now I was voicing both mine and Gill's view at that point.
It was this school versus community dispute that formed a backdrop to Valerie Way's interview with this initial dispute between the two deputy head teachers.
However, as soon as we reached the interview for the home/school post a debate on the school and the community began again as shown from the notes I took where the main participants in the discussion were Phil Barlow (the Deputy Head for Curriculum), Chris Cousins (the Deputy Head for Community), Ann Thomas (the Community Adviser for the LEA) and Father Curtis (the Chairman of the Governors).
Father Curtis  turned to the home/school post which quickly generated a pre-interview discussion:
Fr C. Home/school links.
C.C. Valerie Way is the only person in school who has looked at home/school links.
P.B. I wasn't aware of this.
A.T.
In the English Department they have done work in which they have interviewed parents.
P.B. But isn't this part of English Department work?
A.T.
This is a means of developing links with parents.
FrC.
Is this a valuable area to develop?
A.T.
This is a way parents can be involved academically and socially.
For example, through transfer, option choices, work experience.
How do you get support?
P.B. I'm concerned about this.
For example, Valerie Way is a member of staff who is against work experience.
Valerie Way is in the English Department and she is against work experience.
She also has no experience of the option system.
C.C. But we are looking at enhancement.
P.B. This overlaps a lot of areas in school that other people are doing.
A.T.
It overlaps with home/school area.
But is it a transfer area?
FrC.
It should be a wholesome visit to homes.
P.B. Mary O'Dowd visits primary schools and knows the homes.
C.C. I would like to hear how Valerie Way would get involved in home/school work.
P.B. If we are taking the tack that she is visiting homes.
Is she the right person to do it from a Catholic school?
A.T.
I think we are nowhere near this.
I think she is looking at what can be done in the school.
You might look at how you communicate options.
It is not knocking on doors.
Why should she visit homes?
If she says she visits homes I would say ‘surely you can find a Catholic teacher to do that?'
Within this exchange several themes arise.
First, the relationship between school and community and the way in which the latter holds implications for the teacher's task.
Here, it is apparent that  the teacher's role is seen in broader terms in the community college than in the school.
However, this raises an issue concerning the work of pastoral and academic staff, the relationship between their work and the boundaries that exist between them (cf Burgess, 1983).
In particular, this also raises the importance of Catholic teachers being involved in issues relating to the family, to parents, and to home/school visits.
The values of the Catholic teacher are, therefore, placed against the values of the non-Catholic teacher; especially those who are engaged in work for the community college.
It is in the interview that many of these aspects of the post are checked on with the candidate.
Here, it becomes apparent that there is a lack of clarity about the purpose of the post; a situation that results in further discussion when the candidate has left the room.
Here, the priest who is chairing the panel opens up the discussion:
Fr C. Should the post exist?
It's easy for us as establishment people to say they can come to us.
But are our relationships a shade cold-blooded from their point of view?
P.B. But we invite people to family mass.
Fr C. But anything which strengthens links is good.
It is at this point that Phil Barlow makes his strongest attack when he says:
P.B. I would be concerned as a Catholic parent if a lady who does not go by her married name and does not wear a wedding ring is appointed.
I, as a Catholic parent, would be worried.
Here?
Catholicism, marriage as symbolised by the wearing of a wedding ring and the idea of parenthood as part of family life, is brought into discussion.
Distinct Catholic values are, therefore, being used not only to challenge the individual candidate but also to challenge the existence of the post and by implication to challenge the status of community education in McGregor School.
At this point the community adviser suggests narrowing the scope of the post but Chris Cousins, the Deputy Head Community, takes the opportunity to challenge what has been said by the other deputy when he remarks:
C.C. She [Valerie]did not wish to replace the pastoral team or visit homes.
I'm disturbed with what Phil says as he argues  that we should trust staff but we would not like them knocking on doors.
This seems to be against what we are doing in this school.
Here, the community deputy has turned the argument around on the other deputy by suggesting he does not understand the issues that are central to bringing school and community together in one institution.
With this Phil Barlow capitulates and agrees that he has no objection to this appointment provided it is merely a monitoring job where no direct links are made with parents.
At this point, the chairman of the governors suggests that the job should be redefined so the post is offered to Valerie Way and was recorded in the sub-committee's minutes in the following terms:
[Valerie Way]was offered the point and given a brief to examine the transfer procedures of parents when children change from primary school to McGregor, to explore the opportunities possible.
The Governors considered the job description too vague and asked that it be made precise.
This post had posed a challenge not only to the Governors but also to the two Deputy Head Teachers.
Here, it carried with it the notion of breaking down not only the school/community barrier but also the school/curriculum barrier by suggesting that parents might be directly involved in the education of their children by participating in classes.
In this instance a direct challenge is made to the expertise of the teachers and their professional skills — areas that had been defended by the Curriculum Deputy when it was suggested that the Bursar might become involved in interviews for community posts.
Finally, there is the question of the extent to which Catholic values influenced the definition of this post and the debate about the appointment of this particular teacher, given her values and the feminist perspective that she brought to the school — a situation that also occurred in the appointment of another teacher but in a different way.
Case 2: the case of Jenny Ball
Jenny Ball had, since May 1984, taken responsibility for youth work in the community college — a position that she hoped would  eventually become a part-time permanent post.
Throughout the academic year she campaigned for such an appointment to be made until the local authority provided additional money for this post to be advertised.
Again, it was an internal appointment which resulted in one applicant: Jenny Ball.
On the day of the interviews I noticed that Jenny Ball was smartly dressed and in particular I also saw that she was wearing a wedding ring; an item of jewellery that she seldom wore when I saw her in school on other days.
I decided, therefore, to ask her about this in a conversation I conducted after her interview:
R.B. Well I know what I wanted to ask you.
I just remembered as you waved your hand through the air.
J.B. (laughs)
R.B. The day you were interviewed for the youth tutor post
J.B. Oh God, yes.
R.B. You did what every teacher does and that is you dressed differently.
J.B. I was wearing this jumper.
(laughs)
R.B. I don't remember that.
But you dressed differently, I remember that and you also wore a wedding ring.
J.B. Yes.
I did yes.
Deliberately.
R.B. Can you tell me…
J.B. (laughs)
R.B. Can you tell me why?
J.B. Because Father Curtis was there and I thought you know he won't want some married woman who goes round not wearing a wedding ring in charge of all these kids will he?
Even though I thought the job was really mine I thought I had to create the impression of somebody who was, you know, above board, for, you know, the Catholics.
R.B. Had anybody said anything to you about doing that?
J.B. No.
No, well you see I wear a ring intermittently like I'm wearing that one today.
R.B. Yes.
Well as you waved your hand through the air I saw that ring there you see and I thought…ah I know what I've been meaning to ask her for ages.
J.B. Yes, but yes it was a deliberate act on my part to be respectable.
R.B. When you talk you do wave your hands through the air
J.B: Yes…
R.B. And of course where I was sat you see you were waving your hands through the air and I noticed it…
J.B. Oh yes, absolutely deliberately, to be respectable, because you know youth workers, well you know, what is it Chris (the Community Deputy) has got this phrase ‘trendy, left wing, arty-farty bi-sexual’ or something he says and I mean that's the youth worker image isn't it?
And I didn't want to have that 'cause I was looking for respect for me but also for my area of work and it was an absolutely deliberate act.
Interesting that you picked up on that one.
(laughs) And I do wear it now and again, but I don't wear it every day.
R.B. But I certainly noticed it that day.
J.B. (laughs)
R.B. And I sat there…
J. B. I was going to borrow me Mum's crucifix as well.
I thought that was going a bit over the top (laughs).
I mean, absolutely, spot on, why I did it.
You know, so personally for my area of work I just wanted them to think they were getting someone respectable.
R.B. Yes, so you were buying respectability?
J.B. Yes, and I do wear it for occasions like that.
You know.
If I'm going anywhere where I want them to see me as a ‘teacher’ you know with all that that implies, then I'll wear my wedding ring.
Here, the symbolic value of the wedding ring was used by this teacher to communicate the values associated with marriage and the family that had been discussed by the deputy head in the previous interview.
Just as the deputy head had made certain assumptions about the absence of a wedding ring on the candidate's hand, so this teacher made certain assumptions about the symbolic value of the wedding ring and the way it would be perceived by Catholic governors.
Similarly, her consideration of wearing a crucifix as jewellery was linked to assumptions that individuals might ascribe to the wearer.
But we might ask: how do the themes that have arisen in these two job interviews also occur in teachers' work?
Teachers work
In the course of conversational interviews (Burgess, 1988) that 1 conducted with Valerie Way and with Jenny Ball I followed up the themes of religion, gender and feminism and the impact these had upon their day to day work.
As far as religion was concerned both women discussed the way in which they considered being a non-Catholic in a Catholic school limited their job opportunities.
Furthermore, in common with other non-Catholic teachers, they considered that at times when it became essential to redeploy teachers, it would be non-Catholics that would be first in line for re-deployment.
Valerie Way remarked:
V.W. I find myself a non-Catholic in a Catholic school that at the moment is promoting Catholics and I'm at a complete dead end.
R.B. One of the significant strands you've pulled out is this phrase ‘a non-Catholic in a Catholic school’.
V.W. Yes, I mean that's something that when I first started I wouldn't have said, but I've seen over the last six years changes in the governors and the role of the governors and I sense very much so that now they want Catholic appointments.
It's not said, this is the problem, it's not openly declared and it should be.
However, she felt that this manifested itself nor only in the kinds of statements made and questions posed in interviews but also in day-to-day work in the school.
In particular, both women considered that the attitudes to them was part of the broader set of links made between Catholicism and the status of women who should be based in the family and the home rather than in the world of work.
In turn, they pointed to the ways in which issues concerned with feminism, with gender and the curriculum and the education of girls were handled by members of the school.
In a discussion with Jenny Ball, we talked about those women teachers who stood up for women's rights.
However, Jenny  explained that there were few feminists and a small number of women teachers who were involved in equal opportunities work, with the result that they were rarely treated seriously (cf Joyce, 1987).
Jenny summed up the situation by saying:
I know that I'm regarded as one [a feminist]because of the way they [the male staff]treat me.
And they try to institutionalise it and put me down.
And talk about me being an honorary man and you know, take the piss out of what I say, like how Geoff [the Head]did when I complained bitterly about that bloke [a workman who had whistled at her].
Now you see there aren't many women on the staff who would have done that.
There aren't many women who would have gone and complained about that.
However, it was also claimed that feminism and gender issues were not treated seriously by the senior management.
Valerie Way had been on a teachers' course concerned with gender and the curriculum and described what happened when she returned to school.
V.W. I tried to get something going last year after we'd been on this girls in secondary schools course.
The idea was to try and get working parties going.
Mr Goddard [the Head]was ‘oh, yes’ nodding his head.
I gave him the booklet and I told him I'd been doing it…oh, yes, and he'd put it in as one of his objectives for this year.
It's not even been mentioned!
R.B. Yes, another teacher mentioned this when I talked to her and I was saying that it seemed to me that it was a blind spot.
V.W. Total.
I mean it's enough that he pays lipservice to it now which you know wouldn't have even been recognised.
But by the nature of the staff that we have in this school, I don't know whether Mr Goddard deliberately tries to surround himself with fools so that the school will collapse when he leaves, but the quality of the people that he has, in terms of having a broad idea of education is just a non-starter.
With this response to gender and feminism, both teachers appreciated that some care needed to be exercised in introducing a feminist  perspective into discussions either with staff or with pupils.
For example, Valerie Way remarked:
V.W. I'm not quite the loony that I was seen to be six years ago, when I first came in the school.
I've never, ever pushed the feminist line, it's always been attributed to me.
I've never actually spoken out, other than last year when there were a few incidents with girls where I sort of said well you get what you deserve, you know, if you're going to operate such a sort of sexist situation, then you're going to get very difficult for girls because they've no positive images whatsoever, and I was actually…
People suddenly saw me as somebody who knew something whereas I've always been laughed at before.
I mean, again, that's, you know, my projections…but I've never spoken…
I've never made issues out of things.
Similarly, in taking a feminist perspective in her youth work, Jenny Ball was aware that considerable care needed to be exercised so that neither the work nor her position became vulnerable.
J.B. I don't want to be too obvious about feminism.
Well I'm very hot on that in the youth club.
The girls are getting very hot on it too.
Actually we've got some nice strong girls coming up through that.
I'm in the process of trying to get someone to come in to do one evening girls' assertiveness, you know which some of them said they'd quite like to do.
You see, and all the time we're pushing it, you know, the girls have got to stand up for themselves and they're not to allow the boys to speak to them in ways that are sexist.
There's a very interesting issue has just come up actually 'cause we're having this fashion show.
R.B. Yes, I've heard about it.
J.B. Yes, you see.
And I'm very worried about this, you know, what you do about this.
But the girls really want it and we're making it an all-girl event.
R.B. Yes, so I've heard.
J.B. You know it's positive discrimination in that and boys will not be allowed in so they can have, you know, an enjoyable night, being girls but not with boys there to say, ‘oh, yea, you've got nice legs’ and all this, so that salves my conscience a bit and I wasn't very worried about it, but  I won't have beauty demonstrations and things in the club 'cause I'm not going to reinforce the image that boys already have of the girls.
If…it's very difficult though but it would be very good when boys behave themselves, and the girls are getting very good on actually thinking.
They're very, very aware of it now.
R.B. How far do you think the two issues…well there are many issues here, but two in particular it seems to me…the whole question of feminism is particularly important to the Catholic community?
J.B. Well again you see you're up against tradition all the time, aren't you?
You know, you should stay at home and have at least eight babies — it's incredibly difficult, I mean a lot of parents would disagree whole heartedly with what I tell the girls.
And again, I do feel that pressure, you know the girls come to me and say oh, I really fancy ‘X’ over there and I say, go and ask him out you know.
They are positive acts but yet again you see, it's very, very difficult.
They just want the girls to grow up I mean, to be in the end good Catholic wives, don't they?
A lot of mothers.
R.B. Who are the mothers?
J. B. The mothers, the families in which they come from.
I mean now talking to some of the girls a lot of their parents are very strict on them.
It's very, very hard in encouraging them to…
OK they're quite happy for their girls to be academic but daring to be more positive about being ordered outside that because it involves such a lot, having control over your own body, again you know, abortion raises its hairy head again.
It involves such a lot.
So again you have to be very careful, a bit tentative and the sort of sexual politics of it all, do you know what I mean?
You see it's hard.
But I mean I suppose you get those pressures in an ordinary school say if you go and teach in an inner city school you've got…you know Asian mothers.
As in Marilyn Joyce's study of feminist teachers (Joyce, 1987) these two teachers highlight the problems facing feminists working in schools who confront problems in their appointment, and in presenting feminist issues to pupils and to colleagues.
Conclusion
In this chapter an attempt has been made to explore some evidence about teachers, teaching and teachers' work.
In particular, emphasis has been placed on the position of women teachers in secondary schools — their status, the processes involved in their appointment and the implications of feminism and a gender perspective being brought to bear upon teachers' work with pupils.
In this respect, I have drawn evidence from case studies of two women teachers in a Roman Catholic comprehensive school to illustrate the way in which gender, religion and feminism interact with each other not only in relation to their appointments but also in relation to their work with pupils.
On this basis, we have only just begun to explore some of the social processes that are associated with teachers' work.
Clearly, there are further topics to be placed on the sociologist's agenda when studying teachers' work if we are to move beyond the assumption that we all know about teachers and teaching.
WOMEN AND TRADE UNIONS: THE CASE OF GENDER CONSCIOUSNESS Sheila Cunnison
Introduction
Some areas of social life such as the family or social class are long-standing and familiar subjects of social investigation.
Others, such as trade unions or the role of women in society, have become subject to sociological investigation only recently.
Ten years ago when I began researching into the role of women in trade unions, it would have been quite surprising to find such a subject included in a sociological textbook.
Thirty years ago it would have been unthinkable.
Now it is acceptable.
The position of women in the unions, as in other male-dominated areas of life such as politics and business management, is an area of growing sociological interest.
What are the processes by which the role of women within the trade unions has emerged as an accepted research topic?
How do themes emerge, develop, attract popular sociological interest and become acceptable topics of empirical research?
I will examine this problem by focusing on my own research at three points in time, the 1950s the 1970s and the 1980s.
All knowledge, including that about social life, is a product of a specific time and place, both a particular set of social conditions and a particular way of thinking about society.
This is not to deny the brilliance and seminal contribution of certain individuals.
But the work — even of these people — both grows out of, and builds on, that of those who have gone before; it is a product of  the social concerns, social climate of opinion and general culture of the times within which they live as, of course , are the more modest contributions made by the majority of those who practise the craft of social research.
Empirical research proceeds, first by the formulation of themes or problems relating to particular areas or topics of social life, problems which are generated in the course of reading and discussion with students and scholars.
Next there is the search in the real world for data which will throw light upon the chosen problems; the collection of the data follows and finally its analysis.
The cross-fertilisation between formulating problems and collecting data is of central importance in participant observation when the researcher spends several months ‘in the field’ trying to understand what is going on.
It is of much less importance in large scale survey research where questions are formulated in advance and respondents contacted only once.
It is then only of use in setting problems for next time.
I will illustrate, from my own research, the way in which problems arise in the process of data collection.
The 1950s — raising the issue
Thirty years ago I was a research assistant, part of a team working on a project designed by someone else.
We studied five workshops by means of participant observation.
We worked alongside the people by day, observed and committed to memory what went on, recorded these observations after work, later analysing them and writing a report.
The theme selected for the research was an investigation into social factors affecting output.
Specifically we set out to discover why workers produced the output levels that they did and whether they grouped together to control their output or earnings at predefined levels.
This problem fitted the times, a post-Second-World-War Britain emerging from a period of austerity, concerned with increasing output, efficient management, the rational use of resources.
We found some workers who deliberately controlled levels of output and some who did not; we found varied social mechanisms for  controlling output.
Our report emphasised the rationality of workers' behaviour in relation to their own goals and working situation.
We explained the presence or absence of worker control over output and earnings by ‘external factors’, social influences from outside the individual workshop, eg the organisation of the industry, its degree of capitalisation, the strength of trade unionism and the culture of the community (Lupton and Cunnison, 1964).
At this stage we were unsure how to deal with the social category of sex (the way gender was talked about in those days).
Women were already an issue in industrial sociology; for example, married women with home responsibilities were seen as ‘problems’ for employers (Brown et al , 1964) and women were seen as having difficulties accommodating their ‘two roles’(Myrdal and Klein, 1956; Klein, 1965; Komarovsky, 1962).
In our study, gender was taken account of in the selection of workshops: we studied workshops with men only, with women only, workshops where men and women did the same work and were paid at the same rate, and those where the sexes did different jobs and men were paid more than women.
Our early data showed that gender played some part in structuring workshop life (Cunnison, 1966).
But with regard to output levels its influence was outweighed by industrial factors.
Furthermore, we were not sure how to handle gender in terms of our internal/external dichotomy.
The proposition linking external factors to workshop behaviour rested on the first three studies.
However, the following two raised other interesting problems.
The fourth (Wilson, 1963), linking together gender, local culture and technical processes within the electronics industry, produced an analysis which pre-figures feminist factory studies of the eighties (Cavendish, 1982; Pollert, 1981; Westwood, 1984).
It raised questions about the connections between male power within the family and within the industrial firm.
The factory bench was seen as a crucial division, a ‘watershed’ structured by patterns of class and gender located in the wider society.
On one side were young, working class, local ‘Dockford’ girls; on the other were middle class, mainly middle-aged, socially and spatially mobile men.
Relationships between the two groups were mediated by gender, family and class.
The fifth study carried out in 1958, raised problems about the position of women within the unions, which proved difficult to  handle within the sociological thinking of that time.
One particular incident brought them into focus, an incident over which I puzzled, on and off, for a long time, but which is amenable to analysis using current sociological notions.
I was working in a factory mass producing men's suits.
Jobs were strictly segregated by sex.
Men did the cutting, women machined and did intermediate pressing, men did the tailoring and pressed the completed garment.
The women were on straight piecework, the men on more complex systems of payment.
I had finished six months participant observation.
I had watched the small group of sewing machinists with whom I worked respond to the management's introduction of a change in their job routine.
A new piece-rate price was set.
There had been a long struggle.
The women claimed they were unable to reach output targets set by management and, at the price offered, they were unable to make their ‘wages’.
Management claimed they could, but the women consistently produced less than the required targets.
However, they lost no money as, while the dispute lasted, they were paid on special time rates.
These rates were an average of their piecework earnings in the three weeks previous to the job change.
The women were represented by their union.
Negotiations were conducted by the Chief Steward, a man and a cutter.
The women avoided talking to the Chief Steward, or among themselves, about the detail of the job.
Their strategy was to claim that output targets were unattainable, and not to attain them.
Their tactics were to be to maintain a tight-lipped silence punctuated by claims that the new job was harder.
They complained loudly that targets could not be reached, but sometimes I detected whispers passing from one woman to another.
‘We  mustn't let him know’, they said, when some part of the job had gone smoothly (him referring either to manager, or to Chief Steward).
The price eventually agreed was higher than the original offer.
Output thereafter went up so that the women were earning about the same as before the job was changed.
It was clear that there had been an implicit agreement to hold back output until a higher price was fixed.
At this point I left the factory.
Several months later I returned to visit the Chief Steward.
I found that the new piece-rate price had been cut.
The steward told me how the management, had by chance, come across records of the women's wages.
‘You should have seen the wages!’ he said  ‘Some of them were earning as much as the men!’
The management wanted to cut the rate.
The union agreed.
A technicality in the job change provided the excuse.
The women did not protest.
According to the steward they knew it was ‘not right’ for them to earn those wages.
I found the case shocking.
The increase had been won only after a long struggle.
To see it so easily removed, and with the complicity of the union, was disturbing.
It brought several things to mind: the evident barrier during negotiations between the steward and the women; the warnings of a friend about my own relationship with the steward —‘You put too much trust in that man’; and the remark made when I reported how I had initially explained my research aims to the union stewards —‘You told the Secret Service!
You should have told us!’
The overall picture of output controls fitted the findings of the early studies which stressed the importance of ‘external factors’ but the incident recounted above suggested that this was not the whole story.
The role of unions, the place and powerlessness of women within them and the control of women by men needed explanation.
I was young and inexperienced, but also because sociology had not then developed theoretical propositions for analysing such issues.
In the sociological analyses of the 1950s women, as mothers and wives, were recognised as having different interests and different responsibilities from men.
Such differences were thought of as ‘natural’ or ‘given’, as were certain psychological traits, for example women were thought of as physically more dexterous and emotionally more volatile.
Hence questions about what social processes gave rise to or maintained such differences were never asked.
Further sociology, especially industrial sociology, tended to be framed in terms of a male world, male workers, male managers, male unionists.
Women, as a distinctive category of workers, tended to be ignored except where their domestic responsibilities raised uncomfortable problems for management.
An exception was Lockwood's study of how women displaced men in the occupation of bank clerk, and the membership of women in banking unions (1958).
Thirty years on the situation has changed: the position of women in the society has changed; and the discipline of sociology has  changed, influenced in fairly fundamental ways by the Feminist Movement (Finch, 1982; Roberts, 1982; Stacey, 1982).
Looking at my early field-work now I would ask different questions: ‘Why was the union acting against the interests of its members?’
‘Why was it that men, management and union together, were able to use the union to control women's wages?’
Several sociologists are asking question like this now (Cockburn, 1983, 1985; Coyle, 1985).
None were doing so then.
To do so means looking at unions not as combinations of workers defending their interests but as male-dominated organisations which, in the name of the family wage and the male breadwinner (Land, 1980), have developed customs and practices that keep highly skilled and well paying jobs for men and relegate women to jobs of low pay and low status.
Women's participation in trade unions — a problem for the seventies
I move on, twenty years, into the mid-seventies, to a study of the participation of women in their local trade union organisations.
Why had such a research topic now become acceptable?
First during the seventies the position of women in society, an issue dormant since the 1930s, became again a matter of public debate.
The demand by women for equal opportunity with men was given public and legal backing by the Equal Pay Act 1970 and the Sex Discrimination Act 1975.
The Women's Liberation or Feminist Movement was influential in bringing women's issues into public consciousness.
Emerging in the late sixties it took several forms: informal consciousness-raising groups were set up; women's campaigns were run in support of abortion, battered women, women in employment, and of oppressed women in different parts of the world; and women found their own voice in establishing their own magazines and publishing houses.
Underlying this change in public consciousness were fundamental changes in women's lives: family size had been shrinking since early in the century; and more women, especially married women, were in paid work.
Between 1950 and 1975 the female proportion of the working population rose from 33 per cent(which  it had been since the 1890s) to over 40 per cent (Hunt, 1975).
The new women were employed mainly in the expanding public services while the old male-dominated manufacturing industries declined.
Unemployment, now a major problem, was in the mid-seventies only a threat; privatisation was not an issue; government attacks on the trade union movement were a thing of the future.
Trade union membership grew rapidly in the expanding public sector, especially among women.
In 1950 women were 17 per cent of UK trade union membership.
By 1975 the figure had risen to 27 per cent.
Between these years, some unions which had been mainly male became mainly female eg NUPE (National Union of Public Employees) where the percentage of women rose from 24 per cent to 63 per cent, COHSE (Confederation of Health Service Employees) from 39 per cent to 67 per cent and USDAW (Union of Shop Distributive and Allied Workers) from 40 per cent to 57 per cent .
This raised problems for the unions to which I return later.
There were notable instances of militancy among women workers, the Ford sewing-machinists' strike (Friedman and Meredeen, 1980), the night cleaners' campaign in London (Hobbs, 1973) the sit-ins at Fakenham's (Wajcman, 1983) and Lee Jeans.
All involved their unions.
Feminists have led some of the most exciting recent developments in sociology.
The definition of work has been a central issue (Oakley, 1974).
Work is commonly taken to refer to paid employment, thus implying that housework and childcare are not work.
Feminists questioned this, drawing attention to the contribution to wealth made by women's unpaid labour in the home.
Connections were made between women's domestic labour and the segregation by sex of jobs in the labour market.
Questions were asked: Why do most women work in unskilled, low-paid jobs?
What is, and has been, the role of the union in this?
During the 1970s sociologists were beginning to think about how to incorporate gender divisions into sociological theory.
They (especially women sociologists) were undertaking empirical research into women's employment — research intended to redress the image of the male and cloth-capped ‘worker’— but this research was not published until the 1980s (Cavendish, 1982; Pollert, 1981).
In the seventies, most research in the field of work and industrial relations, was done by men and about men, though there were  exceptions (Hunt, 1980; Porter, 1978; Purcell, 1978).
Women were just becoming visible in men's researches: meriting a few pages or a special chapter (Nichols and Armstrong, 1976).
An otherwise outstanding ethnographic study by Beynon of a motor manufacturing plant,Working for Ford , gives only three pages to the two to three hundred women sewing machinists whose historic 1968 strike for regrading and equal pay was one of the inspirations of the 1970 Equal Pay Act (Wintour, 1984).
Their claim, which failed in two Courts of Inquiry, continued to fester.
Sixteen years later the same workers failed to get equal pay at an industrial tribunal under the 1983 amended Equal Pay Act.
Rather than wait for an employment appeal tribunal, they went on strike.
This time (1985) they won.
Another influential book of the seventies, Braverman's Labour and Monopoly Capital , proved gender-blind.
It argued that work is continually de-skilled and degraded through the interaction of technical change and international patterns of capital accumulation.
Highly-acclaimed on publication, it was also heavily criticised for its neglect of gender (Baxendale et al, 1976; Beechey, 1982).
Though most male industrial sociologists avoided issues concerning women, a few men had begun to research the role of women in trade unions.
The impetus came from the unions.
NUPE sought advice about how to achieve fuller representation of their large new female membership.
A research report on union organisation recommended, among other things, positive discrimination in favour of women (Fryer et al, 1974).
Problems faced by part-time women shop stewards were researched by this same group of men.
A few other studies were made in the 1970s, by women, about the problems which unions raised for women as well as the problems which women raised for the unions (Cunnison, 1983; Coote and Kellner, 1981; Stageman, 1980; Harrison, 1969, 1980).
In summary, the 1970s was a period when inequality and gender were publicly debated, when unions, largely to further their own interests, were trying to redress the powerlessness of women within their organisations, and when sociologists first recognised gender as an indispensable concept for the analysis of productive relations of the workplace and reproductive relations of the home.
In this situation I was able to ‘choose’ to study the position of women in the unions.
Women and unions: from the 1970s to the 1980s
A theme raised in recent studies is that of women's consciousness: in the classic form of class consciousness (Hunt, 1980; Porter, 1978a, b) and of gender consciousness within class, within work and trade unions (Cunnison, 1983; Wajcman, 1983).
The notion of class consciousness is derived directly from Marxist analysis.
That of women's or gender consciousness emerges from the women's movement when consciousness-raising helped to make women aware of their specific position and disadvantages within contemporary society.
In reviewing recent empirical work on women's consciousness, Beechey (1983) notes that: women's class consciousness, because it is largely mediated through husbands' employment, tends to be weaker than men's; many women, under the influence of capitalist and male-dominated ideology, remain unconscious of their gender-related disadvantages; women's consciousness probably varies over their life cycle; and it is fractured and contradictory.
The notion of trade-union and gender consciousness is useful in examining my research women's participation in their local unions.
This research encompassed the 1979 Winter of Discontent when selected public service workers went on strike against a government-imposed pay limit.
The women's response to this dispute differed.
Some, previously inactive, became and continued to be active.
Some, previously only marginally interested, developed a consciousness as trade unionists and became committed activists.
A few became aware of specific disadvantages suffered by women in a sex-segregated labour market and within their unions: for them there was a dawning of gender consciousness.
From participation to consciousness
My initial interest was in participation.
Available figures showed that women were grossly under-represented at all levels of union organisation.
Activity at a local level is generally a pre-requisite for influence higher up.
Accordingly I directed my researches to the first steps on the ladder, the branch and workshop.
My main research technique, participant observation, was coupled with informal interviews to learn about the past and about  areas of life I could not observe.
Participant observation seemed particularly appropriate to research which was essentially exploratory and in an area of rapid social change, in employment, union policies and general attitudes.
It was better than formal interviews for probing attitudes to an area of social life where women expressed lack of interest.
Initially I saw the women as in two different groups, activists and non-activists.
I planned participant observation among the non-activists at the workplace and the activists at the branch.
In researching the activists I went also to the local trades council and its women's committee, union meetings called over disputes, local demonstrations, courses and day schools for women trade unionists.
I went as an observer to three national union conferences.
The non-participators join in
None of the women in the school kitchen where I worked went to union meetings.
In 1978 in the whole of the city, not a single woman from the school meals service regularly went to the meetings of either of the relevant unions, NUPE and the then G & M (General and Municipal Workers Union).
Apart from social evenings and negotiations about pay, the women considered the union an irrelevance.
When problems occurred at work, they preferred to approach the cook personally.
Getting no satisfaction from that quarter a few of them had taken a problem to a union meeting.
The branch officers, all men, refused to let the women speak, claiming they were not following correct procedure.
The women approached the union again, while I was there, to get a local agreement about hours of work enforced.
This time they succeeded.
It took many months during which they lost potential earnings; afterwards they were still critical of the union.
An explanation for this negative attitude towards the union lies in the way the women identified themselves in terms of their domestic lives rather than as paid workers.
Domestic chores, house furnishing and decorating, births, marriages and deaths, problems with children, care of elderly parents — together with TV — predominated in conversation over issues connected with work.
Money was important.
But as part-time, low-paid workers, the women earned very little.
They saw themselves as secondary earners, supplementing  the male wage earner (all but one were married).
They saw men's identity as lodged in work and the ability to earn a ‘family wage’.
Thus they considered it an affront to a man's dignity — but not to a woman's — to earn a wage only on a par with social security benefits.
They saw the union as being primarily concerned with keeping up levels of men's pay and hence as the sphere and responsibility of men.
Yet there was an element of ambiguity.
Their identity was fractured.
As wage earners themselves, they saw the morality of equal pay.
Yet almost in the same breath they stated that men should earn more because they had ‘wives and bairns’ to support.
Such ambiguity impeded commitment to the union (Charles, 1983; Cunnison, 1983).
Union consciousness and the ‘Winter of Discontent’)
The Winter of Discontent began nine months after I left the kitchen.
It was February 1979: a group of four unions had refused to accept a pay limit of 5 per cent imposed by the Government on all public service workers.
These workers, mainly from local government and the health service are amongst the lowest paid in the country.
The economy was inflationary with private sector pay increases well above the 5 per cent limit.
The unions claimed the government was further penalising the low paid.
When negotiations between employers and unions finally broke down strike action was taken with different groups of workers coming out in different parts of the country.
Locally action was taken by health workers, with the support of a committee drawn from the whole range of public service workers.
Meetings and demonstrations were held both locally and nationally in support of the strikers.
Union members were exposed to both the rhetoric about union solidarity and the real need to support the class interest of their fellow workers.
The union campaign highlighted the problems of the low-paid male worker with a family to support, referring  explicitly to the family wage.
This touched a chord in the women's experience: most had been, at some time, dependent wives responsible for feeding and clothing a family.
Only once during the dispute did I hear the woman  worker's point of view publicly debated.
A school cleaner pointed out that there were many more low-paid women than men among the public service workers.
She asked why women's labour should be worth less than that of men.
The women responded to their union's appeal, attending meetings and demonstrations.
A highlight of the dispute was a demonstration, several thousand strong, organised in London by NUPE.
All the women from the kitchen where I had worked (despite previous criticisms of the union) went on the London demonstration.
They met workers from other occupations and other areas; they swapped stories, shared jokes and learned about one another 's problems.
It helped to break down isolation (a particular problem in school meals where there are many small workplaces) and to create feelings of solidarity and shared class interest.
As a result of the action several school meals women became active in their unions.
One joined the strike support committee; several started going to branch meetings; one became a shop steward and served in that capacity for five years.
Women from other kitchens became interested.
Even before the dispute began one woman had come forward to be a shop steward.
Now there were two and after a few months there were four.
Underlying this increased union activity was a change in women's consciousness: in their perception of their jobs, their place in society and their role as trade unionists.
The ambiguities in their identity were not resolved, but seen in a different perspective.
Priorities were changed; more importance was attached to paid work and hence they were willing to give more time to union affairs.
The unions themselves eagerly fostered the new involvement generated by the dispute.
Union consciousness and the activists
Conventional wisdom attributes women's low participation in union affairs largely to domestic responsibilities.
Yet several activists had strikingly heavy domestic commitments.
The nineteen whom I interviewed included women with seven, five and four children, several under school age.
One had taken her seven-year-old to branch meetings, despite the protests of the men.
At a national  conference I met a woman convenor of a local group of refuse collectors; she had ten children.
It seems to be all a matter of priorities, of what is most important to people and how they choose to use their time.
The question then arises, how did these activists develop such a consciousness as waged workers and trade unionists?
Most, through divorce, widowhood, sickness or marriage to a low-paid man, were or had been, main family earners.
When interviewing them I tried to locate turning points in their lives when they had changed their perceptions of themselves as workers and union members.
Most identified turning points in terms of crises in family relationships, often connected with a change in financial circumstances.
A woman abandoned by her husband found her wage of new and crucial importance and looked to the union for support.
Two women, both family breadwinners, found the union of help in fighting for the right to be considered for promotion.
Others found that workmates pressured them to challenge management.
It seems that women, whose fractured identity inhibits their union activity, will nevertheless encourage others, especially those who are highly articulate, to speak up on their behalf.
Those thus pressured may find themselves becoming interested and committed.
Unions eagerly encourage the further involvement of such women by means of day release or other union courses.
Such courses, especially those for women only, increased women's confidence and introduced them to new ways of interpreting their experience.
Union commitment grew, in some cases, from pre-existing class consciousness.
One woman explained that her union commitment derived from her pregnancy as a teenager.
She was sent away to a home for unmarried mothers run by middle-class women.
The treatment meted out was degrading and she had hated the middle classes ever after.
Her judgements about them were later reinforced.
A consultant visiting her sick child at home, blamed her for the terrible housing conditions where she lived.
He said that the child must stay in hospital until she found somewhere better.
She organised a rent strike and got her whole street rehoused.
The experience strengthened her belief in the existence of class conflict.
Later, she found it natural to be active in her union.
Another woman, who had been summarily sacked for challenging a supervisor who was cheating fellow workers, joined the union when she learned it would help her get back pay and holiday pay.
From then on she saw the union as an organisation which redressed the injustices of the employers.
She was a faithful attender at branch meetings till she retired.
She joined the Labour Party.
She saw her political and union commitment as grounded in a class consciousness developed during childhood in a poor working-class community.
Childhood was followed by hard physical labour in local factories where workers were locked in to work or, if they arrived late, locked out.
Gender consciousness and the Winter of Discontent
Her story does not stop here.
In 1979 as a hospital worker, she was caught up in the Winter of Discontent.
The strike lasted several weeks; she picketed throughout, was abused and spat on by nurses who thought that striking was wrong.
Finally the strike ended: at a mass meeting the membership were asked to vote on a proposal by the national executive to abandon action.
In return there was to be a Commission of Inquiry into hospital workers' pay.
Meanwhile an interim award of £1 was made to full-time workers; part-time workers got nothing.
The membership was disappointed.
Locally the strike was still strong.
Many people were reluctant to return and to abandon the original goal of £60 per week.
People spoke for and against.
Then suddenly this woman got to her feet.
‘Women,’ she claimed, ‘are not being treated fairly.
It is the women who have fought this strike.
They are the ones who have done the picketing.
But they are the part-time workers.
They are going to get nothing.
Women are being discriminated against.’
She got a big round of applause, but no one spoke in her support.
It was an insight which came to her on the spur of the moment.
Earlier she had always insisted that men and women were the same — all in it together.
Now she thought differently.
The pay settlement had changed her mind.
She could not sleep that night.
The next day she wrote to the General Secretary.
He replied, but failed to answer her point about discrimination.
Two years later this woman retired.
Her new insight and  changed consciousness came too late in her life, as happens with many women, to bear fruit for herself or for others.
For me it raised a number of questions.
How does the typical life cycle of women contribute to their disadvantage within the labour market and within unions?
What events and experiences bring women to a consciousness of these disadvantages?
How do women with a consciousness of their place in the class system and trade union movement become aware that unions are male-dominated and have inbuilt tendencies to support men's rather than women's interests?
How can those women who do become conscious of their predicament act to change their situation?
How far will the unions support them?
My research indicates a variety of routes to class, trade union and gender consciousness and the probability of interaction between several factors: hardships experienced in a working-class childhood; changes in household structure, such as taking over the ‘man's’ role of breadwinner; becoming involved in industrial action; developing a new awareness of how social life is organised through contact with political or trade union ideologies; and just growing older and having more time free from actual and ideological family constraints.
Gender consciousness and the unions today
Women generally, and younger women particularly, are, it seems, becoming more aware of the disadvantaged position of women within our present society.
Changes in household structure — the increase in single parents and in divorce, and a greater emphasis on equality of opportunity within the education and employment systems; legal changes; all have contributed to a rising level of consciousness.
Furthermore women are now sought after by the unions which are themselves trying to raise women's consciousness.
Past performance by unions in support of women's interests has been uninspiring: one hundred years passed between the TUC's endorsement of equal pay and the Equal Pay Act of 1970.
Until recently women have had a struggle to get the unions to espouse their interests.
Important here has been the ‘charters’ drawn up by  feminists, in and out of work, listing minimum demands relating to women's disadvantages in employment and at home.
The Working Women's Charter, endorsed by the Women's TUC in 1975, put issues such as childcare, nurseries, abortion, maternity and paternity leave, women's educational opportunity and their health on to the union agenda.
However, by the mid-seventies, self-interest brought several unions to pay attention to women's issues and since then there has been a flurry of union activity directed towards them.
Massive amounts of union literature have been aimed at the women's issues noted above.
Recruitment and educational campaigns have been directed towards them.
Organisational reforms have tried to help them find a voice: through positive discrimination in the form of reserved seats on committees at all levels; through National Women's Officers; through Women's Advisory Committees which run parallel to the decision-making committees of the unions and have free access to the latter but no voting rights.
These processes have gathered force as economic decline, anti-union legislation and more direct government attacks have decimated the bastions of male union power.
The miners, the printers and the workers at GCHQ (Government Communications Headquarters) have all been defeated, marking a turning point in the policies and strategies of the union movement as a whole.
The women's support groups and community organisation of the miners' strike have given the union movement a new and wider perspective.
Faced by unemployment, by the growth of homework and of part-time, temporary and contract working, the unions have turned towards this long-neglected, low-paid and largely female sector of the labour market.
Edmonds of GMBTU (General, Municipal and Boilermakers Trade Union) has called explicitly for men in the movement to support the new ‘servant’ class of exploited female workers, the unemployed and pensioners, for involvement in leisure life, for a move into popular culture (Guardian, 1986).
The TGWU (Transport and General Workers Union) is to lead a recruitment campaign for part-time and temporary workers, again mainly women (New Statesman, 1987).
Four unions representing workers in the health and public services are working together to re-evaluate and up-grade so-called ‘women's’ jobs, thus moving towards equal pay (Guardian, 1986, 1987).
Nationally union policy towards women in now more favourable than ever before.
However, a policy which takes full account of women's needs is still a long way off (Cockburn, 1985).
At a local level, research shows that practice often does not follow policy and men continue to hold fast to their power (Cunnison, 1983 and forthcoming).
If women do not manage to enter the decision-making strongholds of the unions, there is a danger that they will end up as in the past, manipulated and exploited to serve the interests of the male hierarchy.
STILL WORLDS APART?
POLITICAL SOCIOLOGY AND THE POLITICS OF GENDER Marion Price
Introduction
Since the ‘second wave’ of the women's movement exploded onto the scene on both sides of the Atlantic in the late 1960s, few fields of study have escaped the searching gaze of feminism.
Time and again, the established disciplines of sociology, anthropology, economics, history, geography, political science and so on , have been investigated and found wanting.
Work done from a feminist perspective has challenged the theoretical frameworks, key assumptions, methods and findings of the traditional social sciences.
The overwhelming verdict has been that what ‘passes for knowledge’ in a particular field is in fact ‘partial and patriarchal’.
While all disciplines have disputes over what constitutes worthwhile and well-founded knowledge, what holds each together is some measure of agreement over the boundaries in which such disagreements arise.
Feminists have argued that these boundaries systematically restrict our attention to the experiences and interests of men and reflect the priorities, prejudices and power structures of male-dominated society.
In effect the mainstream has been the malestream (O'Brien, 1981; Siltanen and Stanworth, 1984).
One aim of this chapter is to assess the impact of feminism on political sociology ‘twenty years on’ and to look at the difficulties confronting those who wish to do work on women.
In particular, it will examine the extent to which questions concerning women and power have become part of mainstream political sociology.
Man-made knowledge
From the start, feminists had little difficulty uncovering the sexist assumptions lying at the roots of most of the established trees of knowledge.
Women had either been ignored or treated as the deviant half of humanity.
It was not long before feminists inquired m-to the reasons for and the mechanisms underlying these pervasive exclusions and distortions and wondered about the part played by ‘man-made language’(Spender, 1980) in upholding a gender order in which women are systematically subordinated.
By and large it is men who construct knowledge, check with other men as to its significance and validity and build on the traditions developed by other men.
Men set agendas and act as gate-keepers to knowledge.
‘A ‘style’ evolves with its own questions, solutions and standards…
And women have not been present in those circles with the result that they have been deprived of the means to participate in the construction of forms of thought which are relevant or adequate to express their own experience,(Spender, 1981, p. 3).
By the same token this raises the interesting possibility that, for much of the time at least, men view their knowledge as self-evident and many women may, in the absence of alternatives, come to interpret their own experiences in terms of the categories made available by male experts.
how far have we come?
In the early 1980s, Dale Spender edited a collection of essays assessing the impact of feminism on the academic disciplines.
For Sociology, Helen Roberts reported considerable changes both within the organisation of the discipline and within the structure of the profession, seeing these changes largely as the direct or indirect result of an increased level of awareness brought about through the women's movement over the previous decade (Roberts, 1981b).
Roberts argued that up until the last few years, apart from a very few studies made by certain women scholars, women were notable in British sociology mainly by their absence.
While the rediscovery of women's experiences has been seen as one of the first tasks, the problem is not just one of ‘bringing  women back in’ but involves a struggle to upend traditional theories, concepts and methods so that women's experiences, their relationships to each other, to children and to men become part of the mainstream.
Work on women cannot simply be added on to existing, flawed bodies of thought but requires a revolution in the ways in which we think about men as well as women, about work as well as the family, about political and public as well as private issues.
Much of this work is already in hand, aided by advances made in the organisation of women outside and inside the sociology profession.
There has been the growth of feminist bookshops, research and resources centres, publishing houses, journals and magazines — even if they usually exist on shoe-string budgets.
There is a large and growing feminist literature in sociology which is much appreciated by women students, including influential and innovative collections stemming from the British Sociological Association's conferences and study groups on Sexual Divisions (see, for example, Barker and Allen, 1976a and 1976b); there is the BSA women's caucus which operates as a forum for women and as a pressure group within the profession; there is also the work of the BSA Standing Committee on the Equality of the Sexes; and many of the small number of women in positions of relative power in the profession have been willing to use their influence on behalf of other women.
Finally many sociology departments in higher education now run courses on Gender Divisions.
The feminist challenge threatens to upset not only existing assumptions and findings but also the whole way in which knowledge is produced and valued.
Resistance is only to be expected.
The challenge goes against a whole tradition in which the core of the discipline and its prestigious areas have been theoretical and methodological issues centring largely around analyses of power, class, conflict and the problem of order.
As Roberts notes, ‘there is nothing about these concepts as such…, which excludes either women or a feminist analysis…but traditionally, studies of sexual divisions have been accorded somewhat low status and certainly seen as peripheral to the central concerns of the subject’(Roberts, 1981b, p. 75).
This raises questions of how far work on women is still relegated to the sidelines of sociological inquiry and teaching.
How often are  gender issues, if included at all, confined to one section of the curriculum, never to be raised again in other areas?
How often are they raised by adding on a small, discrete area to existing topics (for example, ‘Women in…’)— thereby leaving the rest untouched — rather than acknowledging that feminism has generated a challenge to the whole field?(see BSA, 1986, for a discussion of teaching in higher education).
How successful has sociology been, for example, in incorporating questions about the politics of gender into mainstream approaches to the study of politics?
It is difficult to deny that there has been some change in the right direction.
But the low priority still given to gender, and the position of women in the foothills of the profession,(see BSA, 1986) together with increased competition for the limited funding available for sociological research in the present political climate, suggest that feminists still face a long struggle to put women's issues onto sociology's mainstream agenda.
Studying politics
But what about the other term in our equation — the sociological study of politics or political sociology?
In its broadest sense, politics is about power.
Political sociologists often claim that they are concerned with the study of power in its social context (see Bottomore, 1979, p. 7).
This is a very wide claim and one which potentially includes questions concerning the relationships between women, power and politics.
Indeed, since power is an aspect of most, if not all, social relations, the field of political sociology threatens to engulf many other areas of the discipline.
Yet in everyday terms most of us have little difficulty using a quite specific meaning of the term ‘politics’ seeing elections, party competition, parliamentary majorities and the composition and deliberations of cabinets and parliaments as the heart of British politics.
We assume that politics takes shape here in its purest form since it is a central arena where struggles for power are staged.
But we also acknowledge that there is more to politics than choosing the next Government and what that Government attempts to do when in office.
The governing process refers not only to the  activities of Cabinet, Parliament, nationally and locally elected representatives but also includes those of the large public bureaucracies of civil servants, the police, the army, the courts and so on.
There is clearly something special about the apparatus of government when it comes to talking about the power which it has over our daily lives through its ability to take decisions which shape and lead society in a certain direction.
It is now commonplace to remark on the influence which government has in regulating our lives, from supervising and registering our births to certifying our deaths and most points in between.
At this point we might begin to talk about ‘the state’ as something which extends beyond government (and especially beyond the Government of the day) and the part which it plays in ordering our lives through its claims to guarantee, represent and provide for the common interests of its citizens.
The idea of the state revolves around notions of its privileged position of power and rule.
The modern state is a public power claiming supreme jurisdiction over a given territory and this claim is backed up by its ability to use force to ensure obedience to its rule.
As the supreme or sovereign power within its own boundaries the state cannot have rivals which successfully deny its law-making powers or its claims on the ultimate allegiance of its citizens.
Even in modern democracies where the ‘people's will’ is, in theory, sovereign, the state nevertheless constitutes ‘a power ‘up there’, separate from ‘the people’who helped to form it' (Hall, 1984, p. 14).
In view of this special relationship between the state and the distribution of power within a society, it would be very surprising if political sociologists were not interested in the claims and activities of the state.
Political sociology and political science
Political sociologists generally acknowledge that political science has a long, honourable and scholarly tradition of studying the apparatus of government and the state but worry about its tendency to consider this in relative isolation from its wider social context.
As a relative newcomer, political sociology has made wider claims  and has sought to extend the notions of power and politics beyond the confines traditionally set by political science.
It has been suggested that whereas political science tends to be mainly concerned with the machinery of government and the mechanisms of public administration, the sociological analysis of political phenomena is concerned with the wider interplay between politics and social structure, between political and societal processes (Coser, 1966).
Nevertheless it is important to stress that debates take place among political scientists and sociologists as well as between them.
Many political scientists have tried to shift the focus of political science away from government itself towards an understanding of the social context of politics (see Coates, 1984, p. 15).
Important debates about how best to study politics cut across boundaries.
Marxists, for example have criticised what they see as the shortcomings of both ‘bourgeois’ political science and sociology.
More recently feminists have challenged the assumptions and findings of a variety of disciplines.
Whatever their ‘disciplinary’ background, they have found that they often have more in common with each other than with their respective academic counterparts who continue to work in pre-feminist or anti-feminist ways.
Since the invisibility of women is not confined to particular disciplines, feminism has tended to take on an interdisciplinary approach.
As Siltanen and Stanworth argue, there is ‘a remarkable coincidence of assumptions about the political capacity of women’(1984, p. 11) in political science, political sociology and industrial sociology.
For my purposes here it is therefore possible to treat political sociology and modern political science together.
The male agenda of political sociology
We can certainly agree that political sociologists have not confined their attention to the narrower governmental sphere or believed that this constitutes a part (albeit an important part) of the world of politics.
In fact, many political sociologists have paid scant attention to the formal institutions of government and administration, preferring instead to study the ways in which the formal is conditioned, even undermined or replaced by, the informal.
The work of elite theorists such as Pareto, Mosca, Michels and Wright Mills, of Marx and Engels, and of pluralist critics of traditional democratic theory such as Dahl and Polsby — in spite of their differences — bear witness to this.
There has always been a self-proclaimed tendency to look behind the scenes, to see where power really lies, to explore and explode the myths surrounding a society's image of itself and its political system.
Political sociology has cast itself in a debunking role.
Yet the redefinition of factors which need to be considered for a fuller understanding of politics and power have not gone nearly far enough: they are still confined to the world of public politics and the struggles for power in the public arena.
One consequence is that mainstream political science has a long history of insensitivity to issues of gender.
The relationship between society and the state has been a central concern of western political and social thought for the last four hundred years, one crucially bound up with attempts to understand and evaluate the character of new social, political, economic and intellectual forms associated with the development of a capitalist world economy.
Beginning with Hobbes in the seventeenth century, the ‘great age of political thought’ was preoccupied with the relationship between the state and civil society.
But women were commonly considered not full members of society.
They were in, but not of, civil society.
Their interests were incorporated into that of the family and represented by its male head.
According to Bottomore (1979) the major themes of political sociology in its formative period in the first half of the nineteenth century were inspired by the beginnings of democracy as a form of government and the development of classes on the basis of industrial capitalism.
The hopes and fears engendered by the extension of the franchise to the male working class made the consideration of the relationship between representative democracy and capitalism a central concern of most varieties of political thought.
From its earliest beginnings, the central concepts and problems of political sociology — class, power and the state — referred to developments and struggles in the public world of politics, commerce and industry.
But this was a world from which women were largely excluded and few thought to question the  relationship between the public world of politics and the private world of the family.
Given its concern with the exercise of public power, political elites and government institutions, the modern study of politics cannot fail to be sexist.
Women are still likely to be excluded precisely because they so rarely exercise public power.
Apart from the comparative investigation of women's political behaviour carried out under the direction of Maurice Duverger (1955) very little systematic work was done in this area.
Thoughts on women and politics generally tended to emerge on an ad hoc basis as a  by-product of empirical studies into voting behaviour and political participation carried out in the 1950s and 60s.
In spite of their unsystematic nature they were nevertheless very influential in constructing a particular image of political woman.
Political man and apolitical woman
In the 1970s a small number of feminist critics accused most of these influential and widely cited texts of sexism,(targets included A. Campbell et al,The American Voter ; G. Almond and S. Verba,The Civic Culture ; R. Lane,Political Life ; R. A. Dahl,Who Governs?).
They stood accused of substituting prejudice for analysis and ideology for science (Goot and Reid, 1984).
Feminist criticism stressed the ways in which ‘knowledge’ was used to support the interests of dominant groups.
As Bourque and Grossholtz put it, ‘that politics is a man's world is a familiar adage; that political science as a discipline tends to keep it that way is less well accepted, but perhaps closer to the truth’(1984, p. 103).
The failure of political science/sociology to question women's role in politics reflects one of its most pervasive political assumptions, that of ‘male dominance’.
The prevailing sexual division of labour and function in the family and society at large is accepted and simply transferred to the world of politics.
It is taken for granted that men do and should occupy the leadership roles and make the important decisions.
Critics like Bourque and Grossholtz (1984) do not dispute the fact that men hold the majority of public offices at all levels and have the lion's share of influence.
Political scientists cannot be blamed for reporting this particular division of  labour between the sexes.
What the critics find unacceptable is their failure to question this situation, to ask why this happens and to worry about its implications.
Since it sees politics as properly a man's business, the malestream approach sets up male behaviour as the standard by which all other responses should be measured.
Rational political behaviour is defined by the male pattern.
Bourque and Grossholtz (1984) argue that the acceptance of ‘masculinity as ideal political behaviour’ has dire consequences for studying women: the unquestioned assumption that the political attitudes, behaviour and preferences of men define mature political behaviour means that when women do not match these they are said to be either apolitical or politically naive.
A common practice is to define women's responses as moralistic and emotional while seeing those of men as rational and hard-headed.
Thus is politics defined as a man's world.
Siltanen and Stanworth (1984) point to the malestream tendency to exaggerate gender differences in political experience, potential and approach.
Stereotypical images of women are used to legitimise male dominance.
Women's supposed ‘failure’ to live up to male standards justify their exclusion from positions of political power and leadership.
Malestream studies have ‘found’ women to be less interested in politics, less well-informed, less forceful and less politically sophisticated in their approach.
Women's political life is characterised as marginal, shallow and inauthentic in comparison with that of men.
Moreover, the stereotype of women's behaviour stresses the differences between ‘all women’ and ‘all men’at the expense of exploring differences among women, or even the possibility that factors other than gender itself may be important in explaining supposed differences.
The possibility that so-called gender differences in participation reflect differences in the ‘openness’ or responsiveness of institutions to women and men is not explored in the malestream approach.
Political parties, for example, may not present such an ‘open face’ to women; their agendas may be of less interest to women or women may face more difficulties in fitting in with their timetables and organisation.
Concentrating on gender differences and women's ‘failure’ to take part, while ignoring the nature of the political environment which confronts them, appears as a neat case of ‘blaming the victim’and again shores up the notion of politics as a man's world.
The social reality constructed by the malestream approach rests on shaky foundations.
Feminists have accused political sociologists of substituting their own views of what should be the case in the place of evidence.
Thus Bourque and Grossholtz (1984) expose the common practice of ‘fudging the footnotes’.
Findings from previous studies are often used to ‘support’ particular arguments in inappropriate or misleading ways.
Misuse of the data from earlier studies usually involves removing all the qualifications and careful language of the original study, thus misrepresenting and in some cases falsifying the data.
In a useful review of existing work on women's relation to electoral and work-based politics, Siltanen and Stanworth (1984) argue for a complete rethink in political analysis.
This need arises from the limitations of malestream accounts, from ‘traditions of thought which are, in both their theoretical and empirical dimensions, rooted in masculine experience’(p. 14).
There is a need to up-end malestream approaches, to develop analyses which are sensitive to gender and accord women the dignity of a political life.
While holding that gender differences in political behaviour are small they also challenge the criteria by which the political is defined and evaluated in malestream analysis, and the degree to which these criteria underestimate women's political contributions.
By questioning the taken for granted boundary of the political which operates so that women's experiences and concerns are often excluded, research should take account of women's distinctive political contributions.
Feminist research involves exposing the ways in which the ‘male-as-norm’ principle operates in political and sociological analysis, rejecting arbitrary divisions between the moral and the political, re-evaluating women's contributions as ‘private’persons to political life and an awareness that women's ‘restraint’in traditional areas of political activity may be a rational response to the nature of their political environment.
Power: a radical view?
Starting out to research the topic of women, power and politics, Margaret Stacey and I soon realised that we could rely on little in the way of help from traditional approaches to the study of politics.
The ‘behaviourist’ approach associated with malestream accounts worked with the assumption of male dominance.
It did not worry about women's invisibility precisely because it accepted prevailing views that politics should be left to men, that the proper forum for female participation is inevitably the family and that the main function of the politically competent woman is to socialise the children and to filter the needs of home and family into the political system.
But what about politics and power within the family?
Was it correct to assume that women were invisible in the public domain because their interests as ‘partners’ in the family were adequately and fairly represented there by men?
Feminists think not, seeing the family as one of the main sources responsible for the continued subordination of women.
Stacey and I followed these arguments, insisting that issues of women and politics can only be addressed if attention is paid to the familial institutions of society (Stacey and Price, 1981).
The personal is political.
We therefore found it necessary to look again at the empirical evidence about what goes on in the nuclear family — Who has the power?
What kinds of power?
Do women have power in some areas and men in others?— and to question the ways in which this data had been handled in existing sociological accounts.
We found that researchers had often been guilty of assuming male dominance.
The behaviourist approach to political participation and power had already received criticism from within political sociology itself.
Power clearly has something to do with ‘getting one's own way’ and the behaviourist approach involves studying actual behaviour to see which groups or individuals get their own way in cases of decision-making where there is an observable conflict.
Those who win regularly on significant issues can be said to be powerful.
Such a ‘one-dimensional’ view of power with its concentration on observable or overt behaviour was criticised for ignoring a ‘second face of power’.
Bachrach and Baratz (1970) argued that power is also exercised when some groups are prevented from raising issues that are against the interests of the powerful.
Such topics are kept ‘off the agenda’ by the dominant group who may then be said to have the power of non-decision-making as well as decision-making.
This approach is potentially useful since it suggests that women's under-representation in public politics can be seen not simply  in terms of women's lack of interest in politics but of the ability of men to prevent women's issues entering politics.
Many of the issues that women seek to raise are not in the interests of men.
What have often been termed ‘women's issues’ have therefore been kept off the agenda, not taken up in mainstream debates, trivialised and seen as secondary issues.
Going a step further, the idea that conflict may be hidden in this way suggests that those who are relatively powerless may be unwilling or unable to translate their interests into claims on public policy.
Both rulers and ruled may believe that some issues are not a matter for public concern.
Women's interests (as housewives or mothers for example) often fall into this category and are defined as non-political.
But most worrying of all, the subordinate group may be unaware of its ‘real’ interests and subscribe to the inevitability of the status quo: a fact which Lukes (1974) recognised when calling for a ‘three-dimensional’or radical approach to the study of power.
Lukes argued that power is not always about making decisions or taking actions but may result from the way in which ‘the system works’.
Arguing that a dominant group may be so well entrenched that it is unaware of any potential challenge, Lukes points to the importance of socially and culturally patterned behaviour, to ways of acting and thinking which are taken for granted and which are rarely exposed to serious challenge.
For our purposes, as we shall see, the assumption of male dominance may be a good case in point.
From the point of view of the development of political sociology in relation to the politics of gender however, the radical critique of behaviourism — much of it influenced by a Marxist perspective — did not go far enough.
In ignoring other dimensions of power, behaviourism was accused of producing a superficial account of the distribution of power.
This debate between pluralist or behaviourist and radical/Marxist accounts of power in capitalist societies has been an important one in political sociology with Marxist writers such as Westergaard and Resler (1975) arguing that pluralist accounts did not get to the roots of the power of capital.
Since power rests not just in individuals or groups but in anonymous social mechanisms and assumptions, they argued that the power of capital is revealed not in individual acts of decision-making but in the everyday application of ‘those assumptions  which give priority to private capital accumulation and market exchange in the use and distribution of resources’(Westergaard and Resler, 1975, p. 144).
Researchers were encouraged to explore the assumptions and mechanisms underlying the acceptance of the status quo which may favour the interests of dominant groups (in this case, the bourgeoisie).
Yet in practice this view was not extended to take in the case of gender: the advances made as a result of the critique of behaviourism and pluralism did not go on to question the assumptions and mechanisms that continue to define politics as the affair of men.
Marxist and other perspectives continued to use concepts derived from the public domain.
The hidden mechanisms of capital were explored but not those of patriarchy.
Moreover, many of the issues have spilled over in a marked renewal of interest in the state in the last twenty years.
Yet in spite of significant debates, both within and between Marxism and pluralism, very little attention has been paid to the patriarchal nature of the state.
Women, power and politics
‘Where power is, women are not’.
We borrowed these words to summarise the position of women in positions of public power at the end of the 1970s (Stacey and Price, 1981).
The more powerful the assembly, committee or board whether in industry, commerce or national and international political institutions, the fewer women are to be found there.
If present at all, women are more likely to be found in less important and less influential bodies, at local or regional level rather than national levels, and on advisory rather than decision-making bodies.
The higher the position, the less likely is the occupant to be a woman.
In other words, where the women are, there the power is not.
On the surface there was so little progress to report.
Women had not emerged as equal partners with men in public life.
At the Parliamentary level the great hopes of the suffragettes had not been realised.
The number of women representatives had not increased dramatically over the 50 years since women first gained the vote on equal terms with men.
By 1979 women had still to reach the  level of 5 per cent of candidates returned to Westminster in any one general election.
With this sort of evidence in mind, we were invited to answer the question, ‘Why is it when women have had the vote for 50 years, so few women are to be found in politically powerful positions?’
It was not long before we decided that the question had to be turned on its head.
It became, ‘how can it possibly have come about in so short a period of time that so many women have become involved in politics?’
Given that there are so few women in powerful positions this may seem surprising.
It is important to be clear then about our reasons for feeling that we had to explain why women have come so far rather than explaining why there had been so few gains.
Public and private power
First we felt that women have come a long way given the very radical and novel nature of their demands to enter public life as individuals in their own right.
We were aware that women have exercised and do exercise certain kinds of power given particular social arrangements; we were aware too of the need for new ways of thinking about power which would allow us to answer questions about women's authority, power, influence and status in different times and places.
What kinds of power have women exercised?
Have women ever ruled supreme?
Under what circumstances can women be said to have a domain of their own?
Did women, do women, have power in the family?
How does this relate to power in the public world of politics?
These questions led us to think about the relationship between the public world of politics, government, industry and commerce, and the private world of the family, kinship and domestic arrangements.
We recognised that this relationship is not a static one and that the nature of these domains themselves change over time.
Having looked at the evidence we concluded that wherever public power has been separated from private power, women have been excluded from it.
The political power which some women have exercised sometimes and in some places in the past and other societies has derived from their position in a familial or kinship group.
We looked at European history and traced the effects which the  growth of specialised institutions of government and administration have had on women's potential for political influence.
In the modern age, institutions outside the family have been created to administer public affairs and women were for a long time expressly excluded.
In earlier times, the family had often held the key to power and women had more opportunity to influence affairs: thus, in feudal times, the Lady of the Manor supervised a large household, exercised great practical authority over both men and women, and stood in for her husband in his frequent absences from home.
The wives of prosperous burgesses also had a good deal of managerial responsibility and authority.
When ‘affairs’ were more closely tied to the home, the wife could gain experience in their management.
Medieval women were not without authority in the familial and economic spheres even if there was no place for them in public politics.
Their only public actions were as women of a family substituting for a man, most often for its head.
Nevertheless, while then as now there were important class differences among women, there was the potential for some women to exert indirect influence over the public domain from their power bases within the family (as, for example, the wives, mothers, mistresses of powerful men).
The rise of industrial capitalism and associated changes in political organisation involved a more complete separation of the public domain from the private domain of the family.
By the nineteenth century, middle- and upper-class women were increasingly cut off from the world of production, while some working-class women regained a limited role in production outside the home.
The family came to be seen as a refuge from a harsh world in which men were pitted against each other in merciless competition.
Women's confinement or privatisation within the home was idealised in terms of their place as Angels in the House.
Men's task was to protect such weak creatures from the outside world.
Each sex was thought to monopolise the characteristics consistent with its proper sphere: for women, the private, for men the public.
In this way men continued to act as the mediators between the public and private domains, between the world of politics and the family.
As heads of families they became ‘individuals’ with rights and duties towards the modern state.
The newly developing notions of individualism, associated with the rise of capitalism and with the  successive struggles of men to become citizens of their state, excluded women who remained non-persons.
At the same time, new administrative and political arrangements effectively reduced such power and influence as woman previously had.
With the separation of political power from the family, women were less able to influence the process of political recruitment or to act as substitutes for their men.
As Weber stressed, the new forms of political organisation were based on rational authority and the adoption of bureaucratic methods of administration.
The further the office, the party and the seats of government were removed from the home and family influence, the less able were women to exercise influence upon the male public world as they had formerly done.
The new public world was one in which power was increasingly divorced from the family.
At the same time women were being confined to the family.
In the sense of their access to political power it was not so much a case that women were ‘returned’ to the family since they had never really left it to go out to get power — rather they had traditionally exercised power, if at all, by virtue of their familial positions and as the public and private spheres were separated, women were left behind.
It was inevitable that women would lay claims to enter the public domain.
Nineteenth-century feminists saw their task as extending the rights of citizenship to the female sex and concentrated on gaining political power in the form of the vote.
This demand was indeed radical since women were for the first time trying to achieve some independence as persons and to exercise some power as individuals in their own right.
But the movement for political rights overlooked the immensely conservative tendencies inherent in the structure of the surrounding society and particularly the institution of the family.
In general, these early feminists accepted the broad contours of the family: women were seeking to enter the public domain without recognising the implications of the private domain for this process.
Other changes needed
This leads to our second reason for feeling that we had to explain how women have come so far: when women achieved the vote little  else changed.
No other social institutions changed, no alterations were made in the sexual division of labour and the previously existing power structure.
Despite some legal reforms important features of women's position remained unchanged.
The ideology of what it was proper for women to do remained largely untouched.
Women were still the gentle sex, their task was nurturing, caring, supportive; no leadership roles for them.
This ideology remained unchanged because the institution of the family remained substantially unchanged and the ideology was necessary for its legitimation and maintenance in that form.
Despite some changes in the family, such as the decline in the size of the nuclear family and its increasing distance from public life, the essential assumption that the major task of women was to serve a husband, bear and rear his children remained.
It was in the interests of the men, of capital and the state that the institution of the family and the division of labour within it should continue.
In this way men continue to have remarkably cheap servants and capitalist industry and the state to have the labour force reproduced as cheaply as possible.
In addition, if women were to enter public life and achieve positions of power there they would constitute a personal challenge to the men who had hitherto had it their own way.
Men therefore stood to lose not only in their personal home environment but also in their public life.
They had no reason to legitimate the access of women to power; far from it.
Men have a material stake in resisting the emancipation of women.
Given the odds, a great advance
Adult female suffrage gave legal recognition to an utterly new status for women who could enter the public world as individuals in their own right rather than as members of families.
To translate this new legal status into political action would have required an organised support basis and this did not exist.
Working-class men used the various associations of the working-class movement, developing particularly the trade unions and the Labour Party.
There was no such basis available for women.
Most importantly, the institution of the family did not change nor women's place within it.
It is only recently that feminists have  come to realise how many other changes are needed if women are to share power with men and have recognised that the gender order must change, with men undertaking ‘women's work’ as much as women entering the men's public domain.
But the peculiar nature of the relationship between women and men means that women's struggle for liberation is particularly delicate and difficult because it involves the most intimate facets of life and affects social and personal relations within the family.
It is only latterly that we have become used to talking about such relations in terms of power.
While the familial basis of women's oppression remains for all classes, upper class women have more chance for freedom than their working-class sisters who suffer a double oppression.
There is a legal potential for women to enter the world of management of capital and the professions and this is now beginning to happen.
But when women first achieved the vote, not only did they have no soundly based organisation to support them, they also had no significant power bases in other institutions.
It is not surprising then that the earliest women to enter politics did so as ‘surrogate’ males, to stand in for husbands or fathers (see the case of Nancy, Lady Astor) or that no ‘monstrous regiment’of women was waiting to overwhelm men in the battle for parliamentary seats.
The evidence is that since the thirties women have begun to stand for political positions in their own right but progress has been slow.
One resource which women have been able to use latterly is education.
Women still lack power bases from which to enter the political world.
The institution of the family in its present form continues to prevent women's full entry into the public arena on equal terms with men.
In spite of the critical part played by women (including married women) in today's labour force, the dominant ideologies still hold that the man is the breadwinner and the woman the home-maker.
Women suffer a dual burden of work inside and outside the home and the strains experienced by working mothers have not been eased by offers of help either from male partners or the wider community and the state.
When women go out to work they do ‘women's work’ which continues to be paid less than men's work, despite the legislation, and most women are still subservient to men in their work.
Women much more rarely achieve managerial positions; when they do, they are more likely to be in middle  and junior management rather than genuine policy-making positions.
Nor are women prominent in senior positions in the professions although they have long had a place there in those areas concerned with women's affairs which are most clearly associated with their assumed ‘natural’ role of caring for and serving others.
Even there, senior and management posts go disproportionately to men.
Women continue to be under-represented at all levels in the trade unions but especially at leadership levels.
In the Civil Service, the higher levels of responsibility and reward have continued to elude women.
Entry to the public domain is therefore a difficult undertaking for women.
We concluded that women who are successful in political careers tend to come from middle- and upper-class backgrounds and from professional occupations; they have either been able to rely on the resources and support of their families or to have minimised the handicaps deriving from women's status within the family by remaining unmarried or childless or by entering public life later on when their familial obligations have, to a larger degree, been completed.
The assumption that politics is not a place for women persists and must itself reduce the number of women putting themselves forward.
There are also difficulties of child-rearing and politicking at one and the same time.
Women face difficulties when they do come forward.
Party selectorates, for example, reflect and reinforce the attitudes, beliefs and values about the role of women in politics that are widespread throughout society.
This is not merely prejudice since it is the case that women's position in the family is rarely irrelevant to their position in the public world.
Successful political women are likely to be ‘exceptional’ women who have minimised the ‘family effect’.
Given the present gender order, women, other than a few exceptional women, just cannot win.
And there is also the question of male bias in the construction of political agendas and the common expectation that the woman's voice in politics should speak on ‘family and women's issues’ and then only when it does not threaten the interests of men.
We therefore argued that given the radical nature of women acting as independent agents, action which still flies in the face of dominant ideologies and which challenges the nature of the family, it is astonishing how much progress women have made in this  period.
The inroads made into the male strongholds are small, but the progress is remarkable when one sets sixty years now against preceding  millennia in which western world women only existed in a family and under male domination.
Ten years on
A decade after we started to gather data for our research, the picture is still depressingly familiar.
In Britain there have been advances and setbacks.
The 1987 general election produced a record number of women MPs (41 or 6.3 per cent of all MPs).
Organised pressure from women within the parties has had some effect.
There is also some evidence of increased levels of representation for the few women employed in the highest paid jobs (Labour Research, Jan 1987).
On the other hand, against the backdrop of recession, rising unemployment and Government policies on welfare and the family, women have lost important employment protection and maternity rights, unemployment amongst women has almost tripled and any new jobs are mainly part-time and low-paid; women still earn only two thirds of average male pay.
As we finished our research the first woman Prime Minister headed the British Government.
She had no other woman in her cabinet.
It is significant that Mrs Thatcher's cabinet still contains no woman apart from herself.
Changing the gender order
Real progress requires a fundamental transformation in our social arrangements.
As long as the attitudes to women's status and obligations and the division of labour within the family remain unchanged, it is difficult to believe that gender will be irrelevant to politics.
In Women, Power and Politics part of our argument was that legislation is not enough to establish a gender order in which women are seen as the equals of men.
Legislation alone cannot overturn the ideologies and assumptions underpinning male domination which are rarely spoken and which often seem so natural to those who hold them that they are not even aware of  them.
Legislation for equality cannot alter the sexual division of labour with regard to housework and child-rearing.
In practice, legislation has reinforced the pre-existing gender order.
The Beveridge reforms of the post-war years laid out a framework for the welfare state based on the assumption that women should be and wanted to be, first and foremost, wives and mothers.
Women in the family have been faced with an army of professional experts, acting as agents of the state, offering advice on how they should serve their husbands, run their homes and rear their children.
Social security and tax arrangements have assumed and reinforced women's dependence on men.
Despite its many other interventions, the state has failed to deal with the problem of violence against women in public or private.
There is a need to look at more positive notions of the relationships between women and state policy which would make space for women and men to explore new options for living.
This is what thinking about politics means.
Conclusion
Politics is everywhere.
David Held argues that it is something found ‘in and between all groups, institutions (formal and informal) and societies, cutting across public and private life.
It is involved in all the relations, institutions and structures which are implicated in the activities of production and reproduction in the life of societies’(Held, 1984, p. 235).
Yet in using concepts developed from the public domain, malestream political sociology has been unable to put issues of crucial concern to women on its agenda.
Until it does, political sociology and the politics of gender will remain worlds apart.