

WHAT ANIMALS ARE: CONSCIOUSNESS, PERCEPTION, AUTONOMY, LANGUAGE
Wittgenstein and the scientists
Mary Midgley, it has already been noted, is critical of Wittgenstein.
He is, she contends, typical of those thinkers; she also includes Max Black (1972) and Stuart Hampshire (1959: 97–100), who are not disputing nor even interested in ‘the very large literature of careful discussion by zoologists and psychologists about the different kinds of understanding and conceptual grasp which different sorts of animals actually display’(1983: 57).
She goes on to accuse him and the others of, as it were, defining themselves into respectability: ‘They are not prepared to count as concept or understanding anything which does not involve speech.’
This is a tempting criticism; typically half truth and half error.
Wittgenstein's discussion is certainly not peppered with references to narrow-front migration, smoke-bathing, or Skinner boxes,(nor is that of Regan, Singer, Frey, or Midgley herself, come to that), since his concern is to clarify the implications of our everyday ways of attributing psychological concepts like hope, fear, belief, understanding, and so on.
Unless we are clear about these, in the case of human beings, and then of the grounds for proceeding to apply them to animals, we will be ill-prepared to assess the claim of the scientist or other trained observer that a segment of observed animal behaviour is thoughtful, or intentional, or hopeful, or self-conscious.
When the psychologist Donald Griffin describes the ability of great tits and chickadees to obtain milk from bottles by ‘pecking through their shiny coverings with the conscious intention of obtaining food’(1984: 35), it is obvious that were he not talking of a ‘conscious intention’, in the normal human acceptation of the phrase, he would fail to arouse the average reader's curiosity and sympathies.
Earlier Griffin has bemoaned the fact that ‘throughout our educational system students  are taught that it is unscientific to ask what an animal thinks or feels’(1984: vii).
It is philosophy's task to bring to light the roles of these terms, embedded in our language-games used of animals.
Good science does not necessarily make for good philosophy.
The example is useful in underlining the error of Midgley's point about definition.
We may certainly talk of animals, in the absence of speech, ‘consciously intending’ or being compassionate, both of which carry implications of understanding to some degree.
The error is to confuse the identity of terms in the language-games used of animals and human beings, with an identity of implication.
The differences are as significant as the similarities.
Consciousness
Now let us take Midgley at her word and ask what Griffin, as a representative scientist specialising in the field of animal thinking, has to tell us about possibly the most basic attribute of all animals, namely, consciousness.
(We may then proceed, in the remainder of this chapter, to discuss some of the most important of the manifestations of this consciousness whilst tying in loose threads protruding from earlier discussions.)
Griffin opens confidently: ‘Conscious mental experience, in men and in animals, remains a challenging unknown territory’(1984: vi).
With Wittgenstein's approach in mind, this can only be a dispiriting beginning.
For a start, it shows symptoms of the ‘craving for generality’(BB 17–18): the lady regained consciousness, she sat up, she remembered her name — are these all landmarks of the same territory?
More importantly, Griffin seems either to be confused or just wrong about consciousness.
What is unknown about it?
His comment suggests that it is almost as if , when someone woke up in the morning, they were  suddenly possessed of something mysterious in becoming conscious, like a metaphysical virus.
But the truth is that they just wake up .
If I meet my young son from school, laughing with his friends and waving to me and the dog, who wags its tail and barks in return, should I be supposed not to know what I am talking about if I pronounce them both to be conscious?
Whatever can Griffin be after?
We soon discover:
What is it like to be an animal?
What do monkeys, dolphins, crows, sunfishes, bees, and ants think about?
Or do nonhuman animals experience any thoughts and subjective feelings at all?
People have always been fascinated by the question of animal consciousness, because both pets and wild animals arouse our admiration and curiosity.
They tempt us to put ourselves into their skins and imagine what their lives are like.
(Griffin 1984: 1)
This is crypto-Cartesianism.
As John Cook pointed out in the preceding chapter, it mistakenly assimilates the concepts of capacities like understanding, thinking, remembering, and the other psychological verbs to those of sensations like pain, and thus turns them into specific yet insubstantial and wholly mysterious inner states, available only to private introspection, which correlate in some way with their behavioural signs.
This is not the place to repeat Wittgenstein's rejection of such figments of linguistic bewitchment nor yet to deny that people and animals do have inner lives of pains, itches, tingles, thrills, and throbs.
The basic point is that the language of conscious states has its primary ground in the interaction of humans, and of other beings that behave like them, and the question of the inferential access to inner worlds of ‘subjective feelings’ is not raised.
Griffin is right to the extent that we do entertain fantasies of inhabiting other ‘skins’(David Garnett's Lady into Fox (1932) is a good example of the literary genre, although Kafka's Metamorphosis (1961) is pre-eminent in casting the shadows of paradox involved in the attempt) but the failure to achieve this does not in any way put at risk our understanding of what others say of their own or others' consciousness .
Nor in the case of animals will it undermine what we say of their consciousness, grounded as it is in their contiguity to the human paradigm.
To describe both my son and the dog as conscious makes no assumptions about infantile nor canine ‘subjective’ worlds.
Self-consciousness
My argument in this section, and in much of the chapter as a whole, will involve the exposure of a persistent confusion in the analysis of a whole series of allegedly revelatory examples of animal behaviour.
The source of the confusion was located in Chapter 5 but it is elusive and uncompromising enough to need repeating.
To attempt to understand human nature requires that we grasp the import of what we say.
That we are able to speak to each other gives rise to the complexity of language-games that we are able to play, yet find it so difficult to describe .
Language provides the context in which we can be  said to understand each other.
But language itself emerges from primitive forms; the ‘pre-linguistic prototypes’, to use Wittgenstein's phrase.
Now animals share much of this pre-linguistic heritage with us, in varying degrees depending upon whether we are speaking of gibbons or goldfish, but (pace Washoe) stop short of speaking and the consequent  metamorphosis of the prototypes that goes with it.
Many of our typical reactions in the presence of animals acknowledge this disparity in the language-games and is further fortified by what we say of them.
Yet it is sometimes easy to be dazzled by the well-intentioned enthusiasm of a Vicki Hearne, or by false philosophy, into misunderstanding or down-playing the differences, and because it comes naturally to us to say that both we and the dog are angry, or frightened, we conclude that what goes for the human must go for the animal, making certain allowances for sensuous and anatomical variations.
This is the confusion that bedevils so much liberationist and even scientific thinking.
Regan is a patent offender.
Having argued that animals can act intentionally (to which I will return in the section on autonomy), he thinks this to be ‘possible only for those who are self-conscious’(1983: 75).
This is consistent given that in the case of intention, and all other mental capacities, those of animals are viewed by him as ‘models’ of human mental capacities’(75).
Unfortunately, Regan has a grip on the wrong model.
Stephen Clark, on the other hand, is less doctrinaire.
The congregating of woodlice, migrations of salmon, and nesting of wasps are adequately explained in terms of humidity reactions, chemical attraction, or fixed action patterns (1985: 44).
He later cites more complex examples of bats bumping into things, and laboratory mice that are ‘induced to leap into empty space with the conviction that there is a safe landing’(47).
What he then writes almost gives the impression of avoiding the confusion which I diagnosed above: ‘This is how self-consciousness arises, the capacity to locate oneself within physical and social space…to know where one is and whom one is dealing with and what is expected of one’(47).
Clark could be implying that the doings of the bats and mice are the pre-verbal beginnings of self-consciousness, of which he provides a reasonable working definition.
However, ‘arises’ is ambiguous and his later examples suggest, on the contrary, that a form of self-awareness has already arisen with the behaviour.
But what use can such an attribution serve?
The leaping of a dumb brute can hardly even sustain its conviction that there is a safe landing (although a reader would appreciate the attenuated  implications) but the added weight of its needing  ‘to know where one is and whom one is dealing with and what is expected of one’ is far too much.
(Clark subtly assists the progress of self-consciousness into the debate by employing the misleading metaphor that many animals ‘operate largely in terms of a learned map of the area’(47), to account for what they do.
We know, of course, what he means — animals can find bones or their ways through mazes — but the cartography misleadingly evokes the human paradigm.
Maps are consulted; but not by bats.)
The confusion has an interesting source which, again, in a distorted way, recalls Wittgenstein's ‘prototypes’.
Animals and human infants, Clark argues in The Nature of the Beast (1982), must ‘have a pre-verbal concept of the beings that they are, distinct from others and from the environment, and having policies that are all their own….
Without such concepts I cannot see that human infants could acquire a language’(1982: 47).
There are two related errors here.
Firstly, Clark assumes that all substantives name such ‘concepts ‘: ‘If I can learn a word for something, I must first have grasped that thing as something nameable, whether it be a tree, a cat, a word’(1982: 46).
But Wittgenstein has been seen to argue convincingly that naming is a subsidiary use of language and that many substantives are not used for this purpose (the psychological participles like ‘thinking’ being the obvious example) and, furthermore, that naming itself is not a sort of primal act of speech acquisition but a clutch of language-games that need to be mastered like any others.
For Clark to bracket the self with trees and cats as something nameable is to mistake its use.
It is a relatively sophisticated concept emerging from the mastery of a series of interlocking language-games, such as naming, talking of hopes and aspirations, claiming property and equal shares, justifying one's actions, promising, and punishing.
Its model is not unlike that of the language-game of time .
Kenny makes the same point but slightly differently:
A dog may well think that his master is at the door: but unless a dog masters a language it is hard to see how he can think that he is thinking that his master is at the door.
There is nothing that the dog could do that could express the difference between the two thoughts: ‘My master is at the door’ and ‘I am thinking that my master is at the door’.
(Kenny 1975: 5)
This leads to Clark's second error.
His ‘pre-verbal’ concept of the self  could only be predicated of beings who already had some grasp of language.
This is at the heart of Wittgenstein's criticism of St Augustine's account: it is ‘as if the child could already think , only not yet speak’(PI 32); as if it were learning, not its native language, but a subsequent one.
Other commentators, unlike Clark, cite their favoured items of behavioural evidence for self-consciousness as if they were authoritative without further argument.
Singer, it will be remembered, in claiming that the higher mammals were persons, provides the support of the chimpanzee's frequent use of the sign ‘Me Washoe’.
This is about as convincing as claiming that her signing ‘clock’ manifests her mastery of ‘time’.
Griffin gives many further examples: that pets and other tame creatures come when they are called by their names (this would commend itself to Hearne), and that numerous species of birds, mammals, and even some fish and insects, seem to recognise individual members of their own species.
Our predictable reply would be that Griffin's examples are no more than contributory prototypes of self-consciousness.
Thus a 10-month-old baby who failed to respond to its name, or to betray signs of recognition towards its mother, twin sister, or even its rattle, might well give therapists cause for concern; which is not to say that the normal baby, who does succeed in reacting appropriately, is thereby yet self -conscious.
Griffin replies to such scepticism rather lamely: ‘Allowing that an animal can be aware of outside events but denying that it can be self-aware becomes somewhat ridiculous — can the animal be aware of other creatures but not of itself?(1984: 205).
A thought to the quotation from Kenny (above) will show how comprehensively Griffin's comment misses the point.
Self-awareness even in an absolutely minimal form, is not merely to recognise oneself, but to be aware of recognising oneself as oneself , with much of what that implies.
But G.G. Gallup's mirror experiments, from the mid-1970s, are a particular favourite of those prowling for overt evidence.
Here is Griffin's account:
Chimpanzees are first given an opportunity to familiarize themselves with mirrors and then, when they are under deep  anaesthesia , their foreheads or earlobes are marked with a conspicuous spot of rouge or similar material.
Chimpanzees lacking experience with mirrors pay no attention to such marks, but those that are accustomed to…mirrors reach directly for  the new spot.
This seems clear evidence that they recognise the mirror image as representing their own bodies.
(Griffin 1984: 74–5)
Now this is certainly intriguing evidence of the ability of some species to adapt to mirror images (problems gleefully exploited in Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking Glass ), and it is curious that follow-up efforts showed monkeys and even gibbons failing the tests.
It is however not at all obvious that the results yield the conclusion that Griffin draws, nor is it clear that even if they did we would have evidence for saying more than that the creatures recognise their own bodies .
But for self -consciousness to get a foothold it would be necessary to establish that they were aware of recognising themselves ; which is awareness of a different order.
The added complication of seeing the image as a vehicle of ‘representation’ is also unwarranted.
Are we being invited to invest chimpanzees with an incipient grasp of mimetic theory for good measure?
It is not fanciful to allow animals recognitional capacities.
However,self -awareness has affinities with the fear or belief that something will take place on the day after tomorrow; it is, as Churchill puts it, ‘a transaction that is made in language’(1989: 314).
Perception
The previous section depicted all sorts of situations in which it would be natural to describe animals or human babies as recognising something — names, parents, fellow-creatures, their own bodies (but not their ‘self’)— and it was concluded that there was nothing out of order in so doing.
Now recognition involves the use of the senses.
Only within the language-games of certain literary genres would it be legitimate to describe a tree, which opens its leaves to a shower, as recognising anything.
But animals, to varying degrees, employ all the senses available to human beings, with perhaps a few extra ones, and often with a far greater range of sensitivity.
Now the fantasy involved in inhabiting the bodies of animals, previously alluded to, and skilfully exploited by writers like Kafka, certainly extends to a curiosity over what animals might be said to see, hear, smell, or otherwise sense.
What can we say of this?
Now this question will be answered in the wrong way if we forget the qualifications, forced upon us by the adoption of Wittgenstein's notion of language-games, which permeate the implications of such  talk about dumb animals.
Frey would solve the problem in the following manner: Recognition involves certain beliefs ; specifically, that the object has been previously encountered, that we are not imagining it, and so on.
But only a self-conscious user of language could be capable of this.
So animals are incapable of recognition.
Now Regan's response to this, exemplified in the imbecile's fear, would be to insist that since ordinary usage almost seems to demand that we describe that unfortunate as recognising a snake, and because this is only possible of someone who holds the necessary beliefs, then he must hold them somehow and somewhere.
This, as we saw, will not do.
Regan is right to the extent that to talk of recognition in such circumstances does have a purpose, as it would of a dog's staccato barks and tail-waving on hearing its master's voice, but he fails to realise that the same form of words now features in a related, but different, language-game.
A far narrower range of beliefs are attributable to the dog, specifically those that hark back to what we could immediately read off from similar behaviour in the case of a human being; thus the dog believes his master is at the door but it would be a false move in the game also to ask if it believed that its master would be late the next day.
Lacking language, such a belief is not even possible.
However, the child who dances with delight upon hearing her father's key in the lock does unmistakably believe that he is at the door, in normal circumstances, but, without asking her, we will not know if she is aware of the next day's possible delay.
Yet she may do; and it is certainly a legitimate move in this revised game to be curious enough about it to ask.
Now given this analysis of the animal's ‘thin’ or attenuated concept of recognition, it will not be open to Frey to employ the strategy he uses against ‘simple’desires, which bypass beliefs, by attempting to trap their advocate with the question whether or not the animal is aware that it has them (1980: 104–5, and Chapter 2, above).
It will be aware of its master, in that it hears and smells him, and of its own exertions, in that it is awake, but it will not be aware that it recognises him, for this is of the order of tomorrow's delayed return — a linguistic belief of which dumb brutes are incapable.
In clarifying our confidence in another's consciousness, human or non-human, it was seen to be an error of Griffin's to pose the problem in terms of putting ourselves into another's ‘skin' or to experience their ‘subjective feelings’(1984: 1, above).
The same will apply in deciding what we may legitimately say that animals, in the absence of language, see, hear, or smell.
We must remind ourselves of the contexts in which the relevant terms are acquired.
The distracted car  driver who arrives at her destination without mishap ipso facto saw where she was going.
Her inner life or ‘subjective feelings ‘are irrelevant, although not non-existent (indeed her inattention might have been due to severe toothache).
Furthermore, learning to perceive involves getting to know .
The infant learns to talk of hearing its mother in the garden, smelling hamburgers cooking in the kitchen, or seeing the dog enjoying itself with a ball or being hurt by the cat.
There is a mistaken tendency, nourished perhaps by too partial examples, to see perception as the passive reception of evidence from an external world from which we make inferences to its causes.
Thus it might erroneously be said of the dog's leaping to catch the ball that what I really see are just its movements , upon the basis of which I make a leap of faith to its inner, privately introspective, enjoyment.
But an example like this clearly reveals the artificiality of such an analysis of what we mean when we say we see, and we have already considered the grounds for rejecting such theories in accounting for capacities like remembering, and emotions such as grief or anger.
(In the case of sentience the illusory difficulties rapidly multiply.
Do we really see the movements of the dog, or, in the spirit of such theorising, should we limit our visual world to one of rapidly succeeding shapes and colours from which we hazard the inference that a leaping dog is in the vicinity?)
Perception, therefore, at least in the human domain, seems to involve being able to talk about what we see, hear, or smell, and thereby to entertain beliefs about its objects.
This is not to imply that we need always be certain nor never make mistakes; but in cases of doubt we should nonetheless be ready with some description: I see something black and circular in the road, I hear creaks and rustlings downstairs.
However, this might well be thought to overstate the case, and we must not ourselves draw too heavily upon selected examples.
What do we say of our driver, who was so preoccupied with her molars, that she can recall nothing of her trip?
Her passenger, let us say, observed that she braked suddenly to avoid some pigeons and then carefully negotiated some roadworks as well as stopping at several sets of traffic lights.
Surely we do not wish to deny that she saw these hazards despite her being unable to tell us anything about what she saw.
And should we say the same of the large  dalmatian sitting beside her, and also of her 6-month-old child strapped in the back seat?
(We must suppose both to be located at vantage points.)
Of the driver it would be reasonable to say that she must have seen them but she has forgotten about the pigeons and just didn't notice the  lights and roadworks.
(It is a mistake to assume that we must automatically notice everything we see.)
But what of the dog and the infant?
G.J. Warnock, a distinguished post-war philosopher, offers a strange analysis of seeing which allows no place for judgement nor even the capability of it, as was the case with our driver, and which would include both the dog and the infant.
He writes:
Suppose that, when I saw Lloyd George, I made no mistake only through making no judgement whatever….
Suppose that I was an infant in arms.
Even so…there is reason to say that I saw him, even though I then neither made, nor could have made any judgement at all , either right or wrong, about who or what it was that I saw.
(Warnock 1955: 204)
But what might the reasons be for saying such a thing?
Imagine the driver's passenger attempting to draw the baby's attention to the pigeons, the traffic lights, and the roadworks.
It might, if it is able, focus its eyes upon the speaker, having heard the voice, but it will certainly not understand.
Even if it began to howl or to wave its rattle, we would hardly claim that by so doing it was discriminating between the items mentioned and a myriad others; indeed it would be odd to talk of its discriminating at all.
Not until it does begin to react to such objects in recognisable and predictably different ways can the baby be said to be capable of noticing the objects in question.
A developing grasp of speech will facilitate the process.
Given these considerations I think Warnock is wrong to claim that there are reasons for saying that the baby saw these things.
But the case for the  dalmatian , depending on its age and alertness, might be stronger.
It could well become agitated at the dispersal of the pigeons, turn its head towards the lights, and bark heatedly at the roadworkers.
The kinship evoked of human adult reactions in such circumstances, remembering our previous analysis of recognition, would be reason enough to say that the dog noticed the workmen and didn't like what it saw; albeit a ‘thin ‘attribution.
Warnock's example, and its supporting analysis, might well be grounds for arguing that any living creature whatsoever might see anything.
His babe in arms would be no more responsive to Lloyd George's leonine appearance than would an accompanying parakeet in a cage and if both, having seen him, were then carried around the National Gallery, it would be equally valid to claim that they had seen  the works of art on display as well.
Warnock's error is to have neglected the necessity, in any account of seeing, of the subject's capability of noticing what it can be said to perceive.
We can generalise from the rights and wrongs of his account of seeing to the use of the other senses as well.
That a subject is capable of noticing whatever is to be perceived can be broken down into two individually necessary and jointly sufficiently conditions:
1.
They can recognise the object; be it their mother, a hamburger, a pet's enjoyment, traffic lights, or workmen.
There is a temptation to construe this by saying that the subject therefore has the concept of a mother, hamburger, or whatever.
This formulation would be acceptable if the analysis were to cover only perceiving by human beings.
But if the perceptual powers of babies, higher mammals such as mature dogs, and of more primitive beings such as parakeets and fish is also covered, then to talk of concepts unduly evokes the possibility of a linguistic criterion.
Kenny disagrees: ‘Anthropomorphism comes in only if we attribute to [animals]concepts whose possession cannot be manifested by recognition and non-verbal reaction ‘(1975: 51).
If however, as I have argued, the recognitional capacities of dumb creatures are parasitic upon the human paradigm, and to that extent attenuated, then to talk of concepts is to over-emphasise the similarities to human beings at the expense of the differences.
2.
The object must be such that the subject's senses are acute enough to pick it out.
Thus we could not claim that an adult must have seen a speck of dust at a range of more than a foot or so, whereas birds could be said to see a small insect at 400 metres.
What animals are capable of discriminating between has been subjected to rigorous experimental study for many decades.
Walker, for example, reports on Pavlov's success in training one dog to salivate to middle C, whether played on a clarinet, tuning fork, or organ pipe, but to no other note varying by more than a semitone however played; whereas another animal reacted to any notes but only when reproduced by one particular instrument (1983: 246).
Researchers studying the other senses document numerous similar results, and what occurs in laboratories will be outnumbered by those discriminations occurring naturally in the wild that nobody knows anything about.
This might be thought to throw into disarray our grounds for specifying what animals see, hear, and otherwise sense.
Surprisingly it does not; which is in no way to disparage the scientific value of such research.
Similar experiments, of greater variety and  equal sophistication, have long been used to test human perceptual abilities but cause scarcely a ripple over the apparatus of our everyday perceptual judgements.
Their importance will undoubtedly be misjudged however if we persist in the error of thinking that perceptual judgements, or those about consciousness, involve the replication of another's inner experience, human or non-human.
The judgements we make are surprisingly flexible.
‘Did you see that shabby old character with the red nose?’
I ask.
‘That was no shabby old character’, I am firmly corrected, ‘it was the Archbishop — and his nose is just cold.
‘Here there is a variation in background belief and ‘subjective feeling ‘perhaps, but which allows for either judgement being preferred, even were I totally unaware of what an Archbishop was .
It will be the same in our judgements about animals.
Of either of Pavlov's two dogs we might say, as they salivated to the sound in question, that they heard a clarinet, middle C, a note, a sound; and we would be correct in each case.
The prototypical reactions of dogs, in such circumstances, and their similarity to those of humans, are the grounds for our confidence in the judgements.
But as we descend the evolutionary scale, and the human paradigm is more distantly evoked in the diffusive movements of fish, birds, and insects, we will be uncertain what to say.
As Wittgenstein observed: ‘If however I doubt whether a spider feels pain, it is not because I don't know what to expect’(Z 564).
Frey argues that animals cannot have any perceptions at all since this involves making judgements, attaching predicates to subjects, of which, lacking language, they are incapable.
To say that the cat perceives the ball is stuck requires that it has the belief that it is, and this involves its possessing the concepts ‘ball’ and ‘stuck’.
Obviously he does not deny the cat's whining and agitated leaping in the presence of the ball, nor does he refuse its possession of ‘sensory data ‘, but these will not show what the cat believes; namely, ‘what categories of things it recognises’.
He also contends that if one attempts to isolate the judgemental aspect and base the perceptual claim upon what remains, all we have is behaviour and the ‘sensory data’, which is not perception (1980: 118–20).
Our analysis should clearly indicate the several blind alleys which Frey here explores.
Firstly, he misses the variety of forms in which perceptual words figure and which derive from the contexts in which they are acquired; being oblivious, it would seem, to the role of language-games.
Thus perception, as he conceives it, is tied too closely to the human paradigm; those normal contexts in which we require  that someone be able to tell us about what they see.
This is not invariable however; the case of the distracted driver or that of my seeing an Archbishop in ignorance of such phenomena are both problematical.
Animals, infants, and deviant adults are said to see, hear, smell and so on, in those special circumstances, where we feel impelled to mark the similarity of their behaviour to that of human beings situated likewise whilst allowing for the inability to describe what they perceive.
Statements about beliefs play a far less obtrusive role in these games.
So we say ‘Of course the cat believes the ball is stuck — it is conscious, its eyes work, why else would it behave as it does?’ but disallow that it might have the belief ‘that it believes the ball is stuck’, this being linguistic (Kenny 1975: 5).
This would allow us to say that the cat believes the ball is stuck but does not understand that it is.
We might well say the same of a very young infant.
(The more detailed working of this language-game was explained earlier in this section when discussing an animal's recognitional capacities.)
Secondly, we are now in a position to see how we can isolate uses of perceptual words from implications of possible judgement, for what remains is not just behaviour and ‘sensory data’, as Frey supposes, but pre-linguistic prototypes of the fully developed language-game.
It is unfortunate that Frey gets caught up in talk of ‘sensory data’ for it tends to deflect attention towards the workings of ‘inner’sense and away from the whole context of the appetitive or like behaviour of the animal or human being.
Vision plays a necessary but not at all exclusive role in the attribution of the perceptual words and their belief corollaries.
Autonomy: ends and means
Jane Goodall's chimpanzee, Figan, and Bernard Rollin's police dog are the sorts of example particularly favoured by enthusiasts anxious to elevate the moral status of animals.
They are allegedly instances of rational action; of using means to achieve ends .
But it is vital, before we canonise the creatures, to note that acting for an end (requiring teleological explanation) is almost a defining feature of the living world as a whole.
Naturalists shower us with intriguing accounts, both anecdotal and experimental, and their range tends to put in perspective the sense, if any, in which we might wish to claim that some were consciously purposive and others not.
However, there is a useful terminology to hand in the distinction between purpose, which betrays intent, and function, which does not.
Chickens are pecked by their social superiors in order to maintain a rigid status quo within the flock.
The kangaroo rat, like many desert rodents, conserves water by remaining underground by day to avoid the heat of the sun, emerging to feed only by night.
J.H. Fabre, the famous French entomologist, describes how the mud-dauber wasp lays each of its eggs in separate mud cells which it has constructed, providing in each an advance supply of fresh food consisting of spiders paralysed by its sting.
It then seals each cell with ‘daubs’ of more mud and leaves the offspring to hatch in fields of plenty.
A small fish that strays near a sea anemone, one of the lowliest life forms, will be stung by a tentacle and held paralysed by it.
The other tentacles then combine to force the prey into the creature's apology for a mouth (Burton and Burton 1977: 75–7).
Cats have been known to laze, apparently half-asleep, for up to an hour beside a mouse hole, yet instantly to cut down the unwary prey that, even momentarily, shows itself.
All of these descriptions are shot through with implications of reasoning from means to ends; for human beings to perform similar actions would, under normal circumstances, be to act purposively, with conscious intent.
But given the dumb actors portrayed, there seems to be a clear need to draw distinctions between, at one extreme, the cat and the chicken and, at the other, the sea anemone and the mud-dauber; despite the fact that for many readers, ethologists included, the wasp's habits will be the most intriguing of all.
But the problem will not be where to draw the line but how to draw it.
For where it has been drawn is everywhere; from the insistence of Thorndike, and the early behaviourists like Watson and Hull, that all is to be explained, including human behaviour, in terms of conditioned reflexes, to the open-handedness of well-meaning liberationists like Rollin who argue that even worms and sea anemones should be given the benefit of the doubt since we cannot be certain that they do not feel pain and therefore have a consciousness (1981: 31).
Again, pursuant upon the discussion of recognition and perception, the criterion I will adopt will be the closeness of the behaviour to the pre-linguistic prototypes of human behaviour.
Anthony Kenny's analysis of the differences between the voluntary behaviour of animals, a position acutely argued for by Aristotle, and that of human beings, gives us a useful start.
It is beyond doubt, he argues, and most psychologists and ethologists would agree, ‘that animals act for the sake of goals, and that they may be conscious of their goals, in the quite literal sense that they may see or smell what  they are after’(1975: 19).
(Kenny does not add that if we were talking of the perceptions of fish or bees, our judgements might lack the confidence of those made of cats or apes.)
But, he continues, animals are limited in two fundamental ways:
1.
Animal goals are very short term.
Kenny calls them ‘immediate goals’(1975: 19).
They lack the remote aspirations of human beings for which, presumably, a linguistic grasp of categories involving at least the present and future would be necessary.
But Kenny's notion of ‘immediate goals’ is not free of ambiguity.
Clear examples of it would be the cat leaping for its ball, or a lion in pursuit of a zebra.
But must a foraging hyena be conscious of the food it has not yet uncovered, or a homing salmon aware of its destination as it begins the laborious trip upstream to its natal stream to spawn; both exemplars of goal-seeking behaviour?
There are two possibilities.
On the one hand we could insist that the creatures had to be conscious of their goals; that the salmon, for example, smells its home stream.
Or, on the other, it could be claimed that these were long-term objectives and that the animal was conscious only of intermediate ends; the hyena was following the promptings of its hunger.
Scientific observations might contribute towards a decision but Kenny's notion need not carry this degree of precision because of the second, much more important, distinction.
2.
Not only must we limit the scope of animal goals but we must also limit the sense of the claim that animals act for the sake of goals.
Kenny here explicitly invokes St Thomas's distinction between perfect and imperfect knowledge (which was discussed in Chapter I).
The actions of animals are less ‘full-bloodedly voluntary’ than the intentional acts of human beings.
Kenny explains:
When a human being does X in order to do Y, the achieving of Y is his reason for doing X. When an animal does X in order to do Y, he does not do X for a reason , even though he is aiming at a goal in doing so.
Why not?
Because an animal, lacking a language, cannot give a reason ….
It is only those beings who have the ability to give reasons who have the ability to act for reasons.
(Kenny 1975: 20)
This is well put.
Aquinas is right; and it is a credit to his genius to have put animals so neatly into a perspective consistent with Wittgenstein's analysis.
Kenny sums up the position:
It is undeniable that animals intend to do things in the sense that it is often true of them that unless interfered with they will go on voluntarily to perform various actions.
But, if Aquinas is right, they do not act intentionally, intending a goal which is the reason for their actions.
(Kenny 1975: 21)
This cuts the Gordian knot.
It builds on the argument in the preceding section where it was argued that because the cat sees and tries to extricate the ball stuck in the tree, it thereby manifests only those minimal beliefs that we would attribute directly to a human being in similar circumstances.
We would disallow any involving the mediation of language, including, of course, the belief that it believes.
But, to repeat and stress, the minimal attributions involve different language-games since the claim that the child Mary believes the ball is stuck, or that she desires it, is made of a being who does use language and the judgement carries with it this enhanced contextual implication.
In the case of dumb animals, infants, and sufficiently deprived adults, the grounds of the attribution will be the similarity of the pre-linguistic prototypes to the developed human paradigm.
We might even wish to speak of animal intention , but if we do so it will be in terms of its ‘natural’ expression: ‘What is the natural expression of an intention?— Look at a cat when it stalks a bird; or a beast when it wants to escape’(PI 647).
The cat will see a bird and pursue it, to that extent knowing what it wants; but it will not know why it is doing it, and to that extent what it is doing.
There is no mystery here and any paradox is only apparent.
The child Mary, in the hurly-burly of lacrosse, is simply chasing a ball.
She provides us with numerous natural expressions of intention.
But to attempt to isolate them, in practice, can be no more than an illustrative device since the language-game we use of human beings encapsulates the possibility that at any moment Mary can be summoned from such a state, or summon herself, to one of reflection about her reasons for adopting this or that tactic.
The same would apply to the abstracted car driver.
But for the animal there is no escape; it is condemned to the natural expressions in perpetuity, and the language-game we use of it is appropriately minimal.
This will account for the fact that although it is the obvious lesson of Darwinism that species mutate, they cannot be said to be aware of this nor in any sense to change themselves .
They are true primitives.
Kenny makes a similar point when arguing that we can talk of  animal wants only to the extent that they are restricted to their conscious needs.
This will recall our discussion in Chapter 2, where Frey extended needs (understood as what are ‘in the interests’ of something) to plants and machines.
But, as I argued there, the conscious appetitive behaviour of animals is more than enough to drive a significant wedge between the expression of their needs and the mere presence of those of plants and machines.
Kenny does the same, and he relates animal wants to Aristotle's notion of epithumia , or sensual desire: ‘It is felt desire, and it is desire for something now , desire which is more or less continuously felt until it is satisfied (like hunger, sleepiness, thirst)’(1975: 49).
This, I think, is an illuminating way of pointing to the prototypical role of sensations , accompanying as they do (but not constituting) our developed language-games such as those of pain or memory.
Frey's attempt to discredit these ‘simple’ desires will not work here; and for the same reasons that it was finally discredited earlier in this chapter.
The animal will be aware of its prey in that it consciously perceives, pursues, and devours it, but it will be unaware that it is doing these things for the sake of satisfying its wants.
So there will be no possibility of self -consciousness entering the equation, for which, as we have seen, a command of language is necessary.
Clearly the analysis that I have provided will have considerable implications for our understanding of the attribution to animals of free choice.
The horse dragged to the water is compelled to approach it, but if it drinks it does so voluntarily.
But choices , as philosophers since Aristotle have argued, involve some form of deliberation.
A human being, situated as was the horse, would be expected to give reasons for its refusal to walk to the trough (I'm tired, not thirsty).
But dumb animals are incapable of considering themselves in this light; which is not to imply that human beings always do, only that they can normally be expected to if required.
Animal choices, by contrast, admit only of causal explanations.
The horse's response to being dragged to water takes the form of a typical pre-linguistic prototype of human choice.
Similar considerations apply to the comparison of human and non-human preferences.
Preferences bring us to Regan who is rightfully critical of the counter-intuitive implications of Frey's blanket denials of beliefs, desires, perceptions, emotions, and so on to animals and is at great pains to stress their similarities of behaviour to that of human beings.
Unfortunately he pays little attention to the differences and the effect these have upon the implications of what we ascribe to animals whilst  using the same forms of words.
Regan mentions the fact, of course, but in common with all the liberationists, only to downplay its importance.
Thus, he tends to argue in a fairly straightforward way from the similarity of behaviour in human beings and animals to a mutual possession of the same ‘concepts’.
Following the criticism of Frey, Regan moves to establish a particular belief, the ‘preference-belief’, which he will use to prolific effect of his dog Fido's love of bones.
On the basis of his behaviour, therefore, we have reason to maintain that Fido believes that bones are related to his desires or preferences in the following way: Bones satisfy certain desires he has and are to be chosen to satisfy those desires.
(Regan 1983: 59)
On the previous page Regan has conceded that since dogs lack language, ‘Fido of course cannot tell us, or reasonably be expected to tell us, whether he has this belief.’
But has it he certainly does, and ‘if there is some one belief that is essential for possessing our concept of a bone, the preference-belief ‘has at least as strong a claim to that title as any other belief….
We have rational grounds to attribute a grasp of our concept of a bone to Fido’(63).
Regan has achieved his declared aim of crediting animals ‘with beliefs in a full-blooded way’(52), intending an identity with the complexity of human possession.
But he never explains how such a belief about bones could possibly be held by a dog since it has such obvious linguistic implications particularly as grounds for possession of the human concept.
Nor does he consider that animal behaviour might provide us with prototypes of human understanding on the basis of which we might consider something akin to different language-games, reflecting both the similarities and the differences implicit in the respective cases.
The preference-belief is then seen to generate, simply by invoking the human precedent, a whole series of other attributes with which ‘we begin to approach a fair rendering of the mental life of these creatures’(81): perception, memory, desire, belief, self-consciousness, intention, a sense of the future, emotions, and the capacity to experience pleasure and pain.
The insensitive, high-handed, and cavalier nature of Regan's methods are plain to see.
Language possibilities
Investigating animals is big business, both commercially and  academically.
This is hardly surprising.
Given their importance there are self-interested reasons for finding out all we can about them.
Now the many attempts to teach the rudiments of a human language to primates, or more recently to porpoises and dolphins, are fascinating and probably equally useful in extending the boundaries of our knowledge of their recognitional limits.
But the results are often seized upon in an ill-digested way by popular writers, occasionally the scientists themselves, as confirming that the animals have the linguistic competence and cognitive awareness of human beings.
This can even be scientifically counter-productive as the psychologist, Stephen Walker, warns:
Because claims for the conversation-like attributes of chimpanzee gesturing have been exaggerated, it is sometimes suggested that, on the contrary, their gestures have no meaning at all.
It is perfectly possible, however, that something useful may be learned from experiments which fall short of demonstrating human levels of linguistic competence in apes, and I believe this is true of the projects designed to teach chimpanzees sign-language.
(Walker 1983: 354–5)
The most basic error, which I attempted to pinpoint in discussing the sense in which the cries, hoots, and gestures of animals are ‘primitive forms’ of language in Chapter 5, is to confuse the predictive value of the effects of such behaviour with the conscious intent of a speaker to communicate in some way.
Only if this latter requirement is met can we begin to talk of linguistic competence.
If this be thought to be disingenuously restrictive, an attempt to define away the opposition, then consider the alternative.
Much human behaviour imparts information to a sensitive observer of which its instigator may be quite unaware — blushing, rapid eye movements, hesitant speech, or ‘nervous’ titters.
But none of this has any more to do with language than a new-born baby's screeching or a plant's wilting from lack of water, except in the unlikely event (possible only in the human case) of an attempt to deceive.
But this, being a deliberative move to impart false information, would be a reversion to the linguistic.
The ‘primitive forms’ of language are its pre-linguistic prototypes , as I emphasised in Chapter 5, and not primitive language.
Much of Vicki Hearne's otherwise sensitive attempt to depict the complexity of canine discrimination, of which we have little or no inkling, is undermined by this mistake.
That in certain threatening situations  they are able to react, almost instantaneously, to the characteristic scent of an aggressor is hardly surprising.
A cobra doesn't hang about either.
Many species would not have survived without the weapon of the pre-emptive strike.
But to describe this as an uncanny ability to read someone's intentions, as Hearne does, is optimistic to say the least (1987: 56).
And even Griffin (1984: 196) is unenthusiastic about K. Pryor's not dissimilar attempts to communicate with porpoises.
But the explicitly linguistic experiments with primates continue to intrigue the non-specialist above all.
Given the bodily likeness of the great apes to ourselves, and what we are told of the similarities of brain-size and structure, sensory apparatus, pregnancy span, and early cognitive competence, this is as it should be.
The research has gone through four phases:
1.
Attempts, mostly pre-1950, to teach the apes to imitate human speech.
Gua and Vicki were the most well-known subjects.
2.
The very productive switch in techniques to the use of Ameslan, initiated by Allen and Beatrice Gardner at the University of Nevada with Washoe in the mid-1960s.
Maurice Temerlin's Lucy and Herb Terrace's Nim Chimsky (after Noam Chomsky) were other luminaries.
3.
The work of David Premack, begun slightly later at the University of Pennsylvania, employing a magnetic slate on which coloured metal-backed plastic tokens, bearing abstract symbols, can be arranged.
Premack's prize pupil was a wild-born chimpanzee, Sarah.
4.
Duane Rumbaugh's training of Lana, and other chimpanzees notably Austin and Sherman, to use a computer keyboard made up of small rectangular screens upon which visual, iconic-like, symbols of lines, circles, and dots can be displayed.
This was originally contemporaneous with the experiments of Premack and began at the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Centre of Emory University in Georgia.
It is particularly unfortunate that the earliest work came to nothing.
W.N. and L.A. Kellogg adopted the then revolutionary idea of rearing an infant chimpanzee in their own home in the 1920s but the experiment with Gua was abandoned after a year because no signs of vocalisation resembling human speech were observed.
Another family of psychologists embarked upon a similar project in the late 1940s.
K.J. and C. Hayes, after six years of laborious training, had succeeded in getting Vicki to utter  only four grunt-like sounds vaguely  resembling Mama, Poppa, cup, and up.
Other attempts had been no more successful in the interim.
Apes in the wild are not observed to vocalise that much and those in zoos, although prepared to imitate human social habits, never copy their speech.
Yet Vicki was certainly bright and, for example, enjoyed playing with photographs, putting those of other chimps in one pile and, allegedly, that of herself together with those of Dr and Mrs Hayes in another (Jenkins 1976: 86).
What is regrettable is that the more successful methods to follow, including Ameslan, had to abandon speech; yet many theorists, linguisticians and philosophers in particular, insist upon its primacy: ‘Language is speech and the linguistic competence underlying speech.
Writing is no more than a secondary, graphic representation of language’(quoted by Lyons 1970: 18).
Ameslan is gestural and very different from the British ‘deaf and dumb’ language which is a finger alphabet not unlike its aural equivalent, the morse code.
As Walker points out, it smacks of question-begging to translate animal gestures directly into words; but there is no alternative.
Thus ‘pen’ is the first finger of one hand drawn across the palm of the other, a beckoning with the whole hand or finger ends is ‘gimme’, slapping the thigh is ‘dog’, and an index finger drawn over the back of the hand is ‘tickle’(Walker 1983: 355).
After four years of training, in a homely laboratory atmosphere where scientists working in shifts conversed (or ‘signed’) to Washoe and to each other exclusively in Ameslan, she had mastered the use and recognition of 132 signs together with the ability often to pair two of them (but rarely more than two) in significant combinations and under appropriate circumstances.
‘Sorry dirty’, ‘more food’, come hurry hurry', were typical.
The claims were made not simply on the say-so of the individual trainers, although these were influential, but after the intricate analysis of extensive videotapes; techniques particularly associated with F.G.
Patterson and Herb Terrace.
This can provide reasonable evidence that, at the simplest level, one-to-one correlations exist between signs and objects or simple needs.
The ape will slap its thigh when it sees a dog or sign ‘gimme food’ when it can be supposed to be hungry; or reverse the process, if the trainer signs, by producing the appropriate object.
It has been far more difficult however, despite the film technology, to assess the extent to which the gestures are used naturally yet significantly in the more taxing contexts of play and what some researchers call ‘free living’.
It is hardly encouraging that Terrace himself, whose book Nim (1980) is regarded as a classic in the field, after an exhaustive analysis of filmic evidence concluded that only a very small proportion of Nim's gestures, in both training and free living, could reasonably be thought to have been initiated by the animal; the vast majority were repetitions of what humans had just signed or, to a lesser extent, merely random.
More pertinent perhaps, since it casts light upon the vexed question of syntax (the rule-governed combination of several words into a meaningful whole) was Terrace's conclusion that Nim and similar Ameslan apes, despite appearances, were unable to improve upon the meaning of two-sign utterances since longer sets were merely repetitious or random.
Griffin, to exemplify this, reports a signing sequence by Patterson's Koko: ‘Please milk please me like drink apple bottle’, and one from Nim, ‘Give orange me eat orange give me eat orange give me you’(1984: 200).
Recent researchers, such as H.L. Miles (1983), claim to have had more luck but even then, giving them the benefit of every doubt, ‘there remains a large gap between the signing of these trained apes and the speech of children who have vocabularies of approximately the same size’(Griffin 1984: 199).
Washoe, in 1970, moved to the University of Oklahoma with Roger Fouts, a research assistant of the Gardners.
Fouts then began work with Lucy, at that time 5 years old, who had been raised since birth as one of the family of a psychotherapist, Maury Temerlin, and his wife.
Lucy is a departure in that she appears to react to small segments of spoken English, to which she responds with her own Ameslan, in which her ability became roughly equal to Washoe's.
This would appear to have more promising implications for ‘free living’ observations but most of Fouts' research on Lucy seems to have been directed towards syntax formation; without conspicuous success (Walker 1983:.
357).
The only source we have is Maury Temerlin's own account of her upbringing,Lucy: Growing up Human (1976).
It is fiercely partisan, often embarrassing to read, and its anecdotal methods put even Darwin's in The Descent of Man to shame.
(Peter Jenkins (1976), who visited both Washoe and Lucy in 1973, reports that Fouts was cautious about Lucy's abilities at this time and Jenkins himself seems to have been more impressed with Washoe.)
Premack's plastic tokens which Sarah, his only real success, was required to arrange in series on the magnetised slate, were designed to discover the extent to which she could make judgements about the qualities of objects; for example, ‘the apple is red and round’.
She began by being trained, using rewards to reinforce correct responses, to distinguish ‘Sarah apple cut’ from ‘Sarah apple wash’and to act  appropriately.
She progressed to the use of prepositions like ‘on’ and ‘under’, then to comparisons like ‘same’and ‘different’, and finally to manipulate tokens about tokens (i.e., self-referentially, in terms of their colour, shape, and size).
The apparently impressive result was that Sarah made distinctions of the following sort: ‘yellow question banana’ would be replaced with ‘yellow colour banana’, or ‘round question apple’with ‘round shape apple’.
Terrace (1980) and others, including Walker, are unanimously critical of Premack's methods.
Firstly, the translation of very simple movements with tokens into verbal terms, with all the implications of linguistic competence, is highly dubious: ‘There is no evidence that the involvement of tokens in such things as grammar and semantic categorisation approaches the way that words are involved with these things in man’(Walker 1983: 364).
The same criticism can, with perhaps less force, be directed at the translation of the Ameslan gestures.
Secondly, and most serious, are allegations of ‘Clever Hans’ errors; named after the German horse early in the century that gave correct answers to arithmetical problems shown it on a blackboard (by tapping with its hoof) until it was unmasked as reacting to unwitting symptoms of tension in its trainer which caused it to stop at the right moment.
Certainly Premack's findings are under this cloud since Sarah's performance suffered considerably when in the presence of a trainer who did not know the answers that she was supposed to give, and it would seem natural to expect that the more broadbrush methods of the gestural teaching would be equally suspect.
But, given the interpersonal nature of the Ameslan work, it is difficult to devise accurate tests to detect inadvertent undue influence.
Duane Rumbaugh's use of computer keyboards with which two chimpanzees can be in touch with each other in the absence of trainers is, in part, an attempt to bypass these difficulties.
The research team succeeded in getting their prize pair of chimps, Austin and Sherman, to flash images at each other and to respond appropriately by fetching the object signified for the other or to return empty-handed if it were not there.
They performed even more complex tasks, but not more revelatory ones.
They certainly do not justify Geoffrey Cowley's absurdly optimistic claim in Newsweek that, ‘They have since dispelled any doubt that apes can really understand signs’(Cowley 1988: 54).
In particular, the conviction still remains that what we have in all these experiments is a series of adaptive responses, induced by training, to obtain the numerous rewards on offer throughout the training.
Furthermore, Rumbaugh's programme does not obviate the  use of trainers to interest the animals in the keyboards and to guide their reactions.
The possibilities of observing the communicative interaction of more than one ape is certainly something of a methodological breakthrough but it is a far cry from the use of language, observable in very young children, in which the exchange of information rapidly becomes an end in itself, rather than a means of problem solving, admittedly of a high order, which we know to exist in animals anyway.
We can now see how misleading it was for Singer to claim that Washoe, ‘now understands about 350 different signs, and is able to use correctly about 150 of them….
She also uses signs expressing future intentions' (1979: 94).
What in fact these experiments provide, in the absence of vocal speech, are a series of artificial analogues which can, with interest, be compared to the early learning efforts of perhaps a 2-year-old infant.
They certainly go beyond the pre-linguistic prototypes of language, and demonstrate the capability of certain individual apes to outpace other species.
The efforts with pigeons and parrots bear only shadowy comparison.
To this extent, the fascination of the experiments is justified.
But the overwhelming fact that emerges from the decades of dedicated work, using ever more sophisticated technology, is that the creature skills develop no further.
At a comparable stage our infants are learning to talk.
The apes are exhibiting previously unknown resources of problem solving, and the experiments will doubtless continue.
But it is not language nor, it would seem, will it ever be.
The evidence points to an evolutionary dead-end.
Let a scientist sum it up:
Human language is unique to humans, and although some of the distinctive features of human speech, such as the mimicking of sounds, may be observed in other species, the resemblance between, for instance, the trained gesturing of a chimpanzee and communication via sign language among the human deaf is in some senses no greater than the resemblance between the speech of a parrot and that of its owner.
(Walker 1983: 378)
The status of animals: primitive beings
My contention is that our understanding of what animals really are has not been portrayed with rightful subtlety.
In particular, the role of language in the equation has been grossly underestimated.
The  implications of its absence in animals permeate to the very heart of our everyday talk about them.
The liberationists exemplify the varied confusions that abound when these are ignored.
Clark, for example, allows that animals are spared our miseries about money or job prospects, and goes on: ‘It does not follow, however, from their lack of these distresses that calves cannot be acutely distressed at the absence of their mothers, nor that chickens are not distressed when unable to stretch their wings.’
He expands upon this: ‘It does not follow from their alleged unawareness of the possibility of death that they do not fear death, and flee it as the greatest of evils’(1977: 40).
Clark simply refuses to allow that such behaviour by a creature lacking language transforms the content of what they can properly be said to fear or be distressed at.
If I am right then to say ‘The chicken is distressed by its close confinement, is a dual acknowledgement of sympathy at the presence of behavioural prototypes similar to those of distressed people, and a strong veterinary hint of a possible cure; but no more.
Were the chicken a 5-year-old child cramped in a tiny cupboard, our judgement would carry implications of a different order, for the child would be capable of knowing, under normal circumstances,that she was distressed and why .
Clark's introduction of death is even less convincing and here, I think, we might even object to the use of the same form of words for animals and human beings.
That the calf is afraid of death , let alone its fleeing it as the greatest of evils, seems misleadingly to ascribe to it a self-conscious grasp of death and evil, possible only of beings capable of language.
Yet if we deny the creature this understanding, which even Clark himself seems to acknowledge, yet insist with him that it nonetheless fears death, then it is in the distinctly paradoxical position of fearing something of which it could not, in any sense, be aware.
Midgley is similarly dismissive of Wittgenstein's remarks about hope and fear (PI p. 174, quoted above pp.131–2).
Like Clark, her argument is an all-or-nothing affair: either animals hope and fear or they do not.
There is no sense of the various nuances involved in the attributions, nor that some might be inconceivable without language.
That feral cats may arrive every Wednesday to be fed is obviously, she seems to think, evidence that they have a ‘count of days’ and anticipate hopefully what is to come:
Consider migrations, pregnancies, seasons, brief harvests and the constant need to anticipate the movements of prey or  predators.
Many animals move continually….
They have to be able to think how long this or that will last, or when it will recur….
Within this framework, the feat of believing that someone will come the day after tomorrow does not seem at all out of the way.
(Midgley 1983: 58)
There is no suggestion that we are to take this other than literally.
Yet it seems inconceivable to be able to do so without investing every creature from worms and viruses, which follow very precise cycles of action, to the higher mammals, with the sagacity and foresight of seasoned desert nomads or intrepid Viking explorers.
This is anthropomorphism.
How much more appealing, intriguing, and clear of hopeful mysticism, is the Burtons' account of the doings of honey bees, the best known of the social insects and a sub-species frequently favoured for human comparison:
A colony of honeybees is a miracle of organization.
The individual bees appear very purposeful in carrying out their manifold tasks….
The overall control of the nest's activities comes from pheromones secreted by the queen….
Together they are called ‘queen substance’.
The queen spreads them over her body and they are licked off by the workers, who pass them to the rest of the colony by trophallaxis.
Queen substance prevents the workers from rearing new queens….
Another pheromone is secreted by guard bees to alert other guards when danger threatens and they distribute a unique ‘colony odour’ to help guide returning foragers.
(Burton and Burton 1977: 223)
Food-sharing, or trophallaxis, allied with the power of pheromones to trigger patterns of action, is the regulatory bond which gives the colony its aura of the miraculous and an account in these terms is wholly sufficient.
To feel the need to smuggle in supplementary tales of time-keeping and conscious good husbandry, inconceivable in the absence of language, seems almost to belittle the primitive nature of these little creatures upon whom such tasks are imposed.
This then is the status of animals.
They are primitive beings, to recall the psychic hierarchy of Aristotle and Aquinas and the scientific legacy of Darwin, spanning the continuum between plants and human beings.
They exhibit the pre-linguistic sensations of pain and the  ancestral tokens of human attributes such as deliberative intent, rational planning, choice, desire, fear, anger, and some beliefs, where our guiding criteria are the close similarity of their behavioural patterns, in like circumstances, to our own.
Only in an evolutionary context are these tokens the beginnings , let us say, of planning or choice.
Their anger or fear antedates even that of the young infant who is in the process of integrating its pre-verbal behaviour with ill-formed vocal utterances (although we might well wish to stretch a point and allow the inclusion of the Ameslan apes, particularly Lucy, up to, but not beyond, this point).
What we observe, however we dignify it, is the pre -linguistic prototype and it will include the gestural and vocal ‘primitive forms’ of language observed in the vast majority of higher species.
Clearly animals, unlike plants, are conscious; but self -consciousness, like hope, ambition, remorse, and envy, come only with the capability of speech.
(Clearly the categorisation cannot be exhaustive.
The diversity of the language-games in which the terms are employed rules out mathematical precision.)
It is as primitive creatures that we must assess the claims to proper treatment made on behalf of animals.
Its significance will be far-reaching, and this should be hardly surprising since similar considerations already dictate our legal and moral procedures for dealing with those human beings who, for whatever reasons, fail to measure up to normal competence.
AGAINST LIBERATION: THE ETHICAL DIMENSION
Common sense and moral theory
We are all theorists in a variety of ways.
We argue out the whys and wherefores of putting our aged relatives in geriatric homes, taking early retirement, buying a pet for the children, or taking them to the circus.
Many of our decisions will have enduring practical implications of what could be called a moral sort.
In two of my cited cases what we do might have moral relevance for animal welfare; although the label ‘moral’ would probably be disputed if our uncertainty over the pet or circus were solely on grounds of cost or distance of travel.
But such theorising, however ‘moral’, does not make us moral theorists .
(Here, as we have previously noted, we should beware of confusing the methods of philosophy, and also those of the ‘humanities’ generally, with those of the natural sciences where the aim is to explain the behaviour of apparently diverse phenomena in terms of general laws; the more general, the more fruitful.)
Rollin is prey to this confusion.
Our initial attitude to a moral question, he argues, is a response to moral intuitions, or, as he put it less felicitously, ‘gut feelings’(1981: 4–6).
Where these are ‘virtually universal’ there is no problem.
Animal welfare, however, presents us with situations where ‘our intuitions are mixed and inchoate and inconsistent’(5).
We are concerned, he suggests, about our own dog but not our neighbour's, or are in favour of killing ten Siberian tigers as long as they are not the last ten.
Rollin is also severe on the sophistry of the late medieval Catholic Church in sanctioning the trial and often excommunication of countless creatures (and the then, if feasible, hanging, flaying, burying alive, burning, or otherwise executing them) whilst denying that they were free agents.
The favoured species, if that is the right adjective, tended to be locusts, pigs, and cattle, but Edward P. Evans, in his  marvellous book,The Criminal Prosecution and Capital Punishment of Animals , published in 1906, lists numerous others, including eels, weevils, dolphins, and turtle-doves, that were prosecuted over the period AD 824–1906.
(Rollin, however, is mistaken about this.
The proceedings seem bizarre but the Church was not inconsistent.
Evans makes clear, in discussing a refutation of the Cartesian view of animal nature by a Jesuit, Père Bougeant (1739), that it was the received ecclesiastical view that Satan's allies, the myriad horde of fallen devils due for torment at the Day of Judgement, occupied themselves in the meantime by taking over the bodies of new-born babies and those of any other creatures.
Thus, prior to baptism, infants were exorcised.
Animals were demoniacs and possessed souls, albeit not to be seen in the best company, but were unequivocally free agents (Evans 1987: 66–7).)
Rollin continues predictably.
The intuitions about animals send ‘mixed messages’ but are unfortunately just starting points: ‘So we must turn to theoretical accounts in the hope of finding some stable conceptual framework for tethering our intuitions or for cultivating new ones’(1981: 6).
But Rollin overplays the card of inconsistency, as the historical evidence has shown, and consequently sells intuitions short.
There is no inconsistency in my and my neighbour's holding that we each should look after our own dog (or sleep with our own wife, come to that).
The proposition about the tigers also makes good sense; that specimens are the last remaining, be they tigers, books, or bottles of port, affects the propriety of their disposal.
The intuitions survive unscathed.
Admittedly, moral theories have a distinguished lineage and a rhetorical advantage can be gained by invoking them, or, indeed, inventing them, particularly if we include, as we should, the world's religious dogmas.
To have the Almighty on one's side, or one of his lieutenants (even Tom Regan) has its uses.
Theories, however, operate in mysterious ways.
They are not, as Rollin seems to imply, distillations of our intuitions which we then dispense in new applications.
The reverse tends to happen.
We can adapt our theories, or cast around for fresh ones, to suit our intuitions.
Singer's utilitarianism, for example, has already been seen to be eminently manipulable.
He argues, justifiably, that the theory can support all animals being equal; but Regan, with equal justification, is suspicious of its potential redeployment in meat-eating circles and research defence organisations (1983: 200–31).
So Regan, anxious for an alternative theoretical platform from which to put into orbit his  conviction that the immediate and absolute prohibition of all exploitation of animals is imperative, proposes his theory of ‘inherent value’ to serve the purpose.
But the laxity with which he argues for its deployment, as we saw in Chapter 3, gives inherent value a defiantly marshmallow consistency.
Thus this in its turn can be spread as thickly or as thinly as one's intuitions require and therefore used in defence of competing practical positions, most notably in the debates over abortion or the environment.
Darwin's theories have been used to support the view that homo sapiens is the pre-eminent of species, and have fuelled beliefs in the morality of the survival of the fittest, whilst also lending support to positions, reminiscent of Albert Schweitzer's, which emphasise universal kinship and the duty to care for the lowly and enfeebled.
The world's great religions are even more notorious for simultaneously looking in different directions.
A relevant sidelight on their propensity to beget splinter groups, all claiming allegiance to the true spirit of their faith, is the current attempt to establish an authoritative position for vegetarianism, and animal rights generally, within Judaism.
Rabbinical writers, whether orthodox or reform, uphold a tradition of not causing distress to living creatures whilst supporting the eating of meat and the role of the schochet or ritual slaughterer in its preparation.
But enthusiasts like Sidney Gendin (1989: 25–32) and Roberta Kalechofsky (1989: 168–9) claim to have found a chink in the armour of the Torah with the aid of the writings of Rav Kuk, Israel's first Chief Rabbi.
Mary Midgley is alone amongst prominent liberationists in refusing to truckle to moral theories that, as she sees it, unduly promote one aspect of the problem (consequences for the utilitarians, the value of life for Regan) at the expense of others equally important:
It follows that the contemporary search for ‘a moral theory’, meaning a single legitimate form for all justifications, is misguided.
I find it particularly disturbing that this red herring has become so prominent in current discussions about animals, because there is difficulty enough in getting proper attention for the matter without wasting it on these academic artifacts.
(Midgley 1986: 196)
She prefers to engage her readers at the coal-face, as it were; that of the formation of moral intuitions, or the making of decisions.
I quite agree with this approach although (I add hastily) with little of what Midgley has to offer it.
But she is unwise, I think, given her  pragmatism, to ignore the rhetorical value of such theories and systems of belief.
The nature of choosing
If, as I have argued in the previous section, moral or ethical theories do not provide formulae that replace the need for intuitions, but, on the contrary, are used in the service of new ones, it is these intuitions that we must focus on.
How do we come by them?
(The term ‘intuition, has an unhappy history by implying, as it does, a mysterious source of knowledge.
Rollin talks of it as ‘feelings’, and so avoids this, yet his examples rather suggest choices for this course of action rather than that.)
Choices (the term I shall use) can be impulsive and even instinctive.
Rollin emphasises this aspect of them.
Yet even when they are, we feel the need to justify them; which is where Rollin resorts to moral theory.
In addition, of course , choices can result from lengthy weighing of odds.
Here is a simple example of the complexity at issue.
I am driving along a narrow main road, used by fast-moving traffic, with my children in the back seat.
A car some distance ahead strikes a large dog but does not stop, leaving the creature walking-wounded but in obvious distress.
My children, seeing what occurred, cry out.
I glance in the rear-view mirror to see other cars close behind; slowing down but then speeding up again.
I do not stop.
Now is there much point in talking of intuitions here, moral or otherwise?
My driving on was not a blind impulse, for I had reasons to stop with which I would have justified myself had I done so, but I discounted them in favour of other reasons for continuing.
I made a choice .
Yet if I reflect upon what happened, in what some might call an existential manner, or attempt what physicists might call a ‘thought experiment’ to reconstruct my situation, I can see myself as having been assailed by various impulses: to assist the dog and stop the car, to comfort the children, to drive on lest I and they were to be injured in an accident, to avoid the horror of confronting a demented animal.
My point, in this rough-and-ready example, is to isolate certain basic impulses which appear not to be dependent upon others.
The urge to stop the car will not qualify, but that which served as the reason for stopping, namely to assist a distressed animal, well might.
In like manner, the impulses to escape danger to myself or the children, or evade the animal's agonies also appear to be basic.
Evidence of this is that if we attempt to justify them no obvious  answer is forthcoming.
It is useful to recall Wittgenstein in this connection: ‘It is a help here to remember that it is a primitive reaction to tend, to treat, the part that hurts when someone else is in pain; and not merely when oneself is’(Z 540).
Thus to the question ‘Why do you feel affection for your children?’ or ‘Why are you inclined to assist animals (or fellow citizens) in pain?’, it would sound lame and otiose to reply that it is because your children are kind and decent, or that you assist others in the hope that they will assist you, or that you do both to contribute to the greatest happiness of the greatest number of creatures.
The answers should be in terms of what people do naturally.
They are not reasons for the impulses but causes that hark back to the primitive responses that we share with many animals; yet qualified by noting that we, unlike dumb brutes, can reflect upon our impulses and resist them if we so decide, as happened in my example.
In this context they are the ground of our reasons for acting.
My contention is, that as animals ourselves, we inherit genetically a whole network of such reactions within which our language-games are integrated and to some extent grounded.
Thus a parent's moral duty to protect his or her children is grounded in instinctive feelings proper to our species.
Parents that lack such feelings, and there are many, even if they do their duty ‘for duty's sake’ are nonetheless thought to be morally deficient.
But parental feelings are only one piece of the jigsaw.
The nuances of relationship, by which naturalists describe the societal life of animals, their instinctive protection of eggs and off-spring, the mating displays and individual protection of territories, and, in particular, the varying treatment meted out to strangers, from tolerance to outright aggression, all find their analogues in human interaction.
(Remembering, yet again, that the depiction of dumb brutes in these terms requires a language-game specific to creatures that lack self-consciousness.)
The pressures of the moral arena
The child, as it gains a progressive mastery of language, grows gradually into an awareness of what it is capable.
As language is integrated with its pre-linguistic impulses a genuinely human life begins to beckon.
The baby's embrace of its mother, originally a mere impulse of survival and dependence, is transformed into a manifestation of love.
The now conscious impulses, two or three of which dominated my example in the previous section, proliferate by this  means.
More sophisticated inclinations emerge to compete with the basic ones, or with each other.
Thus my impulse to assist the injured animal may be overridden by my reminding myself that I am on my way to get married and am already late.
We are entering what some analysts call the arena of moral debate.
It is important to appreciate its complexity for we might then be less likely to generalise its demands, or the way we decide between them, on the basis of the (by now familiar) too narrow diet of examples.
Some problem-solving will take the form of a deliberative weighing of consequences, although quite often we choose the least likely-looking solution or toss a coin, but equally frequently we have little or no time for debate.
Furthermore the sense in which we describe certain dilemmas, impulses, intuitions, or decisions as moral ones is notoriously imprecise.
The complexity we are faced with here is one of everyday messiness.
The longer one debates a trivial matter such as whether it is right to put up with the notorious rudeness of the only fishmonger in town or to fight back, the deeper one is enmeshed in an ever-expanding web of implication.
Yet we do have rough-and-ready scales of value; certain impulses regularly win out over others and, if the toss is there to be argued over, we will claim that this is how it ought to be.
Driving instructors will tell us that if a cat or dog strays into our path, and we are unable to stop or otherwise avoid it in an orderly fashion, then we should run it down.
Only a psychopath would include children in the instruction.
So children take precedence over animals and other human beings generally do also.
But the pressures mount.
One works to feed, and slaves to entertain, one's own children, and sometimes their friends, feeling no such obligations towards those next door.
It is thought neither whimsical nor absurdly divisive to spend money on one's friends but not on strangers; to attempt to do so, other than in special social circumstances, will be to make a fool of oneself.
Many people furthermore (much to the irritation of utilitarians, it must be said) will think it right and proper to give tea and cake to the healthy beggar at their own gate but think little of those starving overseas; they are someone else's business, it is argued.
It is tempting and indeed justifiable for the purposes of straightforward situations such as these, to tabulate a diminishing order of obligation: immediate family, relations, friends and colleagues, fellow countrymen, one's racial group, people at large, animals, and the natural world.
An objector will immediately point to the lack of stability of this  simple, some will say simple-minded, hierarchy.
The need to assist a stranger, even a foreign one, even a strange foreign animal, badly injured outside one's home will bring the children's party to a halt.
Some people hate their relations and spend all their time gardening, and it is certainly the bone of much contention that racial and colour affinities, together with religious ones such as Judaism or Islam, cut across and militate against national allegiances.
A.M. MacIver (1948) captured the slippery nature of all this particularly neatly in a short article, ‘Ethics and the beetle’, which despite its age still retains a cult following:
Fellow members of a society are those, whoever they may be, who are regarded in the society as fellow members by the others.
I myself feel that the cat and the dog who live in the same house with me are fellow members of my family circle, closer related to me socially than the human neighbour next door whom I know only by sight and name, and infinitely closer than some odd Brazilian or Melanesian, with whom my only connection is that we are fellow men.
(MacIver 1948: 66–7)
All that MacIver shows here, and I think that it is all he intends, is that in certain circumstances, including those where domestic creatures are happily housed, one can argue for the promotion of animals in the hierarchy.
But they become only honorary family, lacking the status of MacIver's wife and children; unlike them the animals will quickly be ‘put down’ when old or in distress.
The position of animals as a whole , in the original table, remains as it was.
The objector is forgetting its point; it is both provisional and one to be argued over .
The misanthropic gardener elevates his roses and relegates his relations and if challenged, as well he might be, would give us possibly good reasons for so doing.
Reasons are required; to have none would be weird.
But to revert to normal and to prefer one's relations to the garden would not seem to require obvious explanation.
So again the hierarchy retains its integrity.
Where the objection does dent it, however, is in the ambiguity of key terms like ‘fellow countrymen’, something that MacIver points to.
Would a Melanesian who happened to be one's cousin five times removed be a relation or a foreigner?
But the objection is salutary.
The intuitive ordering will be in a state of perpetual disruption because of the pressures which give rise to varying likes and dislikes.
The obsessive gardener hates his relations because two of them have criminal records.
A foreigner who  is stunningly attractive will readily upset the apple-cart of our preconceptions, as will a friend whom we discover has been slandering us behind our back.
All sorts of influences are brought to bear upon us every time we turn on the radio or open a newspaper.
Religious emotion is particularly potent.
Sober citizens have been known to read about Mother Teresa, or other such charismatic figures, and be seized by the need to promote the well-being of the Calcutta poor above all else.
Some have even left their families to do so.
There are some observers who think this to be admirable; but there are others who believe that in such cases the basic obligations that should keep such enthusiasts at home have been obscured by pretension and sentimentality.
Neither convert nor critic is obviously wrong.
Religion is not, of course, just practice but theory as well .
We have already discussed theory's peculiar role in moral decision making.
Yet it can sometimes be influential although, more often than not, it is the personal advocacy which brings about the conversion.
A reader of Singer, let us suppose, is taken with the idea of ethics as taking the universal point of view and progresses to the principle of the equal consideration of interests, attracted perhaps by its sense of having rekindled the spirit of the Second Commandment in secular guise.
But others will contend, with no lack of passion and sincerity, that if the principle of equal consideration is taken seriously and always to predominate, then it will seriously distort those natural impulses of affection and solidarity which dictate so many moral choices.
The issue of ‘moral distance’ focuses on this.
It is easy to argue, invoking self-righteous precedents, that the lady who hurries to assist the injured animal or pedestrian in the street or who feeds the beggar on her doorstep, but who fails to get excited about suffering in general and shows a disinclination to contribute to Oxfam, is really not a good Samaritan; that she is morally short-sighted in letting ‘distance’ be a factor, and that she should be equally concerned for suffering whenever and wherever.
The slighted Samaritan can, of course, reply on her own behalf that she does care about suffering in general but that she cares much more about its manifestations that she can do something about and that involve her personally.
This does not settle a continuing debate but it does not need to.
This, I think, is what Bernard Williams has in mind in the following passage from Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy :
Some moralists say that if we regard immediacy or physical nearness as relevant, we must be failing in rationality or  imagination; we are irrational if we do not recognize that those starving elsewhere have as big a claim on us as those starving here.
These moralists are wrong, at least in trying to base their challenge simply on the structure of obligations.
Of course this point does not dispose of the challenge itself.
(Williams 1985: 186)
It is enough to mount a convincing argument, in this instance by someone who is prepared to get dirty hands for her convictions; which is not to say that she must convince everyone.
But it is an argument for the quite different model of moral obligation which I have suggested in this section.
Moral choice and legal obligation
Some readers, particularly those convinced that if only we thought long enough, or prayed hard enough, we would discover reassuring tethering posts to which to secure our moral choices, will view with some disquiet the position reached so far.
This could be exacerbated by considering the possibility, not as remote as it might seem, that either party to the above dispute between the convert to utilitarianism and the Samaritan might in fact be convinced by the other's argument and take up a different moral stance.
This is not to claim that there would be a change in their basic natural impulses (to assist animals or fellow beings, to protect children, prefer friends, and so on).
The change would be nonetheless profound for it would involve a revaluation of the priorities given to these claims for attention.
In fact such transformations are rare precisely because, if more than lip-service is to be paid to them, the practical implications are considerable; which is not to deny that lip-service, in the form of campaigning and complaining, has its uses.
But what is true, I suggest, short of the occasional religious conversion or metamorphosis of lifestyle, is that the variety of circumstances make our decisions often unpredictable, but not thereby whimsical, to the extent that we often surprise ourselves.
The nearest we can get to a guarantee of success in our moral choices is the cogency of the arguments that we bring to bear in their support coupled with the recognition that what we are almost invariably doing, as MacIver points out and thinkers like Sartre have laboured to establish, is continually deciding between possible alternatives.
There is at hand a convenient way out of the present morass.
An  earlier example posed the case of man whose feelings for his garden far exceeded those for his relations whom he disliked because their brushes with crime offended the respect in which he held the law.
If religious example, and to a lesser extent philosophical theory, can influence our moral decisions, then that an action is legal or illegal will probably have even greater significance; less so for an old lag, more so for a judge.
But the connection between moral choice and the ‘law of the land’ is far more intimate that this apparently casual connection suggest?.
The concepts of a right and a liberty (as opposed to freedom generally) probably originated however, in systems of juridical law, and it is in legal systems that they have their most subtle and interesting applications and most thorough and detailed elaborations.
(Feinberg 1973: 55–6)
And what goes for a right and a liberty is also true of the other cornerstones of moral language: duty, obligation, right, wrong.
The polemics of legal or parliamentary advocacy are close, formal analogues of much ethical debate; and the fines and other sanctions have their moral counterparts.
The legal application of these central ideas will provide the model against which to compare the deviations, if any, of the moral equivalents.
The law: stability and animals
Individual moral decision although capable of exemplification has, because of its circumstantial and often impulsive nature, been shown to be impossible to pin down for classification.
But the system of laws in place at any one time in a democracy worthy of the name has a permanence about it; partly due to the formality and bureaucracy of the institutions which sustain it, but, more importantly, because of the hydra-headed nature of the social processes which it facilitates.
If income tax, the armed services, or even the Royal Family had to be revolutionised, it would be achieved by degrees with countless checks and balances.
In addition, the everyday activities of the courts, in handing down precedents, and the workings of legislative assemblies like the US Congress and British Parliament, ensure constant modification and renewal at, as it were , the edges.
But what remains at any one time provides a crystallised record of the society's received wisdom transmuted to some extent, of course, by the political  intrusions of the democratic process and Christian tradition.
(Christian belief was the forming influence of the law of equity which, in part, has to do with those legal ‘persons’ unable to help themselves.)
Now if we consult this record, and remember the success, in giving it its modern form, of a gallery of reformers of roughly utilitarian hue from Tom Paine, Bentham, J.S. Mill, and Tolstoy, to Bernard Shaw, Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and Evelyn Strachey, we might wonder why its provisions for animals do not embody more closely the ideals of that theory.
Yet public opinion, as it is reflected in British law, has steadfastly refused to enlarge upon the spirit of the pioneer legislation of the early 1820s and 1830s, updated fifty years later, which introduced the protection of animals against cruelty .
The most recent legislation, the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, as its title implies, is not a liberationist document.
In my view this is as it ought to be.
That animals should be treated humanely, and with this proviso, that they may be killed, experimented upon, hunted, raced, or petted is both the legal, and a perfectly defensible, position to hold.
It is no accident that it seems to confirm the position of animals near the foot of our thumbnail hierarchy or ‘order of obligation’, discussed in previous sections.
furthermore the ordering, in general, is supposed by legal requirements in numerous other areas.
A parent is legally bound to feed, clothe, house, not to mistreat, and to see to the education of his own children, but not those of his neighbour; although those next door are legally protected against anyone's abuse or assault.
It can be an offence, however, not to assist strangers, injured or in acute danger, where an obvious remedy is at hand such as pulling someone from wreckage or issuing a warning.
But there is no legal obligation to assist people in general nor the world at large.
The laws of citizenship provide a complete portfolio of legal entitlements which frequently elevate the members of a particular nation into a favoured species and the envy of a less fortunate world at large.
In a less flamboyant way, numberless provisions of state law, county councils, and local authorities, regulate and make possible the wealth, power, and by most people's lights, the reasonable and necessary exclusivity, of clubs, societies, schools, and universities which foster fraternal and even class loyalties.
Reformers and those with axes to grind will argue that much of this is all wrong despite its being the case.
But my argument has been that it is not difficult to defend something roughly resembling the status quo rather than being bludgeoned into a guilty conscience by accepting that one is a covert elitist or racist.
The animal liberationists  certainly think that the ‘cruelty-kindness view’, as Regan calls it (1983: 195–200), is speciesist since it ignores the extent to which animal awareness is akin to that of human beings.
But if this is a mistake and animals are properly to be understood as primitive beings, at least as different from us as they are similar, then their modest entitlement to humane treatment, accorded them by common sense and enshrined in the law, might well be vindicated.
Rawls revisited: moral agents and moral patients
In Chapter 1, when discussing the extent to which Singer's principle of equal consideration of interests captured the sense of equality shared by Einstein and an Ethiopian tribeswoman, the status of Einstein's tree was mooted.
The tree was arguably out of place in any equation involving human beings, however disparate, because it lacks their moral personality'.
However, Singer objected to the importation of moral personality by contractualists like John Rawls on two main grounds and we are now in a position to supplement my provisional replies to his argument.
In the first place, Singer countered, it would be difficult to locate the minimal qualification for the sense of justice and, furthermore, once established, it could well be to the detriment of equality since it might imply that we could have ‘grades of moral status, with rights and duties corresponding to the degree of refinement of one's sense of justice’(1979: 16–17).
My reply was, in essence, to accept what Singer found repugnant as, on the contrary, plausible features of what I have since called the ‘moral arena,.
The contractualist position is supported by the Wittgensteinian model of language-learning.
The vocabulary of moral and legal confrontation (duty, obligation, rights, and so on) is acquired in social contexts involving the recognition of ‘give and take’.
The infant Elizabeth will learn that being promised a sweet for behaving herself will result in more than the mere probability of its arrival; the penny will have dropped when she realises that a promise entitles her to the reward — it is her due , to which she has a right .
She has mastered the language of contract.
Furthermore, the young lady will learn the more vexatious lesson that she can forfeit her entitlements, in circumstances of which others will say were well deserved.
A naughty child will, in this respect, suffer from either a diminution of moral status or, if the fault becomes a seasoned trait, a bad reputation.
This is involved in becoming aware of oneself as a self-conscious moral agent .
It is a  gradual process of which there will be intermediate phases and it is hardly surprising that in such instances we will be uncertain whether or not to admit that the infant has made the grade.
The opening shot of Singer's objection seems hardly to be in earnest.
(Another implication of this way of looking at the origin of moral talk is that the child will learn her primary duties in familial contacts with her parents, close friends, relations, and the family pets.
The horizons are gradually extended to include playgroup supervisors and classmates.
Strangers, whom Elizabeth will have been warned to avoid, will be a late addition.
This shows a developing scale of value, not dissimilar to the adult's hierarchy, although in the child's case there will special reasons, fortified by fairy stories, for promoting animals.)
The second objection of Singer's, more akin to our concerns, is that babies come below any conceivable threshold of moral personality, together with certain permanently retarded or brain-damaged humans.
On contractualist grounds, he argues, they would seem to be bereft of equality.
Animals too are incapable of moral personality.
The three groups, together with the additions of which Rollin reminded us (the aged, the addicted, and the compulsive), are usually described as moral patients .
Yet this can be confusing since many of the qualifiers, including the retarded, will have degrees of moral personality, which, for Rawls, is decisive enough to entitle them to direct justice.
But even to those that have none, he argues, we still ‘have a natural duty not to be cruel’(1972: 114).
Yet he later seems to qualify this, in the case of animals: ‘It does seem that we are not required to give strict justice anyway to creatures lacking this capacity’(512).
So what is now the status of his later insistence that, ‘Certainly it is wrong to be cruel to animals and the destruction of a whole species can be a great evil’(512)?
Regan argues, at careful and considerable length, that Rawls is inconsistent here; that his duty to animals is in reality an indirect one owed not to animals as such but only to self-interested individuals who have purposes that include animals (1983: 163–74).
A great deal of ink has been spilled over the nature of indirect duties, to which I will return in the next section.
It is sufficient at this point to remind ourselves of Bernard Rollin's argument, in defence of Rawls, that the interests of infants, imbeciles, and animals, will be included in the scope of those of the moral agent with moral personality.
The potentiality of young children must be a concern of any community that looks to the future.
The tribeswoman will doubtless have deep feelings for her children and be ambitious for  their success in life, and affection and admiration for animals has had a place in all societies, even in that of Ancient Rome.
It was pointed out, in Chapter 1, that such a defence will have conservative implications since it puts the moral patients at the mercy of those interests, whatever they might be, that prevail amongst moral agents in a society.
Senescent Eskimos, for example, might be thought to have had a raw deal if the stories of the banishment from the familial hearth of those unfit to hunt and fish are to be believed.
But no theory of moral belief ought to rule out such practices if tradition or special circumstances are generally thought to justify them.
Now my argument in the present chapter, which grounds certain duties in our natural responses to each other, and in those towards infants and animals as well (instinctive responses that provide the initial springboard for language itself) lends support to Rollin's development of contractualism.
That this may or may not be implicitly Rawls' own view is only of academic interest.
To round off this section we must return to Singer.
The criterion of moral personality, to which he objected, was introduced to settle the status of Einstein's tree.
Singer s own argument was that trees, lacking as they are in any capacity for suffering, cannot have interests.
But with the hindsight of Frey's distinction (also Regan's) between having an interest and something's being in one's interest, this route is denied Singer because water, sunlight, and even perhaps preservation, in tune with the tree's needs, can rightly be said to be in its interests.
It will thus earn a toehold in the moral company of animals; something that Singer could not accept.
The postscript to this is that such a conclusion would follow from the revised contractualism and, I suggest, is in the mainstream of our moral thinking.
The abiding and mounting preoccupation with preserving the natural world frequently, and quite rightly, takes precedence over the ravages and institutional vandalism of our fellow human beings.
Our natural impulses towards mountains, waves, forests, and flowers may be less overt than those attaching to animals and other people but they are sustained by a fascination all their own.
Indirect duties
Henry Salt, writing at the end of the nineteenth century when laws protecting animals were firmly in place, complained that,
It is scarcely possible, in the face of this legislation, to maintain  that ‘rights’ are a privilege with which none but human beings can be invested; for if some animals are already included within the pale of protection, why should not more and more be so included in the future?(1922: 5)
The philosopher D.G. Ritchie, writing in 1894, pointed to the difficulties in drawing such simple parallels.
Animals cannot be parties to a lawsuit, or be said to be guilty, they cannot be subject to the duties that attach to rights.
And he offers a telling counter-example: ‘Because a work of art or some ancient monument is protected by law from injury, do we speak of the ‘rights’ of pictures or stones?’(1976: 182).
He continues:
Thus we may be said to have duties of kindness towards the animals; but it is incorrect to represent these as strictly duties towards the animals themselves, as if they had rights against us.
If the animals had in any proper sense rights, we should no more be entitled to put them to death without a fair trial…than to torture them for our amusement.
(Ritchie 1976: 184)
He adds that any killing of animals should be painless, and their use in experiments restricted as far as possible to ‘the less highly organised’ creatures.
But these are only indirect duties of kindness since our direct duty is not to animals but to our fellow human beings whose objections to cruelty constitute genuine rights against us.
In like manner, our duty to desist from damaging pictures or monuments (Ritchie conveniently aids his case by talking of ‘injury’) is grounded in society's desire to preserve its cultural heritage.
In a much-maligned passage from his Lectures on Ethics , transcribed during the late 1770s, Immanuel Kant puts the issue more baldly yet laces his account with intriguing illustrations:
Animals are not self-conscious and are there merely as means to an end.
That end is man….
Animal nature has analogies to human nature, and by doing our duties to animals in respect of manifestations of human nature, we indirectly do our duty towards humanity.
Thus, if a dog has served his master long and faithfully, his service, on the analogy of human service, deserves reward, and when the dog has grown too old to serve, his master ought to keep him until he dies.
If then any acts of animals are analogous to human acts and spring from the same principles  we have duties towards the animals because thus we cultivate the corresponding duties towards human beings.
If a man shoots his dog because the animal is no longer capable of service, he does not fail in his duty to the dog, for the dog cannot judge, but his act is inhuman and damages in himself that humanity which it is his duty to show towards mankind….
The more we come in contact with animals and observe their behaviour, the more we love them, for we see how great is their care for their young.
(Kant 1963: 239–40)
Kant then goes on to describe how Leibniz (1646–1716), the great polymath, carried out field observations of caterpillars and similar creatures, being careful afterwards to return them to a suitable leaf out of harm's way, ‘so that it should not come to harm through any act of his.
He would have been sorry — a natural feeling for a humane man — to destroy such a creature for no reason’(1963: 240).
The liberationists are united in their opposition to these defences of animals.
The resort of Ritchie and Kant to direct duties to human society which, as it were, underpin the lesser ones to animals is thought to undermine the seriousness with which we regard offences against animals.
Part of the problem is, of course, that Kant's claim that animals lack self-consciousness, implicit also in Ritchie, finds no favour with contemporary enthusiasts; on the contrary, as we have had reason to note on several occasions, the liberationists depict creatures with so many human attributes that it is almost surprising to find them denied full moral agency.
Clark puts the case against Ritchie:
Either those laws, from Martin's Act of 1822 to modern legislation against gin-traps…recognize that animals can be wronged or else they are laws of manners, dealing with the vice or virtue of the state's citizens.
Either the evil they seek to prevent is the suffering of animals…or it is the moral corruption of human beings.
(Clark 1977: 12)
(Readers should note the exclusivity of the choice presented here; something to which I shall return.)
Kant, in particular, comes in for very rough treatment.
Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) accuses him of holding that animals are mere things : ‘Thus only for practice are we to have sympathy for animals’(Regan and Singer 1976: 125).
Regan relents to the extent of regarding this as an ‘exaggeration’ but  concludes that,, indirect duty views are committed to regarding how we treat moral patients as of no direct moral significance' (1983: 186).
Only Midgley attempts to do Kant justice; although even she cannot resist a nod in the direction of the practice-ground.
She uses the example of a shepherd who works off his malevolence towards the human race by ill-treating his dogs.
But, she argues, ‘Kant, himself a humane man, does not want to issue this general licence for redirected aggression.
He therefore posits a set of shadowy near-duties to discourage it.
But such a status can hardly work’(1983: 52).
In defence of indirect duties
Why is Midgley reluctant to admit to the existence of shadowy near-duties?
Her answer is that ‘The whole point of a duty is that it is bounden or binding’(1983: 52).
A moment's reflection will show how restrictive this is.
Kant talks of animals providing ‘analogies’ of human action and, in like manner, many everyday measures have a claim upon us only because they are analogous to more exemplary duties.
If I am following someone who drops their wallet then it would be idle to deny that I have a duty to pick it up and return it.
But what if they drop litter?
Should I return it and risk a quarrel?
Or cravenly deposit it in a bin?
Or merely kick it aside?
If a slate falls on their head I would, in normal circumstances, be obliged to assist.
But if it were pigeon droppings then it would be a moot point as to whether merely to murmur condolences and hurry on or to set to work with a clean handkerchief.
However, the fact that such quasi-duties are a commonplace does not, of itself, advance the cause of animals.
I remarked that Kant's argument was intriguingly illustrated.
Indeed, his examples repay study since they seem to run counter to traditional interpretations which concentrate upon his theoretical comments.
Let us return to Midgley's malevolent shepherd.
Further suppose that he had tried Kant's remedy of being kind to his dogs, only to discover that it served merely to fan the flames of his misanthropy.
Now Kant does argue that animals exist ‘merely as means to an end’ which involves man.
But if, as Schopenhauer (1965:.
95–6, 175–82) and Regan (1983: 182) believe, Kant held that therefore animals were mere things , like sticks and stones, then why would he not condone the shepherd's return to the beating and tormenting of his dogs in order to assuage his ill-humour?
Midgley is right.
Kant would condemn such goings on because they would be inhumane .
But what price humaneness, that great virtue of the  Enlightenment, if animals were mere things?
Being kind to them would be the worst sort of sentimentality, or, as Ritchie delightfully puts it, ‘a mere hypocritical formula to gratify pug-loving sentimentalists, who prate about a nature they will not take the trouble to understand’(1976: 183).
Had Kant believed this he would have been quick to point it out; but he does not.
Indeed it would have undermined every one of his examples.
Leibniz would have been little more than an impressionable fool in Kant's eyes had the caterpillar that he treated with such consideration been a mere thing .
Yet the sorrow of Leibnitz, were he to have needlessly destroyed it, is described as ‘a natural feeling for a humane man’.
And a few lines later we read: ‘A master who turns out his ass or his dog because the animal can no longer earn its keep manifests a small mind’(1963: 240).
Two competing strands of emphasis run through this passage which it is misleading of Kant to have entangled.
The first, emphasised in the traditional readings of, say, Schopenhauer and Regan, is that kindness to animals is only of value as a psychological cause of human fellow-feeling.
On this view, understandably, animals would be of no more worth in themselves than drugs or edifying books that produced the same effect.
They would indeed be things .
(It should be mentioned that the use of certain creatures in the treatment of mentally disturbed patients bears witness to their therapeutic effectiveness.
So Kant would not be wrong to press this claim).
However, were this the extent of his case then, for reasons which we have seen, his examples would be curiously ill-chosen.
Their plausibility requires that the disinclination to be cruel to animals is a mark of true humanity; part of its content , rather than merely a possible cause of it.
Thus the cruel master of the ass or dog has a ‘small mind’; he is deficient in humanity.
The sorrow of a Leibniz, confronting the caterpillar, is natural ‘for a humane man’.
The inclinations to treat animals kindly are grounded in the analogies to be observed in human behaviour.
They are, as I have argued earlier in this chapter, instinctive responses to the pre-linguistic prototypical behaviour of animals.
This makes it much more plausible to condemn the malevolent shepherd, on Kant's behalf, for he is employing means which are themselves inhumane, albeit for a humane end.
This interpretation seems to leave Kant's theoretical position intact.
Moral patients that lack self-consciousness (babies, the severely retarded, and animals) remain ‘merely as a means to an end’.
But what now rescues them, for Kant, from the lowly state of sticks and stones  are the natural and tender impulses of humane people towards them.
These would probably be intensified in the case of those patients of our own species, particularly babies.
The ends to which they might properly be put would be severely limited by these considerations.
They exist ‘merely as a means’ which is only to say that, lacking language and self-consciousness, they are unable to plan and debate projects of their own as do moral agents.
In this sense, Kant argues, ‘the dog cannot judge’, which does not mean that it is fair game for any purpose we might devise.
This brings us finally to the vexed sentence which sounds so anthropocentric: ‘That end is man.’
This, again, is no declaration of open season; it points merely to the obvious fact that moral agents must necessarily set the agenda.
Only rational beings can weigh up the merits of competing claims for attention, be they those of moral patients or other moral agents.
It is up to moral agents to decide how moral patients should be treated; since animals, infants, and imbeciles lack self-consciousness.
This way of looking at Kant will help to defuse Clark's criticism of Ritchie.
The two competing themes in his account which, much to the confusion of some of his critics, Kant fails clearly to demarcate, both contain valid claims; so I have argued.
This suggests as much as a triple purpose in Kant's analysis of our concern for animals.
In the first place, prompted by our natural humane feelings, we wish to minimise their suffering.
Secondly, there is a need to further the general humanity which such behaviour augments.
A third possible concern is that both may conflict with some human end, perhaps the need to control a population of deer or to eat meat, in which we take an interest.
Legislation is similarly motivated.
The legal protection of Ritchie's ancient monument will have at least a dual purpose; the prevention of future damage to the structure, and the recognition of an addition to our heritage.
Clark's example of laws prohibiting gin-traps and similar cruel contraptions are no different.
They encapsulate the democratically arrived-at beliefs both that it is wrong for animals to suffer in such ways, and also that legislation will lead to an amelioration in the behaviour of farmers and poachers.
As I hinted parenthetically following the quotation from Clark, it seems perverse for him to insist that we must choose one at the expense of the other.
Furthermore, although Ritchie argues that ‘cruelty to animals is rightly supposed to be an offence against humanitarian feeling’(1976: 183), I see no reason for concluding that by so saying he is denying that animals can be wronged, particularly given the wide measure of protection he accords them.
The general public could hardly be  described by Ritchie as viewing cruelty to domestic pets with ‘horror’ were it not that its sympathies were outraged by perceived wrongs.
The varieties of legal subject
The not always well-focussed objections of the liberationists to talk of indirect duties reflects an intense dislike of what they see as the arrogance of thinkers like Kant and Ritchie.
The implication, they fear, is that when the chips are down it is only rational human beings that really matter.
In the preceding section I gave ample evidence that the fear is unjustified.
Kant is in favour of consideration towards animals, not just because of the salutary effects upon human beings but because cruelty calls forth the sympathy of humane people.
Ritchie is equally punctilious in their regard.
But, it will be objected, these theorists actually regard the status of moral patients as akin to that of slaves, and we would expect also to be reminded that contemporary opinion in the civilised world, despite pockets of resistance, is still largely in agreement with this view.
Now there are grounds for this disquiet despite its being misplaced.
Slavery was not exactly an enviable affair, its memory haunts much of our literature and is aggravated by the recent Colonial past of many nations.
It was an envenomed back-cloth to the movement for civil rights, particularly in the United States.
Feminism has an equally enlivening history.
Given that Singer and his supporters deliberately cast the manifesto for animal liberation in the image of these two charismatic originals, to benefit from their impetus, it is no surprise that complaints about second-class citizenry, or unequal rights justifiably voiced on behalf of blacks and women, surface in the other arena of cats, dogs, apes, and dolphins.
But the analogies which are used to justify the transition are dubious at best.
Normal slaves, blacks, and women are, despite their generic and individual differences, caught within the extremes of Einstein and the Ethiopian tribeswoman.
They are moral agents, able to entertain and argue for their place in the world and the entitlements that go with it; in short, they are rational beings.
It is not arrogance to deny this of animals.
Even the enthusiasm of a Maury Temerlin (1976) does not tempt him to attribute this level of sophistication to Ameslan Lucy; in part, for the obvious reason, that she would then be at risk to what is on the other side of this coin — moral guilt.
Moral patients are, for the most part, innocents.
Clearly writers like Kant and Ritchie are impressed by this fact.
In this  section I want to clarify what follows from it; specifically, to what extent the entitlement to something is affected by the nature of the beneficiary.
Here is a simple illustration of what is at issue.
A lady dies having willed money separately to her husband and the family  Dalmatian .
If the will has been properly drawn up, the dog's legacy will be administered by an independent trustee.
Now if the executors of the will delay paying out then the husband can claim that he has a legal right to his money.
Now what of the  Dalmatian ?
Certainly its trustee can claim the money, as of right, to be used for what is in the dog's interest.
But does the dog have a legal right, against that of the trustee perhaps, that the funds henceforth be used in its interests?
Yes, if by this we mean that a third party could urge this on the dog's behalf and that sanctions of the law might well ensue.
But the dog knows nothing of rights and entitlements.
Does that matter?
Yes, again.
For the original testator might, as frequently happens, have left trust funds to be administered in the upkeep of someone's grave.
With no less force than on the dog's behalf might the third-party claim that the law should intervene to see the job is done, but there would be no inclination to talk of the right of the grave to be maintained.
But if talk of a right were insisted upon it would be seen as no more than as a flourish of personification to emphasise that the trustee had legal obligations towards the grave.
The talk of rights in the three cases seems to carry diminishing implications.
The husband has rights in a paradigm sense.
The grave, on the contrary, has them in the minimal sense of its being merely an emphatic statement of someone's duties towards it.
The dog, as might be expected, looks in both directions — towards the grave, whose total incapacity to understand rights it shares, yet also towards the human being with whom it has appetitive instincts in common.
(This is close to Ritchie's position, but not identical since he neglects this last point and puts the dog too hastily in the grave.)
If it has rights they are at best analogical ones.
As Bernard Williams writes:
There are good reasons for not inflicting pain on animals, but no particular point is made, except rhetorically, by grounding this in rights .
Rights are a distinctive kind of ethical reason, and they are best explained in terms of assuring expectations…a consideration that does not apply to other animals.
(Williams 1985: 216n.)
H.J. McCloskey, whose writings in this area have been influential, misses this analogical nuance, whilst otherwise arguing towards a similar conclusion in his article ‘The right to life’(1975):
The idea of a chooser, a decider, who has a full capacity for rational decision and choice, seems to be central to our idea of a holder of rights….
Rights are thought of as things which are possessed, enjoyed, exercised, yielded up, foregone, etc.
(McCloskey 1975: 414)
The last sentence is particularly to the point since it stresses the complicated role of rights talk in everyday human transactions.
Rights can be earned (to a salary at the end of the month or to a place on the Board), they can be purchased (by paying an entrance fee), they can be entered into in all sorts of ways (white has the right to move first in chess).
Most of these possibilities exclude animals but where they do not (we might, for example, feel it appropriate to praise the sheepdog by saying that it has earned the right to a good meal) the attribution is clearly analogical since it is based upon such a slim comparison with human capacity.
The most important point of departure, however, is that rights, whether moral or legal, can involve correlative duties .
Citizens' rights can be forfeit if we fall foul of the law.
My right to the first move at chess carries with it the duty to continue with the game, and so on.
Animals obey orders, the guard-dog does its duty, but as we saw in Chapter 5, such attributions involve a language-game only reminiscent of the human paradigm.
In more extreme manner we might wish to register our displeasure at the felling of a row of fine trees for a road-widening project by saying that they had the right to be left in peace.
McCloskey is right, up to a point, in claiming that in cases such as these we have changed the concept: ‘What we are ascribing and according are not rights in the ordinary sense of rights’(1975: 416).
But the idea of a continuum of language-games employing the same word, whose contexts recall more or less distantly the analogous human original, seems more adequately to capture the spirit of what we need to say in such circumstances.
Moral rights as legal rights
The preceding section returned to a theme that originated earlier in the chapter.
Legal models were invoked, certain entitlements under a will, to illuminate a moral notion.
There are close analogies between the two spheres.
But, of course, they are far from identical.
In the first place, our everyday lives are governed by clusters of obligations, many  of them in conflict, which are not the law's concern.
The previous examples used to rehabilitate Kant's ‘shadowy near-duties’ against Midgley's criticism are mere tips of the moral iceberg.
The rules of dress, and etiquette generally, sustain a great industry whose fashions seem to preoccupy some people's whole lives.
To breach them can be a grave moral fault.
The same implications attach to the playing of games or the membership of clubs and so on, although what is of even more interest are the ‘unwritten’ rules which underwrite the more formal, quasi-legal, ones.
Without unwritten rules civilised life would be impossible.
Indeed we are rarely aware of them as rules, until they are broken, since they are typical of the settings in which we received our moral training.
Many were originally instinctive and,to that limited extent , occur naturally in animals: we normally make way for others in the street, keep promises or apologise, treat people politely and respect the sense of another's property.
These are all constituent pressures of the moral arena.
Morality is frequently invoked to influence legislators.
This is a commonplace that does not need arguing for.
In 1911 the Parliament Act was passed permitting members of the British parliament to be paid for the first time.
The argument was that some candidates, particularly from the emergent Labour Party, were not of independent means and would be otherwise unable to serve if they were elected (the first Labour MPs had appeared in 1906).
This is a good argument as it stands but one can well imagine that it would have been pressed in terms of these hopefuls having a right to be paid if they succeeded.
Prior to the legislation this right could only be a moral one; once enacted it would have legal standing as well.
In like manner the suffrage of women prior to 1918 was a claimed moral right.
Now although the law may be extremely complex it also aims for clarity in its pronouncements or it would fail to work.
One either is or is not legally entitled to an American passport, or to benefit from a will; difficulties, if any, crop up in satisfying the qualification.
Where genuine ambiguities of scope arise (is a skateboarder a pedestrian or a driver?) then the aim is to reintroduce clarity by judicial precedent.
There are reasonably explicit ‘rules of recognition’.
Laws, whilst they are in force, are in this sense inalienable.
If one qualifies, there is the right to a passport; if the relevant Parole Board decides in favour then the prisoner is entitled to be released.
The moral arena also contains more motley claimants.
Do I have a right to pursue the person who drops litter, using its return as an excuse for expressing my anger?
In this case, even if one reinforces  the claim by supposing that littering is illegal, the answer must be No.
The most that can be said is that a good case can be made out for so doing; law-abiding spectators would probably be sympathetic, depending upon the outcome.
The use of ‘right’, in such circumstances, seems to be a clear case of special pleading that my decision is justified by some unambiguous legality.
Since I know that it is not , then my use of it is a bit of rhetoric .
It would have been more honest to say that I thought the litterbug needed a lesson.
A young girl at a picnic, let us suppose, has some peanuts taken from her plate by a foraging squirrel and indignantly throws stones at it.
Her elder sister rebukes her: ‘It's only providing for its family; it has a right to them.
Here the rhetoric is obvious, backed up as it is by the personification of instinctive animal behaviour into that of a desperate mother driven to crime.
Had another child taken the nuts without permission then parents would probably treat the moral rights of ownership seriously since there are close legal analogies; in this case with stealing.
In like manner, it seems natural to claim the moral right that promises will be kept, and for apologies to be due if they are not; or the right to polite treatment, since they trade upon the legal parallels with contract, and assault and slander.
I am not arguing that moral rights get their sole authority from contiguous laws, although they can, but rather that the existence of such laws, having been passed in a deliberative and ultimately democratic manner and being constantly under test by the legislature, is evidence that these types of transaction are important enough for the maintenance of civilised life as to require such formal recognition.
This seems close to what Williams says, in the above quotation, that rights are to be understood as ‘assuring expectations’ of which animals are incapable (which is not to deny that we might have such expectations concerning the treatment of animals):
People must rely as far as possible on not being killed or used as a resource, and on having some space and objects and relations with other people they can count as their own….
Considerations that are given deliberative priority in order to secure reliability constitute obligations; corresponding to those obligations are rights, possessed by people who benefit from the obligations.
(Williams 1985: 185)
Moral rights in dispute
Now what remains to be settled is the status of those claims for moral rights that do not enjoy the reflected sanction of the law (examples of which I have already slighted as rhetoric), and those, perhaps more all-absorbing ones, that are thought meritorious enough by some to become laws.
Two obvious, and ultimately successful, candidates were cited above; the first being the alleged right of those elected to Parliament to be paid for their services, and the second the claim that women had a moral right to vote.
Both proposals provoked a considerable amount of opposition at the time; the drama of the bitter, tragic, and prolonged struggle of the suffragettes, in particular, will endure as part of our cultural heritage.
Arguments against the first measure were also pushed with vigour.
They really mattered in a society remote from our own where the prestige of many professions, including the polite ranks of clergy and the armed services, catered to the motivations only of duty, vocation, or ambition.
This was fair comment at the time; some of it doubtless justified.
The reasons for resisting women's suffrage were equally entrenched in traditional prejudice, as we would judge it with hindsight, but they were nonetheless sincerely felt for all that.
The point to stress is that rights which we now tend to regard as unquestionable were bones of serious contention in the past, and, like present-day calls for the return of capital punishment, might well have remained so.
The reverse also is the case.
What the Victorians and Edwardians accepted, and the law enshrined, as natural privileges due to birth, social connection, and education, are fiercely contested these days.
Now the rights to vote and to receive reasonable payment for one's work are representative of a special category of alleged rights.
They are examples of what are variously called ‘natural’, inherent, inalienable', or ‘human’ rights.
Animals possess legal rights; although, as we have seen, the notion is more restrictive than that of human entitlement.
Laws in most countries protect them against cruelty and other forms of abuse.
But liberationists like Regan and Clive Hollands (1985), as we saw in earlier chapters, scorn this as requiring no more than kindness towards animals (Hollands, for example, dismissed it as ‘a Victorian concept’) and demand a great deal more.
Their language frequently evokes the domain of human rights, no more so than in the ‘Declaration against speciesism’, which concluded Chapter I, where we have a transliteration of the US Declaration of 1776.
If, as seems to  be the case, animals are alleged to posses rights with all the charisma attaching to these more fundamental notions, we need to clear the air by examining the extent to which human beings do.
Natural rights
The law, I have argued, is relatively fixed.
It will fail to perform its function of maintaining a stable society if people's expectations cannot be reasonably guaranteed for some time to come.
But its provisions are not sacred.
Even in cases where a written constitution exists, such as in France or the United States, the introduction of interpretational devices can soften the letter of the law (witness the continuing debate in America between ‘strict constructionists’ and the rest).
The US citizen's historic right to bear arms, for example, is thought by most of them to be both outdated and counter-productive, yet it was taken by the founding fathers to be ‘self-evident’, inherently the due of human beings.
Were they wrong?
Are its contemporary critics at fault?
Or is natural rights a confused notion?
I suggest that it is a confused notion.
The only plausible way historically to guarantee the authority of such rights has been to see them as the issue of a divine law-giver.
In this guise they embody fundamental truths which are permanent throughout time and space.
This is the theory of Natural Law.
In ways that are seldom very clear, although in which inevitably revelation plays a part, the terrestrial instruments of the Divine (the Biblical prophets, the rabbis, Mohammed and the Koran, Christ and the Bible) derive from these natural laws not only the more temporal and local moral  paraphernalia but also, in collaboration with jurists, dictate the content of the civil law.
Both the French and American Declarations make explicit reference to their theological inspiration.
Theories, however, as we have already seen, are notoriously prone to being wielded in support of often contradictory ways of behaving and believing.
The natural law doctrine of a core of unassailable and self-evident moral truths rapidly gets squashed by the mountain of successive interpretations which devitalise even the simple phrases of something like the Ten Commandments.
It was this impatience with the manipulative potential inherent in talk of natural rights, and the possibility of its being used to delay or reverse urgently needed measures to ameliorate the lot of the common man, which was Bentham's reason for dismissing it all as rubbish.
In a famous passage in his Anarchical Fallacies — An Examination of the Declaration of Rights (1795) we read,
That there are no such things as natural rights…no such things as natural rights opposed to, in contradistinction to, legal: that the expression is merely figurative…
Reasons for wishing there were such things as rights, are not rights;— a reason for wishing that a certain right were established, is not that right — want is not supply — hunger is not bread…
Natural rights is simple nonsense: natural and imprescriptible rights, rhetorical nonsense,— nonsense upon stilts.
But this rhetorical nonsense ends in the old strain of mischievous nonsense: for immediately a list of these pretended natural rights is given…there is not, it seems, any one of which any government can , upon any occasion whatever, abrogate the smallest particle.
(Bentham 1962: II.
500–1)
This gave rise to so-called legal positivism.
Any talk of rights other than those enshrined in the (positive) law is dangerous because it can be used by fanatics or the self-serving to subvert that law.
The mere fact that people are convinced that freedom, for example, is a good thing, even that God desires it for us, does not make it more than wishful thinking.
Rights without the backbone of legal sanction, Bentham contends, is just talk.
The only principle that should guide legislators, and it is a moral principle stemming from the revolutionary ferment on both sides of the Atlantic, is to advance the general welfare.
(Note that its pre-legal status would deny even this as a right .)
Since the Second World War, however, the climate of opinion has reversed itself.
It is again fashionable to talk, this time of human rights, with the same inalienable and even self-evident character of the earlier natural rights or the rights of Man.
The United Nations 1948 Declaration lists no fewer than thirty main Articles with numerous dependent entitlements.
It represents a summation of the received humanism of the latter half of the century, including the main provisions of its eighteenth-century predecessors (life, liberty, security, and the pursuit of happiness) and with gestures towards more partial demands for Trades Union membership, paid holidays, and freedom to travel, yet without any obvious grounding in a religious deity.
Most of its requirements are incurably vague and therefore fair game for the most wilful of  interpreters , others, such as the right of unrestricted travel or for paid holidays (tell that to a Sudanese peasant), are totally impractical.
It is difficult to view the  talk of ‘rights’ here other than in the light of Bentham's scepticism.
The provisions are well-intentioned hopes, for which arguments may be forthcoming, but with which many will disagree.
Its sole authority is that of the United Nations Organisation itself.
The charge of rhetoric sticks.
The language of rights evokes the context of legal entitlement backed up by civil enforcement.
In Some cases, those where laws have been enacted , this will be justified, but for those that remain mere hopes it is no more than a persuasive figure of speech.
Regan (1983: 268) quotes the philosopher Richard Hare who in his article ‘Justice and equality’ denounces those obsessed with asking about their rights; they will,
being human, nearly always answer that they have those rights, whatever they are, which will promote a distribution of goods which is in the interest of their own social group.
The rhetoric of rights, which is engendered by this question, is a recipe for class war, and civil war.
In pursuit of these rights, people will, because they have convinced themselves that justice demands it, inflict almost any harms on the rest of society and on themselves.
(Hare 1978: 130)
This is strong stuff, true only in a minority of instances, but Hare's point is that the potential for stupidity and even tragedy is always present when people mislead themselves and others into thinking that if they want something strongly enough then they are entitled to it.
Some contemporary defenders of human rights, and with them animal rights, such as Bernard Rollin, use in their support the arguments of Ronald Dworkin in his influential book Taking Rights Seriously (1977).
Dworkin's starting point is that the content of a particular law is almost invariably open to the interpretation of judges.
Hard cases test the ‘rules of recognition’ and, in the absence of explicit guidance, impossible for every contingency, judgements are made on the basis of prevailing feelings about ‘justice or fairness or some other dimension of morality’(1977: 22).
For example, in an important case where a murderer claimed an inheritance, having been named in the will of his victim, judges invoked the moral opinion that someone ought not to profit by their crime (23).
This referral to morality, Dworkin argues, is endemic to all law.
The concentration of the legal positivists upon the use of utilitarian considerations to guide legislators, judging everything in terms of the common good, can  result in individual injustices, and human rights are necessary to protect the individual against these.
In attempting to elaborate upon this and to answer the question, ‘How do we establish other rights, or define the content of the rights which are enumerated?’,
Rollin shows how little Dworkin's argument serves to deflect the Benthamite scepticism.
‘The answer is simple’, Rollin comments, and quotes Dworkin's argument that the American Bill of Rights ‘must be understood as an appeal to moral concepts rather than laying down particular conceptions’, taking this (rightly) to mean that ‘one must use moral arguments ; one must present moral reasons and discussion’(1981: 75).
Surely we need to invert Rollin's naivety here: the answer is therefore anything but simple.
To ground the many provisions of, let us say, the UN Declaration of 1948 in the mere possibility of their being defended by moral argument is to consign them to a very combative arena indeed, the vagaries of which we have explored in this chapter and are precisely those exploited by Hare in his gloomy quotation.
It will certainly not provide the stability necessary for rights which are supposed to be inalienable and  imprescriptible , let alone self-evident.
What might perhaps be rescued however, to which Dworkin gives us a clue, is the sense of a cluster of very basic rules, the observation of which seems necessary for the understanding of rational existence as we know it.
These are the ‘unwritten rules’ of civilised life discussed in the preceding section: the keeping of promises, treating others politely, respecting their property.
The sense in which they are natural is that such ways of behaving are grounded in instinctive reactions, and their prototypes are observed in some animals.
They provide the basic impulses which prompt decisions and, as we have already seen, serve for us as important reasons for action.
But their versatility and the unpredictability of the individual moral dilemma, including, in particular, the implications of competing reasons which may be brought to bear, make it impossible to specify the courses of action in support of which these reasons will necessarily lend themselves.
The closest to an available touchstone will be those rights which, at any one time, have survived the rigours of debate and enjoy the protection of a legal system.
This is not an acid test, far less a self-evident one, but, as I have tried to show, contenders that profess to be are sure to fail.
How animals should be treated
If, as I have argued, it is normal and typical of human beings to have basic impulses to assist other creatures in distress, to find them appealing to view, and in some cases to enjoy their close proximity (infants reach out naturally towards a puppy but get agitated by wasps or beetles), it does not follow that we know how to treat them.
At the simplest level we may be in doubt, for example, whether to approach an injured bird for fear of exacerbating its plight, or be uncertain whether the bitch giving birth needs assistance.
In such cases we consult the veterinary experts.
But there are, of course, problems of a different order which also test the reliability of our initial impulses.
Is the donkey pulling a loaded cart, the sheep on its way to the slaughterhouse, or the dilapidated parrot on a perch, happy or being treated cruelly?
If our inclinations are to intervene, should we do so or resist them as sentimental?
Here the expert will be less authoritative.
Even if we are assured that the creatures in question are not in any pain, some people will prolong the argument either by insisting that they must be in some sort of distress, or by claiming that even if they are not overtly suffering, what is happening to them is cruel and unwarranted exploitation.
Now how we answer these questions will depend crucially upon what we think animals to be.
If we claim, as Regan does, that animals enjoy a whole range of cognitive abilities in the same sense in which we ascribe these to human beings , then what follows is that ‘human and animal welfare do not differ in kind’(1983: 116).
Consider the following example.
Cases frequently come to light in which submissive children have been treated literally like household slaves, often into late middle-age, by domineering parents.
That they made no complaint and knew no better would never justify such treatment.
Critics would stress the extent to which the children's freedom to map out their lives for themselves, to make genuine preferences on the basis of a range of possibilities denied them, had been stifled.
Doubtless they would also point to the misery, frustration, and sense of a life wasted, that this belated recognition would inspire in the children themselves.
Such mental distress is only possible for beings capable of comparing one chapter of their lives with another.
The possibility of reason-giving, of being capable of the awareness that one's life was one way,that it is now different, and that futility is the result, involves, as I have contended at length, the possibility of language.
Only for such beings is ignorance not bliss.
Yet Regan argues for animal welfare on the same model, making the explicit comparison with human beings:
It is…no defense of consigning either humans or animals to environments that ignore their biological, social, or psychological interests…to claim that these individuals do not know what they are missing and so cannot be any worse off for not having it.
(Regan 1983: 117)
So the implication is that in such instances animals also would be worse off.
But how?
There are two possibilities.
Overt suffering might be the result; but Regan immediately rules this out (as one also would in the case of my example).
Such environments are harmful to the interests of ‘humans or animals…whether they cause suffering or not’(117).
The alternative is that the dog, like the children, has the capability of becoming aware of the misery of its present existence, although it may never in fact do so.
But, in the absence of language, this is impossible.
Regan persists in smuggling in such propensities.
That Fido eats from the bowl of meat rather than from that containing eggplant is ‘grounds for saying that the dog prefers his normal food’(85).
As a special language-game, pointing only to the pre-linguistic prototype of human action, this would be acceptable.
But this comes down to saying no more than that the dog eats the meat not the eggplant.
But Regan wants more; specifically, he wants the human context of ‘prefer’.
Of the animal's need for water, he points out, ‘like us, and in this respect unlike flowers, they prefer to have these needs satisfied’(89).
But the human context involves the capacity to weigh the merits of the case, to give reasons for one's choice or to dismiss them.
This involves language.
The alternative to Regan's typically liberationist view of animals, which I have argued for in this book and summed up in the concluding section of Chapter 6, is that animals are primitive creatures.
Judging their welfare now becomes in many ways a much easier matter since we do not have the intervention of mysterious interests which, on Regan's model, they must be supposed to have yet will be unable to give voice to since they do not speak.
No.
Our true guide should be their perceived needs, their ‘simple’ appetitive desires devoid of the human implications that ‘desire’carries with it of being self-conscious.
The welfare of human beings, even the comparatively straightforward needs of health, food, and sex, are assessed largely in terms of the  individual's view of their own life.
But the needs of animals, what we see to be, in their interest', cannot be guided by their own views of themselves for (lacking language) they cannot have any.
We can only look to the practices within which we treat animals, be it as pets, racing animals, food, experimental subjects, or denizens of the wild, tempered by our natural disinclination to cause them needless suffering, or treat them with disrespect.
These practices dictate the criteria for our judging what constitutes needless suffering.
The needless suffering of race-horses, for example, is assessed differently from that of laboratory animals.
(We will return to these practical issues in the next chapter.)
The argument in the preceding paragraph is tantamount to accepting the interpretation put upon Kant's dictum, earlier in this chapter, that animals are means to an end: ‘That end is man.’
That they are not ‘ends in themselves’, to continue with Kantian terminology, simply marks the contrast with human beings whose desires and needs operate within the context of the pattern they impose upon their own lives.
Yet this will not rule out our taking seriously the ‘preferences’ of animals themselves (using the term in the sense of the attenuated language-game proper to them).
But the value of so doing will still be measured against our purposes for them.
Farm animals that eat cow parsley with apparent avidity will, if they lose weight, be properly prevented from so doing.
If their appetites return following the deprivation then it would be pointless of anyone to argue, after the manner of Regan, that by barring them from eating what they prefer the farmer is harming their interests.
Only if they showed signs of overt suffering, such as palpitations or symptoms of unusual aggression, ought the farmer feel constrained to act.
Thus, for animals in the absence of suffering, ignorance is bliss.
Flights of fancy: the exaggerations of welfare
If animals, particularly mature birds and the higher mammals, are taken as possessing more or less the full range of human capacities, with the exception perhaps of moral agency, and if the only dissimilarity is that the capacities are manifested in more limited ways, then there will be an almost irresistible temptation to give them moral status approaching that of recently discovered Stone Age tribes such as the Dani of Irian Jaya.
Now if we can give a sense to a residue of basic rules which qualify as human rights, as I have argued, then a respect for life would certainly be one of them.
And if the Dani are  being systematically wiped out, as Edward Whitley alleges, then such rights are being shamelessly violated (1989: 18).
Rollin's parallel is predictable:
What of animals' rights to life?
The point seems clear.
If one takes the position that human right to life is absolute, then one must show a morally relevant difference between human and animal life that justifies denying that an animal's right to life is absolute, and I believe we have shown that such a difference is not readily found.
(Rollin 1981: 48)
(In fairness to Rollin he does allow that such rights may be breached, but only for life-or-death reasons.
Our ‘mere gustatory predilection for meat’, in his eyes, certainly does not qualify.)
Now there is a huge gulf between the liberationist picture of mammals having the moral status of honorary human beings, albeit primitive ones, with rights in tandem, and the view which I have advanced that mammals are primitive beings .
Fish, beetles, protozoans, and trees, will be successively more primitive beings.
If the Dani are being killed simply to make space for settlers from Java then it is appalling, and for reasons previously advanced on behalf of the Ethiopian tribeswoman.
But if animals are primitive beings then none of this applies to them.
An animal does indeed strive instinctively to keep alive, much as it will forage for food (plants in unconscious and less mobile ways do also), but, lacking language, it is unduly anthropomorphic to describe this as hoping or aspiring to live to a ripe old age; except perhaps as a joke.
It would be even more fanciful to claim that the animal has plans.
If, furthermore, animals lack self-consciousness, as I have argued in Chapter 6, then no sense can be given (a far stronger claim than that we do not know) to the contention that they are aware of the prospect of death and terrified at its implications.
(I will return to this point in Chapter 8.)
This must not be seen as condoning the random killing of animals; far from it.
In the first place, elaborating upon arguments in previous sections, our instinctive impulses to avoid cruelty will normally extend to their needlessly being killed.
(That some people lack these impulses is normally grounds for criticism; we call them sadists, cruel, or, if it is by way of business, then merely hardened.)
Secondly, what is or is not needless killing will again be determined by the role of the animals in the practices in which we employ them.
The wardens in a National Park, or game reserve, will cull only those deer necessary to  march the herd to the available food supply.
Unless and until the killing of animals for food becomes illegal then farmers will rear and select those creatures that need to be killed to meet the demand.
Rollin's confusion stems from his assumption that because animals have needs we may conclude that they have interests, which, like those of human beings, are owing to the possessor.
This is not so.
We pay attention only to what is in the interests of an animal, since it is incapable of the awareness that it has an interest.
And what is ‘in the interests’ of animals is mediated by human practices that involve them.
Rollin quotes some biblical examples of regulations which, as he quaintly puts it, ‘bespeak an eloquent awareness of the status of animals as ends in themselves’(52).
This would be mildly surprising given that the primary emphasis of both the Old and New Testaments is of man's ‘dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth’(Gen. 1 v. 26).
Two of his examples are the prohibitions against plowing ‘with an ox and an ass together’(Deut .
22 v. 10), and against muzzling the ox ‘when he treadeth out the corn’(Deut .
25 v. 4).
But these are just as convincingly seen as injunctions which any sensible farmer, keen to use his animals most efficiently, would employ.
Needlessly to hamper working animals bespeaks more eloquently of bad husbandry.
This brings us to another group of alleged animal rights which relate to its functioning as a biological organism.
Rollin writes: ‘An animal has a right to the kind of life that its nature dictates….
This nature is defined by the functions and aims (not necessarily conscious aims) of the creature in question’(52–3).
It is in this spirit that Rollin interpreted the biblical examples.
The patriarchs of that distant agrarian culture are supposed to have been motivated by the rights of farm animals to do what comes naturally to them.
But other examples will better illustrate what Rollin has in mind:
A captive giraffe has a right to a cage in which it can stand straight up…
Or a bird surely has a right to fly, and keeping a bird captive in a small cage that prevents this is immoral in much the same way as is not allowing a person to express himself verbally…
(Rollin 1981: 53)
Most reasonable people would side with the rhetoric of ‘rights’ here, particularly of the giraffe's plight were it unnaturally cramped.
The analogies with human incarceration are uncomfortably close.
But the ground of the complaint would not be that the giraffe's right to self  determination was being thwarted, as we would say of a human being in a cage, but the general distaste at the conviction that the animal must be suffering severe discomfort.
Now what of the bird's right to fly?
This example is far less clear cut.
If the bird were dashing itself against the bars, feathers flying, then the similarities to human suffering would arouse impulses to assist, even to release it, like the giraffe.
But what if the bird were quiescent?
To say, in the abstract, that birds have a right to fly seems to me rather foolish if it be taken as saying more than that most birds fly naturally.
But it does not follow from this, as Rollin seems to suppose, that we ought to allow them to do so in the absence of clear signs of distress.
We have only to think of numberless caged birds the world over who are better fed, more healthy, and longer lived than their fellows in the wild, yet apparently contented despite their inability to do little more than flap their wings.
The temptation is to anthropomorphise their plight, to compare them with human beings in similar situations (as Rollin does explicitly) who would almost certainly be distressed at the opportunities that they were foregoing and make protest.
Yet if, like John Cromartie in David Garnett's novella A Man in the Zoo , such a person did not object to being caged up (Cromartie enjoyed it) then we would raise no objection to its continuing, however unenviable we might think it to be (Garnett 1932).
Why not adopt the same approach to the bird who shows no distress and, lacking self-consciousness, is incapable of considering its position one way or the other?
Animals and imbeciles
It is impossible to discuss in any depth the merits of treating animals in one way rather than another without making comparisons with human infants and imbeciles.
It goes without saying that almost invariably the instances of animal behaviour that we find ourselves discussing involve adult creatures.
Yet the capabilities of mature mammals and birds to fend for themselves, to care for their offspring, and to interact with their own and other species, far surpass those of the 12-month-old baby or the anencephalic with whom they are so frequently bracketed.
These abilities promote animals in our affections or, to put it more academically, are moral points in their favour.
Yet most babies rapidly and without effort cross the language barrier, emerging slowly into self-consciousness and incipient moral agency, a barrier which for animals is insurmountable.
Babies also become  human adults; the significance of which will be reserved for the next section.
Imbeciles may well have been adult persons, if their disability were due to accident or disease.
These variations may well affect our decisions about the treatment proper to subjects in the respective categories.
Yet it is dangerous to be doctrinaire about precise significance.
Moral theorists, and not just liberationists, get very excited about marking out the differences between cases which are ‘morally relevant’ and those which are not.
(Utilitarians like Singer, for example, put exaggerated emphasis upon the capacity for suffering, whilst Regan, as we have seen, takes refuge in the theology of ‘inherent value’.)
But the realities of decision making, as I have tried to show earlier in this chapter, are not so readily pinned down.
It would surely be over-hasty to argue that a mother, for example, who clearly preferred her showjumpers, or even her collection of books, to her children, was necessarily in the wrong; she might nonetheless treat her offspring very well.
Even so, our feelings about the mistreatment of the permanently retarded tend to be particularly strong.
It is a category, as we have seen, which encompasses a range of disabilities from Down's syndrome (whose victims may even learn to read or write) to microcephaly (where the manifestations of life are no more than those of a vegetable) and these differences are usually of account.
That a hospital lets babies with minimal brains and no conscious potential die would occasion less hostility, and many might even approve, than if mongoloids were dealt a similar fate.
Yet if it were known that microcephalic babies (perhaps older infants as well— would it make a difference?) were regularly sold to research laboratories, then there would undoubtedly be an outcry.
The liberationists are alive to the implications of these sentiments for the cause of animals.
Stephen Clark in his article Animal wrongs' puts their case as well as it can be put:
We know that we ought to care for the subnormal precisely because they are subnormal: they are weak, defenceless, at our mercy.
They can be hurt, injured, frustrated.
We ought to consider their wishes and feelings, not because we will be hurt if we don't, but because they will be hurt.
And the same goes for those creatures like them who are of our kind though not of our species…
If the one is wrong (as it surely is), so is the other, for they are, in moral terms, the very same act.
(Clark 1978: 149)
This argument invites us to ignore the relevance of any distinctions  which we may draw between subnormal human beings and other animals.
If we accept it, as many people seem to with enthusiasm, then we would have to include the rats, mice, dogs, cats, and numerous other creatures used in the laboratory, in our outcry over the revelations about the sale of microcephalic infants.
The argument will have done its work.
Yet it will strike others as suspicious, if well meaning, sleight-of-hand.
Three difficulties present themselves:
1.
It ignores the obvious discriminations which we make between similar treatment of different species within the animal kingdom.
The casual shooting of a chimpanzee or a horse is surely regarded as more reprehensible than routinely stepping on a beetle or laying a trap for mice.
All are equally weak, defenceless, and at our mercy but there is no question here of ‘the very same act’.
It is not just that beetles and mice are pests (we might have said the same of ladybirds and the pursuit of wildfowl), but rather that the relative similarity of the larger mammals to ourselves materially affects our thinking and is reflected in our instinctive responses.
2.
Clark does not help his case by talking of the human ‘subnormal’ for it is a class, as we have seen, that manifests a wide range of distinctly human abilities.
Our care for the teenage mongoloid, for example, is powerfully influenced by its own plans and aspirations, and this will obtain to a diminishing extent with the more severely retarded.
In many cases the possibility of being used in painful research would be a prospect that they could grasp and would not relish.
That none of this is within the competence of animals would seem to influence a preference for them as laboratory subjects.
In such cases the similar treatment of human subnormals and lower animals would be far removed from ‘the very same act’.
3.
Clark's argument might appear to be on firmer ground had he restricted the human comparison to total imbeciles (anencephalics and the like) where the complete lack of linguistic ability, and even of its behavioural prototypes in many cases, would prevent any appeal to exclusively human propensities.
That we do not treat animals with at least the same respect that we treat such unfortunate human creatures is seen by the liberationists as ‘speciesism’ in its purest form based as it is only upon the anatomical difference.
There are four cumulative replies to this charge.
First of all one can deflect it by denying that some forms of species solidarity are mere bias.
If homo sapiens is unequivocally demarcated from the rest of the animal kingdom by the  language barrier then it would seem reasonable to accord something like honorary status to those existing in its image, as it were, but otherwise enfeebled through age or retardation.
Certainly the spirit of the legal provisions for such unfortunates is onerous in its detail and wide in application, extending even to strict regulations covering the proper treatment of human corpses .
Even household pets, as MacIver reminded us, can be accorded similar if less formal privileges.
This urge for special consideration, in the second place, is reinforced by our normal instinctive responses to assist those in distress which tend to operate even more peremptorily within species than across them.
Thirdly, human imbeciles will usually have relations or medical custodians deeply concerned for their welfare whose wishes have a right to be heard.
Again only pets (and some zoo creatures) bear comparison.
Finally, it is possible to reverse the flow of the argument and consider whether the attention paid to what some will regard as mere wrecks of humanity, quite apart from the treatment of human corpses, is not exaggeratedly sentimental.
Perhaps, after all, anencephalics should be considered for suitable research, although I personally would not subscribe to such a view.
This reversal of the argument will clearly not assist the cause of animals.
The comparison with human imbeciles can serve to show animals in a more creditable light.
They are, as we have frequently observed, capable of feats of sentience and locomotion that surpass anything of which we are capable.
The rather weary drawing of parallels between animals and instances of human retardation diverts attention from their true source of value to us.
Animals may be primitive beings but they are not thereby defective ones.
In this sense, animals (and we might add primitive peoples and even the environment) are sui generis ; they are perfect of their kind.
I can make the point more contentiously.
The vast amount of medical research devoted to the early detection and treatment of foetal abnormalities is witness to the fact that society would prefer that there were no retarded babies born.
This does not imply that existing defectives should be done away with, nor that we should condemn the decision of a couple, whose foetus is at risk, that to have a retarded baby would be preferable to having none at all.
Nor is it to deny that defective dependants will often, and quite understandably, attract far fiercer loyalties by that very fact.
The point is that normally such parents would prefer that their babies were not defective and would welcome a non-controversial cure were it to become available.
Actively to wish to give birth  to a retarded baby, or to insist that one remain so when it might be otherwise, would be perverse and eccentric.
In this sense the world would be a better place without mental retardation, madness, and senile dementia.
But if someone were to claim that it would be a better world without birds and bears, trees and rivers, and the Dani people, then we would have to assume that they were either joking, lying, or crazy.
To highlight the sui generis nature of animals is not liberationist.
It serves only to put their comparison with human imbeciles in proper perspective.
It is a substantial prop but supports no more than the traditional safeguards for the protection of species and against cruelty and abuse.
Infants and potentiality
In the preceding section we saw the obvious advantages for the liberationists in urging that animals be included in the respect and sympathy normally accorded to human sub-normals.
But the inclusive nature of this category required that comparisons be limited to the most severe cases; those lacking any semblance of human capability.
Now normal pre-linguistic human infants, for a relatively brief period of their development, share none of the conscious hopes, plans, and desires for a continuing life, of the mongoloid child.
To this extent the baby is comparable to the total imbecile; or, if we include its sentience, limited locomotion, and prototypical behaviour, it is not unlike a cat or gibbon.
Yet society tends to lavish care and protection upon normal babies far surpassing that accorded anencephalics or even cases of Down's syndrome and mongolism where letting die (‘passive euthanasia’) is frequently defended.
Now if the liberationist can persuade us that this passionate regard for normal young babies is based upon an unjustifiable prejudice in favour merely of our own species, and that apart from this, animals are no different, then consistency should require that both groups ought to be accorded the same treatment.
The obvious objection to this ploy is that whereas babies, soon to be crossing the language barrier without let or hindrance, have the potential to develop into normal autonomous persons, even the highest animals do not.
It is on this account that we talk of the baby's right to life, much as we would of a normal adult.
(We cannot, of course employ this argument on behalf of anencephalics, although mongoloids could benefit from a variant of it.)
It is, however, vulnerable to a well-known reply.
Singer, for example, although he is  here questioning the alleged rights of the human foetus , admits that it must have a potential that
surpasses that of a cow or pig; but it does not follow that the foetus has a stronger claim to life.
In general, a potential X does not have all the rights of an X. Prince Charles is a potential King of England, but he does not now have the rights of a king.
Why should a potential person have the rights of a person?
(Singer 1979: 120)
This is a good argument for it should warn us that there are degrees of potential not all of which are automatic claims to fame.
(This realisation seems completely to disarm McCloskey (1975: 415), for example.)
This is well illustrated in Singer's own context of the abortion debate.
The one-day-old normal baby is a potential person with a right to life that very few would deny it.
But so is the 6-month-old foetus.
In its case, although just viable, opinions over its right to life are fiercely contested.
Now what of the zygote, the newly fertilised egg?
It too, in a sense, is a potential person but it would seem the act of a fanatic to insist that it has a right to life.
And what of the sperm?
It also, with the right degree of cooperation, may become President of the United States.
The principle seems to be that the closer the potential person approaches its realisation and the fewer the remaining hurdles to surmount, the more attributes of the actual person seem proper to it.
But precision is lacking; the debate over the foetus at six months contrasts with the unanimity over the zygote and new-born baby.
Let us now turn to Prince Charles.
Note how Singer muddies the water in his case.
The general principle (line 3) uses the world ‘all’, the implication being that a potential X has some of the rights of an X. This is true of anyone a mere heartbeat from the monarchy.
Prince Charles has many of the powers of a king, particularly in the Queen's absence, and to a diminishing extent so do the other princes, princesses and minor royalty, at further removes from the throne.
Someone is doubtless fiftieth in line, and still a potential monarch, but with no supermarkets to open or ships to name, the rights have run out and the potential succession will be little more than a talking point.
But Singer omits the ‘all’ in the two concluding sentences of the quotation which gives the misleading impression that Prince Charles has none of the rights of a king.
What can we say of the infant?
We are aware of its potential.
All being well, it will slowly qualify to make decisions upon progressively  more major matters.
It will gain the rights to an education, and eventually to marry, vote, and buy alcohol.
But it does not now have these rights although it is highly desirable (for us) that its future progress towards them be facilitated.
What is therefore owing to it, what is ‘in its interest’ are our custodial duties of care and protection.
These are the only rights of persons (we can certainly call them rights since they are protected by law) that it is necessary and makes sense to attribute to the infant now.
Animals bear no comparison, lacking this potential; the care and protection due them is no less peremptory but it is dramatically limited in scope by their ‘primitive’ status.
So, against Clark, it must be argued that it is misleading to claim that because animals, imbeciles, and normal infants are all weak, defenceless, and at our mercy, to treat any of them in the same way (say by killing them for food or using them in research) is ‘in moral terms, the very same act’(Clark 1978: 149).
A great deal hangs upon the species difference, the human capacity of the less subnormal, and the potentiality of normal infants.
Furthermore, the possibility of reversing the flow of the argument on behalf of imbeciles, mooted in the preceding section, and to wonder if our regard for them is not in part sentimentality, will not work for normal infants.
The reversibility depended upon the permanence of severe retardation whereas infants are not defective and their human potential is a fact.
If the direct comparison with human beings, defective or otherwise, is not to be the touchstone of our treatment of animals; if they are, as I have argued,sui generis primitive beings, then what may we do with them?
What is permissible?
It is to such practical questions that we turn in the final chapter.
CHAPTERS OF DISCONTENT: EATING, EXPERIMENTING, ZOOS, BLOODSPORTS
INTRODUCTION
Bernard Williams touches upon several themes emerging from the last chapter which will directly affect the practical conclusions of this one:
A concern for nonhuman animals is indeed a proper part of human life, but we can acquire it, cultivate it, and teach it only in terms of our understanding of our selves.
Human beings both have that understanding and are the objects of it, and this is one of the basic respects in which our ethical relations to each other must always be different from our relations to other animals.
Before one gets to the question of how animals should be treated, there is the fundamental point that this is the only question there can be: how they should be treated.
The choice can only be whether animals benefit from our practices or are harmed by them.
This is why speciesism is falsely modelled on racism and sexism, which really are prejudices.
To suppose that there is an ineliminable white or male understanding of the world, and to think that the only choice is whether blacks or women should benefit from ‘our,(white, male) practices or be harmed by them: this is already to be prejudiced.
But in the case of human relations to animals, the analogues to such thoughts are simply correct.
(Williams 1985: 118–19)
The message here is straightforward.
If we are required to make a decision which has consequences for other people, and if we wish to treat them properly, then it is vital that we take into account their own views on the matter.
Simply to decide upon the basis of what we think is best for them can be a form of prejudice.
Many contemporary abuses bear witness to this.
The alleged displacement of the Dani in Irian Jaya is one.
The deplorable and apparently continuing goings-on of the American fundamentalist New Tribes Mission in the Gran Chaco wilderness of Paraguay, if the reports of Norman Lewis are even half true, is another (1989: 20–4).
To round up clans of Ayoreo Indians with the dubious intent of rescuing them for Christianity, massacring those  resistant to ‘taming, imprisoning the remainder and allowing them to sink into ill-health and torpor, seems monstrous.
Even if the treatment were kindly it would still be prejudiced.
If we were convinced that conversion would be in the Ayoreo's interests, it nonetheless should be entered into willingly.
With animals it is different.
The best that can be hoped for, on their behalf, is that human beings are kindly disposed towards them.
The most primitive people, as we have seen, have a clear sense of what is owed to them in social and quasi-commercial transactions.
For others knowingly to ride roughshod over these expectations is where the concept of ‘exploitation’ begins to get a foothold.
But animals can have no expectations in this sense since they lack moral personality — a sense of rightful give and take.
The entitlements that animals assuredly have, embodied in prolific legislation, are those that human beings have given them.
They are based upon our ways of treating animals, whether it be killing them painlessly or protecting an endangered species or preserving a natural habitat.
The same, of course, goes for human infants or incompetents (and for trees as well ).
In all of these cases special considerations, which I have elaborated, serve to limit what is thought to be appropriate treatment; but in none of them do we consult the recipient's point of view, for there is no such view to be had.
Even when we defer to a creature's apparent preference (for a particular type of food, let us say) the decision will be dictated by our desire to keep it fit and healthy.
Abuses and abolition
If Norman Lewis, a reputable journalist, is to be believed, then the Ayoreo Indians have been shamelessly abused by the New Tribes Mission with, it seems, the open support of Paraguay's ruler.
Less is known of the Dani's fate, but let us suppose that Whitley's worst fears are justified (1989: 18).
What, if the means were available, should be done?
In the absence of a convincing case for the defence, we would undoubtedly require that the Indonesian authorities be seen to have  cleaned up their act and that the New Tribes Mission be put out of business in South America and perhaps worldwide.
But would it not be dangerously confused to call for an end to all missionary activities or every government resettlement programme, even in Indonesia and South America?
A practice may be abused without its necessarily being a bad one.
We would not wish to outlaw parenthood on the grounds that some children are abused, even murdered, in the home.
Most of the calls for the abolition of our routines involving animals, particularly those appearing in the Press or the propaganda material issued by organisations like Animal Aid or the League Against Cruel Sports, ignore this basic logical point.
So-called ‘horror stories’(gory illustrations depicting the de-beaking of turkeys, dogs being hanged, huntsmen exulting over the corpse of a fox, or reports of a senile researcher who failed properly to anaesthetise his animal subjects) may well be effective copy and have an impact upon gullible readers but are of limited argumentative worth.
A genuine case for abolition, if it is so based, needs to establish both that the alleged abuses are as stated and that they are endemic to the practice; thus unavoidable .
KILLING FOR FOOD
The number of animals killed to satisfy our taste for meat dwarfs those used in the other main areas of controversy, those of experimentation and hunting.
Richard Askwith (1988: 22) gives the British Home Office figures for 1986, which are a typical comparison for the UK.
Just over 3 million experiments were performed upon animals, mostly rats and mice.
Richard Ryder's figures for 1987 are slightly higher at 3.6 million (1989: 242) .2 UK Government statistics for 1988 and 1989 show a steady decline in the use of research animals since 1977 (Highfield 1990).
But around 400 million animals are eaten annually in the UK.
The irony, of course, is that since a considerable proportion of these were bred for the purpose, a large number of animals would not otherwise have lived were they not destined to die prematurely.
(Askwith also mentions ‘some 100 million birds and small rodents estimated to have fallen prey to domestic cats, although surely such a statistic could hardly be arrived at with any confidence.)
What these figures will not have taken account of is, for example, the 54,000 kilos of frogs legs imported in 1986 mainly from Bangladesh and Indonesia.
Frog-catching gangs ensure that this is a thriving trade in these countries although it is conducted in hideously  unhygienic conditions and there are adverse ecological implications  due to the increase in  malarial and other waterborne pests.
Partly for these reasons, and partly due to pressure from western organisations like Compassion in World Farming, the Indian government has recently banned the slaughter of frogs for this purpose.
A related example, which provides a useful introduction to a more detailed look at the complaints levelled at our own practices, frequently surfaces in the national Press.
Campaigns are being waged against the Republic of Korea where laws forbidding the eating of cats and dogs, the latter a traditional source of medicinal potency, are openly flouted in the ubiquitous ‘boshintang’(dog-meat soup) houses.
‘Gae sogu’, a dog-meat wine, is also popular.
Yet the so-called ‘International Alert’ issued by the World Society for the Protection of Animals, which highlights the charges, is curiously ill-focussed.
Its petition refers to the ‘inherent cruelty’ of dog eating (the use of ‘inherent’seeming to imply that abuse is inevitable) but the supporting literature does little to substantiate this.
The dogs are raised mainly on breeding farms and are described as ‘generally well kept in outdoor pens with adequate room’.
The traditional method of slaughter by slow strangulation might well seem revolting but that is admitted to be a ‘waning practice’.
Its replacement by ‘a sharp blow on the back of the neck or a blow from a mallet to the forehead’ is relatively humane if administered skilfully.
The transport to market is certainly slipshod but the dogs illustrated look in good condition and, indeed, would not sell if they were dilapidated since the animals are generally sold live.
If there are abuses then they are clearly avoidable, and this, as we have seen, provides inadequate grounds for abolishing the (in Korea's case admittedly illegal) practice of dog eating.
Vegetarianism as a test case
Clark, Regan, and Linzey are, for different reasons, in favour of the total abolition of everything associated with meat eating.
Linzey, of whom I have said little, bases his case upon strong ‘theos’ rights for animals emanating from the God of Christianity being on the side of, or ‘for ’his creation (1989: 40–4).
It is an insecure notion which runs into troubles that Linzey himself raises (43–4): the Old Testament seems to point to something approaching a psychic hierarchy, and Christ ate fish and conceivably meat as well.
But the most serious hurdle is the fact of a creation in which animals kill each other.
Linzey rather lamely consigns this to the problem of evil.
Yet Clark sees it as a perfectly natural phenomenon and not to be condemned nor  interfered with (1977: 166–7).
Linzey's theology is typically manipulable into something approaching Clark's position.
If God created primitive living things like plants for animals to eat (do plants have theos rights?), then why should He not have created more complex but still primitive beings which kill each other and may be eaten by man who has been set in dominion over all else?
The liberationists, with the possible exception of Rollin, do seem to regard the use of animals for food as the cardinal vice, although it is run close by the fuss over furs and field sports.
Perhaps it is due to the disproportionate numbers killed for food, or possibly that becoming vegetarian is an unmistakable gesture that it is within anyone's competence to make.
From it follows a series of hardline implications for the other practical issues.
The only other dissenter is Mary Midgley who, with good sense, questions the pride of place given to an unambiguous vegetarianism (1983: 25–7): ‘What the animals need most urgently is probably a campaign for treating them better before they are eaten’, and she augments this by advocating a gradual move towards the consumption of less meat (27).
She needs to have added the caution that much depends upon the reasons why people are vegetarians.
My brother just dislikes the taste of meat and is faintly surprised that other people do not.
But he is not critical of meat eaters.
(He is, I suspect, in a minority among vegetarians.)
But if there were a sea change, and they became the majority that meat eaters are at present, and if this were  fuelled by the arguments of Regan or Singer, then surely it would be reasonable to expect a knock-on effect in the other contentious areas.
Consideration of utility: human welfare
In Animal Liberation and all his subsequent writings on the topic, Singer employs his animal-enhanced equality principle to argue that the consequences for all concerned would on balance be best served by almost total vegetarianism.
(The ‘almost’ allows for exceptional circumstances where, let us say, killing is the only way to obtain food (1979: 55, 105).)
What are the interests put in the scales?
Firstly, there are considerations of human well-being.
The evidence that it is inefficient to use meat for food is well documented.
If the grains, soy beans and fishmeal, which are used in the feeding of food animals in the developed world, were consumed directly by human beings then there would be something like a ninefold gain in the nutritional spin-off.
In other words, 90 per cent of the nutrients are lost in the  transformation of the grains into meat.
It is worth noting that the beneficiaries would not be the members of the developed world: ‘If we stopped feeding animals on grains, soybeans and fishmeal the amount of food saved would — if distributed to those who need it — be more than enough to end hunger throughout the world’(1979: 160).
Now the ending of all hunger would undoubtedly benefit many in underdeveloped countries in the short term; although the demographic and political implications might be slightly chilling if one ponders upon international stability in the next century.
But what of the claimed benefits for the health of developed nations?
The only fact upon which dieticians seem agreed is that in general we eat too much meat and too few vegetables, which distorts the balance of fat in our bodies.
Research suggests that the incidence of cancer, cardio-vascular complaints and other degenerative diseases, quite apart from the general ill-health resulting from obesity and lack of exercise, diminishes if our intake of meat, and other sources of fat, is lowered.
For instance, in Japan the diet, still mainly fish and rice, contains considerably less fat than that of Europe, North America and Australasia.
The Japanese also enjoy a lower incidence of cancer.
But as Carl Simonton, the radiation oncologist prominent in the holistic health movement, and others point out, this does not isolate diet as the sole or even the main cause and it is likely that cultural factors, for which Japan is unique among industrialised nations, may be more significant (Simonton et al .
1986: 38–40).
Population studies have shown that the susceptibility of institutionalised catatonic schizophrenics to cancer is very low.
(Catatonics typically do not speak or appear to listen or take necessary initiatives; they cut themselves off from human contact.)
But the incidence of cancer among paranoid schizophrenics in the same or similar  institutions eating the same or similar American diet is higher than that of the normal population (Simonton et al .
1986: 38–40).
These and similar studies suggest that the stress put upon diet, in the case of cancer and related conditions, might be misplaced.
Furthermore, meat as a known but not unique source of calories, protein, and vitamins of the A and B groups, is almost invariably included in balanced diet sheets.
Only proselytes urge that we should all desist from it entirely; and there are exceptions among even them.
I am not claiming that meat is  indispensable for good health; it is only necessary to show that a diet to which it contributes can be no less healthy than one from which it is excluded.
Utility and western society
But let us, for argument's sake, concede the nutritional point.
Whatever weight this would add to the utilitarian scales, would need to be colossal to offset the social and economic ills which might well follow.
Frey in Rights, Killing and Suffering (1983) paints a detailed picture of the possible downfall of whole economies the minutiae of which, although hinting strongly at overkill, are nonetheless plausible enough to be disturbing (197–203).
I will mention only three areas of potential catastrophe.
In the first place, a huge number of industries would be undermined, bringing the misery of unemployment to employees and their families where alternative jobs were not available.
Many localities in Europe are dominated by livestock and poultry farming and vaster areas such as the states of Iowa, South Dakota and Texas are deeply involved.
Argentina, Australia and New Zealand would have a considerable proportion of their national economies wiped out.
Secondly, our social lives would need readjustment.
If it is difficult to change habits like smoking or drinking, despite the best of intentions, then the switch to nut steaks and vegetable lasagne might be just as painful, and for those forced to it because of the unavailability of meat it would also be deeply resented.
Most traditional French, Italian, British, American and even Oriental restaurants would cease to exist in their present forms.
Thirdly, the idea of the European countryside, valuable to many as a source of beauty, history, and national pride would also be transformed.
Sheep would not safely graze nor would spring lambs nor calves; the average farmer could hardly be expected to stock them for old times' sake.
Clark is beady-eyed in his dismissal of what he seems to regard as sentimentality:
We are entitled to ask why it matters, if it is true, that there should be no such poor slaves to be seen.
Because we get aesthetic pleasure from the scene, and are therefore entitled to instigate whatever distress be necessary to achieve our satisfaction?
(Clark 1977: 65)
His alternatives are predictably bleak: ‘Much of what is now sheep country could profitably be reforested with nut-trees’(1977: 60).
Rural Britain would more and more resemble parts of the American mid-west.
Life would be strange indeed.
Singer's attempt to duck these difficulties by arguing that social changes of this magnitude would need to be phased in slowly will not survive scrutiny.
The problems would re-emerge in other forms.
What, for example, would be the time-scale envisaged?
Thirty years?
Would impatient abolitionists like Regan be prepared to wait that long?
If Frey is an exponent of gloom and doom, then Regan is a master of myopia on this issue and shows an unbecoming lack of sensitivity which suggests that his answer would be No.
In the first place, he argues, farming is a risky business (he compares it to ‘road racing’) and if the demand for his products dries up then it is just bad luck on the farmer and his dependants.
In the wider context Regan contends that, ‘though the (economic) heavens fall’ there is no case for protecting society ‘if the protection in question involves violating the rights of others [viz. farm animals]’(1983: 346–7).
The dark side of farming
Most vegetarians are so, I suspect, primarily because they object to the death and what they see as the suffering to which animals are consigned by meat eating.
The suffering involved which receives most publicity takes place in intensive or factory farms, although it is not confined to them.
These are a practical necessity and it would be quite impossible to meet the present demand for meat and dairy products, except in certain rural areas, from the products of traditional farms that were the order of the day in Europe and North America up until the Second World War:
Now, virtually all of our poultry products and about half of our milk and red meat come from animals mass-produced in huge factory-like systems.
In some of the more intensively managed ‘confinement’ operations, animals are crowded in pens and cages stacked up like so many shipping crates….
There are no pastures, no streams, no seasons, not even day and night.
Health and productivity come not from frolics…but from syringes and additive laced feed….
The typical cage in today's egg factory holds four or five hens on a 12- by 18-inch floor area.
(Mason 1985: 89, 91)
Jim Mason is writing of Britain in the early 1980s.
The percentages for the rest of modernised Europe, with the exception of Switzerland, are slightly higher and for North America they are higher still.
Patrick Sutherland estimates that of 170 million farm animals in  Britain ‘about two thirds never walk on or eat grass’(1989: 62).
Horror stories abound, originally fuelled by the publication of Ruth Harrison's Animal Machines (1964), a book which in Britain directly influenced the setting up of the first parliamentary inquiry into the new methods of animal husbandry under the chairmanship of F.W.R. Brambell.
(It reported in 1965; nothing was acted upon for about six years and even then very little was implemented.)
Close confinement encourages aggression and distorts instinctive behaviour patterns.
The result is often cannibalism, especially in chickens and turkeys, which are debeaked and often have their toes cut by the same hot-knife machine as a preventative.
Pigs also are prone to the habit.
With these it is often initiated by acute tail-biting which gets out of hand ‘and then the attacking pig or pigs continue to eat further into the back.
If the situation is not attended to, the pig will die and be eaten,(quoted by Mason 1985: 95).
The factories are rife with diseases needing attention and routine dosing of the animals with vitamins and drugs takes place, often to the point of dependency.
Singer, like Ruth Harrison, gives prominence to the methods employed in the production of veal that were pioneered in Holland.
By now, due in part to media coverage, these are fairly well known.
The calves, when only a few days old, are tethered by the neck in a stall about 60 cms wide and 150 cms long, until they are too large to turn.
It has a slatted wooden floor and is often without bedding lest it be eaten.
The calves remain ‘crated’ until taken out for slaughter between three and four months later during which time they are fed a milk-derivative liquid diet ‘enhanced’in the usual ways with vitamins, medication, and sometimes growth-promoters.
The feed needs to be as iron-free as possible in order that the eventual meat will be the light colour preferred by consumers.
Because the animal is denied the natural iron in what would be its natural food it develops anaemia.
As Singer puts it, ‘pale pink flesh is in fact anaemic flesh’(Regan and Singer 1976: 32).
This is not the end of its troubles.
The instincts to suck and later to eat roughage are often vented on the wood of its stall.
Stomach ulcers and other digestive disorders are rife and there is a high mortality rate amongst veal calves despite their brief lifetime.
Defects of utilitarian abolition?
Now Singer thinks it is undeniable that what we have here is a catalogue of inequality.
Unless we are confident that the meat we eat was produced without suffering, the equality principle ‘implies that it  was wrong to sacrifice important interests of the animal in order to satisfy less important interests of our own’(1979: 57).
However, this conclusion is not without its difficulties.
1.
Even if all meat and dairy products were produced by intensive husbandry and the alleged abuses were rife it would nonetheless be perfectly fair to argue that the possible catastrophic consequences of widespread vegetarianism for human beings, which have been pointed out, would more than outweigh the continued suffering of the animals.
Clark not only dissents but is hopeful enough to scorn utilitarian considerations about humane husbandry and so forth:
This at least cannot be true, that it is proper to be the cause of avoidable ill…this at least is dogma.
And if this minimal principle be accepted, there is no other honest course than the immediate rejection of all flesh-foods and most bio-medical research.
(Clark 1977: Preface)
2.
Not all meat and dairy products are produced intensively and Singer seems to allow that it we are confident that ours came from animals humanely bred and slaughtered then we are doing nothing wrong in eating it.
Admittedly he has some reservations even about free-range farming such as the need for castration, transportation and slaughtering techniques but, as Francis and Norman point out (1978: 516), since Singer himself thinks that much of this suffering could be eliminated, it is simply a matter of working to bring these improvements about.
Someone concerned at the suffering might well think it more appropriate to work for reformation rather than abolition.
3.
Although it is undoubtedly the case that farm animals do suffer from many of the horrors of intensive husbandry (it cannot be pleasant for a pig to be eaten alive) there are serious questions to be asked about the extent and nature of the alleged suffering.
Dr Livingstone's paralysis of feeling when seized by the lion is worth recalling.
An observer would have been convinced that Livingstone was in hideous pain but this was not so.
Injuries in war and disasters provide numerous anecdotes of the anaesthetic effects of shock; a doctor in the aftermath of London's Clapham rail crash of 1988 reported having treated several victims lying or sitting by the track in a state of bewilderment and oblivious of serious wounds; in one case an ankle was completely severed other than for a few shreds of flesh.
In most of the accounts of animal abuse, be they in factory farm or  primate laboratory, even the more sensitive monkeys are portrayed in similar ways: comatose, agitated, even neurotic, often with serious injuries, but not necessarily in pain .
This is so even of accounts by activists anxious to maximise the horror (Pacheco and Francione 1985: 136–7, Barnes 1985: 160).
We owe it to clarity to disentangle the varieties of suffering possible in a given situation.
Here is another example of the need for vigilance when assessing usually well-intentioned accounts of distress.
Singer, in his depiction of the hapless veal calf, protests that, ‘Obviously the calves sorely miss their mothers.
They also miss something to suck on’(Regan and Singer 1976: 31).
The previously-mentioned use of the wood of their stalls as a substitute is adequate grounds for the second complaint.
But to describe their state as one of missing their mothers sounds  suspiciously like hyperbole designed to wring illicit sympathy from the reader.
(We noted the same imputation by Clark (1977: 40) in the concluding section of Chapter 6.)
Are we meant to take it seriously? premature babies are routinely taken from their mothers on the maternity ward into intensive care, or sterile areas, often for long periods and although their mothers might miss them, it would be thought sentimental to claim the opposite.
What is true is that the absence of, say, its mother's milk may affect the baby's medical condition and, to this extent, it misses the milk (although unable to be aware of the fact) but not its mother.
The baby can certainly suffer complications if deprived of mother's milk and it might well be claimed that talk of its missing its mother is a special language-game pointing only to the source of the deprivation, but Singer is certainly not using the phrase with this in mind.
His use is anthropomorphic.
The calf is supposed to miss its mother as it might be said of a 4-year-old child.
But this requires the self -awareness of a developing language-user: a grasp of the significance of its mother, her absence and hoped-for return, and so on.
This is something that not even a Washoe or Lucy, far less a baby calf, begins to approach.
Slaughtering
Similar arguments to those just put forward can be used to defuse the claim, frequently made by liberationists, that animals awaiting slaughter are aware of their fate.
Harriet Schleifer is a vigorous employer of selected horror stories: ‘Thousands of animals are assembled in a single location, close to a building that all of them must  enter to die.
They cannot remain unaware of their fate, and intense fear is the natural and inevitable result’(1985: 71).
This is designed to evoke chilling reminders of men, women, and children huddled in ghastly expectation; dying in pogroms and concentration camps.
But the analogy is misplaced.
Animals must, and can only, remain unaware of their fate since to be even possibly otherwise would involve an understanding of dying, and its implications for one's desire to continue living.
(I likewise criticised Clark in Chapter 6.)
Schleifer is confusing the agitation, or even prostration, which occurs in badly run holding-yards as a result of heat, noise, overcrowding, or lack of water, with the uniquely human fear of death.
This is not to condone the abuses of transit animals.
They are rightly illegal.
If the strict regulations in most western countries governing the transportation, temporary holding, and eventual killing of farm animals, were more effectively policed, and often inadequately staffed inspectorates brought up to required strength, then mistreatment could be all but abolished.
(In Britain, for example, only a few of the larger slaughterhouses, mainly in urban areas like Birmingham, have a permanent staff of qualified veterinarians to check procedures.)
Abattoirs are forbidding places.
Visits are not encouraged and, if permitted, are best not preceded by a heavy lunch.
But far too much can be made of this.
The world is full of unlovely places and we should even be grateful that people are prepared to do important work in uncongenial surroundings like prisons, operating theatres, field hospitals, soap factories, coal-mines, and sewage farms.
Slaughtermen in the UK need to be licensed (although the requirements are often easily met and there are no statutory national standards) and those that I have observed take a grim pride in doing the job with efficiency.
(Doubtless there will be the odd sadist in their midst but this is predictable of any group of more than thirty people.)
A contentious issue within the trade, relevant to our enquiry, was the growing problem of ritual slaughter required by orthodox Muslims and Jews which must be undertaken by special religious functionaries like the Jewish schochet .
Despite being generally unlicensed these tend to work alongside the regular staff usually in the larger urban abattoirs.
Traditional methods require that the animal bleed to death after having its throat cut; an agonising and unsavoury procedure lasting between one and two minutes.
This, however, can be avoided by ‘pre-stunning’ before blood-letting; a compromise which ensures that the animals die insentient.
Yet for some time the  imposition of this compromise was resisted and resented as seeming to undermine the spirit of the ritual methods.
But times seem to have changed and pre-stunning now meets only token  resistance , if any at all.
Indeed recent reports on the Muslim-owned United Food Corporation, centred in County Mayo and one of the world's largest meat suppliers, suggest that the Islamic ritual, which governs all its slaughter, can be interpreted as requiring only that the killing be performed by the appropriate Muslim using normal abattoir equipment (Murdoch 1990: 28).
Conclusion
It is certainly possible to defend vegetarianism.
Apart from merely disliking the taste of meat, like that of anything else, one might also decide that the cruelty involved in some intensive farming, although not endemic to it, is unacceptable even in the short term.
Others might be persuaded by the current furore over the possible spread of spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) to nonruminants such as poultry and pigs, and decide to give up all meat (contrary to the majority of expert opinion).
But it is equally justifiable to eat meat whilst being concerned about current abuses in its production and preparation, none of which, given time and energy, are thought by bodies like the RSPCA, to be irremovable.
Intensive farming is, after all, in its infancy and the campaigns against it, both in Britain and the USA, have resulted already in remedial legislation on such issues as debeaking, overcrowding, cage sizes, and the use of steroids and other growth promoters.
But attempts to convince us that the eating of meat and fish is an evil invasion of the inalienable rights of animals and that it should cease forthwith are a sham.
They can only succeed with the help either of opportunistic flights of fancy such as inherent value or theos rights, or by otherwise obscuring the differences between creatures like ourselves, who use language, and those that do not.
The result of so doing is the sad and mischievous error of seeing little or no moral difference between the painless killing of chickens and that of unwanted children.
EXPERIMENTATION
All Of the practical issues raised in this chapter have their expert domain.
The possible spread of BSE from ruminants to other food  animals, even To pets and human beings, is a typical case in point.
The propriety of using animals in scientific education and research is, however, dominated by esoteric debate to the extent that the average reader is easily overawed into thinking that there is no room for non-specialist opinion which is other than rattle-brained (of which there is no lack).
Obviously for the average electrician, stockbroker, or humanities-trained academic to be laying down the law un the value of a human blood substitute from cows or the spread of BSE would, as things stand, be foolish.
Yet it would be quite proper, and indeed is necessary, for non-scientists to have views about whether or not to buy meat for the coming weekend.
Furthermore, let us suppose that it becomes established, to the satisfaction of most experts, that there is a definite if slight possibility of the spread of BSE to human beings, similar decisions will remain to be made.
(People drive cars despite knowing that thousands die in them each year.)
Things are no different in the field of animal experimentation.
Firstly, the researchers dispute amongst themselves over the value of experiments where animals need to be used.
Colin Blakemore's much publicised work on the eyes of monkeys and kittens is in example.
There is also dissension over the value of many proposed alternatives to the use of animals.
Secondly, although the majority of the research community favours the use of animal subjects, within the existing legal safeguards, it contains respected figures who are well-known in the animal rights movement.
Donald Broom, professor of Animal Welfare at Cambridge, and Gill Langley, scientific adviser to the Dr Hawden Trust, are two of the better-known in the UK.
(Langley is also a member of Animal Aid, an organisation with a radical image opposed to the use of animals in any research, who was unfortunate enough to be beaten up in 1987 by a member of an even more extreme splinter-group.)
Martin Stephens and Andrew Rowan are two of many such sympathisers in the USA; Rowan's Of Mice, Models and Men (1984) being particularly highly regarded.
Finally, and most significantly, the public would be seriously worried, whatever the prevailing view in the laboratory, if it were to chink that little of moral significance separated the killing of animals from that of certain groups of human beings such as babies or imbeciles.
This is only marginally a scientific matter, over which the research community is largely silent or divergent.
It is a philosophical problem, a fact recognised by scientists themselves on both sides of the argument.
Gill Jangley acknowledges the ‘support of eminent philosophers such as Peter Singer and Tom Regan’(1988: 6), whilst the then Director of  Intramural Research at the US National Institute of Mental Health, Frederick Goodwin, a vigorous critic of the rights movement, sees the need to undercut their assumptions.
He writes:
The stakes are enormous.
The animal rights movement threatens the very core of what the Public Health Service is all about….
A pro-active stance should include a vigorous focus on the fundamental philosophical underpinnings of the animal rights movement, namely the moral equivalence between human beings and animals.
Goodwin's letter was given a predictably rough ride by the liberationist press.
The usually respectable FRAME News , the newsletter of the Fund for the Replacement of Animals in Medical Experiments, published it in full(1988: 1–2), and Langley in the Dr Hawden Trust's Alternative News analysed with some alarm (he signs of a fight back on the part of the American medical establishment after many years of tactical passivity known as the ‘bunker strategy’(1988: 6–7).
The more aggressive attitude of researchers, after enduring a decade or more of letter-bombs, threats, disruption and other forms of intimidation, seems to have spread to Britain (Askwith 1988).
Yet, as I write, the attacks by extremists with sophisticated explosives upon scientists, whom their more moderate critics agree are decent people, continue.
The Animals in Medicine Research Information Centre (AMRIC) was founded in 1985 to speak out on behalf of such workers, yet the climate remains an unhappy one, thriving on propaganda, half-truths, and plain ignorance, as well as violence.
Askwith quotes Marjorie Johnson, the press spokesman of AMRIC:
Many scientists would like to influence public opinion by speaking out about their work, but they know that to do so would put them in danger.
There is no question that any scientist who ‘goes public’ today will find his life transformed for the worse.
(Askwith 1988: 18)
Pain, suffering, distress, and anxiety
It is difficult to discuss the abusive treatment of animals, or indeed of human beings, without using one or more of these terms.
We have already, on several occasions, drawn attention to the variegated ways in which people suffer pain (by worrying about its implications, for example) which are inapplicable to animals.
Are animals therefore incapable of suffering?
A lot might seem to hang upon this question since the term is highly emotive — suffering is an unpleasant experience, to be avoided at all costs.
But need it be?
A moment s reflection upon, let us say, Frey's analysis of the concept of, interests,, will show that it need not be an experience at all.
Plants can suffer from too much sun or too little water, or a watch from rough handling.
This must not be dismissed as mere metaphor since it could also be true of the reader, for whom a health check might reveal their having suffered from a range of complaints in blissful ignorance.
An animal obviously can also suffer in this way, although like plants and watches and unlike the reader, the fact can never be brought to the creature's attention.
The other concepts betray similar logical peculiarities.
A flower or tree might well be said to show signs of distress much as an athlete might unwittingly show symptoms of it, although it would be inappropriate to describe a watch in that way.
The same seems to be true of anxiety.
Animals again can easily be accommodated at this level but it will not follow from this that they will be capable of the conscious distress or anxiety of a parent at an injury to their child, or of the hamstrung athlete warned by the doctor that they must give up running.
Writers almost invariably insist upon ignoring, conflating, or otherwise confusing these implications.
Part cause is undoubtedly what some see as the need for straightforward yet all-inclusive definitions ; the lack of which can often be used by politicians and official bodies as a strategic delaying tactic.
Any attempt to define ‘suffering’, for example, is bound to fall between the two stools of being unhelpfully imprecise (such as ‘a diminution in wellbeing’) or too precisely exclusive (‘an unpleasant emotional response’).
Another problem, and one discussed at length by Wittgenstein in BB and PI , is that definitions of the lexicographical sort have only limited relevance.
To attempt to encapsulate ‘pain' or ‘red’, in the sense in which these are sensations or experiences, within a form of words, is no more illuminating than trying verbally to capture the stink of durian (a tropical fruit with a foul odour yet hypnotic taste).
Here the emphasis must be upon the contexts in which the word or phrase is acquired.
The initiations are encouraged by sniffing the fruit or by being shown a colour sample of red.
This is ostensive definition.
The child is introduced to pain in the contexts of burning its finger or comforting the dog injured in an accident.
In this sense the committee  chairman who attempts to hide behind the lack of a definition of pain will, to be consistent, need to be sceptical of the noisy contortions of a cow or sheep crushed by a tractor.
Rowan, like Ryder, is a prolific definer of the wrong sort.
He first of all distinguishes human suffering from that of animals but then defines the latter as ‘the unpleasant emotional response to more than minimal pain and distress’(1989: 97).
This is hopeless.
Not only does it ignore the sense in which suffering can be unwitting but it also begs the question in favour of saying, when specific symptoms like struggling or urination occur in animals, that these are properly to be seen as, emotional responses' (which covertly elicits our sympathy for the conscious distress of the stricken human parent rather than the symptoms of it observed in the struggling, yet unaware, athlete).
The Wittgensteinian model puts these concepts in proper perspective.
They have their primary application in the human sphere but are employed, with diminishing implication, in language-games involving other creatures to the extent that similarities with human behaviour exist.
This extends even to plants and, to recall Descartes, complex machines.
Being human there can be for us no other benchmark with which to operate.
Rose and Adams, in Langley's collection, wrongly see this as some form of limitation: ‘Possibly the greatest difficulty that we have in furthering our understanding of pain and suffering in other animals is the limitation of the human model’(1989: 63).
Similar confusions seem to account for Marian Dawkins' difficulty in pinning down objective criteria of animal suffering beyond obvious pain reactions like tail or limb-biting (1980: 110–11).
Much of the technical literature on the subject seems to confuse the two sets of questions distinguished in this section.
There are primarily those about animal welfare; what makes creatures healthy ones given what we strive for in our treatment of them as pets, as a food source, in zoos, or conserved in the wild.
These do seem to admit of answers in terms of the working criteria of veterinarians, farm and abattoir inspectors and zoo managers.
But other concerns seem to centre around whether animals might properly be said to be happy or free from worry', not in the sense of being healthy and free from pain but rather with the human paradigm in mind.
Certainly we do wish sometimes to say this of animals and, strictly by analogy and with the appropriate language-game in mind, justifiably do so.
But it seems only marginal to our treatment of them and, not surprisingly, highly informal.
Replaceable and rare subjects
We have already noted the over 3 million animals used annually in the 1980s in UK research laboratories; the total having dropped from 5.6 million to 1970.
(Not all of these will have been killed.
The Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act requires only that a ‘protected animal’ must be killed if, at the conclusion of a series of ‘regulated procedures’it ‘is suffering or likely to suffer adverse effects’(section 15), although it may be killed nonetheless.)
Although the total numbers used in the USA are vastly higher, Rollin (1981: 91) gives a figure of around 100 million for 1980 but this had reportedly declined by about 10 per cent by 1988, the percentage breakdowns are remarkably similar.
Rats and mice account for 75–80 per cent, 0.5 per cent are dogs, 0.2 per cent cats, and the remaining 20 per cent mainly comprises smaller rodents and other vertebrates like fish and birds.
In percentage terms the number of larger mammals, including primates, is very low.
The sheer numbers of creatures involved, particularly rats and mice, demands that where practicable they are bred for the purpose.
Other methodological requirements such as those of standardisation and the preference for certain species on account of their docility, ease of handling, and intelligence (such as beagles and the albino form of the wild brown rat) are best met by regulated breeding.
Indeed the 1986 UK Act specifies that all mammals, with the exception of birds and farm animals, are ‘to be obtained only from designated breeding or supplying establishments’(Schedule 2).
The irony, remarked upon in connection with the supply of food animals, repeats itself here since the vast majority of these creatures will enjoy a well fed, decently housed, and sometimes even pampered existence, prior to a painless death.
The Act explicitly allows for release ‘into the wild, to a farm or for use as a pet’, where circumstances permit (Personal Licence: Standard Conditions, 9).
Inevitably, however, pain will sometimes need to be inflicted, and in the absence of anaesthetic, which must be set against this point.
Richard Ryder, for example, lists fifty sample procedures from both sides of the Atlantic (1976: 38–46), some of them highly disturbing.
But, again, we must beware the limits of anecdotal evidence; several of Ryder's examples are from the 1930s and 1940s (and one from as long ago as 1909) and would breach today's legal standards.
We are not told of the use or otherwise of anaesthetics, nor of any benefits flowing from such research.
The rearing of vast numbers of animals that will never live out their natural span, and that are killed for human purposes, will only seem immoral if (yet again) there is a confused identification with similar programmes were they to involve human beings.
Killing an animal harms it, of course; so does cutting down a tree.
But if there is no question of the animal's being aware of this harm in prospect, and if it is coupled with a painless death, then the question merely reverts to one of our own justification for the practice.
Do we have a need to eat meat or to conduct experiments upon animals?
Different issues, although of a similar order, surround the demand for laboratory subjects captured from the wild.
This highlights the predicament of chimpanzees, the ape closest to homo sapiens and consequently much sought after by researchers.
But chimpanzees do not breed well in captivity, partly because of a long pregnancy and childhood, and trapping them in the wild is expensive and wasteful enough to put them at risk of extinction.
Yet they are the only animal known in whose bloodstream the AIDS virus survives for any length of time.
The implications of these facts should be obvious and the status of chimpanzees as a threatened species is a powerful consideration in favour of banning their use in the laboratory, if only as a remedial measure, despite the pressures of the AIDS lobby.
Vivisection in education
Dissection has traditionally been a means of acquiring a knowledge of anatomy.
Pupils in the UK and USA, taking even very elementary courses in biology and zoology, were taught the skill.
But pressure from the rights movement has influenced even the British Veterinary Association.
Its widely available policy leaflet now acknowledges that, ‘it is clear that a very large part of school biology need not involve dissection’ whilst warning that students intending careers in the subject (and in associated areas like dentistry, or human or veterinary science) will be required to dissect at college or university level.
Yet, in the UK, even this is no longer true.
A mainly student organisation, Euroniche, with active committees in West Germany, Norway, Britain, Spain, Ireland, Denmark, and the Netherlands, is mobilising its members through its newsletter to question the use of dissecting techniques or even of animal tissue in university biology courses throughout Europe and Scandinavia.
However, there are at least two separate complaints, with differing implications, which need to be distinguished.
Applicants in the UK  have the least to object to.
Dissection here takes place on cadavers or using tissue taken from them.
There can be no question of cruelty or abuse.
Only a total abolitionist, like Clark, Linzey, or Regan, opposed to any killing of animals for human purposes (other perhaps than in self-defence), could have serious objections to it.
Indeed it is possible to circumvent the argument that the cadavers needed for educational purposes involve substantial extra killing since tissue is regularly collected from abattoirs or from research laboratories where the animals have been used in licensed procedures.
(Deeply anaesthetised animals, once finished with, are also frequently used for intramural practice purposes, in such institutions, prior to humane killing.)
It is a worthwhile conjecture that many, particularly the young, set their faces against these forms of dissection as a morally enhanced form of squeamishness.
This is understandable up to a point.
I personally find it repulsive to handle dead creatures or to ‘gut’ them for cooking, but it is not an attitude to commend in professionals like surgeons, veterinarians, nurses, forensic and medical scientists, service and police personnel, even mortuary attendants, undertakers, and butchers, who will regularly need to perform far more unsavoury tasks with equanimity.
However, of genuine concern is the potential cruelty resulting from ‘survival’ or ‘recovery’surgery used in the training of some veterinarians in the USA and probably other parts of the world as well.
(Euroniche (1989) alleges that it has recently been used on pigs in Utrecht.)
The animals in question are anaesthetised, of course, but are then allowed to recover and may then be subjected to repeated surgery.
Rollin condemns it outright, and most instances of it would fall foul of the UK 1986 Act (sections 14 and 15):
In Great Britain, veterinarians are trained without ever laying hands on an animal, save for therapeutic purposes.
In the United States, it is considered necessary that prospective veterinarians and medical students do a good deal of practice work with animals in order to develop technical abilities, for example, surgical skills….
One of the most  flagrant abuses in this regard is the widespread practice of multiple recovery surgery….
What makes this practice abhorrent is the fact that recovery from surgery, as we all know, involves shock, pain, distress, and suffering.
(Rollin 1981: 106)
The strongest argument in favour of survival surgery is not the mere  acquisition of ‘hands-on’ expertise but the experience of postsurgical patient care, the observation of wound healing, and correction of possible complications.
If the student does not recover the animal from anaesthesia, where will the experience of post-operative care come from?
Alternative solutions to these problems, such as the study of wound healing and the use of surgical techniques on animals in need of them, have become more widespread and surveys by Nedim Buyukmihci (1986) and R. Playter (1985), for the American Association of Veterinary Clinicians, indicate that, since Rollin wrote, the practice is on the wane in North America.
It is certainly a procedure where one could well argue that the potential for serious abuse is endemic and inherent rather than isolated and, with due care, preventable.
The UK is surely better off without it.
Products testing and pharmaceuticals
Very different uses of animals are involved here.
Some writers, like Michael Allen Fox, argue that testing for safety the thousands of new products that come on to market annually, from shoe-polishes to children's crayons, ‘is often confused by the media with research, leading to a negative impression of the latter’(1986: 181).
This is a fair point.
Certainly most members of the general public will have heard of the Draize test for detecting the irritant potential of cosmetics, or perhaps the more widely used LD50, nor will they have been spared photographs of immobilised creatures in plaintive lines.
(What is less widely known is that Draize testing need involve only minimal discomfort; the animals are under local anaesthetics and are humanely killed upon completion.)
But Fox does not deny that research and testing are, without doubt, necessary.
The problems arise in determining how both tasks are effectively and humanely carried out.
It must be enough here to point to four main areas of debate, each of which has its political, economic, medical, and moral ramifications.
They apply as much to the testing of new drugs by the pharmaceutical companies as to that of more mundane products.
1.
How reliable are the present tests?
On theoretical and practical grounds the experts differ.
The British Home Office still takes the line affirmed in its committee report (1979) that live animals need to be used and the statement of the British Medical Research Council, included in it, that ‘the LD50 test is the only reliable measure of acute toxicity and yields a result with the least possible expenditure of life’(1979: 16).
The official position in the USA is similar.
Yet the technical literature is littered with damning criticism of the LD50 (which signifies the single dose of the substance under scrutiny necessary to kill 50 per cent of a group of test animals within fourteen days).
Robert Sharpe, for example, quotes from a major review by the toxicologists Zbinden and Flury-Roversi: ‘For the recognition of the symptomatology of acute poisoning in man, and for the determination of the human lethal dose, the LD50 is of very little value’(1989: 104).
Sharpe is equally critical of extrapolations from the Draize test as indicators of toxicity for humans (100–1).
Rollin quotes F. Sperling, whose conclusion is even more abrupt: ‘The LD50 is in fact only marginally informative, toxicologically inadequate, and misleading’(1981: 98).
Rollin's own review (1981: 96–105) is also useful since it covers tests for carcinogens, mutogens, and for effects upon embryo development (teratogenicity).
2.
The Home Office report (1979) indicated that 5 per cent of all experiments in the UK were in the nature of such routine testing.
Need animals be used to this extent?
The short answer is No.
Product testing is a target area in the search for alternatives pioneered by organisations like FRAME.
But a balanced reply must take account of less tangible issues like legislative simplicity and public confidence.
The Draize test and the LD50, which has at least stayed the course since 1927, are both relatively straightforward and easy to regulate.
They also serve as international standards.
Any wholesale replacement of them will be a tortuous process on these grounds alone.
3.
More impatient liberationists argue that since most of the products, typically cosmetics, are used voluntarily then animals should not be killed to protect the users from possible harmful consequences.
(This is a variant of Regan's argument that the interests of farmers should not figure in the debate over vegetarianism since they are ‘risk takers’.)
However, even if the development of vital drugs like antibiotics was a permitted exception, the implementation of such a policy would have lunatic implications.
Numerous forms of disease and injury are predictably related to voluntary activities.
We might have to deny medical treatment to sufferers from AIDS and venereal diseases, alcoholics, those injured in sport or road accidents, on the grounds that more animals would be needed to test the new drugs and further the medical procedures necessary to treat the deluge of suffering resulting from the prohibition of testing with animals.
4.
Since many of the products, and most of the drugs, emerge from  economies  fuelled by intense competition, is there not a danger of mere frivolous novelties or wasteful duplication, all of which will nonetheless require testing?
The statutory requirements for the introduction of any new drug are particularly formidable.
On average, four years of predominantly animal trials are conducted pre-clinically and may well continue after it has eventually been licensed.
G.J.V. Nossal is particularly critical:
One of the worst features of research in the drug industry is the work which needs to be done to make and test products which are only marginally different from existing ones.
As soon as a real therapeutic advance occurs, there is a great temptation for a competitor to come along with a drug differing slightly in chemical composition which can then be marketed without patent infringement.
(Nossal 1975: 46)
It is difficult not to agree with Nossal that such wastefulness is inherent in any system where consumer pressures predominate and is one of the less happy faces of market economics.
Perhaps we should applaud the will to curb it whilst being sceptical of practical moves to bring it about.
It is in this spirit that we can greet Rollin's attempt to resolve the ‘entire question of toxicity’, if we extend the field beyond drugs to insecticides, preservatives, children's toys, and the rest, by demonstrating that our own interests and those of experimental animals overlap: ‘Basically, it is in both our interests to diminish the number of potentially toxic substances being introduced into the market and into the environment’(1981: 99).
This may only be wishful thinking, but it is worth thinking.
‘Pure’ research
In the  preceding section it was accepted without question that if experiments were wasteful, presumably with or without animals, it would be best if they did not take place.
Nossal also describes superfluous testing as, ‘mentally stultifying and, with rare exceptions, of no benefit to mankind’(1975: 46).
Colin Blakemore was pilloried in 1987 and 1988 not just because his work was considered (wrongly) to be excessively cruel but also because it was thought to be useless.
Gill Langley, for example, was quoted in the Sunday Mirror as saying that Blakemore's research was ‘cruel, barbaric and of no clinical value’(Askwith 1988: 19).
The assumption seems to be that research involving animals, particularly if they are to be harmed in any way, must at least be justified in advance by its probable benefits for human beings, or possibly other animals.
But this is making demands which are wildly at variance with the methodology and history of the experimental sciences.
It is illuminating that much of Askwith's article is devoted to Blakemore's apparent surrender to these demands having himself ‘invited most of Britain's leading ophthalmologists’ to bear witness to the clinical benefits of his work.
(This was duly forthcoming.)
Yet far less emphasis was given to Blakemore's denial, later in the article, that salubrious consequences affected the ethical justification of his experiments.
‘Of course I'm very pleased’, he was reported as saying,
that my work has turned out to be medically relevant, but it might not have done, and that wouldn't have meant that it was useless or wasted.
If I had had to justify my work in terms of clinical benefits before I started it, I would never have been given a licence.
Like most researchers, I simply didn't know what I was going to discover.
(Askwith 1988: 21)
There are two separable claims here.
The psychologist Jeffrey Gray, who is also quoted by Askwith, more clearly distinguishes these, although perhaps unaware that he is doing so: ‘How can you know , in advance, whether an experiment will be relevant?
I would defend to the hilt the right of scientists to experiment on animals in the pursuit of pure knowledge’(21).
The weaker claim is that although one cannot be certain that beneficial results will accrue, there are grounds for the probability that they will.
The stronger, less compromising, position is that it is enough to have a problem, possibly due to lack of data or thrown up by another's findings, and plausible ways of solving it.
It is a persistent misapprehension that the UK 1986 Act requires that a programme must be justified in terms of the weaker claim if it is to be approved by the Secretary of State.
But this is not so.
It is enough that a project satisfy the purpose of ‘the advancement of knowledge in biological or behavioural sciences,(section 5.3(d)), although the applicant must then justify the necessity of using animals at all(5.5), and in specific terms if the use of larger mammals is proposed (5.6).
What might be seen to be a hurdle is that the ‘likely adverse effects on the animals concerned’ will be weighed against ‘the benefit likely to accrue as a result of the programme’(5.4).
But a benefit can quite properly be judged in terms of the advancement of  knowledge and not require a specific clinical spin-off.
This is probably why Blakemore would have been given a licence had one been needed under previous legislation.
This is as it should be.
It is quite wrong for such as Regan to claim that criteria such as these make a mockery of the statutory scrutiny of proposals.
He quotes the psychologist C.R. Gallistel, whose position is close to Gray's: ‘There is no way of discriminating in advance the waste-of-time experiments from the illuminating ones with anything approaching certainty.’
But Regan wilfully distorts this into the implication that we can never say in advance that a given proposal has been drawn up by an incompetent researcher who doesn't know what he is looking for…
Why not draw straws instead?’(1983: 383).
But Gray and Gallistel are merely denying that there is any certainty in the selection.
The assessors will be guided by probabilities, the reputation and track record of the project director, and so forth.
Furthermore, Regan's incompetent researchers ought not to get to first base, at least under present UK regulations, for they would have been required to state objectives, if only of an ‘advancement of knowledge’, which the assessors would judge to be significant enough to outweigh any proposed harm (under 5.4) to the animals at risk.
It is on these grounds that we could discount the ‘rare exceptions’ referred to by Nossal (1975: 46, above), since the superfluous testing which he condemns has a far greater probability of continuing to be of little benefit to mankind, even in the advancement of knowledge, than the work of Gray, Gallistel, or the early objectives of Blakemore.
The drawback of the argument in terms of the uncertainty of outcome, in support of the demand for pure research without beneficial strings, is that evidence in its support seems destined to be anecdotal.
But Julius Comroe, sometime director of cardiovascular research at the University of California, has demonstrated that it need not be.
Comroe's findings in his book Retrospectroscope (1977: 12), are here summarised and quoted by Fox:
Comroe and Robert Dripps, with the assistance of consultants, studied ‘the ten most important clinical advances in cardiovascular-pulmonary medicine and surgery’ between 1945 and 1975.
Out of 4,000 scientific publications they selected 529 ‘key articles’(‘a key article was defined as one that had an important effect on the direction of subsequent research and development, which in turn proved to be important for one of the ten clinical advances’).
Comroe notes, ‘Our analysis showed  that 217 of the 529 key articles (41 per cent) reported work that, at the time it was done, had no relation whatever to the disease that it later helped to prevent, diagnose, treat, or alleviate’.
(Fox 1986: 140)
If this evidence is taken at face value it would seem spectacularly to support the uncertainty thesis.
Alternatives to animals
The field of ‘research into research’ is a highly active and fast moving one.
The motivation behind the search for alternatives to animals need not necessarily be humane.
D.H.
Smyth (1978) in Alternatives to Animal Experiments , points out that several of its techniques, such as mass spectrometry, gas chromatography, and the use of isotopes in biomedical research, were developed much earlier in the century on the grounds of simple efficiency.
Tissue culture, an ancillary method with a particularly high profile, ‘was first used for vaccine production in 1949, a long time before the present demand for alternatives.
The driving force was the need to find a better protection against poliomyelitis’(1978: 116).
Social minded reformers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries collated statistics which pointed to the influence of lack of sanitation and poor living conditions on a host of diseases such as  diphtheria , scurvy, smallpox, and TB, little aware that later generations would dignify their efforts as alternative medicine.
It is ironic that even in the UK the National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) urges us in its literature to look to our own self-interest.
The species difference between animals and human beings can give rise to quite different reactions, as in the case of penicillin, digitalis, and aspirin, and with drugs which were thought to be safe after pre-clinical tests upon animals, such as thalidomide, clioquinol, osmosin, opren, and eraldin, the results were human death and tragedy.
But obviously, although the NAVS encourages us towards alternatives such as homeopathy, a careful diet and relaxed lifestyle, and away from drugs, its main aim is to abolish the animal abuse implicit in testing them.
A concern for animals is also to the fore in the classic text of W.M.S. Russell and R.L. Burch (1959),The Principles of Humane Experimental Technique .
Their ‘three Rs’ almost invariably provide the framework for classifying alternatives.
In some cases methods will be employed to reduce the number of animals used in a programme.
Mathematical and computer-assisted models, for example, can enhance the data obtained from six subjects in an LD50 test which previously killed many times more than this.
In other cases, techniques will be refined to reduce the suffering or stress of the animals as in the use of improved anaesthetics or postoperative drugs.
Finally, there will be alternatives which replace animals entirely.
The Ames test for detecting carcinogens or mutagens in hundreds of chemicals, where micro-organisms are used instead of vertebrates, is a paradigm case.
FRAME (1985) make no secret of the fact that replacement is the final goal.
I quote from its fact-sheet: ‘The ultimate aim is to provide alternative methods for use in toxicity testing and in drug development, which will be so relevant and reliable that no animal testing will be necessary.,
But, it must be stressed, this is not a call for the total abolition of animals from the research laboratory.
FRAME seems to be too well provided with practical, scientific expertise for such idealism.
Rollin, in particular, is openly critical of utopian pressure: ‘However well intentioned, an extremely heavy emphasis on replacement is misdirected….
The most currently viable hope for diminishing the total amount of suffering is by refinement of existing procedures’(1981: 104–5).
Rollin is thus at variance with Regan who argues that all research involving harm to animals, and this includes killing them painlessly, must be stopped (1983: 397): ‘If nonanimal alternatives are available, they should be used; if they are not available, they should be sought’(388).
Whatever is supposed to happen in the meantime, or in the event that alternatives never become available, cowers the imagination.
But the reason why Fox reports that ‘there is virtually unanimous agreement among working scientists that animals will never be replaced entirely in the laboratory’(1986: 174), except perhaps in the fields of product and drug research and development, is that numerous research projects involve the study of fully functioning live animals (in vivo ).
Smyth provides the clue:
In general, the organ functions because of the coordinated activity of all the different kinds of cells.
This has one very important result which has great significance in relation to alternatives.
The organ will have properties which would not be apparent from studying the individual cells which compose it, or even the separate tissues…
The various organs of the body do not function in isolation, but are mutually dependent on the activities of each other…
This  kind of coordination can only be studied on whole animals, and could never even be guessed at from…experiments on tissue culture.
(Smyth 1978: 26–7)
But, in addition to the somewhat haphazard list of alternatives that I have so far mentioned, there is a pre-eminent group which does comprise whole animals, namely human beings.
Man, as FRAME (1985) puts it, ‘is the ultimate experimental animal’ since, individual variability notwithstanding, interspecies difference (such as those encountered with penicillin, digitalis, and thalidomide) cannot arise.
Human subjects have always figured in the history of medicine and are now used widely in the testing of cosmetics and toiletries, and treatments for common diseases like influenza, although there are ethical limits to the severity of the ailments, or expected toxicity, to which humans ought to be exposed.
These limits have given rise to thorny debate in at least two areas which serve as a reminder that it is not only nonhuman animals which are put at risk:
1.
Human subjects are volunteers; a fact which commends them to those opposed to the use of animals incapable of choice.
But should there be limits?
If the use of human subjects could promote dramatic advances in research into hazardous surgery, such as liver transplantation, or the search for drugs to reverse Alzheimer's disease, angina, or AIDS, but with possibly lethal side effects, why should we not offer long-term criminals the choice of undergoing such tests in exchange for a commutation of their sentence if they survive?
If people are honoured for risking their lives in the not obviously useful pursuit of speed records and mountains to climb, why should they not be encouraged to do so in more worthwhile causes?
2.
In less dramatic contexts many of us already run such risks.
The UK Committee on the Safety of Medicines regularly provides General Practitioners with questionnaires with which to inform it of any irregularities encountered in the use of new, but already licensed , drugs.
It makes no secret of the fact that these drugs, despite having passed their statutory pre-clinical tests upon animals, are now being tested upon us .
As a result of such returns, for example, the heart drug Corwin (xamoterol fumarate) is presently in danger of withdrawal from the UK market.
Such procedures are quite routine.
The Medical Correspondent of the UK Sunday Times reported in May 1990 that the anti-oestrogen drug, tamoxifen, used for several years to treat  women actually suffering from breast-cancer, is now to be tested on 30,000 human subjects over a period of five years to assess its potential as a preventative of the disease in healthy women.
A ‘small pilot experiment’ has so far detected no side effects.
Some might nonetheless think it justifiable to be fearful of the merely speculative dangers of a long-term reduction in the body's oestrogen levels.
The problems associated with the common contraceptive pill, brought to light decades after its introduction, might seem to serve as an ominous precedent.