

Chapter One
POLITICS AND THE MASS MEDIA
INTRODUCTION
Empirical research has long confirmed that for most people the mass media are the major sources of information about world events (Table 1.1) and about political affairs (Table 1.2).
However, despite television's growing importance as a source of information, regular readers of newspapers continue to attach a great deal of weight to the print medium (Table 1.2(b)).
Non-readers show a greater dependence on television for political information.
Both tables conceal significant variations in responses between readers of ‘quality’ and ‘tabloid’newspapers (Table 1.3): the former remain wedded to their preferred medium, using it much more extensively as a means of surveying the world in depth, whilst readers of tabloid newspapers rely more heavily on television and also tend to attach greater credibility to it as a source of news (Table 1.4).
These tables confirm the centrality of the media for the public.
They are the means by which the public acquires information about the world and, more importantly, through which the public derives its knowledge and perceptions of current political and social problems and of the means to their resolution.
The approach to the study of ‘politics and the mass media’ adopted here is inevitably much broader than that usually found within political science.
Traditionally, the study of politics and its relationship to the mass media has focused on institutions and bona fide political actors.
Governments, politicians, departments or voting patterns have usually been the political scientists' fodder.
When married to an interest in the mass media, the result has been an over-concentration on institutions, structures and the political élite.
While this remains of importance, this sort of approach overlooks the part the mass media play in generating public perceptions of political and social change as well as of policies and decision-making processes.
The political significance of the mass media goes far beyond such questions as ‘who controls the media?’ and ‘how do people get elected?’; even concerns over ‘bias’and    ‘objectivity’are too narrow to take in the full significance of the mass media.
Politics and the political infuse all aspects of our lives, our attitudes and our behaviour.
And because the mass media are at the heart of the processes of communication through which ‘problems’ and their ‘resolution’are framed and discussed, they deserve extensive analysis.
THE NATURE OF ‘MEDIATED’ KNOWLEDGE
This broad approach to the political significance of the mass media is reflected in many contemporary writings.
These emphasize the media's role in providing information — both images and texts — which forms the basis of public perceptions and responses to events.
The media provide, in Blumler's words, ‘the informational building blocks to structure views of the world…from which may stem a range of actions’.
Although these ‘informational building blocks’ combine with a multiplicity of political and social factors to direct an individual's action, they determine the limits of our knowledge and of our perceptions of events and their causes.
The growing interest in exploring the ‘stored information about…objects held by individuals’— sometimes referred to as cognitions — marks a shift away from the view of the media as of great importance in the formation of individual and specific attitudes or opinions.
An individual may not acquire a specific attitude — on how to vote, about race or trade unions — from the mass media, but he/she will derive information from the media which will contribute something to each of these individual areas.
It is therefore conceptually useful to distinguish between what  the mass media tell us to think about — this is signalled by the events they cover — and what specific attitudes or opinions we have to adopt towards those events, though clearly these distinctions may be difficult to uphold in practice.
A television or press report of an event, for example, will consist of a selection of information and that particular selection will inevitably inform as well as contribute towards, rather than directly form, specific attitudes.
This distinction between cognitions (the informational building blocks, the stored bits of information) and specific attitudes or opinions is critical, for it not only emphasizes the public's growing dependence on the mass media for information but it also draws our attention to the consequences of such a dependence.
Because only a small handful of events can ever be experienced by individuals at first hand, we inevitably rely on the mass media to inform us about events beyond our immediate grasp.
But the mass media select which events to cover and they take decisions about how those events will be presented; they therefore not only inform us about (a small selection of) events but their presentation of those events will also consist of their explanations and interpretations of those events.
To paraphrase C. Wright Mills, ‘…men [and women!]live in second-hand worlds…
The quality of their lives is determined by meanings they have received from others.
Everyone lives in a world of such meanings’.
As the influence of other agencies of socialization and knowledge transmission such as the Church, schools, and political parties declines, the mass media become even more central in the creation of the ‘images in our heads of the world outside’.
What sort of information do the mass media select and how is that information presented?
Analyses of ‘news values’ suggest that the information chosen is not simply a random selection of events.
There is a clear pattern; a pattern which indicates a hierarchy of seemingly important events and individuals.
Elite groups, nations and individuals as well as large-scale, dramatic events dominate the news (see Chapter 7).
Thus, the news values and news judgements which determine the content of the media not only direct our thinking to specific areas which the media define as ‘important’ but, conversely, direct our thinking away from other ‘unimportant’areas.
In this way they contribute to our mental maps of the world.
In the realms of politics ‘they define — and also define away — opposition’.
News values and considerations of newsworthiness also prioritize events and they describe, establish and reinforce images and relationships of order and power in our society.
The prominence accorded to certain political actors, institutions, and practices is not simply an outcome of judgements of what is, or is not, somehow intrinsically important.
News judgements contain within them an implicit understanding of the nature of our society, where power lies and how it is or should be exercised.
For example, ‘the very notion of ‘élite persons’— a key category of newsworthiness — has, according to Hall, ‘the ‘routine knowledge of social structures’ inscribed within it’.
In order to communicate, the mass media must ‘infer what is already known, as a present or abstract structure…but [this structure]is a construction and interpretation about the world’.
It is not a mere reflection of it; the media do not simply report the world for us in any ‘neutral’ or ‘objective’sense, they interpret the world for us.
Furthermore, the items selected will usually have rich meanings within specific cultural contexts.
So within specific cultural contexts, the mass media are able to employ existing cultural  referents because, like coins of exchange, they are comprehended by all.
In this way, there is a reciprocity between the mass media and society/culture.
They draw upon past and present political/ social and cultural  referents but, at the same time, they also contribute to these.
This allows for cultural continuity as well as for cultural change.
A good illustration of this is the way in which today's images and meanings of the monarchy have been successfully layered onto the more popular and spectacular historic traditions — so ignoring less popular and controversial republican ones — and, at the same time, given a contemporary appearance.
Members of the Royal Family have long been aware that to remain in the public conscience requires coming to terms with, and feeding, the needs of the media.
The Royal Family has thus judiciously assented to this and so has participated in the creation of its own image; in the process, it has ensured that the monarchy, as an institution and as a symbol, retains a cultural past, present, and (crucially) future.
It goes without saying that both sets of institutions have benefited enormously from this symbiosis: the former from its continued popularity and support and the latter from a continuous stream of royal copy which appears to ensure increased sales.
The media also perceive some institutions as more ‘important’ and hence more ‘newsworthy’than others and they perpetuate that perception by locating themselves within or near those institutions.
Political institutions, the judiciary, and the police, for example, are considered ‘newsworthy’ and become natural sources of information for the mass media.
Consequently there is a ‘bias towards authority’ ever present in media work.
The very presence of the media also tends to alter the relationships between the political and social institutions which they link up.
The mass media form a web of communications across institutions and their existence and practices impact on those institutions and their relationships to each other.
The mass media have become an integral part of a complex network of institutions and they contribute, and give meaning, to the relationships between institutions and groups in the political system.
This is true in at least two senses.
In the first place, the mass media are ‘so deeply embedded in the [political]system that without them political activity in its contemporary forms could hardly carry on at all’.
Few contemporary political strategies are conceived without considerable attention being paid to media considerations.
This is particularly so during election campaigns, though one can easily cite numerous other and different examples (see Chapter 8).
Beyond this accessible and easily comprehensible illustration of the ‘impact’ of the mass media and the extent to which political activity is a by-product of the existence of the mass media, there is another, more elusive, but just as significant aspect to the media's role in contemporary society: the nature of political practice and the contours of the political system are, to an extent, derived from the work of the mass media.
To quote Gitlin at some length,
the texture of political life has changed since broadcasting became a central feature of American life.
The very ubiquity of the mass media removes media as a whole system from the scope of positivist social analysis; for how may we ‘measure’ the ‘impact’of a social force which is omnipresent within social life and which has a great deal to do with constituting it?
The contours of the political system cannot be seen as something external to the mass media, something on which they have an  ‘impact’, since they play a part in its determination by, for instance, giving meanings to events, by setting the agenda for debate and by shaping the political climate.
The recent coverage of environmental issues illustrates this point.
By giving substantial coverage to environmental issues, the mass media call attention to them.
Publicity forces policy-makers to respond.
Those lobbying on behalf of the environment may also gain a legitimate place within the policy-making process and the character of their organization may change as a consequence.
All these changes fall well within the observation that ‘political activity in its contemporary form’ owes a great deal to the existence and practices of the mass media.
Media activity gives shape to the ill-defined contours of the political system: it brings new players and issues into the political arena, it leaves others out and it rearranges positions and placings.
Such activity goes beyond the granting or withdrawing of legitimacy.
In a real way, the mass media give political systems their contemporary form and operational concepts within the political system their contemporary flavour.
But the mass media do not single-handedly give shape to the contours of the political system.
Much recent research has focused on the degrees of co-operation and collusion between the mass media and those with the power to impress their own definitions of the world onto the practices of news organizations.
This would suggest that the study of politics and the mass media needs to take account of the relationships between the media and those in positions of power; it also needs to focus on specific and recognizable instances of ‘impact’ and ‘effects’as well as the deeper level of perceptions of politics and of the political system.
THE MEDIA, THEIR ‘POLITICAL IMPACT’ AND THE ‘QUESTION OF ‘REALITY’’
Although it is plainly easier to examine the narrower conception of the media's political impact by exploring specific case studies, long-term and fundamental changes in the public's perceptions of the political world must not be overlooked.
These two dimensions of the media's political influence can be illustrated by briefly comparing two contrasting, albeit complementary, approaches to the study of the role of the mass media within the political system.
(1) Political ‘impact’ as changed relationships: the work of Colin Seymour-Ure
Seymour-Ure's detailed study of the part the mass media have played in British politics contains a considered summary, and clarification, of the concepts of ‘effect’ and ‘impact’.
Though he often poses specific questions when exploring individual case studies, he nevertheless adopts a fairly wide-ranging conception of ‘effects’ since his orientation is towards such broad questions as ‘effect of what kind upon whom or what?’and ‘How far and in what ways are the political relationships and individuals affected by the communication between them?’.
In adopting this approach, Seymour-Ure avoids the idea of the mass media having a universal and unitary effect on all members of the audience.
The ‘impact’ of the mass media will, according to his analysis, differ depending on the context of the communication and the actors concerned.
He also distances himself from approaches to the study of media ‘impact’ which conceive of them in a fairly narrow way.
Instead of using the Lasswellian framework for the study of the media's effect on, say, individual voting preferences — namely, what is ‘the effect of the media on the election’— Seymour-Ure suggests that one should rephrase the question as follows: ‘What is the function of media in the electoral process?’
This would avoid the ‘assumption that the effect of the media is limited to the potency of their messages ’.
The suggestion that the media can have a multiplicity of ‘effects’ on a variety of different actors is developed fully in his examination of the meaning, and nature, of media ‘effects’.
‘At its broadest’, he writes, ‘effect’ is defined…as any change within the political system induced directly or indirectly by the mass media.’
These can vary in intensity: the media may be the cause of something or, at the other extreme, merely a catalyst.
In essence, though, ‘all political effects are initially upon individuals.
They consist in increments of information, which may or may not modify attitudes which may or may not modify behaviour’.
At the most basic level, an ‘effect’ would consist of an individual's changed ‘relationship with at least one other individual’.
Such effects could take place at a number of different levels within the political system: an individual's relationship to another could change as a result of the media just as an individual's  relationship to an institution could change as an outcome of media work, and so on.
Seymour-Ure sets out five such possible levels of ‘changed relationships’, with appropriate examples:
political system/individual e.g. Enoch Powell's 1968 ‘rivers of blood’ speech had an enormous ‘impact’on British politics;
political system/institution e.g. the entrenchment of the monarchy;
institution/institution e.g. the relative strengths of the political parties;
institution/individual e.g. resignations of individual politicians;
individual/individual e.g. the televised Kennedy/Nixon debates in the early 1960s worked to the former's advantage.
An interest in ‘the relationships that the media affect’ means, in effect, that one can legitimately explore an enormous field of activity; no field is precluded since the media are omnipresent.
The areas that the political scientist will explore will, however, most likely depend on the sorts of ‘effects’ and relationships they are interested in.
(2) Television and ‘the question of ‘Reality’’: the work of Kurt and Gladys Lang
Whilst Seymour-Ure's approach is focused on individual case studies, he hints at but does not examine a range of important, but empirically not easily verifiable, effects of mass media in general, and of television in particular : effects which may be both cumulative and long-term.
Such studies are rare since they require an examination of media practices and content as well as a critical assessment of the media's presentation of the ‘real world’— an assessment which takes it for granted that the media do not reproduce ‘reality’ in a pure form; their use of language and images as well as the working practices of journalists inevitably refract ‘reality’, so ‘distorting’it.
Probably the best example of this type of approach to the study of the mass media is the Langs' classic study of MacArthur Day in Chicago in 1952.
This study set out to examine television coverage of a procession in Chicago in honour of General MacArthur, who had had a distinguished military career in the Far East, and to contrast television's ‘unique perspective’ with the  direct experiences of actual participants amongst the crowds.
The study has often been used to illustrate the way television deals with events and constructs meanings around those events.
Although the coverage provided by television is by no means neutral or impartial, television's ‘bias’ is seen as the product of routine practices and is, therefore, a form of unintended or unwitting bias.
The study also provides a wealth of information which points to the way television, and by extension the media, alter relationships within the political system.
The Langs observed that
the most important single media effect…of MacArthur Day was the dissemination of an image of overwhelming public sentiment in favour of the General (MacArthur).
This effect gathered force as it was incorporated into political strategy, picked up by other media, entered into gossip, and thus came to overshadow immediate reality as it might have been recorded by an observer on the scene.
Thirty years later, in a review of their own earlier work, the Langs reaffirmed their original conclusions and added some important insights.
These brought to centre stage their concern with media ‘reality’: the public is dependent on what the mass media disseminate ‘yet under no circumstances can the picture replicate the world in its full complexity’.
‘Media reality’, according to the Langs, constitutes ‘a symbolic environment…superimposed on the natural environment’.
The public plays no part in this ‘social construction’, it can do ‘little more than accept or ignore what is transmitted’.
The ‘public definition of an event’ is therefore no more than the outcome of a struggle to control the ‘flow of information to the public about such an event’and these struggles are themselves part of politics.
Television's ‘cumulative effects’ are thus related to the ways in which it ‘transmits reality and affects the imagery of politics and political figures’.
Such effects, they concluded, extend ‘to the shared experience of politics provided by television to which individuals, political actors and institutions somehow accommodate’.
In recent years, there have been several examples of governments excluding or controlling television cameras in order to control the ‘flow of information’ and so minimize the political impact of the medium.
In the early 1980s the South African Government  restricted television's movements in the townships and more recently, in 1987 — 8, the Israeli Government imposed restrictions on television's movements in Gaza and the occupied territories.
These examples have their parallels in Europe; Britain did not let television loose during the Falklands campaign.
Whether these
attempts at control have been successful or not is, in many ways, irrelevant.
The central point is that by controlling the moving pictures of dissent, governments believe that they can not only minimize the dissent itself but also completely remove the major source of criticism.
As will be argued more fully below, for many television ‘reality’ is political reality and so by negating the former one is controlling the latter.
THE MASS MEDIA IN POLITICS
There can be little doubt that the mass media are a vital part of the political system.
Political strategies now usually incorporate media strategies as well; indeed, the two are no longer separate.
Perhaps the best recent example of this, and of the media's growing significance in overtly political activity, can be seen in the Labour Party's strategies in the period immediately preceding the 1987 general election.
Throughout 1986 and 1987, the popular press created and reinforced the image of ‘the loony left’ and ‘the militant left’in Labour politics.
Stories of alleged ‘loony left’ politics became a standard feature of their political coverage: the apocryphal ‘baa baa white sheep’, ‘black rubbish bins’and the true or false antics of Labour Party candidates or spokespersons entered the public consciousness.
Stung by these allegations, the Labour Party reappraised its strategy.
In the short run it attempted to detach itself from its ‘extremist’ wing — more properly, those sections of the Labour Party which the right-wing popular press considered extreme — on the grounds that the ‘loony left’cost it electoral votes.
In the long run it was to create a new ‘image’ of itself which was purposely devoid of politics, as well as left-wing politics.
The Labour Party's obsession with distancing itself from anything which the right-wing media could pick up and exploit as ‘extremist’ is well described by Wainwright in her account of a Labour Party election rally.
The (significantly titled) Labour Family Fun Day in Islington, London — an American-style political convention with a well staged show — was a well policed event.
To test the atmosphere, Wainwright purposely bought a copy of Socialist Worker .
‘Slipping it under my arm’, she writes,
I returned to the hall.
When I came to be searched, an earnest young man asked me: ‘Please could you leave the paper on one side and pick it up afterwards?’
‘Don't be ridiculous,’ I replied laughing.
‘Why should I do that?’
‘Please,’ he pleaded, ‘it will embarrass Neil Kinnock’[the Labour leader].
The Labour Party's insecurity in the face of the press continued into the election.
It nevertheless managed to run a good (television) election campaign.
In this respect, it behaved as others who have political power, money, or status do: it manipulated the media in order to create favourable impressions and images.
Mikhail Gorbachev achieved the same goal during the 1985 Geneva Summit meeting with Reagan.
The Russians changed their ‘style’ in order to capture Western media attention, in order to transform their image.
As one reporter remarked, ‘the success of the Soviet pre-summit public relations effort…has infuriated the Americans who are used to dominating the media without even trying’.
Media presentation has now become such a critical feature of the process of negotiations and public image-making that those who do not give it its due credit are likely to find their credibility in question.
It is possible to detect a similar set of concerns in accounts of the NUM's handling of the media in their year-long dispute with the Coal Board over pit closures.
Sometimes, however, the media cannot be so easily deployed by political actors and the media may, in consequence, exert an indeterminate and sometimes capricious effect on the doings of political institutions and actors.
In the 1985/6 Westland Affair two political opponents deployed the media as part of their armoury but, in the event, both were forced to resign as the affair gained a momentum of its own.
Undue concern with presentation can also create contradictions between media reality and the substance of events.
This problem is most acute when the individual (or group) courting media attention seeks to placate different and conflicting audiences, for example an international/foreign audience and a home one.
A good contemporary example is the meeting between President Sadat of  Egypt and Prime Minister Begin of Israel in Jerusalem in 1977.
This superbly staged meeting between the two heads of state did little to further the peace process in the Middle East.
In fact, it did much to disguise Sadat's unpopularity at home and his break away from the other countries of the Middle East.
Those aware of his unpopularity and unilateralism had little difficulty in comprehending the motives of his assassins.
In contrast, those abroad, notably in the West, who were fed the diet of stage-managed events, found his assassination both momentous and incomprehensible.
Two significant points emerge from the above examples and both need to be considered in the context of a model of political communication.
The first relates to differences between political actors and groups in their abilities to use, influence or indeed manipulate the media; the second to the political consequences of these actions.
Few attempts to change public perceptions are achieved easily, nor can they be performed by all members of society.
Those without power or legitimacy lack the resources necessary to capture the mass media.
The planning and organization required to lead the media and so define the ‘real’ issues and their meaning are outside the scope of ‘powerless’individuals.
Members of the general public usually only respond and react to media content: they are rarely in control of media work.
In such ways political actors, aided and abetted by the mass media, help construct images of ‘reality’.
At the same time, however, leading actors find themselves confronting, and responding to, those very same images that they help create.
Such images or representations can possess great power.
Their visibility, achieved on account of the mass media, forces them into the public and political domain.
At times, these images may be so powerful as to demand an immediate response.
The winter of discontent' of 1978/9 played just such a powerful role in British politics because it was composed of extremely powerful images.
Those images of chaos and of a nation purportedly tearing itself apart — despite much evidence to the contrary — demanded an immediate political response.
Government simply had to act; not to do so would have amounted to avoiding a problem that was ‘evident’ and ‘plain' to all, particularly those who watched the news on television!
The Prime Minister's (Callaghan) dismissive attitude towards those in the media who  emphasized the critical state of affairs in Britain — an attitude condensed into the apocryphal ‘Crisis?
What crisis?’ statement — may have been, in his eyes, a rational assessment of the situation and the media's tendency to exaggerate, but it ignored and misjudged the impact of media imagery and, consequently, the public's desire for reassurance and for the problem to be ‘resolved,.
In the long run, such images become coins of exchange along with pickets, football riots, and urban disturbances; they populate our consciousness and can be recalled intact by the sheer mention of a single word or by a brief news clip from the past.
But, importantly, they cannot be ignored nor can they be dismissed easily as irrational fabrications.
As Labour Party politicians and trade unionists found out to their cost in the year-long miners’ dispute, one could not dismiss comments about ‘picket violence, as untrue and mere fabrications.
The television viewing public had seen images of violence and expected political leaders to acknowledge them and to respond accordingly and responsibly.
Not to do so amounted to a dereliction of duty in the same way that Callaghan's statement misunderstood the political content of media imagery.
The images the media present of ‘reality’ are, for many, accounts of ‘real’events and not fictional ones.
The veracity of the media account may be questioned but few doubt that the events reported took place in some way.
To question the ‘real-ness’ of the events reported, as Callaghan did, is to strain one's credibility since it demands the viewing public to ignore or disregard media imagery.
Callaghan's mistake may have derived from his own inability to grasp the significance of media images irrespective of how closely they did or did not correlate with some other version of ‘reality’.
It may be that for the public gallery, media ‘reality’ is political reality.
TOWARDS A MODEL OF POLITICAL COMMUNICATION
As with other models, our model (Fig. 1.1) is not comprehensive but only attempts to emphasize and closely examine a small section of the mosaic of mass communication.
It incorporates a number of points which are critical to the analysis of the processes of political communication:
that different content reflects different sets of relationships between the mass media and the major actors/events being  reported.
A media event such as a ‘walkabout’ portrays a media subservient to the political actor.
Other events/reports will reflect different relationships.
that different actors have different degrees of power over the creation of media content.
In their interactions with the media, political actors pursue their own goals and do frequently dominate media content.
The public at large, though it may be politically literate, is usually the recipient of media content.
Its power to change content is minimal.
It may be argued that relegating the audience to a passive role in the mass communication process misrepresents their part in the production of television (and media) content.
It is undoubtedly true that the audience plays no active part in the production of content and that audience feedback is minimal but, as some have pointed out, the communicators' image of the audience can affect the content of mass communication.
The intervention of the audience is through the communicators' perceptions and images of the unknown audience.
The intervention of the audience, in this context, is of a metaphysical quality, implicit rather than explicit.
However, at the other extreme, say, in the case of advertising where considerable audience testing and piloting is undertaken, audience intervention takes place prior to the process of message construction and mass communication.
In fact, some of these practices have also been applied to political communication; an election broadcast or a staged political event is constructed in such a way as to elicit a pre-determined and desired response.
Thus the process of message selection and presentation encapsulates the notion of audience feedback.
The careful ‘packaging’ of Mrs Thatcher by Gordon Reece from the mid-1970s onwards was designed to create a different image of her in the minds of the public, an image which was felt to elicit a more positive response on the part of the public.
That which was known to be disliked — for example, the voice — was changed to one which was softer and not shrill.
that there is not one single audience but different audiences for mass communication.
The public or audience of the Financial Times is not the same audience as that of the Sun .
Such differences may explain differences in content as well as the nature and distribution of power in British society.
that the process of news-making involves a degree of interaction or strategic bargaining, as between the sources of news and the news media.
Each feeds off the other, each informs the other and the subsequent reactions are reciprocal and continuous rather than unilinear and in one direction.
The product of this interaction or bargaining is the media content to which the public at large attend.
Examples are again useful.
Chibnall has observed the close proximity between crime reporters and Scotland Yard and Cockerell et al .
have described lobby practices in British political reporting.
Proximity to sources is suggestive of collusion rather than adversity, though elements of both probably co-exist.
The model partially retains the traditional distinction between a political élite and a mass public.
But rather than simply using this for the purpose of political comment in a static model of the communication process, the rationale behind its retention here is that there are real and important differences between these two groups and their relationships, and work, with the media.
The examples above have already indicated this: politicians, officials, even trade unionists, work closely with journalists.
Such a relationship — symbiotic, advantageous to both, and biased ‘towards authority’— is not one that is open to the public.
However, the public is by no means an empty receptacle responding uncritically and unquestioningly to the sayings and doings of those in power.
Indeed, the public's reception of mass communication content remains an academic problem since there is as yet little substantive evidence which directly links public perceptions, actions, and reactions purely and simply to media content.
Other social and political factors intrude into the flow, and reception, of communication and these may be quite powerful in influencing public perceptions of events reported by the media.
This corrective to assertions of media omnipotence can be found in a recent study of a major political/industrial story, the 1984 — 5 miners' strike in Britain.
After analysing all the major news reports broadcast during the year-long dispute, the authors observed that
despite television being overwhelmingly the major source of news for the general public, audience perceptions of the news and as to what the strike was all about differed considerably.
In other words while the public may have all watched the same news they didn't all see it in the same way.
[C]onsistent differences in public perceptions of the news [were]associated with people's (political) predispositions.
The contradictory nature of these statements — media omnipotence and the barrier to it in people's predispositions — merely confirms the difficulty of examining a process as complex as that of mass communication.
The problem is, however, that to examine their ‘impact’ on the (differentiated) public requires a long-term culturally and historically informed analysis that is far from easy.
It is for these reasons that many of the relationships between media content and public perceptions remain at the level of supposition and assertion.
Sometimes, though, there is substantial support for the view that the media are important in forming public perceptions; one can find evidence for this in studies of ‘agenda-setting’, ‘race and the mass media’, ‘reporting the welfare state’, as well as studies of ‘moral panics’.
Our model of political communication does not presuppose a view that the mass media are omnipotent.
However, it does emphasize the extent to which the public relies on the mass media for information about the outside world even though, in the final analysis, their understanding of those events may differ, particularly along political lines.
THE MASS MEDIA AND CONCEPTIONS OF SOCIETY
The model set out above relates the mass media to ‘power relations’ but, at the same time, retains core elements of the ‘fourth estate’concept, namely, that the media can, and sometimes do, act autonomously and are not completely subservient to the state or political institutions.
This perspective avoids both general statements and general conclusions about the mass media and favours an approach which highlights the richness of the relationship between the mass media and politics.
Such an approach treads a thin line between the traditional pluralist and Marxist divide in media studies.
The major differences between the two positions — and they are at times crudely drawn — focus on:
the extent to which the mass media are autonomous in determining the content and form of their messages,
the nature of the relationship between political institutions or the state and the mass media, and i the nature of the media ‘audience’.
Generally speaking, pluralists accord the media varying degrees of autonomy both with regard to their relations with other institutions and with regard to their work in the production of content and meaning.
One prominent analysis of this maintains that the interaction between political institutions broadly defined and media institutions is one of ‘dependence and adaptation’.
‘Political communication’, the authors claim,
originates in mutual dependence within a framework of divergent though overlapping purposes.
Each side of the politician-media professional partnership is striving to realize certain goals vis-à-vis the audience: yet it cannot pursue them without securing in some form the co-operation of the other side.
Other factors in this relationship — the roles adopted by the two groups, their shared culture, the ground rules and the mechanisms of conflict management — highlight the complexity of the mechanisms of political communication.
‘[T]hey badly need each other 's services and dependability; but as a result of their conflicting purposes, roles, and definitions of politics, they are periodically  buffeted by upsets and strains.’
The partners in the relationship may not always confront each other as adversaries but occasionally their different responsibilities in relation to the public may push them in opposite directions.
Unfortunately, in the competitive struggle for dominance, both partners often overlook or forget the needs of the public.
In this conception of the social and political world, the established order is not permanently fixed.
Institutions and groups compete for power and there is, consequently, a plurality of power centres rather than a concentration of power.
Through the competition for political power, change — both positive and negative — can take place.
In effect, individuals and groups can have an impact on the political and social order.
Moreover, the ensuing change is likely to be of a gradual nature and not a radical rearrangement of the political or social order.
Thus, fluidity, continuous change, and an evolving social order are the characteristics of this conception of the political and social world.
In contrast, Marxists emphasize the established and fixed nature of the distribution of power in society.
Power is centralized within a handful of institutions — sometimes collectively referred to as ‘the state’— and those with economic and political power — a ruling class — guard it jealously and use whatever mechanism is available, including the mass media, to retain their power and to ensure their continued monopolization of power.
Those without economic or political power — the working class — are, therefore, excluded from sharing in, amongst other things, the economic wealth of a country.
In a very important sense, then, both the pluralist and Marxist positions vis-à-vis the media are derived from an understanding and analysis — at times implicit, at other times explicit — of the nature of power, and its distribution, in society.
The pluralist description of the social order with its myriad political institutions, groups, and actors all competing, albeit unequally, for power treats the media as a set of institutions which may act independently in society but which may also be deployed by powerful groups.
This position is readily dismissed by Marxists.
For them, the social order is structured and not composed of discrete and shifting groups: there are real and deep inequalities between classes which cannot be easily eliminated or resolved by recourse to a competition, by groups or individuals, for political power.
The location of (class) economic power is beyond the arena of political competition so admired by the pluralists.
The mass media are thus integrated into an already structured and unequal society and, more importantly, those systemic inequalities are not self-sustaining but require agencies such as the mass media, the education system, and the Church to maintain and reproduce them.
But unlike those Marxists who conceive of the mass media as no more than relay systems working on behalf of the dominant classes, some have forcefully argued that systems of maintenance and reproduction do not necessarily operate smoothly; there are contradictions, there is social and political dissent and there is political struggle.
One cannot therefore ignore historical and contemporary struggles between the state and the mass media; nor can one reduce diverse and complex social, political and economic processes to simplified and simplistic accounts.
Recent commentaries on the mass media derived from within the broad Marxist tradition have attempted to move away from the  simplistic view of the mass media as mere relay systems; a view which implicitly suggests that the study of the mass media is not problematic since their ownership (usually by large corporations) pre-determines the nature of their work.
There is now a general acceptance of the belief that the work and context of the mass media deserves deep analysis and that processes of maintenance and reproduction, of manufacturing consent and consensus, are by no means simple or closed.
Political leadership over the whole of society depends ‘not only on the expression of the interests of a ruling class but also on its acceptance as ‘normal reality’ or ‘commonsense’by those…subordinated to it’.
Consent must be won; although the ideas consented to may ‘in fact express the needs of a dominant class’.
Here again, the media are heavily implicated.
‘Relations of domination are sustained by a mobilization of meaning’ largely, one must assume, via the media.
But the media carry a rich variety of messages which are open to different interpretations by a differentiated audience (rather than a coherent class).
There is room for a struggle over meaning and, more significantly, there is also the possibility of developing ‘counter hegemonic projects’, that is, for alternative and subordinate views to gain dominance.
The media are thus also transformed into the site of such struggles.
It may therefore be difficult to accept unquestioningly the notion of unidimensionality and the unproblematic production (and reproduction) of a subservient mass by the capitalist mass media.
Subordinate classes are granted a degree of power to make meanings, to negotiate meanings and even to reject meanings.
Such a perspective also undermines any analysis which sees the audience or classes as uncritically receiving the content of the mass media.
Even the idea that the mass media's power resides in their ability.
to keep ‘important’ issues off the agenda£ fails to take into account the diversity of media — magazines, journals, books, radio — which allow for an enormous amount of information to find its way into the public domain.
Inevitably though, different interpretations of the role of the mass media in society will continue to be informed by contrasting analyses of society.
Those works derived from the broad Marxist tradition will pursue the theme of domination in capitalist societies, whilst pluralists will still shy away from generalizations, preferring detailed empirical work.
Furthermore, they will still resist drawing  conclusions about the proximity of the mass media to state institutions despite the fact that, as in the case of Blumler and Gurevitch (see p. 19 above), it is only a short step away from their analyses and conclusions.
Nevertheless, there has been some crossover of knowledge between these two camps, with each benefiting from the fertilization that has followed.
Pluralists, for example, may now be more willing to examine in much greater detail the relationships between state institutions and the mass media, just as Marxists may be more prepared to consider empirical and detailed case studies.
This book attempts to sustain a detailed analysis of the mass media based on the fruits of this cross-fertilization.
It will draw from a wide range of perspectives in its appraisal of the mass media and it will be based on both contemporary case studies and theoretical analyses of the media.
At its core is a model of the political communication process which is multi-layered, complex, and differentiated — and those differences do impact on the political work of the mass media.
Chapter Two
THEORIES OF THE MEDIA
Of all the existing means of mass communication, it is only the press that has spawned a set of ‘theories’ to explain and to justify its actions and its purposes.
Means of communication that have developed since the inception of the press in the 17th and 18th centuries — notably, television and radio — have tended to adapt these theories to suit their own special requirements.
In some cases, even the notion of ‘the freedom of the press’ has been transposed into other contexts and used to defend practices in radio and television.
Yet the press has gone through many significant changes since ideas about ‘press freedom’ were first discussed well over 200 years ago.
New forms of journalism have developed, there have been changes in printing techniques, changes in ownership, and even changes in perceptions of the role of the newspaper within society.
Furthermore, the press is now only one medium amongst many.
Radio, and later television, have usurped some of its duties.
Despite the enormity of these changes, and the social, economic, and political transformation of the societies within which these changes have taken place, the concepts most often used to justify the existence, and role, of the press — and latterly, the media — today still retain significant elements of 19th century (and sometimes earlier) political thought.
Discussion of the roles and duties of the media in the contemporary scene must inevitably go beyond earlier and rather limited comments on the press.
Nevertheless, one must not underestimate the importance of earlier ideas about press freedom, nor must one underestimate the extent to which these ideas still reside within more complex statements about the mass media.
The  1986 Peacock Committee, for example, considered the future of television in Britain by invoking parallels with the press and the abolition of pre-publication censorship in 1694.
Such ideas, and lessons of history, are clearly of fundamental importance and should not be dismissed out of hand.
Can they, however, satisfactorily incorporate the changes in societies which now determine the existence and practices of the present media?
How do they help us understand developments in the media?
FREEDOM OF THE PRESS
In 17th century England, the state exercised enormous control over the press.
It exercised powers of regulation and censorship on the grounds that press freedom was a threat to the security and stability of the state.
Statements in favour of the ‘freedom of the press’ and the ‘freedom to publish’— from Milton's  Areopagitica  of 1644 onwards — were, therefore, intended as replies to those who maintained that granting the press its freedom would pose threats to the stability of the state.
They were part of a broader argument against the powers of the state over what could and could not be published and what ideas could and could not be tolerated.
Milton's views in favour of freeing the press from state, or any other forms of, control were based on the idea that the censorship and control of ideas inevitably resulted in a loss of an element of truth.
Individuals could only choose between truth and falsehood if they had access to both; ultimately, ‘reason and virtue are predicated upon the freedom to choose’.
Decades later, both Bentham and de Tocqueville were to add their support to these essentially libertarian ideas by arguing that total freedom was very much preferable to any form of suppression.
Other writers expanded on, and embellished, earlier statements on the ‘freedom of the press’, its role in society and its practices.
The press acquired an educational role and the role of ‘watchdog’:.
it was the ‘fourth estate’ taking governments to task and protecting the public interest as well as representing public opinion; and it could also help create a politically literate society.
In all these intricate ways, the press became the channel par excellence through which political debate was to be conducted and political society came into existence and survived.
The nature of political representation and the meaning of ‘public opinion’ would all  change as a consequence of the existence of the press.
These arguments in favour of, or against, granting the press its freedom continued well into the 19th century.
Whereas the American Constitution guaranteed that ‘Congress shall make no law…abridging the freedom of speech or of the press’ as early as 1791, the British State continued to regulate the press through a variety of taxes on paper and advertising until the mid-1850s.
The repeal of the ‘taxes on knowledge’ in the mid-1850s is, therefore, an historical and political watershed; it ensured that individuals and groups could voice opinions and circulate those opinions via the press without risk of prosecution.
In practice, few of the conceptual embellishments of the idea of the ‘freedom of the press’ proved to be any more than occasional glimpses of what an ideal press ought to be like.
It could no more act as a ‘watchdog’ than a critical examiner of the actions of politicians or government because it was closely and inextricably tied to both.
As Boyce has pointed out, the credibility of the press ‘lay in its apparent independence from the political party machine’ even though its natural position ‘was that of being part of the political machine’.
(See Chapter 3.)
The newspaper was anything but an ‘independent’, ‘responsible’, ‘oppositional/adversarial’ force in society; it was a politically committed and attached organ.
The practices of the press were to further undermine its credibility.
Almost inevitably, the press sought out the centres of political and economic power both as a major definer of the social and political terrain and as a source of information.
Consequently, it began to offer a ‘top-down’ interpretation of processes and problems in society.
The detachment of the press from political parties after the turn of the century — a result of economic rather than ideological factors — did not lessen the importance of those with political and economic power.
In fact, the ‘state’ became very adept at using the press as a means of perpetuating its own (sometimes precarious) existence.
‘The government [of 1918]’, according to Middlemass,
clearly intended to create a public distinction between good and bad trade union behaviour, in advance of the bargaining over post-war reconstruction…
Tory Ministers…could be found…asking editors to show their patriotism ‘by refraining from attacks on the capitalist class’.
Newspapers were thus (intentionally) failing to fully represent public opinion.
The BBC was no better; its ‘Byzantine mentality’ created an approach which ‘remained synonymous with the nineteenth century parliamentary constitution’.
Despite these very significant shortcomings, the idea of the ‘free’ press remained (as it still remains) a real and vital concept.
That the press in the 19th and 20th centuries chose to attach itself to political parties and also chose to abdicate its responsibilities towards its publics by identifying itself too closely with the interests of the state in no way reflects upon the notions of the free press.
It does not wholly undermine the principle though it does leave it somewhat tarnished.
To quote Bentham, ‘The liberty of the press has its inconveniences, but the evil which may result from it is not to be compared to the evil of censorship’.
The concept of the ‘freedom of the press’ must, therefore, be appraised with reference to the structural and organisational independence of the press from the state.
Other criteria such as the press's preference for orientating itself to the state, to political parties, or to economic interests are important but secondary considerations.
The essence of the concept must, as it were, be detached from the practice.
Milton's ideas, for instance, were developed in an age when the state exercised enormous controls over intellectual and cultural life.
In that environment, the idea of seeking ‘freedom’ from the state had a real and concrete point of reference.
Though it no longer has the same resonance, it remains an important criterion.
Though it is structurally and organizationally outside the control of the state, as an institution the press daily confronts pressures and constraints which limit its freedom.
Like all other institutions, it cannot enjoy absolute freedom.
No editor is absolutely free to do what he/she desires.
Their working contexts impose certain limits on what they are able to do; for example, on how many journalists they can employ and on how much news space they have on the paper.
Such ‘limits’ on the freedom of the press are often overlooked yet their consequences may be just as severe as those which the state can impose.
Similarly, a newspaper owned by a forceful press magnate may be under heavy pressure to adopt a certain political line in its columns.
Such pressure is often regarded as improper and undermining editorial sovereignty and responsibility; undermining, in other words, ‘press freedom’.
But newspapers, and their editors, can face other constraints.
The editor of a newspaper owned by a Trust will be ‘forced’ to carry on the newspaper's tradition.
Like their counterparts on privately owned newspapers, they will have to take note of the restrictions on space which advertising forces on the paper.
As Curran has forcefully shown, advertising also plays a part in shaping a newspaper and so the needs of advertising to some extent determine the nature of the newspaper.
Finally, no editor has a limitless source of funding, no editor can ignore the readers and their needs and wants, and no editor can safely depart from established news practices.
Editors must, then, exercise a choice and exercising a choice inevitably involves ignoring certain options.
So that even if a proprietor or advertiser does not exert undue pressure, there are other forces that impinge on the ‘freedom’ of an editor and a newspaper.
It could be argued that economic and organizational ‘pressures’ are qualitatively different from the sorts of constraints that governments or ‘states’are able to impose.
In reality, though, there is no rational basis for making a distinction between ‘proper’ and ‘acceptable’pressures — the former — and ‘improper’ones — the latter.
Both sets of pressures involve restrictions of one sort or another.
To some, state or proprietorial interference may be deemed ‘improper’ interference but to others an editor's pursuit of the liberal-middle ground may be an equal misuse of hierarchical power.
If, however, press freedom is never absolute, there can be no real way of guaranteeing that the mass media will represent a wide range of views.
For as soon as a news organization is established within a competitive economic system, it has to exercise choices about what sort of medium it is, what it does and for whom it does it.
These choices inevitably narrow its vision and place it in a certain niche in the media market.
The short-lived ‘left-of-centre’News-on-Sunday (1986 — 7) provides a good example.
The original intention was to publish a radical, investigative, and hard-hitting tabloid.
Many of its ideological touchstones — anti-sexist, anti-fascist, anti-racist — were contained in a published charter.
Despite this ideological coherence (or inflexibility?) numerous disputes raged within the editorial board even prior to its first edition.
With the departure of some key figures, the paper appeared to change its intended style and its  original objectives.
To its critics, it became a mild tabloid and a very pale imitation of what was originally intended.
When it failed to attract substantial readers, it faced a financial crisis which forced it to curtail some of its journalistic efforts.
The foreign desk was, for example, closed down as journalists were sacked.
As the financial crisis deepened, the ownership of the paper changed.
This led, in turn, to a re-definition of the nature of the paper and eventually to its closure.
Throughout this period, the News-on-Sunday changed as both internal and external pressure challenged its very survival.
Its intentions were not borne out, perhaps could not be borne out, because it attempted to find a niche within a competitive industry without engaging in the sort of competition which guaranteed its rivals, success.
By contrast,Sunday Sport , a soft-porn-tabloid also launched in 1986, eschewed the high moral ground and went for the marketplace, seeking to satisfy the insatiable (British?) appetite for ‘all tits and no balls’.
The ideological, economic and structural problems that confronted the News-on-Sunday provide many lessons for those who believe that establishing newspapers is an easy task.
More critically, it highlights the nature of the constraints on press ‘freedom’: one simply cannot do what one ‘wants’; the exigencies of the market determine what is, and is not, possible.
If there can be no way of guaranteeing the full representation of all views, is it possible to create structures which lessen or remove restrictions on press ‘freedom’?
Before exploring this question in detail, we turn to an appraisal of the ‘theories of the press’.
THE PRESS IN THE AGE OF THE MEDIA
Despite the changing circumstances within which the press now operates and much evidence with which to discredit its own claims to legitimacy as ‘the fourth estate’, there has been no serious attempt to reconsider the theories of the press and the media generally as they relate to the remaining decade of this century.
The press today lives alongside the power of television and competes with it for allegiance and influence.
Yet the ideas used to justify the existence and work of the media, such as the ‘freedom of the press’, are ideas whose true meanings are but a memory of past struggles in very different circumstances.
We revert to these distant  ideas when discussing the press and the media instead of attempting to recast the core concepts in the context of today's society.
There has been no significant advance on the theories of the press as set out by Siebert et al .
in the mid-1950s when television was still in its infancy.
Their discussion of what the press ‘should be and do’ reflects an East — West Cold War divide and they set out ideal, polar positions so as to highlight differences.
On the one hand, one finds the libertarian and social responsibility models of the press in those states where ‘freedom to publish’ and the ‘freedom of the press’are established; on the other hand, where there are no such freedoms, one finds the authoritarian and Soviet models of the press.
The libertarian model is identified with the struggle for a free press.
As this model had some rather obvious shortcomings in that it identified the freedom to publish with individual property rights of purchase and sale of newspaper titles, it was necessary to overlay the libertarian (laissez-faire ) position with an element of social conscience.
As a result, the social responsibility theory was born; newspapers remained the property of their owners, they could still be bought and sold in the marketplace, but owners and newspapers were now credited with obligations to society — obligations to provide information, to allow a diversity of views to be printed, to encourage the best and most professional of journalistic activity so as to pursue truth and knowledge (Table 2.1).
Faced with the reality that newspapers (and television stations) were no more than private organs for private gain, commentators   could only hope that private ownership would be tempered by a social conscience.
It is not difficult to be critical of these propositions.
Even Siebert et al .
noted that the press was falling into too few hands to allow for a proper ‘marketplace of ideas’ to operate.
The authors were, however, satisfied that once the press assumed obligations to society, there would be a greater likelihood that all sides of events would be fairly represented and that sufficient information would be available to the public.
Severe criticism of these ideas did little to detract from the belief that even a sickly press was preferable to the Soviet and authoritarian theories outlined by Siebert et al .
These contrasted the Western models with the sorts of restrictions that could and were applied to the media in other political systems: the media were not free to publish, the expression of opinion was controlled, the Party/government could dictate the content of the media, and the essential freedoms associated with the Western models were obviously absent.
These four theories of the press have featured in numerous discussions about the role of the press.
Although these theories could not easily be deployed in the ‘real’ world, they did serve a valuable purpose as condensations of patterns of thought about the media.
On the one hand, they proposed the creation of a press/media where no regulations restrained freedoms and, on the other hand, they pointed to the undesirable nature of regulations.
One of the curious anomalies that this gave rise to was the difficulty of placing an institution such as the BBC into their scheme of things.
Was the BBC ‘owned by the government’ or not?
Was a regulatory framework inevitably anti-libertarian?
In this respect, the European tradition appeared at odds with the American one.
More recently, and as a direct outcome of shortcomings in the original four theories, two ‘new’ theories have been proposed.
The first of these, the ‘development media theory’, is ‘appropriate to the media situation of developing countries’.
Developing countries have their own specific economic, political and social requirements and it is often felt that the media should ‘carry out positive development tasks’; that they should accept restrictions if the state so desires and that they should be subordinate to the needs (economic, cultural, political) of a developing state.
Instead of being critical, adversarial or even sceptical, the media should bow down to the needs of the country so as to encourage development across all sectors.
Instead of being ‘destructive’ the media should be ‘constructive,.
Superficially attractive and officially, if implicitly, condoned by UNESCO, this theory has come in for severe criticism from Western media interests and journalists.
Some of this criticism is based on the fear that Western interests might be endangered: access to the country and its resources might be restricted or journalists might not be allowed to operate freely but be directed in their work.
Other objections to the theory reflect the old libertarian argument of the 16th century, namely, that any control of the media, however benevolent, might be censorious.
The ‘development theory’ made it too easy to claim that a state's interests were at stake at the first sign of legitimate criticism.
Indeed, anything could be proclaimed as being against state interest.
The ‘development media theory’ has generated a far more vigorous debate than the second of the new theories.
The ‘democratic-participant’ media theory is also the result of recent debates on media issues though this theory is ‘difficult to formulate, partly because it lacks full legitimation and incorporation into media institutions and partly because some of its tenets are…to be found’elsewhere.
‘It favours multiplicity, smallness of scale, locality, deinstitutionalization, interchange of sender-receiver roles, horizontality of communication links at all levels of society, interaction.’
It is, in brief, a reaction to all the evils of the present media and the existing processes of communication.
More importantly, it reiterates the belief that ‘[t]he organisation and content of media should not be subject to centralised political or state bureaucratic control’.
This belief in ‘independence’ is well entrenched in the West and it has developed out of a general mistrust of centralized political power and of power that had historically not tolerated the free expression of dissenting views.
Whether one interpreted this from the perspective of a 16th century Milton or that of a 20th century anarchist, the outcome was still the same in its condemnation of restrictions on the free expression and dissemination of opinions.
This strong attachment to a hard-won freedom can neither be denigrated, nor eradicated from consciousness.
It is at the heart of contemporary conceptions of what the media do and ought to do.
Media theories for the present must, therefore, make the absence of state control their cornerstone.
Likewise proposals for the reform of the media must pay due attention to it.
There are, however, two other fundamental problems which cannot be so easily resolved.
First, proposals for reform — such proposals will be discussed more fully below — ultimately fail in their intentions because they do not take into account the social, economic and political nature of today's society and the way that important relationships have changed.
For example, few proposals examine the impact of the welfare state on the relationship between the individual and the state or the ability of the individual to select their own media from an enormous range of national and increasingly international outlets.
In other words, the proposals are framed in a political and social void which does not engage with the sorts of social, political and economic changes that have recently been experienced by all.
Second, proposals which only address (and seek to reform) the structural changes that have afflicted the media, e.g. conglomeration, but fail to note changes in the processes of news-production and journalistic work, are incomplete solutions.
What are these changes and how do they affect media theories?
Four major areas of change need to be considered.
Some describe trends in society, others identify changes in media practices.
Each of these areas impacts directly or indirectly on the structures and regulations surrounding the media, on the work of the media, and on its degrees of freedom.
Moreover, because each of these areas has changed the relationship of the individual to the state, the media are also forced to re-evaluate their roles vis-à-vis the individual and the public interest/public opinion.
As the parameters within which the media operate change, so too must media theories.
The four areas are:
(a)
the national and international media context
(b)
the coming of the interventionist (welfare) state and the growth of the state bureaucracy
(c)
the realignment in British politics since 1945
(d)
media coverage: ‘representations’, ‘forgetting’ and the ‘destruction of memory’.
(a) The national and international media context
The changes in media ownership since 1945 have been well documented.
Briefly, the mass media in Britain form a part of an international media scene with multinationals in charge of broadcasting and newspaper interests.
The prime example of this is undoubtedly Murdoch's News International with its Australian-American connections.
This pattern suggests that individual media institutions are unlikely to survive either in isolation or as independent (national) trading units.
It is worth noting, for instance, that all the new titles coming out in the United Kingdom in recent years have had substantial backing from a variety of sources: finance corporations, industrial interests, media interests, and so on .
Media enterprises — newspapers, radio or television services — now need such large sums of capital that they cannot afford not to turn to outside (sometimes foreign) interests.
This trend is most noticeable in relation to the ‘new media’.
The economic internationalization of the media — a process which reaches its apotheosis with satellite broadcasting — has another side to it, and that is the use of media output, notably television output, e.g. Dallas , internationally.
The cultural impact of this has been well researched and extensively commented upon elsewhere.
It describes a process where national media find it cheaper and more advantageous to broadcast foreign/non-national material.
Such fictional programmes will be joined in the very near future by internationally available news output.
America's Cable News Network (CNN) is the prime example here.
Its output can now reach separate continents and subscribers will, in the future, have access to different interpretations of news events (see Chapter 10).
Internationalization of content has the effect of questioning established national media practices.
Adhering to such notions as balance and impartiality may be justifiable in a national context, although even this is increasingly suspect, but in the international context these notions and their attendant practices are meaningless.
Media theories, as developed in the past, are uniquely national and ethnocentric.
They have never been reformulated in such a way as to incorporate the consequences of the internationalization of media ownership and content.
Such a reformulation would not only call for a reassessment of traditional notions and practices — balance, impartiality, objectivity, ownership, editorial sovereignty — but would also require the media to improve upon their present performances in explaining events in the world.
(b) The Welfare State and the state bureaucracy
Since the end of the Second World War, state institutions have extended their influence over a whole range of activities which touch individual lives.
The state determines the amount of money individuals have available via direct and indirect taxation as well as social benefits; it regulates vast areas of our lives, e.g. via health and safety regulations; it subsidizes foods and housing, for example, and it provides a range of services such as health and education.
There are two consequences which follow from this and both impact on the work of the media.
First, the state is now in charge of vast amounts of administrative and political information which is of direct relevance to individuals.
This information — and it is of enormous diversity and emanates from all governmental departments — does not often find its way into the media.
The dominance of long-standing and still influential ‘news values’ militates against such information surfacing with any degree of frequency, particularly in the popular media.
The result is that the media, by and large, do not play what could be an important part in informing the citizen.
The role of the media as information providers is often overlooked by those who emphasize their overtly political functions.
Second, because governments and ministers still retain political objectives and motivations, they will attempt to guard jealously information within their purview and to use it in such ways as to influence and direct public opinion.
As Norton Taylor points out, ‘administrations have always attempted to present their policies in the best possible light; to avoid public relations pitfalls; to coordinate information policy; and to counter bad news they can do little about…’.
While this is a continuing habit of government it is worth pondering whether governments have become more adept at doing this and whether they have encouraged the growth of a machinery with which to co-ordinate media policy generally.
It is also crucial to ask whether the media are able to cope with this growth in information and whether they can do anything to counter the efforts of governments to manipulate it for their own ends.
(c) The Realignment in British Politics
With the realignment in British politics, it is no longer satisfactory to consider that a ‘left-wing newspaper’ will tip the balance towards some notional idea of equality or fairness in Fleet St/Wapping.
If one abandons a crude Marxist version of the composition of classes in society and the class struggle, then one similarly abandons any pretence of being able to reproduce that in the media.
The results of the 1983 and 1987 general elections were pointers to this problem.
With the national vote split three ways, what positions should the press and broadcasting take up?
It is insufficient to call for a simple ‘left-right’ divide of media power since the traditional ‘magnetic poles’of ideology no longer attract so strongly.
Furthermore, structural reforms which simply aim to bring a balance to political representations in the media fail to address the broader question of which particular set of views need to be represented.
Is it merely a matter of reproducing party political views and, if so, of which political parties?
Is it more appropriate to reproduce cross-cutting sectional views?
In other words, how does one determine which views are ‘significant’ and also ensure that these views are represented?
(d) Media coverage: ‘forgetting’ and the ‘destruction of memory'
In the prologue to his book on the harrowing contemporary history of Cambodia, William Shawcross makes several references to the part the modern means of mass communication play in creating and recreating national and international events.
In brief, Shawcross suggests that the means of modern mass communication bombard us continually with images and information about world events and specifically about natural and man-made disasters, for example , wars, famines, floods, etc.
The effects of this are two-fold.
First, it can create a feeling of impotence as one disaster succeeds another without any suggestion that earlier disasters were in any way ameliorated.
Second, and to Shawcross more important, the effect of continuous, albeit concentrated and short-term, reporting of disasters destroys ‘memory’:
the bloody massacre in Bangladesh quickly covered the memory of the Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia; the assassination of  Allende drowned the groans of Bangladesh; the war in the Sinai desert made people forget Allende; the Cambodian massacre made people forget Sinai; and so on and so forth, until ultimately everyone lets everything be forgotten.
Such a roll-call can easily be updated: Iran, Lebanon, Afghanistan, Poland, Ireland, Ethiopia, and so on.
The capacity of the means of mass communication to convey these images of destruction and suffering cannot be doubted, but there are two fundamental issues of broad political concern that remain unresolved.
The first is whether we tend to accept too readily the veracity and accuracy of media reports.
Often, the media convey a fairly complete picture of the events in question.
This is certainly true when they deal with stories near home.
At other times, however, the media are only able to report snippets of information, incomplete fragments of a complex situation.
They can even become unknowing agents of propaganda.
This is particularly true of foreign stories.
We are therefore exposed to incomplete explanations of events: we know of the famine but cannot comprehend its causes, we are made aware of problems but cannot fathom their resolution.
The second issue, and it is closely related to the first, is whether the succession of images — and they succeed each other with alarming frequency — enables us not only to remember past events but to learn from our past mistakes.
Shawcross raises these questions within the context of disaster relief but they have a broader setting.
The mass media, particularly the national mass media, pursue stories with great intensity for short periods only.
A ‘good’ story may run for four or five weeks, after which the media and the public tire of it.
Another story then takes over.
Significantly though, the media do not retrieve the information at some later date for the public's benefit.
This is evident in a number of situations.
The Ethiopian famine of 1984 — 5 was a more severe relation of the Ethiopian famine of the 1970s yet the latter was consigned to a memory which is rarely mined for information and for the lessons of history.
THE NEED TO REFORM MEDIA THEORY
Traditional media theory fails to provide any intellectual coherence, because it does not consider the changed circumstances within  which the media function and it does not review the impact of a competitive, international, media system.
A media theory for the 21 st century needs to consider these changed circumstances and, more fundamentally, whether we have come, or been led, to expect too much from means of mass communication which are so obviously and primarily economic enterprises with too few available resources to tackle the range of issues that occupy today's citizen.
Put differently, and more provocatively, can the means of mass communication modelled on the 19th and early 20th century models of what a newspaper must, can, and should do, retain any validity today and in the future?
How does one deal with a Sun newspaper or a Sky Channel?
Furthermore, do the recommendations for reform presently advocated come anywhere near improving the present situation?
It is worth recalling, briefly, the source of current dissatisfaction with the media, and particularly the organization and structure of the press.
According to either the libertarian or social responsibility theories of the media, the means of mass communication should not be controlled by the state.
In addition to the absence of state control, the ownership of the press, and indeed the media, should not be concentrated in too few hands.
Although there are no specific ‘injunctions’ against this, the theories imply that concentration of ownership is undesirable.
The failure to achieve many of these desired objectives has been apparent.
Ownership is heavily concentrated and the majority of newspapers are politically partisan.
Also, a section of the press has abandoned any pretence at providing its readers with ‘politics’.
These shortcomings are clearly compounded by the difficulty of creating new titles.
It is, therefore, difficult to believe in the transition of the newspaper from the libertarian model to the social responsibility one.
This pattern and economic and other pressures make it unlikely that the media will acquire ‘duties and obligations’ to society unless they are forced to acquire obligations.
Much of what is often praised in broadcasting is there because of a regulatory structure which encourages diversity in programming.
A deregulated — libertarian — environment would allow the market to determine the content and quality of the service.
However, such regulatory mechanisms have always been anathema to the newspaper industry.
Although the 1977 Royal Commission was forced to acknowledge the shortcomings of the  liberal theory of the press based on proprietorial freedom, it drew back from suggesting any departures from the status quo.
It sought to defend and protect proprietorial freedom yet it ‘seemed to be defining press freedom as a wider, collective freedom of all journalists working in the press’.
As Curran and Seaton observed, the Commission wanted to ‘transplant the public service rationale of broadcasting to the press…but was opposed to the framework of public regulation that underpins it’.
Their own proposals for reform are aimed at restructuring the British press but it can be argued that even they fail to come to grips with the sort of major ‘shortcomings’ of the press (and media) identified above.
Altering the structure does not necessarily tackle practices and the more fundamental issues of how the media should treat and explain the complexity of contemporary social problems or how they should act in the face of the increasing ability of governments and other authorities to control and manipulate information.
More significantly, they seem to be locked into a caricature of British politics.
Their solutions to the dire state of the press are to be found in the labour movement, the Labour Party and the Campaign for Press and Broadcasting Freedom.
The ‘new approach’ they propose, is ‘a programme consciously directed towards broadening the ideological and cultural content of Britain's mass media so that it is more representative of the spread of interests and views within the community’.
They propose a series of anti-monopoly measures and the promotion of ideologically different mass, local, and community media.
This latter recommendation is tied up with the setting up of a Media Enterprise Board which would provide funding — funding derived from an advertising levy — for all newly established media.
The Board's task would be to help fledgling media and in particular media with extensive readerships but whose inability to attract advertising support, perhaps because of their politics, puts them in constant danger of closing down.
However, their idealism is tempered with realism.
They suggest that not all attempts to start up new newspapers should be funded.
The MEB should provide support to proposed new media enterprises ‘providing always that these appear likely to succeed .
There is, in other words, no guarantee that the Board's meagre attempt at overcoming the laissez-faire economic approach will be any more  successful in creating diversity.
Would the MEB, one dares to ask, have funded the News-on-Sunday or Today and what criteria would it have used to justify its support?
Their discussion of broadcasting reform is equally unsatisfactory.
In order to improve the broadcasting system and make it better able to resist political pressure — a prime duty of the libertarian/social responsibility media — they favour a wider range of representation on various broadcasting boards.
Such a reform would be welcome indeed and would remove the existing bias towards ‘the great and the good’ but would it enable the broadcasting authorities to be more assertive in their dealings with governments?
There are many reasons to doubt that.
James Curran and Jean Seaton's strategy is premised on a series of structural changes which are intended to mitigate the ‘undesirable’ effects of the marketplace and produce a more ‘responsible and representative’media.
But there is a view, which is gaining political support, that suggests that the best way to guarantee a ‘responsible and representative’ media, especially with regard to broadcasting, is to remove all regulatory mechanisms altogether: for broadcasting to follow in the footsteps of the ‘free’press.
In that way, the public will be able to exercise a true choice rather than be forced to exercise a choice within an imposed framework.
REGULATION OR DEREGULATION: THE FUTURE OF THE BRITISH MEDIA
‘The market in broadcasting'
A vocal exponent of the need to create a free market in broadcasting is Samuel Brittan.
Although he has often made references to this in his writings, he developed his argument more fully whilst a member of the Peacock Committee.
His position is in stark contrast to that of Curran and Seaton.
Whilst they are of the belief that regulation encourages diversity and underwrites artistic freedom, Brittan maintains that regulation is no different from censorship.
It is, in effect, a form of control.
Although the term censorship is usually applied to instances of government interference in programme making, Brittan uses it much more broadly to include such structural and institutional  constraints as the IBA's power to withdraw franchises and its right to vet schedules and programmes.
As he later recalled, ‘I was indeed disturbed (but not surprised) that liberal minded scholars and businessmen did not share my instinctive revulsion from ‘regulation’…’.
This ‘instinctive revulsion from regulation’ is the foundation of his libertarian heritage and it gives rise to a particular vision of how broadcasting should develop and what its purposes should be.
The fundamental aim of broadcasting policy, according to Brittan/Peacock, is to enlarge ‘the freedom of choice of the consumer and the opportunities to programme makers to offer alternative wares to the public’.
The free market principle and consumer sovereignty — that viewers and listeners are the best judges of their own interests and what they want to consume — are, therefore, the cornerstones of this particular approach to broadcasting.
Consumers of broadcasting must themselves decide what they want and the price they are willing to pay.
Their choice should always remain supreme: ‘no one person or group, or committee, or ‘establishment’ can be trusted to make a superior choice’.
The belief in the broadcasting market is not without its difficulties: how can a multiplicity of channels be introduced so as to allow for consumer choice and how does one overcome the possible detrimental consequences of the market mechanism?
(i) The introduction of multiplicity
The Peacock Committee recognizes that a full market strategy cannot be adopted unless there is ‘full freedom of entry for programme makers,a transmission system capable of carrying an indefinitely large number of programmes , facilities of pay-per-view and a satisfactory charging mechanism’.
With the advent of subscription as a means of payment for television programmes and the introduction of many new channels of communication as a result of the new media, consumers would be better able to exercise their individual choices.
But one would still need regulations or policies ‘to prevent monopolistic concentration’ and a ‘common carrier’obligation imposed upon owners of transmission equipment.
(ii) The ‘problem’ of consumer choice
Under market conditions, would consumer choice eventually lead to a reduction of diversity or a lowering of quality as ‘the worthy’ is  replaced by ‘the popular’?
Would the cheap American import drive out the expensive one-off play, for example?
Is there a ‘Gresham's Law’ of broadcasting?
The answers given by Brittan and the Committee are in the affirmative, if only implicitly.
They therefore recommended that a body, the Public Service Broadcasting Council (PSBC), be created to oversee and encourage public service commitments in broadcasting.
Herein lay a paradox: the PSBC was ‘patronage [good], that is, supporting projects of merit and quality’, whereas ‘paternalism’[bad]referred to institutions, such as the BBC, which believed they knew what the public needed.
Given its rather élitist duties, it is not surprising to note that the PSBC would be funded out of taxpayers' money and rents paid by ITV contractors and not by the (few) consumers of its products.
The case for regulation and public funding in order to create the PSBC is (perhaps paradoxically) matched by strong arguments for the deregulation of broadcasting and the introduction of consumer sovereignty.
As the Committee reminds us, ‘prepublication censorship (i.e. today's broadcasting regulation)…has no place in a free society….’ and there cannot be any justifications for imposing limits on what should or should not be published or printed.
As long as the laws of the land were not broken, there should be a free market in information.
just as there are no restrictions on who should publish newspapers, there should be an equal openness in broadcasting.
The broadcasting market ‘will enable people to choose among broadcasters as they already do among newspapers’.
Furthermore,individual consumer choices, when aggregated, will have beneficial effects on broadcasting as a whole.
Instead of diminishing the richness of broadcasting, the ‘fully developed broadcasting market’ would bring about a wider ‘range, quality and penetration of the best’.
The analogy with the press which is so often used by the authors to justify the liberation of broadcasting, e.g. as in ‘electronic publishing’, is only superficially attractive.
It ignores the real history of the press in Britain and so it paints a naïve picture of a conservative and debased medium which offers little real choice.
Whether these ‘difficulties’ with the analogy — or the impossibility of achieving a transmission system capable of an indefinitely large number of channels — would force an advocate of ‘electronic publishing’to change their positions is very doubtful.
They are too wedded to a consumer-driven philosophy.
Yet because they are aware of the nature of market forces, they are willing to consider regulations which would prevent anti-competitive practices and restrictions on access to the means of communications.
The ‘sophisticated market system’, therefore, imposes its own regulatory requirements.
Some, like the PSBC, are there to ensure that ‘public service’ programming does not disappear; others, such as the ‘freedom of entry’, ‘common carrier obligations…’and the ‘policy to prevent monopolistic concentration’, are there to guarantee openness.
Taken together, they produce not a free market but one regulated to allow for freedom!
Contrasting philosophies: Brittan/Peacock and Curran and Seaton
Although both sets of authors make recommendations for the creation of a broadcasting (and media) system to cater for the British public and its needs and wants, they differ enormously in their interpretations of what those needs and wants are.
They also differ in the nature of the system which would deliver that which is desired.
The Peacock Committee strongly believes in the need for individuals to determine their own needs and wants.
Such choices would not be guided nor would they be limited by the work of other institutions.
Consumers should have a choice to ‘buy’ what they want.
Similarly, producers would be able to make what they want and offer the products to the public at a price.
Together, consumers and producers would come to arrangements which, in their consequences, give rise to a market in broadcasting.
‘Public service’ programming would exist, again at a price, but unlike the present system there would be no obligation on producers (IBA, BBC) to produce these and consumers would be free to avoid them.
Whether Curran and Seaton would agree with the principles that lie behind the above proposals is very doubtful.
Market forces are usually to the detriment of ‘quality’ programming and they lessen diversity as producers chase the same audiences.
Mechanisms and institutions need to be created to guide both the market and the consumer.
Such institutions would also need to encourage diversity in output rather than simply encouraging the ‘artistic and the worthy’.
Only with diversity of output can there be real choice.
The idea that consumers should determine the fate of media by  their exercise of economic choices would not be readily accepted by the ‘left’.
Not only would they point to economic forces which limit those choices but they would also point out that the resultant individual choices lead to an impoverishment of products, to the Sun and not the Independent , to Sunday Sport and not News-on-Sunday .
This would reinforce their belief in the need to help the latter group of newspapers rather than simply leaving them to market forces.
Finally, whereas Brittan and Peacock would perceive nothing untoward in biased programming so long as consumers are free to exercise consumer choice as they do with newspapers (sic), Curran and Seaton propose that broadcasting and the press should be more representative of all political shades.
The two very different sets of recommendations discussed above offer some guidance for the development of a more appropriate and contemporary media theory.
They are united in the emphasis they place on the need to avoid all forms of censorship or control over cultural workers.
This freedom — to publish, of the press, of the media — should remain intact so long as laws are not broken.
One also needs to be wary of the inequalities that market mechanisms bring in their wake.
We do need to ensure that a broad range of views are truly represented even though we may not be able to force individual citizens (consumers?) to acknowledge these.
At the same time, however, we have to consider the possibility that members of society (consumers?) may not care about ‘representativeness’: setting up, say, a left-of-centre paper is a considerably simpler task than making people read it.
Both sets of recommendations, unfortunately, only deal with structural changes, with reforms which will alter the balance between producer and consumer or between the ‘right’ and the ‘left’.
They do not deal with the practices of the media; practices that are, in themselves, real obstacles to the development of a politically literate public.
For example, journalists should perhaps consider redefining traditional concepts of ‘newsworthiness’ and ‘news values’.
So long as these remain at the centre of any newsgathering institution, then the risk of episodic and trivial coverage increases.
To abandon ‘news values’ as the sole criteria of the media would not necessarily lead to a dereliction of duty.
The media would still be able to cover current stories but within a longer-term, in-depth perspective so that Ethiopia or the Lebanon, Westland or nuclear disarmament do not simply occupy a few weeks' worth of front page/main bulletin coverage per year.
By ignoring the vehicles in which politics is communicated, both sets of recommendations overlook obstacles to communication which are just as real in their consequences as structural ones.
To call for the reappraisal of what the media should do goes beyond questions of diversity or anti-monopoly legislation.
Although these are of critical importance, it is not particularly obvious how either a free market in broadcasting or ideological diversity in the media would make us any the wiser about Iran, Iraq or the Lebanon.
If the ultimate aim is to create a politically literate society, then the means of communication ought to strive to meet those objectives.
They would be helped enormously if other agencies of enlightenment, particularly the schooling system, contributed to the task.
In the end, it is naïve to expect the media to single-handedly change centuries of established ways of thinking about the role of the individual/citizen/consumer in the political and social system.
Chapter Three
THE BRITISH PRESS
In an era when the press displays its more ruthless, competitive and combative urges, it may seem curious to begin a discussion of the current state of the British press by delving into its history and, more particularly, its political history.
What, one may ask, is the relevance of such an historical exhumation?
What is its purpose?
What lessons does it teach us?
An examination of the historical pattern of change serves four main purposes; purposes which take on great significance in the context of contemporary debates concerning the proper representation of all political opinion and the nature of bias in the press.
First, an historical analysis reminds us that the press in the last century was not monolithic, that it displayed a rich diversity of styles, content and political positions.
Different types of newspaper co-existed comfortably and their problems were not dissimilar from those experienced by their heirs.
As Koss reminds us,
[T]he remarkable thing about the British press, as it entered the twentieth century, was its resemblance…to the press of mid-Victorian times, in some respects to that of pre-Victorian times.
The problems…had grown tremendously in scale; but they were fundamentally the same.
Indeed, the problems he cites — the commercialism of the press, the effect of advertising, the trend to sensationalism, concentration of ownership, and the reduction of political coverage — have a contemporary ring to them.
Second, to better understand such ideas as ‘press freedom’, one needs to relate them to their original context.
Third, an historical analysis also serves to illustrate how a narrow section of the press — the political or quality press — has had a continuing fascination with, and attraction to, the centres of legitimate political power and those who exercise it; moreover, the relationship between the triumvirate of politicians, proprietors and editors — namely, those who exercise political power and those who seek to bask in the afterglow of the exercise of that power — was never fixed.
It changed, and still changes, as political fortunes and circumstances change.
And this had consequences for the press:
The question of the sort of relations between journalists and politicians which could be considered proper was to remain of great importance in determining the changing role of the press.
Why that relationship ‘remains of great importance’ touches on the final purpose of the historical analysis.
Newspapers and political parties have ‘an affinity’.
There has been a tendency for newspapers to represent both existing political parties and emergent ones.
Newspapers, therefore, are the media through which political parties can establish and/or sustain themselves in the minds of the public.
The newspaper is the channel through which a political party can transmit its ideology and advertise its programme.
This affinity or linkage has real historical roots though its importance and character has changed in recent decades.
However, the disappearance of organizational links between the press and parties has not affected the manner in which those linkages continue to be perceived .
In political systems where there is free electoral competition between political parties for power, ‘one might expect to find a connection not only between individual papers and parties but also a correspondence, or parallelism, between the range of papers and the range of parties’.
Such a correspondence would ensure that no political party exercises undue influence and control over the means of communication or that the means of communication do not overwhelmingly support one political party.
An absence of correspondence, by corollary, would be an indication of the ‘skewness’ of support within the means of communication.
It is with this ‘ideal’ of ‘parallelism’in mind that one embarks on an analysis of the biased nature of the British press, its ‘unfairness’to the Labour party and its ‘infatuation’with the  Conservative party.
The ‘ideal’, therefore, forms the benchmark by which we judge the efficacy, honesty, and impartiality of the press in contemporary Britain.
The absence of ‘parallelism’— an issue discussed more fully below — can also seriously affect the political power of a party in opposition.
While it is the task of oppositions to oppose, the veracity of that opposition is dependent on the mass media, just as public judgements about the competence of that opposition rely on information derived from the mass media.
‘An out-party sometimes forgets that the power it exercises as an opposition is to some extent in the hands of journalists’; the more supportive the press is of the opposition party, the more pressure it can bring on the party in power.
Over the last two centuries, the relationship between the press and the political parties has gone through many changes.
In his work on the history of the ‘political’ press — namely that section of the press that exercised political influence — Koss identifies three broad historical phases.
The first of these is characterized by state control of the press and its eventual emancipation from such controls.
It corresponds, more or less, with the era of the pre-Victorian press.
In the second phase, one can find evidence of the press's gradual ‘emancipation from the political controls, diverse and sometimes imperceptible, that replaced [state control]’.
This phase corresponds to the mid-Victorian press and was to end at the turn of the century with the confirmation of the marketplace and commercialism as the key determinants of the press.
The third, and contemporary, phase emphasizes the dominance of the marketplace and the lessening importance of politics for much of the national daily press.
This chapter will concentrate on these ‘historical sketches’ as a way of illustrating in general terms the pattern of ‘de-alignment’or the loosening of ties between the press and the political parties which has taken place from the mid-Victorian period onwards.
It also considers the implications of this process.
One important lesson which one can draw from this historical analysis is that it may not be possible to predetermine the nature of the proper relationship between politics and the press: each era spawns different sets of relationships which are closely linked to particular configurations of social, political and economic forces.
A POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE PRESS: A BRIEF REVIEW
The pre-Victorian press
The pre-Victorian press was subservient to the state and to state interests.
In addition to punitive legal and financial restraints, governments and officials ensured that preferential treatment and a steady stream of funds kept the press in check.
As the 18th century turned, governments and officials had less to offer and newspaper publishers found advertising more lucrative as a form of revenue.
Although this represented a growing separation of the press from the state, the latter still exercised immense control over the press through the taxes and duties which it imposed upon it.
These duties — often referred to as the ‘taxes on knowledge’— were designed to limit the growth, circulation and distribution of the press in general and of the radical press in particular.
In the 1830s, for example, every newspaper publisher was required to pay a duty on each newspaper published, a duty on each advertisement, as well as a small paper duty.
The combined effect of these ‘taxes’ was to make the stamped press an expensive commodity, thereby restricting its circulation, and to make the ‘unstamped’press, i.e. those newspapers which refused to pay the duties, illegal and so subject to punitive measures.
Though the duties were reduced throughout the first half of the 19th century, they were not finally abolished until 1861.
Their abolition marked the beginnings of an enormous growth in the number of titles published as well as a reduction in cover prices: in 1855, most of the metropolitan dailies were priced at 5d, by 1870 prices ranged from ½d to 3d, with one at 4d.
The growth in titles was also significant.
There were some 43 English provincial titles published in 1868 but 138 in 1886.
This growth was to continue into the 20th century (Table 3.1).
Three features of the pre-Victorian press have a contemporary significance.
In the first place, the press was controlled and constrained.
Arguments in favour of freeing the press stemmed from a real experience of repression.
It is perhaps because of this that there is so much opposition to any form of state involvement in today's press.
Second, and more specifically, it was ‘daily journalism that counted politically, if only by dint of its opportunity for reiteration’.
The Sunday press, the weekly press and the provincial press paled into insignificance in the light of the metropolitan press which replayed daily the myriad Parliamentary political scene in print.
Even the radical unstamped press, which achieved remarkable sales in the early 19th century, failed to achieve this continuity and regularity of production.
With its sights set against the established social and political order, it was further estranged from those newspapers which were able to participate in the reporting and gossip of metropolitan politics.
Thus, as the political centre grew in importance, those who ignored it were unlikely to gain legitimacy as political newspapers.
Finally, the politically important and influential newspapers were not the newspapers with the greatest circulation but the small circulation, élite (political) newspapers as exemplified by The Times .
The press in an age of rapid change: 1855–1945
The emancipation of the press from direct state control freed it into the arms of eager politicians, though both groups of interest benefited from the close,voluntarily established, affinity which was to develop in the mid-Victorian decades.
Each political faction ‘considered it imperative to secure prominent, sympathetic, and reasonably accurate publicity for its own views…
[J]oined to political agencies,…[newspapers]augmented their own status…they were invested with a new validity, and an implicit authority.’
As a result of this close relationship, the mid-Victorian press became overtly partisan.
Freedom of the press in the context of emancipation from the controls of the state meant ‘the freedom to make a political choice…’.
In this period, the press and the political parties experienced their most intimate relationships: newspapers were closely allied to the many political factions which dominated late 19th century politics.
This was true of both the English metropolitan and provincial press.
All the metropolitan dailies published in 1855 as well as in 1870 were committed to either the Liberals or the Conservatives; the same was also broadly true of the English provincial daily press.
Between 1868 and 1885, only about one-fifth of all English provincial titles were not politically committed to the Liberals or to the Conservatives or to a combination of both.
Why did such a close and intimate relationship develop?
Part of the answer lies in the press's eternal fascination with those who wield political power.
For the ‘political’ press this is self-evident since their raison d'être is the reporting of politics, but even other sections of the press inevitably turn to political affairs to confirm their claims to seriousness.
For those involved in politics, the press was to become a medium for furthering political debate and education, for defining and defending party political positions, and for formulating political programmes.
Within a small political élite — and 19th century politics was conducted in a restricted political arena — the press could thus play a significant communicative role even though this role might appear alien to the majority of the public.
Inevitably, then, the two spheres of politics and journalism converged: those active in both spheres were engaging in similar activities by constantly exposing themselves, their ideas and their work to public scrutiny.
One way of illustrating the ‘natural’ affinity between these two spheres as well as its continuing relevance is to identify the overlap between the two occupations.
Though precise historical data relating to the mid-1850s is hard to come by, Lee has estimated that before 1880, there were six or fewer newspaper proprietors in the House of Commons.
In 1880, that figure more than doubled to 14 and continued to rise.
From 1892 to 1910, there were between 20 and 30 newspaper proprietors in the Commons.
Interestingly, in the late 20th century there are no newspaper proprietors listed as members of the Commons: this reflects both the changing role of the press vis-à-vis politics and the changing nature of its ownership.
By contrast, the professions of journalism and politics continue to be closely allied.
In the period 1892 to 1910, there were between 28 and 41 journalists in the Commons.
Journalists also represent a fertile field of would-be Parliamentarians: in each successive general election since 1959, over 100 of the candidates standing for all three major political parties have been journalists.
In the 1979 Parliament, there were 52 MPs whose main occupations were listed as ‘journalists and authors’ and 5 listed as ‘publishers’.
In 1983, of the 1 16 ‘publishers and journalists’ standing only 45 were elected: 30 of the 71 defeated candidates had stood for the SDP!
One outcome of this ‘natural’ affinity was that newspaper editorial offices and political parties were often populated by the same people; newspapers were sometimes funded by political parties and, in line with their ‘freedom to make a political choice’, they espoused certain political ideologies.
These very real linkages contrasted with the theoretical separation between the two spheres which is contained in the notion of the ‘fourth estate’.
Whilst the theory of the ‘fourth estate’ placed the press in an antagonistic and inquisitional role to the state and its institutions, in practice in the 19th century, the press was ‘a part of the political machine’.
The two spheres of politics and newspapers were ‘to all intents and purposes…concentric’.
The commercialization of the press
With time, the intimate relationship described above was to go through periods of stress and change.
Three major causes account for the ensuing periods of upheaval which culminated in the  establishment of a less formal relationship between the press and the political parties in the late 20th century:
a more commercial approach to newspapers;
an aversion to maintaining newspapers for political reasons only.
As costs of newspapers escalated this reason became even more important;
an aversion to political affairs content in the ‘new journalism’ of the late 19th century.
The ‘industrialization’ of the press (see also pp. 67 — 78) transformed it into a commodity and an industrial product.
As newspaper costs escalated and as the nature of the commodity changed politicians and political parties saw their financial grip over newspapers being prised open; by the late 19th century, newspapers had become such costly ventures that they were beyond the reach of politicians.
Not only were the funds difficult to find but it was becoming increasingly difficult to justify such expenditure on newspapers.
As newspaper proprietors showed a growing concern for profitability, politicians became more wary of ‘servants who postured as masters, and whose allegiance was, in any case, problematic’.
For the press, the loosening of the relationship with politicians produced a dilemma: it aspired to greatness as the fourth estate and as an institution for political enlightenment yet it had to pursue the mass audience in order to survive commercially.
The press in the 19th century (and to this day) had ‘its head in politics and its feet in commerce’.
This gave rise to a
struggle between two conceptions of the press: the one of a Fourth Estate, with proprietorship a form of public service and journalists a species of public philosophers; the other of the press as an industry, with proprietors as businessmen and journalism a trade or craft.
Although that struggle brought about changes in the formal relationship between the press and politicians, it did not fundamentally alter the natural attraction that these two spheres had for each other.
Politicians were still able to use their ‘authority’ and status to get their own way.
They were primary sources of information, some became newspaper leader-writers but, perhaps more significantly, they also ‘contracted an assortment of  interlocking alliances with editors, leader-writers, and proprietors, all of whom were expected to do their bidding’.
But despite these manoeuvres, politicians and political parties gradually became marginalized.
One way of illustrating this is to explore the ways in which economic pressures led to changes in the content and style of the newspaper.
The ‘depoliticization’ of the press in the 19th century
The political press, directed as it was to a small, literate and politically informed public, did not aim to capture its readers with an entertaining and interesting package.
It was, by all accounts, set out in a ‘dull and severe style’.
Other sections of the press, for example the Sunday newspapers, had always shown less interest in politics and devoted considerably less space to the staple diet of the ideal ‘fourth estate’ newspaper.
By the end of the 19th century, there was steady pressure towards a more ‘business-like’ attitude to newspaper publishing: newspapers, like all other commodities, would have to succumb to the market and the logic and practices of business enterprises.
This change in attitude to the newspaper had many important repercussions.
Newspapers and journalists were now much more aware of the needs of the market and of commerce.
Critics of this process of commercialization often pointed to the way that it made journalists less concerned with ‘the old style of principled journalism’.
For them, the ‘golden age’ of journalism was being superseded by a more questionable set of practices and principles.
But this pattern was not unique to Britain and it merely confirmed the strength of the economic forces which were coming to determine the development of the newspaper industry and of the newspaper itself.
This process of change can be seen in the growing importance of the ‘new journalism’ of the 1880s.
Changes in content and style —‘news’ was now moved to the front pages, there were briefer stories, news stories grew in importance as ‘opinion and commentary’lost favour, different typographical styles were used to attract readers and make newspapers less severe — reflected much more than a mere process of ‘modernization’.
The newspaper was undergoing a redefinition of its role and place in society.
The  relationship between paper and reader was thus being changed from the ideal one of a tutorial and intellectual nature, to one of a market character.
Both qualities had always been there…but there does seem to have been…a change in the balance of the two.
One consequence was the downgrading of ‘political news’.
In the 1860s, 1870s, and even in the 1880s, the pride of the ‘old journalism’ would be replete with leaders and the texts of politicians' speeches.
But the drive to increase sales and to provide more entertaining material in a different form — both products of the commercialization of the newspaper — directly challenged the place of the political speech and the political leader in the newspaper of the late 19th century.
The verbatim reproduction in print of the political speech was an expensive exercise which was not usually rewarded with increased sales and so, by the 1900s, the political leader and the political speech had been replaced with shortened accounts and by a flood of ‘news’ stories.
The ‘new journalism’ meant ‘less politics…more ‘sensation’and more ‘sport’, the staples of the popular 19th century Sunday press’.
The changing relationship between the newspaper and its readers and the changing content of the newspaper had one other important impact on the long-term development of the press: it fundamentally altered the newspaper's expectations of its readers.
Although not all newspapers were affected to the same degree, the trend towards more ‘sensation’ and more ‘sport’suggested that the ‘reader was expected to be intellectually more passive…attracted less by the prospect of greater wisdom than by that of ‘Elevated’status, and he was now appealed to in a shrill capitalised format’.
It is this turn to ‘passivity’ which remains critical to this very day; today's tabloid press can only be reinforcing a process which began well over a century ago.
The declining fortunes of explicit political content is illustrative of long-term processes which have left the press open to (perhaps)‘undesirable’ commercial influences and considerations.
That such considerations have always existed should not blind us to their ‘undesirable’ effects; however, that they have always existed also suggests that there may be no ‘ideal’to which the press should aspire or indeed revert.
Each period had thrown up a different set of relationships, different influences and different pressures on  newspapers.
The press in the late 19th century thus illustrates a point of transition from one set of dominant relationships to another.
Power without responsibility
Despite the growing independence of the press from political parties, vestiges of 19th century practices remained as politicians persisted in summoning newspapers to their side of the political battle by whatever means possible.
For example, ‘The Observer , The Standard, The Globe , and The Pall Mall Gazette were each receiving aid from the Unionist funds, sometimes as much as £10,000 a year’ in the 1910s.
The outstanding example of politicians seeking to gain press support through the acquisition of newspaper titles in the 20th century is the purchase of the Daily Chronicle in 1918 by supporters of Lloyd George.
Lloyd George sought to obtain regular press support through the direct means of ownership.
In the event, most of the purchase money (£1,650,000) came from ‘wealthy admirers’.
This transaction ‘exposed the myth of the Fourth Estate’ because it confirmed in a stark fashion the well established close connections between the press and politics.
To many, acknowledging the existence of the ‘concentric circles’ meant abandoning the pretence that the press was ‘the fourth estate’.
Yet politicians persisted in propagating the myth and continued to draw attention to the supposed independence of the press.
Asquith's criticism of Lloyd George's actions played upon the myth that
the press should be a free press, criticising the government, and [that the public]wished the government to be an independent government, not disregarding the criticisms of the press, but nonetheless responsible only to Parliament.
Paradoxically, the ‘surreptitious alliance between the press and the government’ which Asquith was criticizing was the norm and not the exception what he implied it was.
In fact, any attempt by the press to act as a free oppositional/ adversarial press was itself likely to generate some form of criticism since it confronted governments with powerful adversaries, a situation which governments (and Parliaments) did not, and still do not, appear willing to tolerate.
So long as newspapers remain in  awe of political authority, they are beyond criticism; once they challenge that authority, they suffer the full force of its reaction.
Herein lies the significance of the actions of the press barons — Beaverbrook, Northcliffe and Rothermere — in their dealings with politicians in the 1920s and 1930s.
The press barons — in particular Beaverbrook (who owned the Express ) and Rothermere (who owned the Mail )— had amassed their vast power through their industrial holdings and/or their ownership of large circulation, and profitable, newspapers.
It was a power which was ultimately independent of either their (parliamentary) political standing or political favours.
Both newspaper proprietors decided to use their newspapers to pursue a political philosophy and policy — the Empire Crusade — which differed in important respects from the policies of Stanley Baldwin's Conservative Government.
The Express and the Mail saw the Empire Crusade as a means of uniting the Empire by encouraging free trade within it and both newspapers gave publicity and financial support to those by-election candidates who promised to uphold that line in Parliament.
In adopting this crusade, the press barons were also directly challenging Baldwin's leadership of the Government and of the party.
It was perhaps this, more than the policy of Empire Free Trade per se , which lay behind their actions.
Such a challenge could not go unheeded, particularly as it departed from the usual array of Parliamentary or constitutional procedures.
The affair came to a head in a series of by-elections in the early 1930s in which the press barons gave their support to Empire Crusade candidates in their fight against the official Conservative central office candidates.
By supporting their own candidates, they were challenging Baldwin's authority and leadership even though he had been given a vote of confidence by the Party in 1931.
In the St George, Westminster, by-election in March 1931 the Empire Crusade candidacy seemed to exacerbate the divisions in the Conservative party which the press proprietors had initiated.
As the London Times reported:
The present campaign [against Baldwin]is prompted by influences outside of the Conservative Party, which refuse to accept the expressed decision of the party itself.
…The choice of leader and the policy of the Conservative, or indeed, of any  organized political party, are the responsibilities of the party: and members of the party are responsible to their constituents….
Those who control great engines of publicity are responsible to no one but themselves; equally their methods are their own.
This theme was echoed in Baldwin's now famous attack on the press when he accused the proprietors of the Mail, Express and Herald of wanting
power, and power without responsibility — the prerogative of the harlot throughout the ages.
This contest is not a contest as to who is to lead the party, but as to who is to appoint the leader of the party.
It is a challenge to the accepted constitutional Parliamentary system.
Baldwin's speech sets out the boundaries within which the press must operate: it can act as an adjunct of the political parties, it can be the mouthpiece of the parties or politicians and it may even criticize governments in power, but it cannot transgress the real line which marks off dependence on, from independence of, the political parties.
It can ask things of politicians but it cannot make demands of them.
Beaverbrook and Rothermere had tried, in their own ways and using their own particular methods, to dislodge the ‘concentric circles’ by establishing another focus of power — themselves and their newspapers — that would generate a circle of press power of equal strength and significance to that of the political circle.
They failed to achieve their objectives and, in a sense, they were bound to fail because their power, based as it was on financial and propagandist resources, was no match for established constitutional and democratic procedures.
Broadcasters were to find that their challenges would be met with a similar response.
The vehement reaction to what was a unique challenge to accepted procedure has ensured that the basic pattern of newspapers working hand-in-hand with political parties and politicians continues to thrive.
Newspaper support of political parties is nowadays volunteered , it is not commanded.
‘Freedom from party control, as distinct from party commitment, is now so much taken for granted that it requires no affirmation.’
The contemporary press, 1945–
One key influence in the loosening of the relationship between the press and political parties was the decrease in the number of titles published and, in particular, of evenings and provincials (see Table 3. 1).
This decline was significant because it ‘reduced the opportunity for the reflection of nuances of debate about policy and personalities within the parties’.
Whereas in the 19th century each political faction prided itself on having its own newspaper, the steady decline in titles narrowed the available range and, inevitably, displaced political considerations as proprietorial and editorial attention turned to questions of commercial survival.
The process of commercialization and industrialization in the newspaper industry which began in the 19th century thus continued to have an important effect on newspapers in this century as newspaper costs escalated, as new methods were developed to tap new audiences, to reach new readers, and to increase sales.
Again, it is the combination of all these factors which is important.
Two sets of examples illustrate these trends.
Until the launch of the Independent in 1986, no new national quality daily newspaper had been launched for 1 13 years.
As for the tabloids, additions to the range of publications have either been arm's-length extensions of existing publishing groups (Today , 1986 —) or born out of existing publishing houses (Mail on Sunday , 1983 —,Star , 1978).
In all these cases (and this is the central point) the costs of launching and maintaining each of these publications are in excess of £20m.
Such sums are not obtained without some sort of commitment to success which, in contemporary terms, means circulation and advertising rather than a blind commitment to a political creed.
It is also extremely unlikely that today's political parties or their backers would have either sufficient funds or the desire to use such large sums of money for purchasing newspapers.
Past experiences were not encouraging.
In the 1910s and 1920s, some newspaper proprietors seemed willing to continue to subsidize their newspapers on political grounds, but the mounting losses incurred in this process — Pearson spent £¾m keeping the Westminster Gazette going, the TUC had spent £½m on the Daily Herald between 1921 and 1928 but only saw profit once in the early years — increased the reluctance of the politically committed to get involved.
Neither the  Morning Post (Conservative) nor the Daily Chronicle (Liberal) found willing political saviours in the mid-1930s.
Similarly, when the left-wing News-on-Sunday faltered in 1987, it was not a political institution that came to its, albeit temporary, rescue but a Northern businessman, Owen Oyston.
Subsidy ‘in a party interest — and particularly by parties — seems to have stopped by the outbreak of World War 2’.
After the War, only two newspapers — the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Herald — continued to retain formal party links.
Although other newspapers were allied to political parties, that alignment was an ‘essentially’ voluntary and/or historical one.
It was not a case of a new breed of non-political owners coming to the fore but of ownership tempered by financial considerations and a changed attitude to the role of the newspapers in the ‘reconstruction’ of Britain.
One example of this changed attitude to the role of the newspaper in the post-War period was the readiness of some newspapers to treat all political parties with equal respect.
This was not common practice but it reached its apotheosis in the 1945 general election when the Observer completely detached itself from the political parties and carried articles by representatives of each of the main parties.
Today, such a practice would not be considered particularly unusual; in the context of 1945 it was novel, more so since the Observer had been purchased in 191 1 to keep it as a ‘Tory organ’.
That newspapers had come a long way in the interim period was beyond doubt; that they were to travel even further was to be confirmed by the manner in which the Cadburys disposed of the News Chronicle in 1960.
A paper long allied to the Liberal tradition had been allowed to be taken over by the right-wing Mail .
Another confirmation of the transformation of the press was its proneness for take-over for financial rather than political ends.
The failure of the Liberal party to save the News Chronicle , and perhaps of the TUC and Labour Party to save the Daily Herald or to originate a paper of their own, only confirmed the lack of financial power which political institutions exercised.
The real power behind newspapers shifted to those who, like the Canadian Roy Thomson or the American Rupert Murdoch, acquired newspapers for their business empires.
Although Thomson and Murdoch may be unusual with respect to the vastness of their empires, other contemporary publishers  have also tended to treat newspapers as part of the financial and commercial landscape.
They undoubtedly relish the prestige and the political power it (reputedly) gives them but their commitment to the newspaper world is ultimately a business one.
The sale of the Express Group by Fleet Holdings (ex-Trafalgar House) to United Newspapers in the mid-1980s, the sale of the Telegraph to the Canadian Conrad Black, the re-launch and closure of the Evening Standard (1987), the launch and demise of the London Daily News and the purchase of Today by Murdoch (1987) amongst other recent changes, have all the appearances of companies engaging in long-term strategic planning rather than political machination on behalf of any specific political faction.
These proprietors retain the potential to exercise political power: indeed, they have used their ownership to chart the political direction of their newspapers, but they have stopped well short of using their newspapers to make demands of the political system in the manner of the press barons of the 1930s.
Possibly the last attempt at such a use of newspaper power — Cecil King's 1968 ‘Enough is Enough’ article in the Mirror which called for Harold Wilson's resignation as Prime Minister — resulted in the dismissal of the ‘abuser’of power, Cecil King himself.
It may be ‘accidental that there is no Beaverbrook or Rothermere’ but it is more likely that they would encounter an enormous backlash if they trespassed into the formal world of politics.
Because they are only accountable to themselves and to their shareholders, they would leave themselves exposed and vulnerable to those who do not take kindly to being dictated to by ‘outsiders’.
Accusations of having ‘power without responsibility’ would thus ring equally true in the 1990s.
The newest breed of newspaper ‘proprietor’— Whittam-Smith of the Independent — would probably abhor the prospect either of alignment with a political party or of dictating demands to a political party.
The Independent , launched in October 1986 with venture capital, seeks to be independent of political party dogma.
It seeks to give fair coverage to all political viewpoints and to treat all views with a degree of respect not always found in other serious newspapers.
Despite its low circulation (hovering around 380,000 in mid-1988), the Independent marks the furthest point away from the description of the political press in the 19th century with which this discussion began.
It is as if the ‘social responsibility’ theory of the press had been translated into real newspaper practices.
What  is equally interesting is that the journalistic profession has clasped the promising idea of the Independent to its bosom.
Not only did journalists flock to join it — so giving it, at a stroke, a solid and respectable ‘roll-call’— but it was rewarded with the ‘What the Papers Say’ Newspaper of the Year award in 1986.
That very same spirit of ‘social responsibility’ was to flicker, albeit very briefly, even in the Daily Mail .
During the 1983 election,Mail journalists objected to the newspaper's coverage of the Labour Party and demanded that it be given a fairer representation.
It may be that such moves towards a willingness to detach comment from political allegiance and dogma is a passing fad but it does also suggest that many journalists are uneasy about blind, albeit volunteered, political commitment.
These changing patterns of allegiance can be analysed within the broad concept of ‘parallelism’: a concept which explores the extent to which newspapers reflect or fail to reflect the breadth of the party political discourse.
A newspaper ‘paralleled’
a party if it was closely linked to that party by organisation, loyalty to party goals and the partisanship of its readers.
A press system can be defined as paralleling a party system when such links exist between each newspaper and a party…
Complete   parallelism would exist if every newspaper was linked extremely closely to one or another party…and when, in addition, the number of newspapers in the system was distributed between the parties in proportion to each party's strength.
A close examination of the three primary links between press and party — by organization, loyalty to party goals, and the partisanship of its readers — reveals the range of possible relationships (Fig. 3.1).
Contemporary national newspapers display a number of different positions at all three levels.
The ever loyal Daily Telegraph would come closest to paralleling the Conservative Party though even here its organizational links with the party are weak and may be getting even weaker as a result of its new Canadian ownership.
The Financial Times , on the other hand, which is the City paper and which has a solid Conservative readership (see Fig. 4.3b, Chapter 4), prides itself on its critical edge in pursuing a business ideology which might, and often does, go against the Conservative Party's views.
Even the Morning Star which is the paper closest to a political party (the Communist Party) has shown itself to be anything but a servant of its political masters.
In the early 1980s, the editorial board of the Morning Star adopted a philosophy which allied it closely to the Soviet Union.
This went against the Communist Party's well known Euro-Communist stand.
In the ensuing power struggle over the right to dictate the newspaper's political position, the newspaper's editor was dismissed and replaced by the Communist Party's own adherents.
Whilst this example is unique, it does serve to remind us that those who are editorially in charge of newspapers are sometimes, though perhaps not for long, able to lead the paper in directions which its masters do not always support or follow.
Their abilities to do so seem to depend, and are related to, the organizational structures within which they operate and whether the owners of the paper are able to exercise their power speedily or not.
In general, then, newspapers do usually align themselves with certain political parties and do show their support for political party programmes and policies in a variety of ways, some stronger than others.
This support is rarely total but undoubtedly some newspapers, e.g. the Daily Mail, Sun , are more ready than others to  support wholeheartedly the political party of their choice.
Such a connection between newspapers and political parties is only to be expected; newspapers have traditionally wished to play a part in the political system and have never been reluctant to express a view (‘The Sun says’) on the ways of the world.
Recently launched titles —Today , the Independent and the News-on-Sunday — neither confirm the historical trend nor disprove it.
Both Today and the Independent originally eschewed political partisanship.
Their intention was to treat each case on its merits rather than reproduce the traditional left-right divide in British politics.
Once Today moved into Rupert Murdoch's News group it changed its politics; its neutral stance and its support for a middle-of-the-road SDP government in the 1987 general election gradually gave way to a more Conservative outlook.
The Independent has remained independent from political allegiances though it too favoured a middle-of-the-road political outcome in the 1987 election.
The interesting points to note for both papers are that they emerged at a time when the SDP, a party of the middle-ground, was in the ascendant, and that neither moved to the ‘left’, not even the social democratic ‘left’, in the 1987 election.
The journalism of ‘neutrality’ may therefore be no more than a reflection, and an acknowledgement, of the arrival of a new political force in Britain and a response to the existence of a market as evidenced by the SDP's success in the political and electoral arena.
No newspaper would be brave enough to alienate prospective SDP members (readers?) amongst its readership and this must surely explain the overwhelming welcome the SDP got from Fleet St.
CONCLUSION
The processes of commercialization and industrialization which have affected the British press have reduced the overall number of titles.
They have also led to a narrowing of the range of political views represented in the press; as newspapers which voiced liberal and social democratic/Labour views (News Chronicle, Daily Herald ) have closed down, the dominance of the Conservative press has become more pronounced.
Whereas just under 50% of the adult population read a Labour paper in 1964, by 1983 only 24% did (Table 3.2).
Although it is possible to interpret ‘freedom of the press’ in such a way as to include within it the ‘freedom’to make a political choice and to volunteer one's support, it does seem that political parties of the left are rarely favoured by newspapers.
In a few cases, the continued support for a political party can be explained by reference to an historical connection.
The Mail , the Express , and The Times , for instance, have always preferred ‘conservative’ Parties.
But even when that linkage has been broken by the entrance of a new press owner — Conrad Black, Rupert Murdoch, David Stevens — the newspapers in question have either maintained or reasserted their commitment to the political right.
As a result the Conservative Party continues to enjoy the favours of those newspaper owners who are embedded in the present structures of power and of wealth generation.
One immediate, short-term outcome of the disproportionate distribution of political support is that political parties which propose radical, particularly left-wing, change will find it increasingly difficult to argue their case in public.
This problem does not seem to afflict the radical right in the same way; since the early 1980s the Thatcher Government has been able to implement radical change without alienating its newspaper support.
Those on the left who have dared not to act in moderation — the Hattons, Grants and Livingstones — have been violently pilloried, whilst their counterparts on the right — the Tebbits, the Brittans — have usually been seen as pioneers of reform.
A longer-term effect may be that the national press will cease to act as a focus of left-wing radicalism and political challenge to established processes.
Can structural reforms ‘improve’ the situation by increasing diversity and lessening the adverse consequences of concentration.
Authors of such reforms believe that greater diversity could be achieved by imposing restrictions on rules of ownership, by imposing levies on advertising revenue so as to create a pool of funds for alternative publications, and generally by controlling free-market forces.
Such reforms would either completely displace existing rules derived from the Fair Trading Act and monopolies legislation or they would refashion them so as to make them more meaningful in the era of multi-media ownership.
One example of such reforms is Curran and Seaton's proposal that no group or individual should own more than three national newspapers; another proposal is to limit cross-ownership of media.
The effect would certainly be to ‘unscramble’ existing media interests.
The weaknesses of the above proposals are fairly evident.
In the first place all they would do would be to redistribute ownership (probably) amongst existing groups.
These proposals would not necessarily increase the political diversity of the press.
Diversity can only be increased through a body set up with the specific task of creating and sustaining new media.
Whether such a body would succeed would depend on its organization and funding and whether it was able to create vehicles which could survive in the market-place and be purchased by the public.
The other major weakness of the proposals is that they do not properly identify the nature of the problem.
One aspect of the problem is, undoubtedly, the economic structure of the newspaper industry which makes it difficult to start newspapers.
Another aspect is the apparent difficulty of getting radical or even social democratic ideas into circulation.
Is the absence of a left-wing press therefore related to the structure of the industry or is the public, for whatever reasons, not receptive to such ideas?
It is impossible to resolve these problems since there is no information which would allow us to pass judgements on them.
Attempts to create vehicles of left-wing opinion have not succeeded; both the News-on-Sunday and the East End News failed miserably.
Part of the reasons for their failures are related to managerial and organizational considerations but these cannot account for everything.
Until the nature of the problem can be identified, it is unlikely that adequate solutions will be proposed.
Structural reforms of any sort are unlikely under this present  Conservative Government.
The press serves it too well for that to happen and so the problems which have taxed the left for so many years will continue to haunt it in the future.
Unfortunately, proposals for change will become less likely as the lessons of the recent attempts to break the mould of Conservative journalism sink in.
Chapter Four
THE BRITISH PRESS: OWNERSHIP, CONTROL, ADVERTISING, AND RESTRUCTURING
INTRODUCTION
The 19th century saw two significant changes in the newspaper industry which were to have considerable impact on future developments.
These were, first, the growing importance of advertising r&venue for individual titles and, second, the development of the large circulation daily press.
Advertising has always had a place in the newspaper; some of the earliest newspapers were essentially means for communicating notices of events, such as the arrival of ships.
In the 19th century, advertising and, more importantly, advertising revenue, became a vital ingredient in the make-up of the newspaper.
It contributed to the newspaper both in terms of content and also in terms of much-needed revenue and so helped newspapers in their struggles to survive.
This connection between advertising, advertising revenue and the profitability of newspapers could be found early in the 19th century in Britain and in the USA.
In the United States, however, that connection was given a unique twist when in 1833 a new mass circulation tabloid, the Sun , was published and sold at one-sixth of the cover price of other papers.
The expectation was that the losses sustained by the low cover price would be more than made up by the larger circulation and by advertising.
This was the same formula that Harmsworth (Lord Northcliffe) used when he launched the Daily Mail in 1896.
Harmsworth was one of many — others include Marconi and the pioneers of the film industry — who were at the forefront of what Briggs has called ‘the development of the mass entertainment industry’ at the turn of the century.
They greatly benefited from  certain ‘economic conditions’ during the period — namely, the existence of a large and concentrated urban population, the rise in real incomes and an increase in leisure time — which made the ‘mass entertainment industry’possible.
Newspaper titles such as the Daily Mail and the Daily Mirror were started up to exploit these economic conditions and the  ever present demand for ‘reading and entertainment’.
These newspapers were unlike the ‘political press’ that served the political élite — their readers were substantially different, the content of the newspapers was also different, as was the relationship between the newspaper and its readers — but they were enormously successful.
The Daily Mail sold well over 200,000 copies daily in its first years and reached half-a-million sales after three years.
Such newspapers were to sell over 3 million copies each during the great press battles of the 1920s and 1930s: sales of such magnitude that they easily dwarfed the circulation of the dailies of the late 19th century.
The process of expansion which the press went through in the late 19th century did not continue beyond the First World War.
In fact, there has been a steady decline in the total numbers of titles published since then.
Not only are there fewer titles published today but the process of decline has also led to monopolies within large cities.
For a brief period in the Spring of 1987, London was the only English metropolitan centre with more than one evening daily paper — it had three — having endured five years when only one, the Standard , was published.
In 1900 it had nine!
By the late 1980s, the division between the small circulation ‘quality’ press and the large circulation ‘tabloid’press had also become well established (Figs 4.1 and 4.2) and each sector appealed to different types of readers (Fig. 43a and Fig. 43b).
Such trends accompanied many others, including the concentration of press (and media) ownership, the increasingly important role of advertising, and its effect on the ‘political’ content of the press.
In the last few years, two new concerns have featured largely.
These are, first, the restructuring of the national daily press within the East End of London and away from Fleet Street and, second, the brief resurgence of interest in new publications.
Each of these issues will be dealt with in this chapter.
1.
THE OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL OF THE PRESS
Concern about the concentration of ownership of the press is not of recent origin.
There have been many periods in the past when the  degree of concentration has been significantly large (Table 4. 1) and when such degrees of concentration have generated calls for inquiries.
The 1947 Royal Commission on the Press' was, for example, established specifically to examine the degree, and the consequences, of concentration of ownership.
A glance at a table of ownership of the British press in 1987 (Table 4.2) confirms that concern is still with us.
The reason for such concern can be found in the 1947 Royal Commission Report; it asked ‘whether such concentration as exists is on balance disadvantageous to the free expression of opinion or the accurate presentation of news ’.
Although the Commission was concerned with, broadly speaking, the effects of concentration of ownership on the diversity of content, it was inevitably drawn into a discussion of the links between owners and the views propagated in their particular newspapers.
In this sense, it was interested both in the narrowing of the range of views presented in newspapers and the likelihood that newspapers could be used for political ends.
Its findings — that concentration was not a particular problem and its effects not particularly harmful — have been heavily criticized ever since.
One such group of critics has been especially prolific.
Graham Murdock and Peter Golding, like other Marxists, take it for granted that there is a relationship between ‘ownership and control’.
However, their task is to explore the nature, and the consequences, of that relationship.
They focus on three propositions:
1.
control over the production and distribution of ideas is concentrated in the hands of the capitalist owners of the means of production;
2.
as a result, their views…receive constant publicity and come to dominate the thinking of subordinate groups; and
3.
this ideological domination plays a key role in maintaining class inequalities.
These propositions raise key questions concerning
(i)
the relationship between ownership and control,
(ii)
the processes through which dominant ideology is translated into cultural commodities, and
(iii)
the dynamics of reception and the extent of adoption of the dominant ideas.
(We are concerned here primarily with proposition (1) and question (i).
The other issues deserve their own extensive studies though they are referred to in passing elsewhere in this book.)
The evidence for arguing that newspaper — and media — ownership is concentrated in a few hands is fairly abundant (see Table 4.2) but this does not, of itself, provide material for analysing the extent to which ‘this potential for control is actually realized in practice, how exactly it operates and in whose ultimate interest (it is)…’.
In the absence of detailed empirical data with which to substantiate the process by which ‘ownership’ translates into ‘control’, such propositions can only be deemed ‘assertions’.
Anecdotal evidence does tend to support the view that owners exercise control but these instances are anything but the basis for generalizable statements across fields and decades.
Furthermore, it is highly unlikely that the same pattern of control will be in evidence across diverse organizations and forms of ownership.
A publicly funded, public service organization such as the BBC would need to be treated differently from a privately owned quality paper or a Trust-owned Guardian .
Although there may be common ground between them there are also likely to be enormous, and significant, differences.
Nevertheless, it is probable that ownership does contain within it the potential for direct and indirect control.
Messrs Murdoch, Maxwell and Rowland, amongst others, are known to have attempted to exercise control over editorial content.
Such instances are not typical of their managerial system of control for it is unlikely that a single individual would be able to oversee a widely dispersed media empire.
Moreover, such forms of control are necessarily direct and crude and mask a range of other means by which results can be achieved.
Proprietors do appoint editors and chief-executives; they decide budgets and manning levels and they put their imprint on the total organizations.
In consequence, editors (and journalists) work within already defined structures and processes.
Decisions about the allocation of space, funds, and resources are often not the editor's responsibilities.
In fact, newspaper editors sometimes do not even exercise control over large sections of their newspapers.
Executives may play a major part in the running of the paper.
It is through the setting of objectives and the process of resource allocation that control can be exercised on branches of the media and that control remains with the proprietors.
However, it is unlikely that such proprietorial power will be exercised without reference to commercial considerations or marketing considerations.
In an increasingly cut-throat environment, purely political, or  ideological, considerations may be important, albeit secondary.
Such an argument would apply to most, if not all, media enterprises irrespective of type of ownership.
The Independent newspaper, the BBC, the Guardian (owned by a Trust) and the Sun are all concerned about their positions in the market-place.
Their measures of success are not ideological purity but profitability within their chosen sectors.
Newspapers exist in a competitive market-place and have to employ whatever means possible to survive in that market-place; overtly political packaging and purity may be incidental to that objective.
The general validity of the argument concerning the allocative power of ownership is in no doubt.
There are, however, grave doubts about its extension to include the statement that ‘the owning group continue to constitute an identifiable capitalist class with recognizable interests in common’.
This statement is too general to be meaningful.
In fact, if one was to query the evidence on the concentration of media ownership, as Tunstall does, then its validity is further undermined.
Tunstall's main thesis is that the evidence for concentration of ownership is very weak if one charts ownership across all media fields rather than simply restricting it to the press, radio and television.
Whilst this does provide a picture of greater diversity of ownership (and thus competition)(Table 4.3), it also highlights aspects of concentration.
How valid is it, then, to suggest that the owners ‘constitute an identifiable capitalist class with recognizable interests in common, and what does it mean apart from something general pertaining to a concern for success and survival?
Does private/commercial ownership produce a ‘business bias’?
Is it the basis of ‘conservatism’ in the media?
Do the views of the owners receive constant publicity?
All these questions (and there are others) imply that media workers are but ciphers and that they transmit the views of others.
Unfortunately, the evidence which would enable us to arrive at firm conclusions is by no means straightforward.
Although journalists are ‘the people who operate much of the power of the press as usually understood’ and they can exercise a measure of freedom in their choice of stories, anecdotal evidence supports the view that the real power within the press is rarely ‘shared between its owners and the journalists’.
In recent years, some newspapers have become vehicles for the pursuit of certain positions and ideologies and consequently less open to their ideological opponents.
By abandoning any pretence to ‘social responsibility’, they have turned their backs on discussion and argument.
In this real world of politics and journalism, there can be little room for the devolution of newspaper power to journalists.
A good example of this can be found in the newspaper coverage of the 1984 — 5 miners' strike.
Specialist labour or industrial correspondents usually exercise a degree of autonomy in their selection and presentation of stories and some accept the need to balance their accounts more than others.
But during the strike, owners and executives saw little reason to balance accounts.
Editors of those newspapers which supported the objectives of the NCB and the Government were generally favoured by Ministers and were given regular briefings.
Although there is nothing particularly unusual in this degree of favouritism, it had two serious consequences:
since most newspapers favoured the Government's position, it was not possible to get a ‘balanced’ view of the dispute;
a ‘balanced’ account was ruled out because those editors also worked hard to exclude ‘balanced’accounts.
The BBC's radio correspondent, Nicholas Jones, admits that ‘stories that gave prominence to the position of the NUM could simply be omitted, shortened, or submerged into another report…’.
The hierarchical nature of news organizations — both as a chain of command and as an information processing organization — ensured that the power centre remained well removed from the specialist correspondents.
Editors were in control of news output and had no qualms about ‘manipulating’ news content.
Even as experienced, and senior, a journalist as the labour editor of the Sunday Times would find his copy altered without his knowledge and in ways which changed the substance of that copy.
His only ‘power’ was to request that his name be removed from the story.
Yet the editor of the Sunday Times explained his paper's coverage and position in a way which begs more questions than it answers.
The Sunday Times , he wrote
took a firm editorial line: for the sake of liberal democracy, economic recovery and the rolling back of union power…
Scargill and his forces had to be defeated, and would be…
Our views, however, were kept to where they belong in a quality newspaper.
— the editorial column .
Journalists do sometimes react against the excesses of newspaper partisanship but even on these occasions it is proprietorial and editorial power that emerges unscathed and victorious.
An attempt by Daily Mail journalists to broaden the paper's political coverage of the 1983 election was rejected on the grounds that only the editor was responsible for content and that outside pressure, if only from an organization's own journalists, amounted to interference in the running of that organization.
It also implied that journalists, even experienced journalists, should not attempt to challenge the guidelines of those who edit or run newspapers.
Not all news organizations display this pattern of behaviour, nor are all journalists mere interchangeable ciphers in the propaganda battle.
The pursuit of the newsworthy, the move to more collective forms of journalism, and the ever-present desire to get copy into the papers, forces all journalists in one direction and towards that which will be interesting and a ‘good read’.
In this scenario, newspaper proprietors and editors do not always need to play an active part in order to ensure that continuity and similarity across, and between, newspapers is the norm.
In recent years, the evidence for proprietorial interference has become even more weighty.
With Murdoch's acquisition of the Times Group of newspapers and the Today newspaper, and Maxwell's of the Mirror Group, the market is dominated by self-styled publicists who are not afraid of exercising their power as proprietors.
The former had little difficulty in removing Harold Evans from the editorship of The Times despite the elaborate system of guarantees that surrounded the editor's post.
The power of proprietors — whether as individuals or as representatives of conglomerate ownership — remains a critical influence on the character of newspapers.
Another, much less visible, influence on the style and character of newspapers (and the media) is advertising.
2.
ADVERTISING AND THE PRESS
Though advertising revenue freed the press from direct political control, it introduced its own form of constraints on an expanding press in the 20th century.
In effect, without the support of advertisers the British media would be in a poorer and much truncated form: advertising revenue accounts for some 40% of the popular press's total revenue and some 70% of the qualities' total revenue; advertising revenue also finances the commercial television channels, countless commercial radio channels and a sizeable proportion of the new cable and satellite channels.
Without this extensive support, many of our newspapers, for example, would either cost much, much more or cease to exist.
With such a powerful presence, it would be difficult to argue that advertising revenue, and therefore advertisers, do not play an important role in deciding the future success of a particular  medium.
But what is the nature of that influence and what are its consequences?
Advertisers form part of the competitive commercial and capitalist context within which media operate, and their decisions reflect that context.
They have clients who wish to sell certain products and services and their task is to enable their clients to reach as many potential customers as possible and at the lowest possible cost.
In this sense, advertisers are not interested in readers or viewers as such, but in readers/viewers who are able to buy products.
They are thus willing to pay several times more for the wealthy readers than they are for the less wealthy or poor.
One effect of this is to force the quality press ‘up market’ so as to serve the wealthy reader.
The popular tabloids, on the other hand, charge considerably less for their advertising space per thousand readers than do the qualities and this forces them to try to maximize sales.
The resulting polarization ‘caricatures’ and magnifies the divisions in British society based on education and class.
Sometimes, though, the outcome of the advertisers' work has surprising results.
As Curran commented with respect to the 1920s and 1930s, ‘developments in the process of media selection and market analysis, combined with important market changes,positively fostered the development of a left press' .
Advertisers ‘rediscovered’ the working class since its combined weight was formidable.
The decisions of advertisers also benefited important sections of the left press in the 1950s and 1960s.
Crude advertising discrimination has tended to be directed at the socialist rather than social-democratic press, thus exempting the mass-circulation,pro-Labour papers that have flourished;…small circulation publications further to the left which have tended to be poor advertising media, judged by the commercial criterion employed by advertising agencies , have probably also suffered as a consequence of overt political discrimination.
If advertisers cannot be faulted for using mainly ‘commercial criteria’ rather than ideological/political ones in their decisions, it is nevertheless true that the outcome of those decisions in their totality have enormous implications.
They tend to favour those media which have audiences with (usually) high purchasing powers as against media which have readers or viewers with  limited purchasing power.
This power of ‘patronage’ imposes its own requirements on the nature of the press and ensures that the press, as well as other commercially funded media, continue to sell in order to sell readers to advertisers.
Newspapers and television programmes are essentially means of packaging readers and viewers (more appropriately, consumers) for the benefit of advertisers.
Some of advertising's other influences are easy to identify.
Advertising structures the newspaper into distinct categories and sections.
Editorial space is, in practice, the space left over after advertising has taken its share of the newspaper.
Furthermore, certain stories, e.g. travel, motoring, fashion, only exist because of their ability to bring advertising with them.
The extreme example of such practices is the supplement with its focus on banking (with banking advertising) or cities/countries (with appropriate advertising).
Such ‘advertorials’ blur the distinction between editorial content and advertising and so shift control over content to the advertisers and away from news organizations.
Few travel or motoring correspondents would wish to be overly critical of the holiday or car so lavishly provided by their respective sponsors.
In addition to imposing its own needs on the medium, advertising has immense ideological implications.
It creates a ‘dream’ world.
‘[I]t mystifies the real world and deprives us of any understanding of it’; ‘we become part of the symbolism of the ad world; not real people but identified in terms of what we consume.’
It therefore masks and distorts real relationships of power and dominance.
Despite the importance of the above influences, it is the impact of advertising on the structure and politics of the British press that has received closest attention.
Two general critiques stand out.
First, that ‘the search for the affluent reader’ distorts the make-up and content of the British press and, second, that the ‘patronage’of advertisers favours some (the middle class) and not other (the working class) types of readers — it freezes out the working class reader and the working class newspaper.
Both critiques have substantial analytic support.
According to Hirsch and Gordon, the quality press focuses on those issues which interest and reflect its middle and upper class readership.
As this agenda spreads to other sections of the press, to radio and to television, it produces a ‘self-enforcing conformity’ whose importance ‘lies not in the nuances of attitude taken on different items on the political agenda, but rather in the common agreement on that agenda itself…’.
Examples abound.
In the 1950s and 1960s, the authors claim, there was a neglect of the question of wealth and poverty in British society.
More recently, one can point to the ways in which the press covers industrial relations news or news about welfare.
In both these cases, there is a conformity in coverage which takes for granted a certain perspective on these issues.
Industrial action, for example, is usually seen as reprehensible —‘the pressure exerted by trade unions…becomes a threat to democracy rather than part of it’— whilst the pressure exerted by business is overlooked.
Indeed, the image or notion of consensus is built into the very language of the media: they contrast ‘compromise’ with ‘dogmatism’, ‘order’with ‘chaos’, ‘realism’with ‘ideology’, ‘responsibility’with ‘irresponsibility’and so on.
The cumulative effect of the ‘up-market bias’ and the consequent conformity which seeps downwards, is to orient the press towards one section of the community (the wealthy and comfortable middle classes) and away from another (women, blacks, the poor, etc.).
The media, concentrated in London, then reproduce a specific view of the country and its ills — a view well rehearsed in the prosperous South but somewhat unreal in the less prosperous North.
The result is an absence of diversity — a key requirement for a truly representative press and one suited for political democracy.
A more sustained attack on the impact of advertising on the press can be found in James Curran's writings.
Curran has argued that advertising pressures have ‘helped to ensure that it (the Left press) has developed in a depoliticised, deradicalised and disabled form’: advertising patronage curtails the radical tendencies of the left press.
These conclusions are based on a study of the demise of the Daily Herald and the ‘depoliticization’ of the Daily Mirror .
However, one major weakness of the study is that by concentrating on advertising as the major culprit, it overlooks the structural changes which media necessarily go through — or do not go through — which themselves place them at risk.
The demise of a medium may, therefore, be the final outcome of a combination of factors rather than the result of one specific one.
This is certainly a very plausible alternative explanation for the demise of the Daily Herald .
The Daily Herald was an extremely popular Labour daily.
Its daily circulation in the 1960s stood at well over 1.3 million copies.
But it was the ‘wrong’ sort of readership.
Unlike the Daily Mirror (see below), it was unable to break away from its predominantly old, male, working class, Labour supporter readership and expand in other areas.
These factors alone would have been sufficient to convince advertisers that it was not the medium for the affluent ‘never-had-it-so-good’ Macmillan era.
However, there was another factor, often omitted or underplayed, which made the demise of the Herald even more of a certainty.
In 1947 it had an average daily circulation of 2, 134,000 copies but in 1961 it only sold 1,394,000 copies.
In a period when all other popular newspapers gained substantial readers, the Herald lost over 700,000 copies in sales.
A decline of such proportions, probably due to a variety of factors, is a clear indication of a severe crisis and would itself justify either a re-launch or closure.
A substantial injection of advertising revenue, or an increase in its cover price, might have saved the Herald , albeit as a temporary solution.
In a competitive commercial environment, neither option is really open: advertisers would soon lose clients and newspapers would lose readers if their competitors were cheaper.
The solution to this problem is the one the Mirror adopted in the 1940s and after, that is, of broadening its appeal to other groups of readers.
Whereas most of the Heralds readers were Labour supporters, only two-thirds of the Mirror's were.
The Mirror's readers were also young.
Does this solution lead to ‘deradicalization’ and ‘depoliticization, as Curran claims?
Curran is convinced that it produced a ‘muted radicalism’ but it would be equally justified to claim that the Mirror had to change because it could not portray the 1950s and 1960s in the language or imagery of the 1940s.
Periods of change produce changes in those professions which reflect them; it is the medium that does not change with its audience that is likely to suffer.
Newspapers are continually undergoing changes.
They respond to external forces, to a variety of other pressures and to the changing requirements of their readers; they evolve and adapt to changing circumstances.
In the late 20th century, the newspaper is an important means of communication but it sits alongside the broadcast media.
It has had to accommodate with changes brought about by television and radio: television and radio deliver news  instantly and usually with sound and/or visual images.
In consequence, newspapers have to adopt other roles; they can become more entertaining and popular, or provide in-depth information to a select few.
Such options merely indicate the manner of their evolution.
To argue, therefore, that changes in newspapers — in their content, style, readership, etc. — may be undesirable (e.g. ‘deradicalization’, ‘depoliticization’) is to confuse that which one may desire (and which may be socially desirable) with the actual and real choices which individuals and groups make in the market-place.
Such choices may be exploited, and fed, by commercial considerations but they ultimately reflect an actual desire for a specific type of medium.
Sun readers will not become Times readers simply because the latter is somehow ‘superior’; they are Sun readers because it ‘serves’ them better in a complex social and psychological way.
3.
THE DEPOLITICIZATION OF THE PRESS: EVOLUTIONARY CHANGE OR STATISTICAL ARTIFACT?
The ‘depoliticization’ of the popular press, according to Curran and Seaton, can be seen in the reduction of space allocated to ‘political affairs’, namely, political, social and economic news, over a period of decades.
This conclusion is based on their content analysis of newspapers in the years 1936, 1946 and 1976.
‘The editorial content of the popular press’, they write, ‘has shrunk during the last forty years.
There has consequently been a marked reduction in the amount of public affairs news and analysis published in all popular papers.
Though their conclusions are clear, the precise nature, and meaning, of the process of ‘depoliticization’ is much less so.
For example, they write that the ‘depoliticization of the popular press merely reflects a reversion to the pattern of the inter-war years…
The make-up of most popular papers in 1976 is similar to that in 1936’.
In which case, ‘depoliticization’ took place during some earlier — unidentified — period.
The attempt to identify the process of ‘depoliticization’— perhaps for specific ideological reasons — is not matched by either careful empirical analysis or sufficient historical insight.
For if we are to follow through the themes outlined in Chapter 3, then the process which is identified  as ‘depoliticization’ is nothing more than the gradual erosion of the supremacy of explicit political content in the press and it is not germane to any specific period.
One can hardly expect newspapers not to change over four decades!
A more detailed analysis of ‘depoliticization’ can be found in Curran et al.'s critique of the ‘human interest’story.
Specifically, ‘common-denominator’ content spread across the tabloids
at the expense of public-affairs coverage.
The Daily Mail and Daily Mirror …reduced coverage of political, social and economic affairs during the inter-war period.
Most strikingly, the Daily Mirror almost halved its public-affairs coverage as a proportion of space in 1937 compared with 1927.
There was no change in the content of The Times comparable to that in the Daily Mail and the Daily Mirror between 1927 and 1937.
A quick reading of the above statements — and of their other similar statements — produces the desired effect: concern over the declining fortunes of the press, the reduction in ‘public-affairs’— an élitist concern?— coverage, and the intrusion of the human interest story in unbounded proportions.
Yet the full analysis of the data does not support this view .
To understand why this should be so, it is necessary to examine two specific weaknesses in Curran et al.'s work: the first concerns the years chosen for the analysis; the second, the analysis of the figures themselves.
The years in question
Curran et al.'s statements are based on an analysis of figures for the years 1927 and 1937.
(These can be found in the report of the 1947 Royal Commission on the Press.)
But there are four reasons why these years should not be used as anything more than points on a continuum.
First, 1927 is the first year for which a full set of figures is available.
But 1927 is only some thirty years away from the beginnings of the mass circulation press in Britain and so can hardly be justified as a bench mark.
It is a point in time.
Second, this period represents the height of the circulation wars and the figures may therefore be a product of this period.
Again, it  may not be possible, therefore, to use them, and those relating to 1937 in particular, as guidelines.
Third, this period represents the ‘flowering’ of radio.
Though there is much evidence to indicate its increasing popularity as a news medium , radio's impact on the popular press has yet to be taken into account when examining this period.
Fourth, it may not be appropriate to use the Daily Mirror as a guide.
It was originally launched at the turn of the century as a woman's paper and was re-launched in the period 1935 — 7 in its more working class, non-Conservative mould.
Facts, figures and percentages
Curran et al.'s observations emphasize the following:
(i)
the Daily Mail and the Daily Mirror…reduced their coverage of political, social and economic affairs during the inter-war period;
(ii)
the Daily Minor almost halved its public affairs coverage as a proportion of space in 1937 compared with 1927;
(iii)
other newspapers, that is,The Times , fared better.
The data are as shown in Table 4.4 Thus, whereas total editorial space between 1927 and 1937 increased by 48% (from 2124 to 3138 square inches) and the ‘news’ content of the paper increased by 81% (from 634 to 1 145 square inches), the amount of space devoted to public affairs ‘news’declined by 9% (from 101 to 92 square inches).
Had public affairs ‘news’ expanded space, it should have taken up 149.5 square inches as against the 92 square inches which it actually took up.
It is this sort of calculation which leads Curran et al .
to conclude that the Mirror's coverage was ‘halved’.
Two points arise at this stage:
should the newspaper have changed in arithmetical proportions?
A similar analysis for The Times belies the nature of the changes implied by Curran et al .
Whilst its coverage of public affairs ‘news’ was not comparable to the Daily Mirror — the amount of space devoted to such news declined between 1927 and 1937 by 59 square inches or 5% — that decline is one of 19% if one assumes that that content should have expanded in line with the expansion of total editorial space.
Admittedly, this decline is not ‘comparable to’ that in the Mirror , but given that The Times was ‘a newspaper of record’whilst the Mirror was a popular newspaper, one can argue that the decline in The Times ’coverage was more serious.
Curran et al.'s conclusions make much of the percentage decreases.
In practice, and using square inches as measures, the area of space devoted to public affairs ‘news’ decreased by some 9 square inches only.
The Mirror grew in size but the physical space devoted to public affairs news between 1927 and 1937 decreased by very little!
Curran et al .
admit as much in a note to their text to the effect that: ‘There was not, however, a corresponding reduction in the space devoted to public affairs due to the Daily Mirror's increased size.’
The above discussion focuses on public affairs ‘news’ and excludes ‘features’.
‘Features’ took up more and more space in  daily newspapers as this century progressed.
In the case of the Mirror the amount of space devoted to ‘features’ as a proportion of total space increased by some 78% between 1927 and 1937.
In 1927 features amounted to some 380 sq.
in, in 1937 some 678 sq.
ins.
(For The Times , the increase was a mere 19%.)
But the space given over to public affairs features also showed an increase (see Table 4.5).
That is, there is an actual increase of some 7 sq.
in devoted to news and public affairs features between 1927 and 1937 and a percentage increase of 6%!
In the case of The Times , there is a decrease in total space devoted to public affairs news and features — 1184 sq.
in to 1164 sq.
in — even though its features space increased enormously by 67%.
From these figures, it is possible to arrive at a number of quite different versions of what changes took place in the years in question.
Clearly, changes in the content of newspapers did take place but that is in itself not surprising.
Newspapers that do not change are likely to be the exception rather than the rule.
Furthermore, there are no logical grounds on which to argue that  some changes are more inimical than other changes.
In fact, one can plausibly argue that the 1937 Mirror reader had just as much public affairs news as was available in 1927.
In absolute figures, he/she had more.
If one were to include other categories of ‘news’, such as‘Law, police and accidents’— a category excluded from the public affairs one — then the reader would have had access to substantial amounts of information about the outside world.
The actual data are obviously open to continuous analysis.
It cannot resolve the problem one way or another because the nature of the problem is itself ill defined.
In many respects, impressions of change may be more important than actual data.
Despite the ambiguity of the statistical debate, it is clear that advertisers do play a part in the lives of our media.
To suggest, however, that it is the determining role is to ignore the role that the audience itself plays.
Without readers, no newspaper can survive; with sufficient readers, and willing advertisers, the chances of survival are greater but the medium still has to prove itself.
Unless it does so, it is likely to lose both readers and advertisers.
It is this complex environment that decides the fortunes of the media.
4.
THE DEMISE OF FLEET STREET: NEW TECHNOLOGY, EDDIE SHAH AND WAPPING
The ownership of newspapers has rarely been seen as either an easy or a sure way of acquiring fortunes.
Newspapers have traditionally moved from profitability to loss and vice versa at regular intervals as their costs and revenues — always delicately balanced — have come under attack from a variety of quarters.
Increases in the price of newsprint, increases in wages, a slump in advertising, a decline in classified ads as the rate of unemployment increased, all impact on the newspaper's balance sheets.
More significantly, it is not always possible to transfer these increased costs onto the consumers, the newspaper-buying public: newspapers are competitive products and one newspaper's increase in costs can often lead to another newspaper putting on circulation as readers switch titles.
These difficulties have long dogged the newspaper industry.
Newspapers are peculiar products in as much as their first copy costs — the cost of producing the issue irrespective of the size of the print run — are so high.
Moreover, they have no shelf life.
Consequently, delays in production, printing and distribution cost dearly.
But the newspaper industry has also suffered from mismanagement.
Managers suffered from a ‘congenital disability’ to understand what its [the newspaper's]purpose is …’.
Was Fleet St an industry striving for profit only or was it dedicated ‘to the public service at the expense of profit’?
One area where mismanagement was legendary was in the production rooms.
Traditional methods of newspaper production involved a number of key processes (see Fig. 4.4).
A story would be typed by a journalist and then cast into metal, usually lead, by compositors.
After correction, the newspaper page would eventually be cast in metal by printers and made ready for the presses to roll.
This was a lengthy and labour-intensive (and therefore costly) process.
Two other properties of this process caused concern for newspaper organizations.
First, the printing unions controlled the process; their powers included the hiring of staff and deciding the level of manning in print rooms.
Second, over many decades not only did those print rooms become overmanned but wages were enormously high.
For the unions, the prospect of modernization using the ‘new technology’ was anathema.
The ‘new technology’— a term used to describe the computerization of the printing industry using word processors and computer-designed pages as well as the direct input of copy by the journalist into the computer (Fig. 4.4)— would gravely affect employment in the industry as it did away with compositors and printers.
For the employers, however, the ‘new technology’ was a means of re-establishing control over the industry and of driving it into profit.
The employers' position had, in fact, long been favoured by analysts.
As the 1976 Royal Commission noted, ‘the only route to at least temporary salvation [was]the dramatic savings in labour costs that can be achieved with the rational introduction of new technology…
‘. The transformation of the industry would undoubtedly be both costly and painful but it was the only means by which it could ensure a future for itself.
But the enthusiasm so often expressed in favour of change produced little movement within the industry.
The unions were always able to exert their control over the industry by, say, threatening to stop production, and the proprietors were never brave enough to withstand significant financial losses.
This  impasse was to last until a number of dramatic events changed the face of the industry and markedly reduced the power of the trade unions.
The key event was the dispute surrounding the Eddie Shah group of free newspapers and it was resolved with the help of two pieces of trade union legislation introduced in the early 1980s which henceforth placed the trade union movement on the defensive.
Eddie Shah owned a series of local free newspapers in the North.
After acquiring a new printing plant on an industrial estate in Warrington, he refused, in effect, to recognize the NGA (the printer's union) 's closed shop and preferred instead to introduce more flexible working arrangements within his organization.
What was a local dispute soon became a national concern.
The print unions saw this as a direct attack on their members and their traditional working rights; for Shah, it was a matter of being able to print and manage his own organization.
The scene was set for confrontation and as these confrontations continued without an end in sight, it became clear that the usual tactics of the unions were not going to work.
They could not rely on support from all of their members and the TUC nor could they call out the membership so as to hit other newspapers and so bring indirect pressure to bear on Shah.
Both were traditional tactics hut now neither could be used because of the Conservative Government's trade union legislation.
Two pieces of legislation were of particular significance: the 1980 and 1982 Employment Acts.
According to Goodhart and Wintour, they were drafted with the print unions in mind.
Their purpose was to weaken the closed shop and to outlaw secondary picketing.
The effect of the Acts ‘was to remove legal immunity from almost all forms of industrial action that were not aimed at the worker's immediate employer or related conditions of work’.
Also, ‘for the first time since 1906 union funds were exposed to the threat of damages claims if official support was even to action which was no longer immune’.
Shah made use of both pieces of legislation to great effect.
The NGA was, at one point, fined £150,000; some time later it was fined £375,000 and it had its entire assets of £11 m seized.
The TUC was never able to offer its full support for fear of challenging the law and a lawfully elected government.
Without that support and with mounting costs, the NGA called off a proposed one-day strike.
It bowed down to the inevitable defeat and Shah emerged  the victor in the 5½-month dispute.
The trade union movement as a whole would, in the future, face similar challenges to its powers in other industries.
Shah's victory opened the door to a brave new world in which the proprietors could, once more, manage the industry and bring about the sorts of changes which they had long desired.
The more moderate print unions now counselled compromise.
After a brief visit to the United States in 1985 to examine the uses of the new technology, SOGAT concluded that
Opposing technological change is not an option for trade unions in printing — it is simply a rapid road to deunionisation.
As a result of new technology there has been a 50% job loss in the US.
As the consequences of the change in union power sank in, the introduction of new processes in the industry became a reality.
Shah next embarked on a new project of launching a national daily,Today , which would eschew traditional printing practices.
Not only was it not based in Fleet Street, but it had a completely computerized process and the paper was being contract printed in satellite centres.
Other newspaper organizations sought to follow suit in the hope of modernizing their operation and reducing their labour costs.
But the initial simple desire for change soon took on a more sinister hue when Rupert Murdoch completely switched his printing operation from Fleet Street to Wapping in the East End of London.
Murdoch had long planned to move part of his operation to Wapping so as to increase his printing capacity.
This had led to a lengthy series of negotiations over the sort of contracts which should bind printers in his new plant.
Unknown to the print unions, Murdoch had also embarked on recruiting electricians to work in his plant instead of the traditional printers.
The electricians appeared to accept the kind of binding agreements which he had vainly sought from the print unions.
In an operation which continues to be a major point of argument, Murdoch sacked his 6,000-plus workers in Fleet Street and re-opened his operation — for legal reasons, under a different organizational name — in Wapping.
The precise details of the methods used by Murdoch to reform Fleet Street are not directly relevant here although they illustrate  the bitterness and enmity that pervades the industry.
Rather it is the consequences of these changes that are of significance.
These are easily illustrated.
After decades when little change had taken place, most — if not all — the newspaper groups have introduced plans to modernize their plants by introducing new technology, reducing manning levels and moving out of central London to the East End.
The effects of the transformation have taken many forms.
At one extreme, Murdoch employs a small fraction of the 6,000 production workers he had in Fleet Street.
This reduction has forced others to move in a similar direction.
The chairman of the Guardian and Manchester Evening News announced in his 1986 annual report that ‘The Times now has a cost structure much lower than our own…we must get our own costs down to their level as soon as possible’.
The group has since announced a reduction in staff of one-fifth and it has moved over completely to computer setting and direct input by journalists.
The Telegraph group, a group in direct competition with both The Times and the Guardian , has also announced a modernization programme as well as a 50% cut in staff in the composing section.
The same story can be repeated for the FT ,Observer, Mirror group,Express newspapers and the Mail group of newspapers.
These reductions in the labour power required to produce newspapers inevitably impact on the cost structures of the media groups concerned.
The 1977 Royal Commission on the Press found that for a quality newspaper, production costs accounted for 31% of total costs; the next largest group of costs were attributed to newsprint and ink.
Editorial costs were a mere 17% of the total.
A popular paper differed from this in that its large circulation ensured that newsprint and ink was its major cost category (36%), followed by production costs (30%) and editorial costs (13%).
Whilst it was clearly not possible for news organizations to make many savings in editorial costs since they employ relatively few full-time journalists, they necessarily turned to the production areas.
Whether the costs savings are very considerable is hard to say but there have undoubtedly been some sayings; what is clear, however, is that costs have been whittled down and that this has had a widespread effect on the production of newspapers in Britain.
What the ‘new technology’ and the restructuring of Fleet Street  have patently not yet done is introduce the variety that had once been optimistically promised.
Newspapers remain expensive propositions and the cost of running them until they turn in a profit is immense.
Few can afford those sorts of funds: Maxwell was finally forced to close down the London Daily News in 1987 in the face of mounting costs.
Eddie Shah's Today , in many ways the model that inspired many aspirants, illustrated that even a fully computerized newspaper did not guarantee success.
The Independent , another new title founded in 1986, also employs comparatively few full-time journalists (200;Guardian 170,Daily Telegraph 300) and, significantly, it too contracts out its printing.
Although its circulation is about 350,000, it appears to be more successful in finding the gap in the market which will ensure its continued survival.
Despite the ‘new technology’, the organization and ownership of the newspaper industry is little different from what it was in previous decades.
Some change has inevitably taken place but it has been less significant than many would have predicted.
Nevertheless, it is now clear that newspaper proprietors have successfully exploited the perception that there would be an abundance of new titles as a direct outcome of the ‘new technology’ whilst confidently bringing enormous structural changes to the industry.
In the process, they have also ensured that newspapers continue to remain unregulated yet firmly in the grip of private capital.
Chapter Five
BROADCASTING IN BRITAIN
Contemporary discussions about British broadcasting have, almost inevitably, taken as their starting point the threats the new media pose to a well established public service broadcasting tradition.
The new media offer, as it were, a prism through which we are better able to understand the existing structures of broadcasting: the threat makes it easier to appreciate what will vanish as well as what will come about.
The often mentioned ‘crisis’ in British broadcasting —‘crisis’, in Gouldner's phrase, being that the system ‘may, relatively soon, become something quite different than it has been’— thus acts as a backdrop for numerous contemporary analyses of broadcasting.
It is unfortunate, however, that the ‘crisis’ is so often seen in negative terms.
A changed environment also offers new opportunities.
Yet discussions of the threat to public service broadcasting have ignored not only the potential for change but also the deficiencies of the existing system which would make us question its benefits and its claim to permanence.
It is as if all plans for radical reform (and it must be remembered that the new media bring about substantial structural reforms to broadcasting) cannot be contemplated; although, in fact, what is missing is a coherent argument for the preservation of the existing system.
As we shall see later in this chapter, the case for the status quo is perhaps too general and too romantic in its assessment of the value of the existing structures.
One cannot deny that there are real threats to British broadcasting but, at the same time, it would be a mistake to label all threats as a ‘crisis’.
The main argument running through this chapter and the next is that there have always been, and will always be, threats to broadcasting organizations and, more  generally, broadcasting structures.
Technological developments and social, political, and economic changes inevitably force the broadcasting organizations to adapt to new and continually changing circumstances.
Few would now see the introduction of commercial television in 1955 as the threat envisaged by, say, Lord Reith.
Similarly, in twenty years' time, the threat of the new media may prove to be no more than a means for liberating the viewer from the duopoly's straightjacket.
It is difficult, therefore, to be dogmatic about the prospects for change; one can only set out the patterns or trends which may come about.
A discussion of these trends will form the basis of the final section in this chapter (and Chapter 10).
Section 1 will explore the essential features of the British broadcasting structures and the ways in which these are organized and regulated; Section 2 deals with the concept of public service broadcasting; Section 3 explores the financial problems of the BBC as a way of introducing the current proposals for changing the structure of British broadcasting and the final section; the final section, Section 4, looks at these proposals in the context of the development and organization of Channel Four.
The next chapter, Chapter 6, returns to the subject of British broadcasting and outlines, in detail, the historical relationship between broadcasting and politics and the nature, and extent, of political control over broadcasting.
1.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF BRITISH BROADCASTING
The decision of the Post Office to set up the British Broadcasting Company in 1922 as a co-operative of radio set manufacturers was an attempt to overcome a series of essentially technical and organizational problems: the need to satisfy set manufacturers by ensuring that all participated in the birth and development of broadcasting, the need to avoid chaos on the airwaves on the American scale, and the need to guarantee an efficient and satisfactory service to all listeners.
It was only later that the company came to acquire a social and political direction; in its inception it was an ‘expedient solution to a technical problem’.
One distinctive element in this particular solution was the decision to finance the service out of a licence fee payable by all those in possession of radio sets rather than some form of advertising revenue.
In this way, the company was guaranteed a  yearly income and it could thus pursue a programme policy that was developed with little regard for the wishes of the audience.
This approach to the role of broadcasting in British society was more than matched by authoritative official interpretations of its duties.
Radio, many argued, was a scarce national resource and should therefore be developed, and regulated, in the interests of the nation.
As the Crawford Committee recommended in 1926, ‘the broadcasting service should be conducted by a public corporation acting as Trustee for the national interest and its status and duties should correspond with those of a public service’.
It is here that one can trace the foundations of public service broadcasting with its emphasis on public duty, on providing for all and on informing, educating, and not simply entertaining.
John Reith's part, both in his capacity as the company's managing director and as the director general of the corporation, in the creation of this ideal model of public service broadcasting, has been amply documented and he was undoubtedly able to exploit such thinking in a way not equalled elsewhere or since.
For the politicians, and for those in charge of broadcasting, the problem was how to reconcile the need for accountability on the part of the broadcasters with their need for a maximum degree of autonomy so as to be able to carry out their work without undue political or other constraints.
The ‘solution’ was to delegate power to a broadcasting authority to run the service along the lines decreed by Parliament.
This would ensure that the broadcasting institution was ultimately accountable to Parliament but at the same time would free it from direct government control in its day-to-day affairs.
The authority, ‘a body of people acting as trustees for the public interest’, does not however exercise executive control over broadcasting.
In theory, and to some extent in practice, it does act as a means of distancing broadcasting from government.
This arrangement was used for the BBC (the corporation) in 1927 when it was set up under Royal Charter, and for the commercial broadcasting sector from 1954 onwards.
Thus, the governors of the BBC — who are constitutionally the BBC — have to ensure that it is run in the public interest; they also have to review its work.
In the past, this has involved both reprimanding the broadcasters and offering them support, particularly when under attack from outsiders.
This dual role, which is also part of the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA) 's work, contains glaring contradictions.
Since both bodies are appointed by, or on the advice of, government they have come to be seen by some as a buffer between the state and the broadcasters but by others as an indirect mechanism by which the state can exert control over broadcasting.
The membership and strengths or weaknesses of these two authorities, as well as their working relationships with those in executive control of broadcasting, have obvious and significant repercussions for broadcasters and their autonomy.
The regulatory structure of British broadcasting is set out in Fig. 5.1.
The state's ultimate authority over broadcasting exemplifies one of the deficiencies of public service broadcasting, though, paradoxically, John Reith, the BBC's first managing director/director general, would not have been able to develop the BBC as he did had he not had the full support of the state.
His vision of broadcasting was based on four major principles:
1.
assured sources of funding
2.
the brute force of monopoly
3.
the public service motive
4.
a sense of moral obligation
These principles enabled him to develop the BBC as an instrument for the achievement of excellence and for the delivery of the ‘best of everything’.
As the BBC's funding was ‘assured’, it could pursue quality in programming without concerning itself with the needs of the public for, say, popular entertainment.
Furthermore, the monopoly guaranteed the success of that particular policy of providing education, information and entertainment: the BBC had total control over broadcasting output in Britain.
But none of these principles could have been exploited or pursued in the ways in which they were had there not been tacit approval and support on the part of the state.
When faced with threats to its broadcasting monopoly or to its programme policy from, say, either wireless exchanges (the precursors of today's cable systems) or overseas commercial radio stations, it was only natural that Reith would turn to the state to guarantee the monopoly.
This dependence on the state was well appreciated by Reith.
Though it created problems in times of political crisis, it was the price one had to pay for pursuing high ideals.
With domestic  competition effectively prohibited, the BBC became the main national instrument of broadcasting in Britain.
According to Tom Burns, Reith developed it into:
A kind of domestic diplomatic service, representing the British — or what he saw as the best of the British — to the British.
BBC culture, like BBC standard English, was not peculiar to itself but an intellectual ambience composed out of the values, standards and beliefs of the professional middle class, especially that part educated at Oxford and Cambridge.
The principles of public service broadcasting were also incorporated into the development of the BBC's television service after the Second World War.
It took root, and remained intact, despite considerable public and commercial dissatisfaction with the monopoly in broadcasting.
Attempts to introduce alternatives in broadcasting had always, for one reason or another, met with failure but the election of a Conservative Government in 1951 saw the start of a concerted campaign in favour of commercial television.
After considerable lobbying, the Television Act was passed in 1954 and this set up the Independent Television Authority (ITA) to supervise a federal structure of commercially funded television companies, each serving a different region or market.
To offset the allegedly harmful effects of relying on major advertisers or of sponsors dictating programme content, a system of spot advertising was introduced.
This intervention was seen as a way of minimizing the harmful and the more undesirable side-effects of commercially funded media.
Funding ITV as an advertising supported channel had one other important advantage: it brought into existence an institution which was not in direct competition with the BBC for revenue.
Each had their separate sources of funding and, as a result, would not necessarily have to chase the largest audience nor produce lowest common denominator programmes so as to please as many as possible.
Direct competition for funding was, after all, the major weakness of the competitive American broadcasting system and the British solution overcame it.
Each broadcasting organization could henceforth pursue its programme policies without fear of a direct challenge to its sources of revenue.
The competition would be in terms of programming and not straightforward commercial terms.
It soon became obvious, however, that the introduction of  commercial television indirectly threatened the position and security of the BBC.
The immediate popularity and novelty of ITV's programmes forced the BBC to review its output and made it aware of the need to survive in an increasingly competitive environment.
While the BBC had remained a monopoly, television viewers had no programme choices nor, for that matter, could there be any argument as to which institution ought to be allocated the revenue obtained from the licence tee.
Independent Television undermined the BBC's historical sense of privilege and security: with less than 30% of the national audience — it went down to 27% in the 1950s — the BBC's position as the main instrument of broadcasting was clearly threatened, as were its claims to the full licence fee.
The competitive threat led the BBC to reassess its broadcasting strategy and it began to respond more positively to the requirements of the audience.
Since the early 1960s, the BBC has therefore aimed to reach a 50% share of the total audience as a means of supporting its claim to the licence fee and of ensuring its continued survival.
With the two institutions in competition for the audience, their policies converged towards the demands of the audience.
The process of competition has, to some extent, eroded the differences between the commercial and the publicly funded television services.
One consequence of this has been that further additions to the existing radio and television services would become deeply contested as efforts were made to detach them from the duopoly.
As the case study of Channel Four (see below) amply demonstrates, concerned groups and individuals attempted to keep these services out of the competitive struggle between the two giants of broadcasting in the hope that they would be better able to serve previously excluded minority groups in society.
Though some of the effects of competition, particularly on the BBC, were beneficial, others were not.
The process of competition stretched the finite resources of the BBC and was to highlight one of the major differences between the two organizations.
Whilst commercial television could meet its costs out of a pool of advertising revenue that was continually growing, the BBC had to meet its costs out of a licence fee that was, at best, inadequate.
Prior to 1988, the BBC's licence fee was set every three years at a level that was mid-way between what the BBC wanted and what politicians thought was electorally acceptable.
Because that level  was set by the government, the licence fee was too often seen as a political issue and a source of political pressure.
Following a recommendation of the Peacock Inquiry (see below, pp. 107 — 11) the Thatcher Government agreed that from 1988 the licence fee would be increased annually in line with the rate of inflation.
This would not only reduce its political significance but it would allow for yearly increases (though broadcasters have been quick to point out that the general rate of inflation is below the industry's rate and so an increase would still leave a shortfall which can only be made up by savings).
So, although there have been moves to improve the BBC's financial plight the essential character of the inequalities inherent in the broadcasting system remains.
From the 1960s onwards, the British broadcasting system began to change.
At first that change was gradual but it soon accelerated.
In 1963, the BBC was allocated a second TV channel (BBC 2) and by the end of the decade there were also a large number of local, commercial, and non-commercial, radio stations.
In addition to these structural changes — and they were to continue in the 1970s and 1980s with Channel Four and TV-am, to say nothing of cable systems and  satellite broadcasting — the underlying philosophy of broadcasting was being increasingly and powerfully challenged.
It is possible to identify three processes at work during this period of transition from a minimal system of broadcasting to a more expansive one.
First, the structural changes identified above were acknowledgements of the  heterogeneous nature of the national audience and, in themselves, transformed the broadcasting institutions into vehicles to serve and exploit different sections of it.
BBC 2 was, for example, a ‘highbrow’ service; Community Radio is aimed at distinct ethnic groups, and pop music radio stations at the burgeoning youth market.
Second, technological advances have made it possible to provide many more, and different, broadcasting facilities.
Finally, under the Thatcher Government, there has been a sustained ideological and political attack on the pillars of public service broadcasting.
Not only has there been a serious questioning of the principle of the licence fee, but there has also been a reassessment of the idea of scarcity in the airwaves, the idea of equality of service to all, and of the need for regulations.
The idea of a national public service paid for by the community is under attack from those who favour the concept of ‘consumer sovereignty’ and subscription (‘pay-per-view’) television.
The combination of  these influences has encouraged the opening up of the airwaves to competition.
Each of these three processes has contributed something to the changing broadcasting scene.
Just as the first two processes have led to the gradual expansion of the broadcasting scene, the last, and most critical, process is aimed at a complete reappraisal of the role of broadcasting, and the broadcasting organizations, in British society.
The effects of this can be seen both in the current major reviews of BBC funding and in discussions over the future of Channel Four.
2.
‘PUBLIC SERVICE BROADCASTING’ AND THE DUTIES OF THE BROADCASTERS
The difficulties inherent in creating a successful broadcasting structure are immense.
For although one might be able to construct an elaborate system of control and accountability, there is never any guarantee that such a system would produce programmes of a high quality.
Regulatory frameworks and obligations do not in themselves translate into good programming.
Yet, Britain has been fortunate in benefiting from a healthy, successful and much envied system of broadcasting.
What explains the successful evolution of this system?
A key consideration here is undoubtedly Reith's direction.
The four pillars of broadcasting — assured finance, brute force of monopoly, sense of moral obligation, and public service motive — combined to direct broadcasting to reach the highest of ideals.
In due course, attempts were made to specify more precisely what made British broadcasting unique.
One could point to facets of the system and to the ideal of public service broadcasting, but somehow the whole defied adequate description.
The Pilkington Committee was reduced to observing that ‘good broadcasting is a practice, not a prescription’ and even the Peacock Committee felt confident in stating that ‘there was no simple dictionary definition of [public service broadcasting]’.
It too was reduced to quoting the Pilkington Committee's view that ‘though standards exist and are recognisable, broadcasting is more nearly an art than an exact science.
It deals in tastes and values and is not precisely definable’.
Given the lack of precision, it would not be too far fetched to  claim that there is an element of post hoc rationalization in some of the definitions of the public service broadcasting notion.
What is clear, however, is that the ideal of public service broadcasting has combined with the imposed statutory obligations on the broadcasters to produce a system of broadcasting which has proved itself over many decades.
These obligations are derived from the relevant statutory instruments which established the broadcasting organizations: the IBA Act for Independent Television and the Royal Charter for the BBC.
In practice, the authorities responsible for broadcasting — the governors of the BBC and the members of the IBA — oversee their respective organizations and ensure that certain statutory obligations are met.
The most often quoted obligations deal with the nature of the service and the need to ensure that content is impartial.
Each Authority has a duty to provide its respective radio and television services as public services for the dissemination of information, education and entertainment, and to ensure that its programmes maintain a high general standard, in particular as respects their quality and content, and a proper balance and wide range of subject matter….
The BBC must ensure that…due impartiality is preserved in news programmes…
The IBA must ensure that a sufficient amount of time in the programmes is given to news and news features and that all news given in the programmes…is presented with due accuracy and impartiality.
Other regulations deal with such things as questions of public taste and decency, the proportion of foreign programmes permitted on air and the extent of permissible foreign ownership in British commercial television (and radio) companies.
(Many of these ‘public service’ obligations do not apply to the new media (see Chapter 10).
In that sense, the new media present a fundamental departure from the practices, as well as the spirit, of public service broadcasting.)
Although the authorities are directly in charge of broadcasting, governments are not without considerable powers over broadcasting.
Ultimately, the broadcasting services operate within the broad  regulatory and structural decisions made by governments.
Such decisions would include how many channels exist, how they will be funded, who will run them, what sort of cable systems will be built, what radio structures will exist and so on.
Other contemporary ‘strategic’ decisions include the Green Paper on Radio (1986/7), the proposed White Paper on broadcasting (1988) and, from 1987, the Conservative Government's intention to raise the percentage of independent productions broadcast by the existing organizations to 25%.
Governments have it within their powers ‘to exercise some general control in the national interest over the total financial resources available for broadcasting’ though these powers do not extend to regulating expenditure on programmes.
Until the very recent past governments would also set the level of the licence fee.
Although this will now be index-linked to the rate of inflation, it was the government which finally decided the base figure (£65).
Governments can also direct the IBA on establishing and managing reserve funds, set the ‘levy’ paid by ITV companies, and request annual reports from the broadcasting authorities.
To these powers, one must add the power to appoint governors (BBC) and members (IBA) of the authorities, and in the context of programmes, the government's power of veto over programmes.
Governments are also often drawn into disputes about matters of public taste and decency.
The combination of these legislative acts, governmental powers, and regulatory oversight makes British broadcasting a heavily regulated system of broadcasting.
But within this regulatory system, one also finds the basis of the idea of public service broadcasting.
It is as if the legislative and regulatory shell has protected and encouraged the growth of a complex philosophy of broadcasting.
According to the Broadcasting Research Unit, there are eight principles of ‘public service broadcasting’.
These are:
geographic universality — everyone should have access to the same services;
catering for all interests and tastes;
catering for minorities;
catering for ‘national identity and community’;,
detachment from vested interests and government;
one broadcasting system to be funded directly from the corpus of users;
competition in good programming rather than for numbers; and
guidelines to liberate programme makers and not to restrict them.
This list represents a normative, desirable combination of all the good things which one would like broadcasting organizations to do.
But it is not clear from the list, or indeed the document itself, whether it relates to some real organization, namely the BBC, or to some underlying philosophy which such an organization is identified with.
For if it relates to the BBC per se then it conveniently overlooks its seedier and more questionable aspects, whilst if it relates to some imaginary institution it ignores the real pressures on institutions which make them somehow less ideal than one would desire.
That there is a real disjunction between what the ideal institution ought to do and what it does can be seen in yet another attempt to describe the BBC as the ideal typical ‘public service, institution.
In a volume titled, perhaps significantly,The BBC and Public Service Broadcasting , Krishnan Kumar emphasized its duty to create and extend a ‘national broadcasting culture’.
Public service broadcasting ought to provide a ‘daily service that is continuously and throughout infused with a sense of its public function’.
That is, ‘serving the public as a living audience with potential for growth and development’.
Such a conception should embrace a whole range of programmes and contents from Shakespeare to Minder , for ‘without such breadth public service broadcasting can become élitist and authoritarian’.
Paradoxically, his subsequent statements do, in fact, make his conception élitist and authoritarian: Shakespeare and Minder are to be applauded but Dallas, Dynasty and quiz shows are to be decried because they ‘show a contempt for the audience, nut simply as it is but also as it might be…’.
Yet there is no cultural measure which allows one to distinguish between these types of programmes; similar criticisms can be levelled against both Minder and Dallas and this makes it difficult to accept Kumar's position in its entirety.
His argument is further weakened when he seeks to defend the very institution that does bring us Dynasty, Dallas and Blankety Blank !
His conception of the ideal institution is clearly at variance with the real competitive environment in which the BBC exists and from which it draws its sustenance.
These contradictions reflect the impossibility of condensing a series of traditional practices and guidelines based on a wealth of cultural history into a set of universally meaningful statements.
Britain has been particularly fortunate in acquiring the sorts of institutions which she did acquire.
There are obviously many reasons for the conjunction of forces which produced its institutions and these must include the Reithian spirit (described above), a political system secure enough to grant broadcasting a relatively free hand and the absence (or the negation!) of deep social divisions.
Finally, and this returns us to Kumar's statements, it is unlikely that with the elimination of the scarcity of resources — and this made cultural direction incredibly simple — and the internationalization of media productions a nation can ever maintain its defensive walls unbreached.
But a breach in the wall à la ITV or even Dallas does not in itself destroy the fundamental nature of the existing system; it may contain within it forces which threaten it but a well established and respected institution such as the BBC ought to be able to adapt to change.
Its ability to adapt is, however, inextricably bound up with its financial underpinnings and, as the next section points out, these do not provide very secure foundations for facing the future.
3.
THE FINANCIAL PLIGHT OF THE BBC
The evolution of British broadcasting has demonstrated an ingenious method by which to avoid direct competition for revenue between organizations.
The ITV companies rely on advertising revenue for their funds, while the BBC is funded out of the licence lee which must be paid by all those who possess a television receiver.
In this way, neither institution seeks to undermine its rival since there are no financial incentives to do so; it is not a competitive market-place.
Similarly, although there is competition for the viewer this does not usually impact on the financial fortunes of either organization.
Clearly, if there were substantial losses of audiences, advertisers and licence payers would object since this would indicate that neither institution was properly serving the audience.
However, by and large, the audience split between the commercial and non-commercial sectors has been in the 40:60 ratio (or vice versa ) and, therefore, within acceptable limits.
For the commercial sector, advertising revenue has represented an ever-growing pool of funds.
Unfortunately, this cannot be said of the licence fee.
Whilst the BBC was a monopoly organization, the licence fee was an adequate source of revenue.
The BBC could plan ahead and not concern itself with chasing large audiences since its funds were guaranteed.
When the monochrome television licence fee was supplemented by the transition to the more expensive colour television licence fee in the 1970s, the BBC's funds remained buoyant.
In more recent times, however, this has ceased to be the case.
The real value of the licence fee has grown at a relatively slow pace and has never quite caught up with the rate of inflation.
Thus, with a rate of inflation averaging 4% in the 1980s, the £58 licence fee set in 1985 would have had to increase by £7 by 1988 if it were to keep up with the increase in the general price level only.
But broadcasting costs are more volatile than other costs and also rise at a faster rate so that even a licence fee increase which keeps up with general costs is an actual real decrease in its total value.
The financial difficulties of the BBC can also be observed in the following data.
(NB In practice, these figures are adjusted and are estimates of revenues.)
In the year ending March 1985, the revenue of the BBC was £723m, of which £555m went towards television and the rest (£220m) to radio.
ITV's revenue in the year ending January 1986 was £1056.9m.
Of this, some £934.8m was spent on programme services (£709.3m) and Channel Four subscriptions (£168m).
In effect, ITV's expenditure on its television services easily exceeds the BBC's expenditure on its television services.
In the early 1970s, the differences in expenditure were insignificant but by the mid-1980s, ITV was spending over one-and-a-half times more on its television services than the BBC.
Nevertheless, and despite these perennial financial difficulties, the BBC — and countless others — have continued to argue in favour of the licence fee.
However, the continuing and, to some, insoluble, problem of the licence fee and the advent of new means of television distribution — satellite television, cable television — and different ways of paying for those services — subscription, sponsorship, advertising or pay-per-view — significantly alter the parameters of British broadcasting.
There is now room for a radical rethink of the foundations of British broadcasting.
For economic libertarians, the starting point for such a reform is the licence fee itself which they have lung regarded as an outdated imposition on the public and a regressive tax to boot.
(See also pp. 00 — 00.)
Others, most notably the members of the Peacock Committee on Financing the BBC (1986), have seen the question of the licence fee as a small, but key, part of the much needed review of British broadcasting.
As the Peacock Committee observed,
practices widely accepted during one decade may become quite inappropriate in the next, in which different social conditions may prevail and different technological considerations apply.
No political decision…can be right for all time.
It must be reviewed in the light of changing circumstances.
Given the current technical framework and the likely developments in the future, how can British broadcasting be financed in such a way as to brine the greatest enjoyment and pleasure to as many viewers and listeners as possible while at the same time fulfilling the public service obligation?
This broad philosophical sweep led the Committee to consider the following areas:
to assess the effects of the introduction of advertising or sponsorship on the BBC
to identify a range of options for the introduction of advertising or sponsorship
to consider proposals for securing income from the consumer other than through the licence fee.
In short, to explore ways by which the BBC could pull itself out of the on-going financial crisis but, at the same time, to maintain the quality of the product.
The Peacock Committee was convinced that it was no longer possible to recommend ‘no change’ to either the licence fee system or the funding structure of broadcasting as a whole; the differences between the two sources of revenue would create recurring crises for the BBC and put it at a competitive disadvantage compared to the ITV structure.
The effects of new systems of signal delivery on British broadcasting could also not be ignored.
Although the Committee recommended that the BBC should not  accept advertising on its television channels on the grounds that it would not be a satisfactory long-term solution to the impending restructuring of broadcasting, it made a number of significant proposals which would have the effect of recreating broadcasting as a market of consumers and producers.
Viewers would pay for what they watched.
Such a system of financing broadcasting would ensure that the public exercised a choice over what it watched and expressed its preferences through direct payments.
No longer would a viewer pay for what he/she did not watch or for a service which he/she did not use.
The philosophical underpinnings of Peacock's thinking are discussed elsewhere; suffice it to say in this present context that such a method of financing broadcasting would completely change the face of British broadcasting by redefining the nature and duties of the broadcasting organizations.
The ‘public service’ ideal would no longer apply across the whole of each service though the public would be ‘better’served by exercising real economic choices.
For Peacock, then, the problem with the licence fee is only part of the difficulty which broadcasters will experience in the future.
A temporary solution is not a satisfactory one since it does not confront the broader pattern of changes which the new media bring in their wake.
What is required, and what Peacock presented, was a thorough review of all the possible changes including changes to the commercial television sector which could be introduced in the future without having an a priori commitment to the status quo.
Peacock's recommendations have not been extensively supported.
Critics of the Peacock Committee have been happier to work within a framework of change that is more limited than that envisaged by the Committee.
In other words, they view the future as involving little radical change; in this latter scenario it is possible to foresee a situation in which the existing broadcasting organizations continue to operate effectively and efficiently, albeit with some modifications.
At the time of writing, moves towards the greater ‘liberalization’ of broadcasting are in fact gaining governmental support.
The Government's Green Paper on the development of radio proposes the creation of national commercial competition for the BBC and also the creation of a new regulatory body to supervise these developments in commercial and community radio.
Like the Cable Authority, this new radio body will exercise a ‘light regulatory  touch’.
It will thus undermine much of the valuable work done by the IBA (and the BBC) to ensure that radio is in tune with public needs.
The Government is pursuing a similar line of developments in television.
With proposals for a fifth terrestrial channel currently being studied and a variety of plans to introduce pay-TV under consideration, the Government is clearly embarking on a policy of opening up the airwaves.
Not only will the BBC be under ‘attack’, but the ITV network is no longer immune from the competitive urge which the Government wishes upon us all.
Its proposed White Paper on television will likely herald a new era in British broadcasting.
Despite the conflicting views about the nature and speed of future change, the concept of ‘public service broadcasting’ will continue to haunt its supporters and advocates.
For those in charge of the BBC and the ITV companies, the real (and ideal) meaning of the concept will continue to be tempered by the competitive environment in which their organizations seek to survive.
In practice, Shakespeare will sit alongside Dallas , and Minder alongside Blankety Blank , as different audiences make choices from a standard menu of ‘information, education and entertainment’.
However, the danger is that in a newly created, lightly regulated, competitive environment it will become increasingly difficult to justify the mixed menu currently available.
Not only will the specialist interest programme go but so too will the minority programmes so carefully nurtured by organizations seeking to satisfy a broad spectrum of interests and groups.
Channel four: ‘better by design'
It is impossible to understand the significance of Channel Four if one has no comprehension of the context in which it developed.
Similarly, it is not easy to appreciate its uniqueness without some knowledge of its structure.
Without doubt, it is probably the most novel and most different television service in the world.
How did it come about and what does the future hold for it?
Discussions about the allocation of the ‘fourth channel’— the last available national off-air broadcasting channel for Britain — began in the early 1970s.
That this ‘fourth channel’ was the last available national channel transformed it into a very valuable national  resource and, consequently, there has always been some concern lest one make a terrible ‘mistake’in allocating it to some unworthy body or organization.
If these fears were likely to prolong the discussions over its future, the socio-political context of its development made the whole affair even more complex.
One aspect of this broader context was the perception that British society had undergone momentous change during the 1960s and 1970s and that, as a result, the ‘fourth channel’ ought to be able to reflect, and comment, upon those changes.
As the Annan Committee on the Future of Broadcasting put it,
the new vision of life (from the 1960s onwards) reflected divisions within society, divisions between classes, the generations and the sexes, between north and south, between the provinces and London, between pragmatists and ideologues….
This catalogue of divisions, the ‘erosion of cohesion and unity’ and the questioning of society which it gave rise to were now important features of the British scene.
The ‘ideals of middle class culture’ which had informed British broadcasting in the past seemed at odds with a divided Britain.
Other commentators also remarked on these changes.
Asa Briggs, the historian of British broadcasting, has noted how changes in society — and trends such as professionalization and unionization in the BBC — have made ‘governing the BBC’ more difficult in the 1970s than at any other period.
This view was echoed by a BBC director general, Alasdair Milne, who remarked that the prescriptions for broadcasting set out in previous eras — even only a matter of a decade or so ago — were of little value in a rapidly changing social and political environment.
In this new climate, ‘balance’, ‘impartiality’, and ‘objectivity’ were rather inadequate practices.
They failed to reflect the political spectrum in its entirety and they tended to exclude or denigrate all those who strayed outside the centre of the political stage.
They were also too crude to cope with the complexity of contemporary life in Britain.
The notion of balance, for example, was too narrow to explore divergent opinions and subtleties: it necessarily divided and exaggerated differences for the sake of political television.
The changes — as well as the perception of change — in the socio-political environment, together with the criticisms of broadcasting practices, highlighted the rather difficult positions which the  broadcasting organizations had come to occupy.
They remained in control over the means of mass communications but those whose work or views they had long ignored were now clamouring for access.
The artist resented the duopoly and its restricted, middle-of-the-road media fare; the politician objected to the continued emphasis on a vanished consensus; the moral entrepreneur objected to its irreverence and irresponsibility, and the political activist resented the narrowness of its political outlook.
But the institutions of the 1970s were too rigidly set within the competing duopoly (BBC 1 + BBC2 = ITV) to be able to meet fully the demands made upon them.
Nor were they able to serve new needs in radically different ways.
Television was still too scarce a resource — and politically and commercially too important — to be granted the freedom to exploit the richness and diversity of contemporary life.
To create new vehicles of communication in this context meant creating a system of broadcasting which could survive outside the duopoly yet one which would not fundamentally damage the ecology of the system.
It is this development which made Channel Four so special and which continues to demonstrate the possibility of encouraging differences through imaginative regulatory and funding mechanisms.
During the ten or so years leading up to the inauguration of Channel Four in 1982 many proposals were considered but there seemed to be a degree of agreement amongst those favouring a novel form of organization that allocating the ‘fourth channel’ to the commercial sector would only
complete the symmetrical straitjacket of broadcasting in Britain and continue it forever: two public institutions would each supervise two channels and they would compete, two by two, for parallel audiences in perpetuity.
By and large, these criticisms were widely accepted and so efforts were directed to making this channel one which would allow for diversity, for new ideas and for experimentation.
In the event, the 1980 Broadcasting Act allocated the fourth channel to the IBA in preference to creating a new authority specifically to run this channel.
However, the IBA would not run Channel Four as a franchise in the same way as it ran the other regional companies, but would  instead own it.
Furthermore, it had to regulate it in such a way as to ensure that it would ‘contain a suitable proportion of matter calculated to appeal to tastes and interests not generally catered for by Service 1 (i.e. ITV 1)’.
Unlike ITV, Channel Four would not seek to serve the vast audience but would have to satisfy parts of the audience at various times during the week.
Another difference from the ITV companies was that Channel Four would not itself make programmes but would commission them from other sources.
Its output would come from independent producers, regional ITV companies, ITN, and foreign sources.
Channel Four's funding structure was, perhaps, the most radical feature of the service.
It was funded by the existing television companies through a system of subscriptions.
In return, the commercial television companies would sell the advertising time on Channel Four in their own regions and retain the revenue.
This method of funding insulates Channel Four from direct pressures from advertisers in search of large audiences and it protects the ITV companies from a direct assault on their own sources of revenue.
On paper then, the structure of Channel Four is both intricate and ingenious.
In practice, one problem has persisted: can a national television service aimed at minorities — the ‘tastes and interests not generally catered for’— exist in the commercial sector?
Since the size of the audience is critical for a commercial medium, would there he sufficient viewers and enough advertising revenue to justify the channel both culturally and financially?
After five years in operation, Channel Four has proved itself on both counts.
It has reached the viewers and, perhaps more importantly, its success has guaranteed its subscribers, the ITV companies, more than enough revenue to match their subscriptions to the service.
Despite, or perhaps because of, these successes Channel Four is also under scrutiny from the ideologues and reformers.
During the review of broadcasting which began with the Peacock Committee, one proposal for Channel Four has been under constant discussion.
That proposal has a number of different themes to it; briefly, Channel Four would be floated off from the IBA and would then be franchised as any other ITV company.
In this new form, it would be independent of the ITV companies and it would sell its own advertising air-time for its revenue.
This change would also break the ITV companies' monopoly over advertising revenue (a  change much favoured by the Peacock Committee and advertisers, amongst others).
The one major drawback with this proposal to ‘give Channel Four its freedom’ is that it would make it compete with the existing ITV companies.
Whether it would be able to survive in the new, more competitive, environment and obtain as much advertising revenue as it does now is far from clear.
Opinion is divided over whether it would benefit financially from such an arrangement.
Equally important is the effect of this ‘flotation’ on Channel Four's original remit to serve minorities.
Could that remain intact as the channel strives to keep advertisers happy?
As with all other proposed changes for broadcasting, the details of the Thatcher Government's reforming zeal are as yet unknown.
The White Paper will clarify many of these issues and will give a good idea as to how the viewer will fare in the next decade.
What is certain is that the ‘no change’ option will not be high on the list.
SUMMARY
The strongest theme in the above discussion is that of constant change.
In recent years that change has clearly accelerated; indeed, the technological threat has made it even more important to plan ahead and to plan for radical change.
But technological change alone cannot explain the many strategies for reform which the Thatcher Government has inspired.
Although the threats to the BBC may have been ideologically motivated, a different sort of explanation is required for the current review of the commercial television sector.
One possible explanation for the interest in reforming the commercial sector may be the Thatcher Government's desire to break the trade unions' ‘hold’ on the industry.
By forcing the companies to reform their practices and structures, the Government is also forcing them to deal directly with the role of the unions in the ITV sector.
The parallels with developments in the print industry (see pp. 91 — 3) are clear for all to see.
Whether the outcome of all these changes will be a ‘better’ broadcasting system is impossible to tell.
Public service broadcasting probably cannot survive in the market-place and it therefore needs financial, political, and cultural support.
If those no longer exist, its own future is at risk.
In which case, the British public may look back on the era of scarcity as a golden age of broadcasting.