

Theory: two views of holism
HOLISM AND CAUSAL EXPLANATION
The arguments in defence of individualism discussed in the previous chapter are widely held to defeat holism utterly by demonstrating the reducibility of all theories about social wholes.
But as we saw, this claim is asserted with more fervour than is justified, since the case for reduction is by no means watertight.
In the first place, it is founded on a number of assumptions that many holists would reject.
And equally important, it is made at a level of generality which has little connection with the work of social scientists.
Because philosophical argument and social theory have floated so far apart, the debate about reduction is liable to seem trivial — an arcane preoccupation which has no counterpart in studies of particular social phenomena.
If the Problem of holism is to be returned to the world of social science, this gulf must be overcome.
Theory and practice, as represented by philosophy and the various social disciplines, must be united, so that it is possible to investigate existing individualist and holist theories rather than hypothetical constructions.
In order to recast the problem, however, we need a deeper understanding of the divide between the two approaches, and must enquire why many individualists believe their view to be a decisive refutation of holism, while holists deny that it makes any headway at all.
I have argued that the individualist case is far from being closed; but why do its exponents not see this for themselves?
An indication that the issue is not quite as straightforward as the focus on reduction makes it seem can be gleaned from the high moral tone which pervades the discussion.
Some individualists defend their view on the grounds that it not only provides simpler, more detailed and more perspicuous explanations than its rival, but that it is also morally superior to holism.
For example, Karl Popper admonishes us that  
Here we are assailed by imperatives: we must not be satisfied by collective explanations, social phenomena must be understood in individualist terms.
And although many individualists do not share this style and instead adopt the quasi-scientific voice of analytical philosophy, passages such as Popper's are nevertheless revealing.
For they suggest that more is at stake in the dispute about holism than the comparatively technical notion of reducibility.
This impression is confirmed by other features of the debate between individualists and holists, including the fact that they continually talk past each other.
A striking example of their dissociation is provided by the following exchange: on the one hand, Runciman takes it for granted that methodological individualism is ‘now generally conceded to be almost trivially true’, while on the other Torrance asserts that ‘In so far as methodological individualism is true it is trivial and irrelevant to sociology, while in so far as it is used to curb or dictate explanatory methods it is either incoherent or false’.
This mutual incomprehension could, of course, be accidental; but I will suggest that it expresses a division between the two positions which runs deeper than the dispute we have so far considered.
Individualists and holists cannot agree about the reducibility of social theories because they approach the problem from different directions, and at the same time fail to recognise that this is so.
To understand what the issue is really about, we must look more carefully at the premises they bring to bear on the discussion of reduction; for this debate functions as a strait-jacket, stifling the very assumptions and aspirations which lie at the heart of the dispute.
The disparate perspectives of holism and individualism can best be appreciated by looking once again at individualism, and at the intuitions sustaining it.
These amount, as we saw, to the belief that many social phenomena are to be explained as the outcome of actions performed by individuals or groups, and the view that groups can only do things if individuals do.
A group action may not turn out exactly as the individuals involved intended; but in order for it to happen at all there must be individuals acting on the basis of various desires, beliefs and intentions.
Thus, the actions of individuals are a condition of the actions of groups; and groups have no causal powers beyond those of individuals.
As one exponent of individualism puts it with unusual explicitness,
For our purposes it is important to consider what view of the individual underlies this claim.
If we are to understand the philosophical assumptions that motivate individualism, we must ask what individuals need to be like for their causal powers to exhaust the causal powers of groups, and for the characteristics of groups to be explicable in terms of the characteristics of individuals.
First of all, there must be a strong asymmetry between individuals and groups.
Within the boundaries of this mode of explaining social phenomena, individual agents are the root of explanation, a foundation for all the rest.
And to fulfil this role they must be seen as independent of the society they help to constitute.
If the traits of individuals were themselves determined by social groups of one sort or another, they would have to be construed as the playthings rather than the planners of institutions  and practices.
So individualism must regard them as being in some way free from the determining influence of society, and it is this which makes the properties of individuals into a suitable stopping point for explanations.
Some properties of individuals are nevertheless held to be more significant than others.
Although individualists allow that certain types of individual property may be explained by appealing to the properties of groups, they are committed to the view that other individual properties cannot be explained in this fashion.
And the most important properties of which this is held to be true are those which constitute our conception of individuals as autonomous agents.
This claim gives rise to an ontological dispute over the nature of individuals, which underlies the issue of reducibility; for holists and individualists disagree about how individuals are to be characterised and what properties they possess.
Are individuals free agents who shape the social world according to their wills?
Or are they the products of society, constrained in their desires and goals, as well as in their ability to realise them?
Or are they both?
Stated in such crude terms, these alternatives are somewhat bewildering; and yet their very crudeness serves to emphasise the fundamental divide between holism and individualism.
For if the category of the individual is to play the central role allotted to it by individualism, it must be the source of a number of social characteristics which demand explanation.
It must be possible to trace these characteristics back to individual properties, and say with confidence that these are what explain them.
Treating individuals as the end of the explanatory line in this way is regarded by holists as a mistake.
Rather than accepting this end point, they want to push on and ask how individuals got the properties — including their desires, intentions and so forth that are regarded as root causes by individualists.
From their point of view individualism gives up too soon, and thus fails to reveal a whole dimension of the social world.
But individualists, while they  can perfectly well understand this holist complaint, have not selected an arbitrary stopping-point.
They think that, because of the kind of thing individual human beings are, they are bound to be the basis of social explanation.
If it could be shown that, as some holists contend, those individual actions, decisions and choices which are appealed to in explanation, are themselves the causal outcomes of various larger states of social affairs, then individuals would not be of any special interest.
They would be like cogs in a system of wheels, driven by social cogs and driving social cogs, but not contributing any new forces to the system.
But individualism rests on the assumption that individuals are not like this: it is because they themselves contribute to the system of social life that they are so important in explaining it.
And they are able to contribute in this way precisely because they are not determined by social factors, but possess the trait generally labelled autonomy.
This difference between holists and individualists, hard as it is to formulate exactly, is a vital one: for it reveals the competing values which underlie the two approaches.
Individualism, on this interpretation, is not adequately identified as the view that explanations must appeal to individual properties — the drives cited by behaviourists, for example, or the features of the unconscious invoked by psychoanalytic theories.
Instead, individualism is motivated by a desire to defend the idea that individuals are autonomous agents, and thus tends to focus on a particular set of individual properties, including desires, choices, decisions and intentions.
Later, in Parts II and III of this book, I will show how this analysis illuminates the debate between holists and individualists and the question of exactly how their positions are to be distinguished.
First, however, I will argue that the ontological divide between the two views is reflected within the social sciences in a manner that reveals both the character of the dispute and its consequences.
The quest of holists and of individualists, each for a particular  type of explanation, marks the social sciences in two ways, one aggressive, one repressive.
The latter symptom, common among individualists, manifests itself as a refusal to acknowledge the problem: while seeking to defend complex theoretical claims, individualists frequently take the intuitive truth of their own doctrine to be so overwhelmingly obvious that its opponents scarcely need to be taken seriously.
Consider, for example, a recent attack on Braudel, which challenges his judgment that ‘Charles V was an accident calculated, designed, prepared by Spain’ in the following terms:
Here, the claim that the empire of Charles V was calculated and designed by Spain is challenged on the grounds that ‘there was no such thing in the late fifteenth century as a Spanish collective will’.
Instead, there were various individuals — Ferdinand, Isabella and their councillors — and the fact that they did not want the unification of Spain and the Hapsburg lands is presented as decisive evidence against Braudel's view.
But the latter can only be so quickly dismissed if the intentions of individual actors are the principal locus of explanation.
And that is exactly what Braudel doubts, and what his opponents would have to demonstrate.
A similar case of petitio principii is to be found in Trevor Roper's presentation of the claim that good history emerges from imaginative counterfactual analyses of events and states of affairs.
Attacking the crude Marxist theory which treats history as a law-governed and predictable process, Trevor Roper points out that the Marxist historians failed to predict the rise of fascism.
And  how can anyone doubt, he goes on, that the course of the Second World War might in fact have been changed by a number of accidents.
Three out of four of these accidents fix on the properties of individual men as decisive variables directing the course of events: had Churchill been a less charismatic politician Britain might have given up her fight against Germany; had Franco permitted an assault on Gibraltar it would probably have fallen; and if Mussolini had not ‘taken it into his head’ to invade Greece, Hitler would have moved into Russia.
And then everything would have been different.
‘…in 1940–1 a mere accident, and one which might easily have occurred, could…have reversed the outcome of the war and transformed the subsequent shape of the world’.
The designation of such events as ‘accidents’ implies, as this statement  makes clear, that things could have been otherwise.
Mussolini might have entertained another fancy, Churchill might have become too drunk to cope, and so on.
But this assumption is what an opponent of a holist theory of history needs to defend.
The claim that individuals are the proper locus of explanation because they could do otherwise, and the claim that their actions are indeed important independent variables which make a substantial difference to the course of events are precisely the claims that must be argued for, rather than merely stated.
In short, the ‘evidence’ that Trevor Roper presents for his belief in ‘historical free will’already presupposes it.ii
Both these cases, while they are addressed to the distinct issues of whether history is accidental or planned, and whether it is accidental or law-governed, exemplify a widespread failure to engage with the problem of holism.
For they beg the questions they ask by simply assuming the truth of individualism.
This feature sharply distinguishes the repressive from the aggressive stance towards the dispute, which consists in holists and individualists giving incompatible answers to the questions they address, each set grounded on a prior commitment to their own approach.
Like its counterpart, this symptom of an unresolved disagreement is extremely common in the social sciences, and crops up in all sorts of contexts.
For example, E. P. Thompson and Perry Anderson, in a vivid exchange, debate the role of class-consciousness in the definition of the notion of social class.
But the diverse views they defend can be traced, as I shall seek to show, to their holist or individualist assumptions.
For each writer, the problem at issue is the relationship between a social class and its members.
Is it true, as Marx sometimes seems to say, that in order for a group of people to constitute a class they must be conscious of their shared identity, or can they form a class on the basis of other criteria?
Thompson, the individualist, takes the view that consciousness is a condition of class identity:
To identify classes you have to go back to the intentional properties of individuals — to the judgments, desires and aspirations which are essential to explaining what they then do in the class struggle.
Anderson, by contrast, rejects this view:
This dispute demonstrates particularly plainly that the underlying divide between holism and individualism is a crucial feature of contemporary social science.
At a superficial level it produces incompatible definitions so that, despite their having the word in common , Thompson and Anderson use ‘class’ in different ways.
It might of course be claimed that this is all that has to be sorted out: just tidy up the definitions, and the problem will be resolved.
But, perhaps unfortunately, the causes and consequences of the dilemma go deeper than this suggestion implies.
Thompson's and Anderson's choices of their respective definitions are clearly the fruit of a more fundamental attachment — to the underlying assumptions of individualism in Thompson's case and to holism in Anderson's — and as the tone of their exchange reveals, they will not lightly give these up.
To point out the difference between their conceptions of class is, in consequence, simply to state a more fundamental problem.
Moreover, their use of their disparate conceptions does not just lead them to give contradictory answers to common questions such as‘Were Athenian slaves a class or nut?’
Both can ask this, both can answer it, and both can see why the other gives the opposite reply.
Once this ground-clearing is done, however, it becomes evident that Thompson and Anderson, like individualists and holists in general, are in fact approaching their subject-matter by asking quite different questions.
When Thompson asks about the emergence of classes he enquires into the choices and intentions of individuals, which are for him a crucial kind of evidence, and sees the process of class formation as one of self-making.
When Anderson broaches the same task he investigates modes of production and the relationships they confer on individuals.
For him it is at best idiosyncratic to speak, in Thompson's celebrated phrase, of the ‘making’ of a class.
Instead, ‘it is, it must be, the dominant mode of production that confers fundamental unity on a social formation, allocating their objective positions to the classes within it, and distributing the agents within each class’.
Andersons's insistence that the notion of social class must be defined in structural terms can be traced to an over-riding commitment to holism.
He rejects the criteria favoured by Thompson not, of course, out of mere dogmatism, but rather because he believes that the self-consciousness of a class is not a crucial factor in explaining its birth and development.
And why not?
Either because its causal impact is outweighed by structural considerations (a possibility that will be discussed in Chapter vi), or because it is itself to be explained as the effect of social wholes and their properties.
The rift that divides Thompson and Anderson commonly afflicts practising historians and social scientists in their attempts to explain particular phenomena.
As a result, it is quite common to find competing explanations of a single set of events, each presupposing the truth of just those premises — whether holist or individualist — which themselves require to be established.
Consider, for example, the long-standing dispute among economic historians about the causes of the industrial revolution in England.
This question has given rise to a whole spectrum of views, whose exponents are united by two traits: their desire to explain why an industrial revolution occurred in Britain and not in other comparable nations, and their adherence to the Millean method of difference.
They agree that to isolate the causes of the revolution one must search for factors which were present in Britain and absent in, say, France or Belgium.
However, when they begin to suggest what these factors might be, it emerges that they have  markedly different conceptions of what will provide an adequate explanation.
There are, first of all, historians who believe that the crucial variable must lie with the psychological characteristics of a comparatively small group of entrepreneurs, who instituted changes in the technology and organisation of industry: British entrepreneurs are held to have displayed a peculiar wit and resource in expanding and transforming production and distribution — a wit which is not itself subjected to scrutiny.
However, this form of individualism is more often tempered by the acknowledgement that social factors at least exert some formative influence on character, with the result that the individualist element of explanation is somewhat muted.
This middle position is well expressed by Mathias.
Individualism of this variety strives to put individuals in their social context, but nevertheless gives them the last laugh.
Ultimately, it is up to individuals to make something of their situation, and their motives and capacities therefore play a central part in explanation — they have, so to speak, the casting vote.
Contrasted with it are explanations which explicitly subordinate individuals to social factors of one sort or another.
For example, in asking why the French did not innovate like the British, one historian turns straight to economic factors.
As before, these manifestos propound a variety of views about how to answer a single question.
Each picks out a different type of factor and claims that it is the key to a causal understanding of the Industrial Revolution; and in doing so, each relies on an undefended account of the assumptions that need to be embodied in satisfactory explanations.
The difficulty, then, with all the cases I have discussed — and with a large number of other disputes of a like kind — is that each side argues past the other by assuming the truth of what has to be proved.
To gain a clearer understanding of the differences between such schools of thought, and thus to see what the opposition between holism and individualism consists in, it is therefore essential to try to do something that the protagonists in such debates themselves seem unwilling to attempt; to give a more precise account of the conflicting conceptions of individuals and their capacities that underlie these disagreements.
It might appear, from the arguments and prejudices just considered, that the nature of the commitment dividing holists from individualists has already emerged: holists, it seems, are in effect determinists, and it is this feature of their theories that individualists are anxious to reject.
But before accepting these equations it is important to ask both whether they are well-founded, and whether they are a means to a better understanding of the relatively specific problem of holism.
I shall suggest that, although they capture some superficial similarities between the two issues, they are ultimately misleading.
One reason why the shift in emphasis to the broader question of determinism is less helpful than it at first appears is that ‘the problem of determinism’ itself lacks a clear formulation, and the difficulty of saying exactly what it consists in is reflected in attempts to relate it to holism.
Various links have been proposed  and discussed, but they are on the whole more revealing of the disparity between the two problems than of their convergence.
This is apparent, for example, in the view that identifies determinism as the thesis that every event, together with some other event, is an instance of a natural law, so that there is a law-like connection holding between each event under some description or other, and another event.
As it stands, this claim will be of no explanatory interest if the relevant descriptions of events are trivial in the light of our projects and concerns, and a persuasive conception of determinism must therefore include some method of selecting from among the multifarious possible descriptions of events those that are considered to be significant.
Different standards of significance will naturally yield different theories — sets of laws relating significant descriptions.
And the proof of determinism would presumably consist in showing that an all-embracing theory of the kind envisaged can be constructed, a theory incorporating every event under some significant description.
However, it is not clear that arguments for or against this possibility will cast light on the differences between holists and individualists concerned with social explanation.
For as Wiggins points out,
Since this formulation of determinism cannot help us, perhaps we shall do better to concentrate, as a number of theorists have done, on a different one: the claim that every event has a cause.
Holists, it is sometimes suggested, subscribe to this view, while individualists reject it in favour of the belief that individuals are capable of free, or autonomous, action.
At the outset, this  dichotomy looks comparatively promising, but once again the equation of determinism with holism on the one hand, and of non-determinism with individualism on the other, gives rise to difficulties.
First, if holism and individualism are to be distinct, causation and autonomy must be mutually exclusive categories: if the autonomous character of action is to stand in the way of the truth of determinism, actions cannot at the same time be caused.
However, we are then faced with the question of what we are to understand by autonomy.
If autonomous actions are said to be uncaused (and hence undetermined) they are left completely mysterious, and the prospects for individualism as a set of explanatory theories look very weak indeed.
But if they are caused, their existence cannot, after all, be used to falsify the thesis of determinism.
Discussions of the exact meaning of autonomy are absent in the debate between holists and individualists.
Almost all individualists are willing to concede that actions have some causal antecedents, since they allow that people are shaped and constrained by environmental factors which form their personalities and affect what they do.
They take it for granted, for instance, that 
But this does not get in the way of the conclusion that 
If their commitment to the central explanatory role of the individual is not to be undermined by concessions such as these, individualists must believe that environmental factors cannot carry all the explanatory weight.
They undoubtedly contribute.
But there must be a point beyond which they cannot go — some remaining ‘self’ to which social scientists appeal.
As this self is debated and discussed, the individualist sometimes seems to be demanding that a ceteris paribus clause should be included in all explanations of social phenomena — a murmured oath of loyalty to the freedom of the will along the lines of ‘…and the individuals involved could have done otherwise’.
Such a clause would not bring the dispute between holists and individualists any nearer to a solution, however, since it begs the very question at issue.
Nor would the dispute be of any great interest, because the explanatory role allotted to individual autonomy is so minimal.
In order to sustain a more robust disagreement, individualist theorists must contend that human autonomy makes a substantial difference to the explanation of action, and stands in the way of the determinist account supposedly favoured by holists.
The assimilation of individualism to this version of anti-determinism presents the individualist with an intractable dilemma.
If actions are uncaused then it is not clear how they are to be explained, while, if they are caused, they are not autonomous.
And the assimilation of holism to determinism leaves holists in an equally unpalatable position.
For the hypothesis that every event has a cause does not make the distinction between the causal powers of social wholes and those of individuals which is central to their view.
Thus neither side is any further forward, and each is adventitiously yoked to the vicissitudes of a complex metaphysical issue.
To gain a richer understanding of the problem of holism we must therefore distinguish it from the problem of determinism.
Rather than treating holism and individualism as exemplifying two qualitatively different types of explanation — the causal and non-causal, lawlike and non-lawlike — they are more accurately conceived as concerned with the relative priority of two kinds of causal factor in the explanation of social phenomena.
As we have seen, individualists are anxious to explain social states of affairs as the outcome of individual actions and attitudes which cannot themselves be explained as the outcome of social states of affairs.
This by no means commits them to the view that actions and attitudes are uncaused, merely to the more limited view that they are not caused by the properties of social wholes.
Holists, by contrast, wish to explain individual  intentions and desires as the outcome of these wholes, thereby awarding explanatory priority to a range of social factors the identity of which varies from theory  to theory.
Each party to this dispute is happy to allow that there are two kinds of causal factor, individual and social, which play a Part in explanation.
It is their status and relationship which is the subject of disagreement.
Once the problem of holism is construed in this fashion, it can readily be unshackled from the various questions surrounding the idea of determinism; and at the same time, there becomes available a more perspicuous account of the notion of autonomy on which the individualist case depends.
For, instead of being tantamount to the mysterious suggestion that actions are uncaused, the claim that they are autonomous can be interpreted as a summing up of the individualist view that they must be explained, at least in part, by appealing to the intentional properties of individuals.
Like individualism itself, it becomes a claim about the kind of causal factors that will provide us with an understanding of the social world.
As soon as the question is posed in this fashion, however, it begins to look as though some form of individualist answer is bound to be preferred.
For there is no doubt that our prevailing intuitions about ourselves as agents, and a number of associated philosophical arguments about the concepts of choice, action and responsibility, have tended to make the case of individualism seem not merely strong, but so compelling that we have no option but to accept it.
The persuasiveness of this judgment is widely attested; but before we can gauge its force, we must consider the grounds for standing by this form of individualism.
A particularly incisive and economical analysis of the reasons for doing so has been provided by Strawson, and his argument, though by no means the only one of its kind, presents an exceptionally strong case.
Strawson begins his discussion with an account of what he calls the ‘reactive attitudes’ which we display to others whenever we treat them as responsible moral agents, capable of forming and acting on intentions.
Relationships of this kind, including most of those between normal adults, give a place to emotions such as resentment, gratitude, forgiveness or disappointment which are only appropriate when we believe that someone's behaviour towards us was conscious and intentional.
It is fitting to feel resentful, for example, when we have been wantonly injured; but for an injury to be  wanton it must satisfy these conditions.
Reactive attitudes of this sort are contrasted with so-called ‘objective’ ones, which we adopt towards agents who are not regarded as morally responsible: thus we often try not to resent injuries done to us by small children or the mad, because we recognise that, in some sense, they do not know what they are doing.
The familiarity of this divide at least seems to show that we do not treat all behaviour as determined, and thus that a distinction between autonomous and non-autonomous individuals is part of our everyday conception of the world.
These are the intuitions that give holist and individualist explanations their initial plausibility.
However, Strawson also draws a stronger conclusion from it — the conclusion that, since a theory of the determination of action is true now if it is true at all, such a theory would have to be compatible with our distinction between behaviour towards which reactive attitudes are appropriate, and behaviour demanding an objective response.
Admittedly, he says, some behaviour is regarded as externally caused in as far as the real explanation is not the intentional one.
But not all behaviour can be explicable in this fashion, because if it were, we should be unable to distinguish the neurotic from the normal.
Strawson's claim is that abnormal behaviour, as its name implies, is defined negatively as behaviour towards which our normal responses are not fitting.
Thus it is only by reference to a standard of normality that we can identify and respond to actions such as those of children and the insane.
Strawson is surely right to emphasise the distinction we currently make between what we regard as non-intentional and intentional behaviour, and to remind us that we react to these categories in very different ways.
For while an objective attitude carries with it a certain distance, and a recognition that what we think of as natural responses such as gratitude or resentment are out of place, reactive attitudes confirm our beliefs about the expectations people have of one another in society.
If we now ask how we could discover that all action is to be explained in non-intentional terms, and at the same time take the point that it could not be non-intentional in the way that mad or childish behaviour is, it seems that we should have to come to see all action quite differently.
For we should have to be able to redescribe both the actions we currently regard as rational, and those we think of  as requiring a reactive response, so as to overcome the contrast between them.
Short of actually achieving this, it is hard to imagine how we would then perceive social relations, and what sort of responses would seem appropriate to the actions of others.
But it does not follow, as Strawson asserts that it does, that we should have to take an objective attitude to all behaviour just like the attitude we now take to behaviour we call abnormal.
If the sense in which all behaviour was non-autonomous turned out to be the same as the sense in which abnormal behaviour is now understood to be so, then the same attitude to it would be appropriate.
But as we have just seen, Strawson gives us reason to think that it cannot be explicable in just this sense, and he is therefore mistaken in concluding that a holist theory would involve us in responding objectively to all actions.
Thus it is not clear what it would be like to regard all actions as requiring non-intentional explanation, and this makes it much harder for the individualist to argue that, whatever it would be like, it is out of the question.
However, Strawson goes on to suggest that the transformation in our attitudes which would be needed if we ever came to believe that all our actions had this character is beyond our capacities.
This claim about human nature is then followed by the assertion that we could never gain adequate evidence for a holist theory, and so could never give up our view of individuals as basically autonomous actors:
This last claim extends the bounds of Strawson's project.
For as well as suggesting that if we were to give up the view that most actions are autonomous we should have to give up a great deal else as well, it asserts that this transformation of our attitudes is  actually beyond us.
We cannot imagine what it would be like.
And it is inconceivable that we could ever achieve it.
However, neither of these claims is self-evident as it stands, and a quizzical holist will want to question their force.
In the first place, the limits of the imagination are shifting sands, and it is not obvious that anything which at present lies outside them is forever beyond our grasp.
It is certainly true that, when offered an explanation that conflicts with our beliefs, we can reject the explanation on the ground that, since our beliefs are true, it must be false.
But we can also modify our beliefs to accommodate it.
By way of reply, Strawson can of course fall back on his belief that this is not true of our commitment to reactive attitudes because it is part of ‘the general framework of human life’, which cannot be given up.
Again, though, a holist may question the assertion that there are such privileged features of our understanding, and may suggest that even our most fundamental attitudes are not immune from revision.
The type of argument exemplified by Strawson's claim undoubtedly has a strong intuitive appeal, and versions of this approach have, ever since Kant, been popular as a means of seeking to set limits to the use of causal explanations in accounting for human affairs.
But so far as the problem of holism is concerned, attempts to formulate such a priori defences of individualism are unsatisfactory in two ways.
Although they aim to carve out an inviolable space for individualist explanation, the boundaries of this area remain unspecified;some human behaviour, it is allowed, requires a holistic approach; but when does individualism give way to holism and vice versa ?
Strawson himself relies entirely on an intuitive sense of the line between them, but we can see from the history of the social sciences that such intuitions change with time and place.
The work of Freud, for example, has so entered our habits of thought that we now label ‘objective’ various forms of behaviour which would formerly have been regarded as reactive.
The second difficulty arises from the fact that this defence of individualism rests on an idea of a ‘general framework of human life’ which is itself open to doubt, and would be challenged by a number of holists.
Like the differences discussed earlier in this chapter, the split between holists and individualists over what is  to be accepted as given runs extremely deep, and cannot readily be resolved on its own.
Since the two views belong to opposed epistemological theories, neither side is likely to be easily convinced by the other's arguments.
This latter conflict is a grave one.
It gives rise, moreover, to an even graver reservation about the efficacy of arguments which rely on our intuitions about agency.
As we have seen, Strawson's analysis gains its plausibility from the fact that it is based on an appeal to our everyday view of ourselves, which is offered as an a priori reason for adopting an individualist approach.
This defence of individualism is then taken to define the limits of holism as a viable form of explanation.
But such an argument implicitly rules out an important alternative; for it discounts the idea that the attempt to give an a priori defence of individualism may be mistaken.
If this excluded option is allowed back into the debate, and the claim that our existing intuitions should not be given the last word is seriously considered, the authority of the case for individualism is immediately questioned.
Instead of being taken for granted as a set of explanatory standards which will bolster and enhance our understanding of the social world, individualism may appear to offer only a narrow and distorting lens through which to inspect it.
The source of this subversive suggestion is the view, already mentioned in the Introduction, that social theorists who adhere too closely to a single set of explanatory canons are liable to put themselves at a disadvantage.
Entering the kitchen with an explicit recipe for explanation, individualists are liable to reject any hypotheses which fail to conform to their requirements, on the grounds that they do not provide an adequate account of the phenomena with which they are concerned.
This strategy may, however, be a mistake.
For it neglects the possibility that, by studying the conjectures and procedures of social scientists, we might arrive at a richer and enlarged conception of social explanation.
Once we see that the relationship between a set of explanatory principles and the more specific analyses offered by social scientists must be a reciprocal one we are able to benefit from the fact that, just as social scientific practice is moulded by existing views of explanation, so those views can be refined and altered by the impact of practice.
Once this idea is accepted in principle, it remains to ask at what  stage a grasp of the mutual dependence between social theory and social science might be capable of helping us with the problem of holism.
My answer is: at the precise stage we have now reached in the argument.
As I have sought to show in the present chapter, the philosophical grounds on which individualism is defended, though compelling at first sight, are in fact open to doubt.
For there is no good reason to subscribe to the widely-held intuition that explanations have to conform to individualist tenets.
But if this is so, not only is the case against holism once more put in doubt, the case for supposing that it can ever be established in such an a priori fashion is threatened at the same time.
If we are to make any further progress, then, we must now abandon the assumption that the practice of the social sciences must conform to our existing philosophical intuitions, and instead consider seriously the possibility that we might be able to develop a better theory of social explanation by way of examining the successful practice of the social sciences.
This is accordingly the method which, in Part II, I propose to adopt.
I shall single out those writers whom I take to be the most significant among contemporary anti-individualist social scientists; I shall examine in some detail the nature of the assumptions embedded in their practice; and I shall seek to assess the coherence of the social explanations those assumptions lead them to produce.
I shall approach their work, in short, in the light of the pragmatist belief that a study of the problems they pose and the solutions they offer may provide us not merely with a new perspective on the scope of holistic explanations, but also with the best means, in the end, of assessing their strength.
ABSOLUTE HOLISM: AND ITS FRAMEWORK: ALTHUSSER
Holism, as we have seen, is defined as the view that social phenomena are to be explained by appealing primarily to the properties of social wholes, since the latter are the causal factors which shape the characteristics of individual members of society.
This analysis sums up a view which is embraced with varying degrees of enthusiasm.
At their most confident, holists expect to supersede the need for any individualist explanations, and thus undertake to provide powerful and wide-ranging social theories.
In their more tentative moods, by contrast, they simply claim a place for their approach, leaving its scope a matter for debate.
But in both cases, holists are united by a commitment to the explanatory primacy of the properties of social wholes that guides and informs their research.
In this section I shall explore the strongest of the range of holist positions — the view that there is no place at all for individualist explanations of the social world.
By investigating the ways in which it has been used to explain particular phenomena, I shall aim to provide a more detailed account of absolute holism, as I shall call it, and of the mode of explanation it embodies.
This task is made all the more necessary by the fact that opponents of absolute holism often find it strongly counter-intuitive, not to say absurd; although they can grasp it at a very general level, they have difficulty in imagining either how it could be developed, or what would make it plausible.
To overcome this barrier, I suggest, one must look at the approach in action; only then will it be possible to see what it has achieved, and to assess what it might achieve if taken on its own terms.
In this chapter I therefore discuss what I take to be the strongest case for absolute holism in contemporary social science, the case expounded by Louis Althusser.
Before embarking on this project, however, two preliminaries must be dealt with — a qualification and a question.
The  qualification concerns the fact that holism cannot be studied on its own.
It is always a characteristic of theories which have many other features, and since it refers to a general kind of explanation rather than to explanations which make use of any particular set of categories, it is compatible with social theories of many types.
They may be categorised as Marxist, like Althusser's, as structuralist (in some senses of the term), as functionalist, and so on.
Any attempt to grapple with a holist theory will therefore have to separate its holist character from its other features, and especially where a theory is weak, it will be important to see whether the deficiency is the result of its being holist, or is due to something else.
For example, Althusser's belief that new theories are the fruit of epistemological breaks or ‘ruptures’ with what went before is fraught with difficulty.
But it has comparatively little to do with his holistic claim that individuals are merely the ‘supports’ or ‘bearers’of social practices.
By contrast, his account of the epistemological status of Marxism is intimately connected with this, since the holistic relation between practices and individuals is intended to destroy the idea of the individual as the locus of knowledge, and therefore calls for major epistemological reforms.
The closeness of these links is obviously a matter of degree, since there will always be some connection between the various aspects of a theory; but a concern with the general problem of holism will inevitably constrain us to see a theory in a particular perspective, and to focus sharply on certain characteristics at the expense of others.
Since this would be true whatever theory we were to select, it remains to ask what makes the works of Althusser and Poulantzas especially well-suited to our purposes.
At first glance, the association of holism with their strongly materialist brand of Marxism might seem to prejudice the discussion: the very distinctiveness of its explanatory categories might seem to distract attention from the matter in hand.
In fact, however, the unqualified character of Althusser's claims are among their advantages.
He defends a position which denies that the properties of individuals are ever explanatory, and which therefore falls squarely into the domain of holism as this was outlined in Chapter iii.
And since absolute holism can be used, in Althusser's view, to explain a wide range of phenomena — to explain how societies are organised and maintained and how they change — his theory provides an  opportunity to assess both the character of his approach and its scope.
But as well as having this comparatively obvious advantage, Althusser's awareness of the radical implications of his claims makes them all the more interesting.
With unusual explicitness, he states the grounds and consequences of his approach, and in addition to grappling with the task of offering holist explanations, he addresses its epistemological corollaries.
His account is therefore by far the most ambitious and the most insightful of its kind, and is of singular value as an instantiation of, and a means to assess, absolute holism.
Partly for this reason his work has been, and remains, enormously influential among social theorists, who are variously attracted and repelled by it.
Some are content to praise or vilify Althusser while never engaging deeply with his views, and many of the debates surrounding his work are conducted at this superficial level.
Others, however, have made serious and much-needed efforts to explore the consequences of his theory.
For Althusser's claims are by no means easy to understand, and one reason for this is the fact that they are all exceedingly general, so that it is often unclear how they are to be used for the vital task of explaining particular states of affairs.
If the theory is to exemplify and test holism, the project of discovering whether, or how, it can be applied, is obviously extremely urgent, and among Althusser's followers, the person who has made the greatest strides in this direction is undoubtedly Nicos Poulantzas.
Poulantzas appeals to Althusser's theory to resolve the long-standing problem of how to characterise the capitalist state — and in doing so casts light on its power and its limitations.
To investigate this kind of holism, then, I shall begin by laying out the most relevant portions of Althusser's theory.
Next, I shall discuss some difficulties which it either generates or leaves unsolved.
In Chapter v I shall move on to ask whether the work done by Poulantzas suggests a means of overcoming these problems, and finally I shall consider how successful the theory is as a tool for furnishing explanations of the social world.
To appreciate Althusser's work one must first of all understand why so much of it takes the form of an exposition and defence of Marx's writings.
Both the book entitled For Marx , and  Althusser's essay in Reading Capital are elaborate interpretations of Marx's views, and this fact is not explained by the simple observation that Althusser himself is a Marxist, anxious to give an account of the theory of history to which he is politically committed.
Numerous theorists approach their work armed with interpretations or modified versions of Marxism, and to stick so firmly to elucidating Marx's own texts might seem a rather scholastic project, in the pejorative sense of that phrase.
But Althusser puts it to dramatic use.
For he claims that, despite all the attention it has received, Marx's doctrine has been radically misunderstood and underestimated.
And he aims, by careful exegesis, to reveal it to a community of intellectuals who ‘have not yet realised, or have refused to recognise it’.
His task is therefore two-fold: he must identify the ways in which Marx has been misread, and provide an account of the work which will lay bare its awesome originality.
As far as Althusser is concerned, the resulting theory is not only Marx's but also true.
In order to do this Althusser arms himself with a method for dealing with his material which he borrows from hermeneutics.
This is the idea of a ‘symptomatic reading’ of the relevant texts, a reading designed to master the superficial characteristics of Marx's criticisms of Hegelian idealism and classical economy, and of his own views of political economy and society, and at the same time yield a deeper understanding of his whole project.
By paying careful attention to what Marx fails to say (his ‘silences’) as well as to what he makes explicit, Althusser hopes to recover two things: the questions Marx was trying to answer, and the general theoretical assumptions underlying his replies.
The justification for wishing to unmask these hidden features of Marx's work is obvious, since an awareness of the questions he failed to ask would enable us to understand more clearly what he was trying to do, and what he regarded as a satisfactory answer to his dilemmas.
But the enterprise itself is interpretatively taxing, since Althusser claims that Marx never consciously formulated his own theoretical position.
He knew, needless to say, that his analysis of the role of the economy in social life was revolutionary, but never realised  the extent to which it was based on a radical philosophy.
‘Contrary to certain appearances, or at any rate to my expectations, Marx's methodological reflections in Capital do not give us a developed concept, nor even an explicit concept of the object of Marxist Philosophy .
They always provide a means to recognise, identify and focus on it, and finally to think it, but often at the end of a long investigation, and only after piercing the enigma contained in certain expressions.’
Althusser therefore employs this method to recover from Marx's work something its author never clearly expressed.
The difficulties of this task are compounded by a natural unwillingness to admit any independent criteria for judging a particular reading, since Althusser's aim is to interpret Marx in his own terms, rather than to impose on him any independent (and ideological) standards.
The point is not to approach the texts with preconceived ideas about matters such as what constitutes an argument, what provides evidence for a claim, or when we can be said to know something.
It is rather to see how Marx handles these problems, and what views he holds about them.
Althusser therefore defends a circular method of enquiry.
Marx's work cannot be understood in any terms other than the ones he himself developed; but these are not spelled out, and are only indirectly expressed in his work.
Therefore it is necessary to read his work in order to master the philosophical principles which enable one to understand it.
Althusser puts the point like this:
A symptomatic reading is therefore a condition of a symptomatic reading, and an interpretation of Marx can only be judged in terms of its internal coherence.
One outcome of this exercise is the claim that Marx's philosophical views are to be found in Capital rather than in his earlier  writing, and Althusser argues that this work, in particular, has been misunderstood.
It is usually interpreted as a critique of classical economy, combined with an alternative suggestion about how economic phenomena can be understood.
Like classical theory, Marx's proposal is said to yield various empirical predic-tions, so that time and experience will enable us to test both positions.
Although this is by any standards a grotesquely over-simplified account of hundreds of pages, it brings out the attitude which Althusser contests — the idea that Marx's theory of political economy is just an alternative to the classical one, in that crucial experiments can be devised to adjudicate between them.
When we compare such a view with that of Althusser, we can see why he feels so strongly that the scope of Marx's theory has not been recognised.
For he believes that Marx constructed an altogether new kind of theory, of a novelty and importance comparable to the discoveries of Newton or Galileo, and with a structure quite unlike those of its predecessors.
‘Marx founded a new science: the science of the history of social formations, or the science of history.
The foundation of the science of history by Marx is the most important theoretical event of contemporary history.’
Very briefly, Althusser first of all argues that this theory is built upon new concepts (such as the forces and relations of production) which have no counterpart in the classical theory of political economy.
Furthermore, even where Marx appears to adopt existing terms (such as surplus value, which seems to combine Ricardo's notions of rent, profit and interest), their relations with other concepts in the theory, and hence their meanings, are changed.
But as well as having a novel structure, the theory has an explanatory power quite unlike that of classical economics: for while the latter attempted to explain economic systems as a response to individual needs, Marx accounted for a much wider range of social phenomena in terms of the part they played in a totality.
Capital therefore provides us not just with a view of the economy, but with a way of analysing the structure and development of a whole society.
Underlying this ‘discovery’ Althusser claims to find a revolutionary epistemology which centres around the abolition of the distinction between subject and object, and makes Marx's theory incompatible with those of his predecessors.
The last part of this reading is the most profound, and is of great interest both as an exegesis of Marx, and as a general philosophical position.
In order to grasp it in detail, however, one must be familiar with the model of social structure which Althusser attributes to Marx.
In so far as one can single out a starting-point in Althusser's exposition, it is Marx's critique of homo oeconomicus .
Classical economy is said to have assumed that all men are alike in sharing certain needs which must be satisfied if they are to survive, but which can be met in a variety of ways.
This ‘anthropological’ approach was the root of notions of production, exchange and consumption, which were thought to apply universally and were used to explain the economic arrangements of existing societies.
Marx offered two well-known criticisms of this view.
First, he argued that it is highly artificial to construe all consumption as a response to needs; while this approach may seem illuminating when it is applied to the consumption of individuals, it cannot plausibly be extended to productive consumption, which has to be treated as ‘the consumption which satisfies the needs of production’, if the theory is to be sustained.
Secondly, he rejects the very assumption of classical theory that economic phenomena can ultimately be explained as the result of universal needs.
Instead, Marx argues that the needs of individuals are a function of their social environment.
It is true that everyone needs to eat to stay alive, but biological requirements of this sort are too ‘basic’ to have much explanatory power; we do not so much wish to understand why societies produce food as why they produce different kinds of food in different ways.
And we cannot explain more complex needs by appealing to a concept of a universal individual such as homo oeconomicus .
While Marx rejects needs as the units in terms of which economic phenomena should be analysed, he could in principle simply replace them by some other property of individuals, and found a theory on this trait instead.
But he does not adopt this alternative, and his criticism of needs is in fact part of a much more fundamental attack on classical economics.
For the attempt to explain social phenomena in terms of needs presupposes that they are ‘given’ concepts which we can apply relatively easily, and use as a basis for enquiry.
In our attempt to understand a group of  complex phenomena we pick on some ‘simple’ starting-point such as a need, and proceed to treat it as though it were completely transparent.
Marx is deeply opposed to the idea that a theory has a ‘starting-point’, and in particular to the claim that social phenomena can be explained as the result of universal properties of individuals, and Althusser sums up his scepticism with an epigrammatic flourish: the classical idea that man makes his own history must be countered with the question ‘How is the man who makes history made?’
‘The individual producer, or the individual as the elementary subject of production, which eighteenth century mythology imagined to be at the origin of society's economic development…only appeared, even as an ‘appearance’ in developed capitalist society, that is, in the society which had developed the social character of production to the highest degree.’
By way of solving this problem Marx suggests that individuals are formed by their social context, by the whole collection of physical conditions, conventions, rules and beliefs which make up their experience.
When Althusser develops this claim, attempting to minimise the value of individual traits as a basis for generalisation, he suggests that not only each society, but each class , ‘makes its own individuals’ because its social environment differs substantially from that of other classes.
(Thus a German worker in an advanced capitalist society has more in common with a British worker than with a German industrialist.)
However, the force of the overall argument is only marginally affected by this modification.
For Marx is trying to develop a theory which will apply universally, and the fact (if it is a fact) that individuals who live in different societies do not share constant properties is enough to disqualify them from being the rock on which social explanations are founded.
As well as implying this criticism of classical economy, Marx's attitude suggests a new approach to the construction of a social theory.
Any attempt to pick out one concept, such as that of an individual, and theorise about it, will always be vulnerable to the challenge, ‘But how is that concept to be explained?’
In one sense this is simply to point out that we can always demand to have an explanation explained.
However, Marx  might argue that because the character of societies is what it is, the demand is not superfluous in the case of social theory, but is a particularly pertinent one.
There are some natural phenomena which we generally explain in terms of the workings of their parts, and if asked for a more detailed account, we discuss the relations between smaller and smaller parts.
And although there may be a limit after which no more can be said, we do not describe a full circle and return to the proposition from which we began.
Classical economy took this view of the explanation of economic phenomena; it explained complex economic systems in terms of their parts, and reached its limit at the level of individual needs.
But Marx opposes this approach, on the grounds that human needs do not spring out of nothing, and suggests instead that a theory must be constructed which has no ‘starting-point’.
For if the relations between the individual and society are as close as he believes, we must take them into account; instead of grounding explanations upon one part we must theorise about the whole to which all the parts belong.
Nevertheless, a social theorist has to start somewhere.
Rather than analysing society in terms of one kind of component, Althusser claims that Marx breaks it up into related units called, in Althusserean parlance, ‘practices’.
The advantage they have over individuals is that, although each practice only contains a part of the complex phenomenon which is society, each one is a ‘whole’ in the sense that it consists of a variety of different kinds of parts, all of which are interrelated.
For example, economic practice contains raw materials, individual men, tools, etc., all united in a more or less institutionalised process.
Instead of thinking of society as made up of simple parts, we must think of it as a collection of wholes which together make up one ‘complex whole’.
However, if Marx's theory is to be universally applicable, it must be built around practices which are common to all societies.
Althusser, in his later work, identifies three of these — economic practice, ideological practice, politico-legal practice and gives an account of them which draws heavily on Marx's discussion of the process of production.
This analysis is, as we shall see, extremely important to his overall position.
He argues that although there is no such thing as production ‘in general’ since, in Marx's words, ‘When we talk  of production we always mean production of individuals living in society,’nevertheless all forms of production have some things in common .
They all use a particular means of production to transform raw materials into a product, whether of a material, political, ideological or theoretical character.
Thus a practice is distinguished by a particular mode of production, adapted to its own kind of product.
The mode of economic production prevalent in a society may be very different from the mode of ideological production, but they can still be said to share certain ingredients.
The claim that the complex whole of society should be seen as consisting of practices is an attempt to get away from the idea that a social theory can be grounded upon a concept which is ‘simple’ and ‘given’.
However, in order to maintain the advantage gained by thinking in terms of practices rather than individuals, it is important to guard against the danger of tacitly converting a practice into a ‘starting-point’.
For just as the properties of individuals are dependent on their social context, the set of social relations which constitutes a practice does not exist in isolation.
Althusser portrays Marx as extremely sensitive to this possibility, and appeals to his awareness of it in a further argument about the position of economic practice in the complex whole.
This attempts to refute a common interpretation of Marx's work and can help us to understand Althusser's reading in greater detail.
The argument attacks the position that Marxism is crudely materialist in regarding theoretical, political and ideological practices as determined by the economic base.
Apart from the inherent implausibility of this claim, Althusser argues that if Marx  were to defend it he would be vulnerable to the very criticism which he made of classical economy.
For just as Marx, when faced with the problem ‘How does man make his history?’ replied with another question, ‘How is the man who makes history made?’, so the proposal that the economic organisation of a society determines its superstructure should prompt us to ask how the base itself is determined.
The parallel between these questions is, in Althusser's view, matched by Marx's answers.
Just as Marx criticised the suggestion that we could found a theory on universal human needs, he now rejects the idea that we can introduce an independently defined notion of economic practice and use it to explain other aspects of society.
Instead we have to recognise that all practices are dependent on each other and are interdefined.
As an example of this interconnection Althusser points out that among the relations of production of capitalist societies are the buying and selling of labour power by capitalists and workers.
These relations, which are part of economic practice, can only exist in the context of a legal system which establishes individual agents as buyers and sellers.
And this arrangement, in turn, may have to be maintained by political or ideological means.
We can therefore see that certain aspects of economic practice depend upon the so-called superstructure, as well as the other way round, and Althusser concludes that it is a serious error to neglect this aspect of Marx's theory.
‘The whole superstructure of the society considered is thus implicit and present in a specific way in the relations of production, i.e. in the fixed structure of the distribution of the means of production and economic functions between determinate categories of production agents.’
This argument against a crude materialist interpretation of Marx is presented as an application of the claim that social phenomena cannot be explained by appealing to a ‘given’ concept.
The same claim is then made the basis of an attack on the classical notion of what an economy is .
By taking certain needs to be universal, classical theory not only committed itself to a particular approach, but also defined its subject-matter.
For anything to do with the satisfaction of these needs was counted as an economic phenomenon, and thus not only the explanatory structure of the theory, but also its content, was taken to be constant.
Althusser's  discussion implies that the same will be true of all theories which have independently defined starting-points, and the identification of this link between the terms of a theory and its subject-matter is an example of the way in which Althusser tries to uncover the assumptions underlying the classical and Marxist views — what he calls their ‘problematics’.
He aims to show that concepts which appear to be independent are actually interdependent, so that one cannot abandon one and leave the others intact.
However, it remains to ask how Marx, with no starting-point to appeal to, defines the economic sphere.
How does the analysis of society into related Practices affect our conception of what is included in economic practice?
In considering this question Althusser indicates the limits of Marx's approach.
He presumably wants to say that the idea that there can be a general definition of the economic sphere is a residue of the classical claim that it is defined in terms of some universal trait such as human needs.
For Marx's view that there is no such thing as production in general has the consequence that there is no economic production in general, but only the modes of production used by particular societies at particular times.
And since economic practice is defined by a mode of production, the character of a given economic practice will be determined by the whole of which it is an element, and may be quite unlike its counterparts in other societies.
Nevertheless it will have a counterpart.
For according to Althusser, Marx takes the notions of certain practices as primitive, and assumes that they will be present in all societies.
Their characters will vary enormously, but since all communities must produce in order to survive, there will always be something identifiable as economic practice.
Although Althusser does not say so, there is thus a puzzle at the heart of his interpretation of Marx.
On the one hand, Marx is applauded for having escaped both from a theory which founds its explanations on a conception of individual needs, and from the very idea of a ‘starting-point’.
But on the other hand he is said to have posited a trio of practices, which fulfil the same function in his own account.
Practices are, to be sure, a very different place to start from individuals.
But this part of Althusser's more ambitious claim for Marx as the founder of an altogether new kind of theory is not upheld.
Instead of what we might call a vertical analysis of society — one  which builds upon a single kind of term — Althusser attributes a horizontal analysis to Marx.
We can best understand the nature of societies and the ways in which they change by investigating the relations between practices.
It is on these that we must concentrate in order to gain a knowledge of society as a ‘complex structured whole’.
We have seen that, according to Althusser's reading, Marx is committed to arguing that practices are mutually dependent, and some of the links between them are displayed in Althusser's attempt to clarify the relations between the practices of capitalist society.
As an example, he speaks about the reproduction of the relations of production — itself a precondition of the survival of the production process.
For, ‘As Marx said, every child knows that a social formation which did not reproduce the conditions of production at the same time as it produced would not last a year’.
This process 
The reproduction of the means of production depends upon two things.
First, certain ‘state apparatuses’ such as the government, police, or army, may use violent means to keep the workers in their  place.
But this is not only achieved by force, for there are also ‘ideological state apparatuses’, such as the education system, religion and the family, which maintain the status quo in more subtle ways.
Now, Althusser consigns state apparatuses to political practice, and ideological state apparatuses to ideological practice.
He then suggests that the former can either directly create the conditions for the reproduction of the relations of production, presumably by quelling any sign of working class insubordination (i.e., a feature of economic practice depends upon political practice), or they can do so indirectly, by establishing a situation in which ideological state apparatuses can do their work (i.e., in which ideological practice determines economic practice).
This set of relations is only roughly sketched, but it is possible to understand the idea underlying it.
If it is against the interests of the working class to cooperate with capitalists, there are nevertheless two possible ways of persuading them to do so.
They can either be forced, or they can be ‘deluded’ into thinking that it actually serves their own ends.
Althusser's reason for assigning these strategies to different practices is, I think, that he believes that they achieve a single result (as far as economic practice is concerned) in radically different ways.
Although the product is the same, the modes of production are separate.
Practices are therefore interdependent.
But this account also indicates that an analysis of society in terms of practices might enable us to understand not only how states of affairs are maintained, but also how they change.
We have seen that Althusser invokes certain aspects of political and ideological practice to explain the reproduction of the relations of production.
But conversely, the failure of these mechanisms would explain the emergence of new production relations, which in turn would have consequences for other aspects of society.
The model for this part of Marx's theory therefore seems to be a system in which an imbalance between two parts may lead to compensatory adjust-ments at other levels or may lead to a major reorganisation of the whole.
An account of society in terms of practices which may ‘complement’ or ‘undermine’each other is therefore potentially able to provide both a social theory, and a theory of history, since it gives us a way of analysing the relations between practices at  a particular time and the conditions in which they change.
According to Althusser, this model is the key to the Marxist concepts of contradiction and non-contradiction; for these are ideal types of the two ends of the spectrum of relations which can exist between practices.
Practices are ‘contradictory’ when they ‘grate’on each other, and non-contradictory when they ‘support’one another .
Although this is no more than a metaphorical description, it nevertheless serves to give some idea of what these relations are like.
And to improve this understanding we must look to the only example Althusser provides: Lenin's discussion of the Russian Revolution.
Lenin wishes to explain why it was that although the ‘peaceful mask’ of capitalism had been torn off in all the countries of Western Europe by the end of the nineteenth century, and popular discontent was widespread, it was only in Russia that a successful revolution occurred.
He suggests that this was due to the fact that Russia was the ‘weak link’ in a ‘collection of imperialist states’, by virtue of the fact that it contained ‘all the contradictions which were then possible within a single state’.
The explanation of the revolution is consequently traced to two sets of circumstances.
The first are conditions within Russia, such as large-scale exploitation in cities, suburbs, mining districts, etc., the disparity between urban industrialisation and the medieval condition of the countryside, and the lack of unity of the ruling class.
The second deals with the relation of Russia to the rest of the world, and includes the existence of an elite of Russians, exiled by the czar, who had become sophisticated socialists, as well as those aspects of foreign policy which played into the hands of the revolutionaries.
Althusser uses this case to support his claim that Marx held a complex view of social change, and did not regard it as the outcome of a single contradiction between the forces and the relations of production.
He appeals to the differences between events in Russia and the other parts of Western Europe to show that while a contradiction between the forces and relations of production may be a necessary condition of a situation in which revolution is ‘the task of the day’, it is clearly not sufficient to bring about a revolution proper.
And then he claims that the list of circumstances above were among the factors needed to produce the revolution in Russia.
Furthermore, these circumstances are said to be essentially heterogeneous, so that they cannot be seen as aspects of one large contradiction; each is a contradiction within a particular social totality.
Althusser therefore concludes that Marx's concept of contradiction is inseparable from that of a social whole, and borrows a Freudian term to describe the relations between various states of affairs.
Changes in social structure are said to be overdetermined by numerous contradictions.
Even in such a brief survey of this notion of contradiction two things become clear.
First, it is a relation which can hold between several different types of term.
Until now we have considered practices within a society, and allowed that if these fail to complement each other they are said to be contradictory.
But Althusser's example indicates that there can also be contradictions between aspects of one practice, such as the methods of production which are used in urban and in rural districts, between social groups, for example different factions of a ruling class, and between aspects of two societies, such as the contradictions thrown up by foreign policy.
An analysis of contradictory practices can therefore be supplemented by an account of contradictions between smaller units.
Althusser himself certainly takes this view.
He says, for instance, that the conditions of a major contradiction are themselves the ‘fusion’ of an accumulation of contradictions.
However, this approach holds dangers for him which become apparent when we try to discover what a contradiction is.
The examples listed earlier suggest that it covers a vast variety of relations; for example the relation between capitalists and workers is said to be one of oppression, while that between factions of the ruling class might be competition.
So, at anything other than an exceedingly general and metaphorical level, there is not a single set of criteria for a contradiction in the Marxist sense.
In order to describe what is common to all instances of the concept it is necessary to talk in terms of relations within (or between) particular totalities which, when taken together, prompt social change.
As such, the dialectic can easily become a teleological notion, covering any factors which turn out to contribute to some structural change in society.
To avoid this, the theorist must presumably have various ideal types of kinds of contradictions in mind, on the basis of which he or she can generalise, and even predict.
But since contradiction is the only source of social change in Althusser's account of the ‘complex structured whole’, it is important to bear its eclectic character in mind.
In this account Althusser has challenged the idea that radical social changes such as revolutions — which he treats as a blueprint for change in general— are the result of a single contradiction in society.
He has pointed out that both our own experience and Marx's writings suggest that changes result from a disparate collection of circumstances which cannot be reduced to a single contradiction, but are jointly sufficient for a situation to become volatile.
However, this is not intended to condemn us to the conclusion that changes in society are the chance results of unrelated factors.
For all these states of affairs are said to be united within the complex whole.
Althusser describes their unity in a variety of ways.
‘The unity they constitute in this ‘fusion’ into a revolutionary rupture, is constituted by their own essence and effectivity , by what they are, and according to the specific modalities of their action.’
First of all, contradictions can only be identified in the context of the whole, because it is only within it that states of affairs become incompatible with one another.
Furthermore, the whole contains parts which are, as we have seen, more or less  closely related.
Thus, when he says that changes are ‘overdetermined’ he has in mind a variety of factors, some more nearly connected than others, which all contribute to a single outcome.
He lays particular stress on two consequences of this analysis, both of which are presented as advantages of Marx's theory.
First, it allows that many kinds of circumstances can contribute to the course of events, and secondly it enables us to understand how these may combine to bring about dramatic and unexpected social changes which Althusser calls ‘ruptures’.
Until now it has been assumed that social changes are determined by events which have the same status in the sense that they may all be conditions and consequences of each other.
But this obviously raises the question of whether any primacy is to be accorded to economic practice.
While the view which I earlier called crude materialism is not compatible with Althusser's general position, it would be remarkable if he were to relegate the economic aspects of society to exactly the same status as everything else.
And indeed, he does give an account of the structure of the complex whole, and argues that it awards a certain primacy to economic practice ‘in the last instance,.
This analysis is based on the works of Lenin and Mao, whose interpretation of the notion of contradiction Althusser adopts, on the grounds that it coincides with his own symptomatic reading of Marx.
Every complex whole is therefore said to contain a principal contradiction and secondary contradictions.
Each of these is said to have principal and secondary aspects.
And finally, the contradictions within the whole are said to develop unevenly.
From what has already been said it is possible to gain a rough understanding of the second and third of these claims.
Any features of a social situation which we pick out and identify as the terms of a contradiction may already be the result of a collection of further factors, some more important than others.
So in this sense a contradiction has principal and secondary aspects.
And the relative autonomy of certain factors within the whole allows the possibility of uneven development; for example an economic mode of production may run ahead of a legitimating ideology, or a scientific revolution may not lead to technological change.
However, the first condition is the most important in Althusser's interpretation.
He points out that a complex whole which contains  principal and secondary contradictions will also contain relations of domination and subordination (since the factors forming the principal contradiction will dominate those forming the subordinate contradiction), and argues that the presence of these characteristics in a complex whole is not merely a contingent matter, but a necessary one.
Now it is certainly true that a complex whole necessarily contains relations of subordination and domination if the presence of principal and secondary contradictions within it is made into a defining characteristic.
For this is to stipulate that Lenin's three criteria must be satisfied if a whole is to count as a complex one.
Althusser seems to take this view when he argues that 
But as it stands, this declaration does not explain why we should accept these criteria, nor why Lenin's proposal is anything other than arbitrary.
Nor does it immediately show us how this approach allots a special role to the economy, since the dominant contradiction of a society may be a feature of any practice at all, and may change with circumstances.
These questions therefore demand attention.
Althusser has a theoretical reason for adopting the views of Lenin and Mao.
He says,
For example, the relations of production are not pure phenomena of the forces of production.
‘The superstructure is not the pure phenomenon of the structure, it is also its condition of existence.’
Furthermore, Althusser explains how it is that the economy can have some primacy within this structure.
‘In the last instance’ it determines the ‘structure in dominance’.
The point of introducing this distinction between determination in the last instance and the structure in dominance is to combine the idea that the practices of which society is made up are mutually determining with the ultimate dominance of the economy.
But Althusser's own account does not make it clear how this is to be done.
It is only in the work of his followers that a fuller analysis is to be found, which explains what is meant by ‘determination in the last instance’ and suggests what further reasons Althusser might offer for accepting Lenin's distinction between principal and secondary contradictions.
Until now I have presented Althusser's analysis of society as designed to explain social change by appealing to the notion of contradiction.
We saw that this term was used very generally to describe various sorts of tension which arise in social practices, or between them, and which may provoke changes in the structure of society.
However, at the other end of the scale these relations may complement each other, and thus be used to explain the stability of a particular form of social organisation.
The way in which the economy determines the ‘structure in dominance, in the last instance can most clearly be seen in the context of a stable society where practices are mutually supportive.
I will therefore follow Althusser's associate, Etienne Balibar — who gives the clearest and fullest exposition of this idea — in discussing it with this sort of example in mind.
Althusser's conception of a structure in dominance is based on the sense, which he attributes to Marx, that in each society one particular kind of interest appears to be central in determining the character of that society as a whole; for example, economic  interests are uppermost in capitalist society, but during the Middle Ages religious concerns dominated social life.
The aspect of society which is seen to be most important in this respect is called the dominant instance, and Althusser and his followers argue that it is determined in the last instance by the economy.
That is to say, the economic practice of a society determines that some other aspect of it will be dominant in the structure of the society as a whole.
This view is supported by a passage from the first volume of Capital , in which Marx answers the objection that his theory only applies to capitalist society.
This is the exegetical foundation for a conclusion which Balibar sums up as follows: ‘In different structures the economy is determinant in that it determines which of the instances of the social structure occupies a determinant place.’
However, even this bare summary raises two important questions.
What is a dominant instance other than an aspect of society which appears intuitively important?
And how does the economy determine which instance is to be dominant?
As the answer to the first of these shows, the pair are closely linked; for there appear to be two kinds of criteria for identifying the dominant instance of a society, which are more or less explicitly mentioned in Althusser's work.
On one hand, it is possible to pick out a dominant instance by its relationship with other aspects of  a social structure.
For although practices, and features of practices, are said to be mutually dependent, it is nevertheless possible that one may dominate the others in the sense that it is more efficacious in determining the character of other practices than they are in determining it.
This possibility is not openly discussed by Althusser, but it is certainly implied by his claim that some ‘instances’ of society are more autonomous than others.
But while he indicates that there are such criteria for distinguishing between dominant and subordinate instances, Althusser pays far more attention to the relation between the dominant instance and economic practice, which itself constitutes a second sort of criterion for identifying the dominant instance.
This relation is most clearly portrayed in the examples given by Balibar.
First of all, it is assumed that in any mode of production where surplus value is not returned to the producers but is taken by other members of society, some justification of this distribution of wealth is required.
In capitalist society the fetishism of commodities sustains the view that the accumulation of surplus value is a property of commodities themselves.
But in other modes of production some external factor is needed to legitimate this arrangement; and Balibar claims that this is why certain political conditions, or a certain kinship structure, may be represented as a feature of the natural order of things, rather than being regarded as implied by a mode of production.
For example, in feudal society products were not ‘of themselves’ the property of the ruling class, but became so in the light of various political practices.
The dominant instance of a society is therefore that aspect of it which sustains the prevalent economic system by legitimating the way in which it produces and distributes wealth.
Its domination resides in the fact that it keeps the economy going, without which the whole society would collapse, and in the fact that it thereby imposes certain restrictions on other practices.
For if a particular form of social life is to be maintained, the practices of a society must not undermine the legitimating scheme embodied in the dominant instance.
The inspiration of this analysis is thus the underlying idea that any mode of production which redistributes wealth away from its producers will not survive unless it can be made to appear  acceptable, and that certain modes of legitimation are particularly well-suited to certain modes of production.
This is then used to explain both why societies contain a dominant instance, and how it is determined by economic practice.
However, the first of these claims is still puzzling.
For apart from Lenin's conviction that there is always a dominant instance at a time of social stability, and a dominant contradiction at a time of social change, Althusser gives us no reason to believe that there need only be one aspect of society which bears this relation to the mode of production.
It is certainly true that Marx speaks of single practices as central to societies (as in the passage quoted earlier) and Althusser may well believe that as far as exegesis is concerned no more need be said.
But if his aim is to justify as well as to interpret Marx's theory, the point becomes more pressing.
For it seems that some assurance is required that societies have and must have this structure.
Why, after all, should there not be a mode of production which is equally dependent on a variety of kinds of legitimation?
An analysis of social practices, and of their complementary and contradictory relations must take account, as we have seen, of many kinds of variables.
But Althusser imposes one stringent limitation on the types that are admissible when he asserts that Marxist history is ‘a process without a subject’.
Out of this claim stem the most radical, and as far as our purposes are concerned, the most interesting aspects of his theory; for it is its ‘subjectless’ character which makes it so uncompromisingly holistic.
By ‘the abolition of the subject’ Althusser means the abolition of the intentional subject whose desires, motives, and beliefs are cited as the explanation of social events and states of affairs.
And since persons are the primary locus of intentional properties, his main target is the traditional conception of individual agents, so central to individualism, which was discussed in Chapter III.
Rather than being regarded as actors who make their own history, individuals are to be seen as the ‘supports’ of social practices who maintain and reproduce them.
As Althusser puts it:
This is not to deny, of course, that individuals are causal subjects; they fill various social roles, engage in the work of production, and thereby bring about changes in the social world.
But, in keeping with Marx's rejection of homo oeconomicus , their intentional properties are to be regarded as consequences, rather than causes, of social practice.
This conception of individuals as determined by social practice is familiar enough, but it remains to see how Althusser fills it out.
First of all, because conditions vary from society to society, the social practices in which particular individuals engage will depend on time and place.
This much is uncontentious, and provides a defence of the claim that the properties of individuals are not constant, so that— as Althusser puts it — each class has ‘its’ individuals, whose beliefs and behaviour are founded upon their experiences.
However, Althusser also argues that, as well as the manifestations of subjecthood changing from society to society, the concept of subjecthood itself also changes.
What it is to be an individual subject fluctuates from ideology to ideology.
A central part of our view of individual agents is our conviction that there is an explanatory link between belief and action.
But Althusser argues that this, too, is the fruit of practice:
Within bourgeois society the human individual is generally regarded as a subject with a certain range of properties including that of being a self-conscious agent.
However, people's capacity for perceiving themselves in this way is not innate; it is acquired within a framework of established social practices which impose on them the role (forme ) of a subject.
Each set of social practices not only determines the characteristics of the individuals who engage in it but also supplies them with a conception of the range of properties they can have, and of its limits.
For example, individuals brought up in a truly Marxist society would presumably not regard themselves as the subjects of history, whereas those in bourgeois society believe that they are intentional agents.
How, though, does the complex whole of society make individuals in its own image?
Althusser argues that our sense of ourselves as subjects is an effect of ideology, which 
The ‘precision’ of this mechanism leaves something to be desired.
But Althusser elaborates it a little, using the example of Christianity, where religious practice is said to ‘hail’ the individual and provide him with his status as a subject.
This case is supposed to show not only how Christianity works as an ideology, but how ideology works in general.
Althusser denies the need for a more detailed account on the grounds that ‘As the formal structure of all ideology is always the same, I shall restrict myself to a single example, one accessible to everyone, that of religious ideology, with the proviso that the same demonstration can be produced for ethical, legal, political, aesthetic ideology, etc.’
I shall say more about this account of the role of ideology shortly.
Before that it is worth reiterating Althusser's holistic view of the individual, and introducing an analogy which he takes from Marx.
The concept of ‘fruit’, Marx says, is the product of various practices concerned with diet, agriculture and so on.
In a comparable way, our concept of the individual must be seen as the conjuncture of the various practices which make up the complex whole.
Individuals are therefore not subjects, and if history is to be a process without a subject there must be no subjects short of the ensemble of practices itself.
How, then, are classes to be analysed?
These, too, are defined by their position in the whole, and by the opposed interests they have within it.
They must be seen not as social groups constituted by individuals, but as positions constituted by the conflicting interests which are an integral part of a particular mode of production.
To regard them as rival teams which are first constituted and then begin to play against each other is a serious mistake.
Rather, they must be seen as sets of roles which, as soon as they exist, exploit one another and are thus engaged in the class struggle.
Consequently, when we ask about the autonomy of classes within the complex whole we are not asking about their ability — or lack of it — to make choices, any more than we would ask if a force of production could choose.
We are demanding to know whether they can function as independent variables in the explanations of events and states of affairs, or whether they are always dependent ones.
Althusser's abolition of the subject therefore commits him to an unequivocally holist account of social explanation.
But it also has important consequences for the epistemological status of the resulting social theory, and much of the novelty of Marxism is said to arise from its break with traditional conceptions of knowledge.
We have already seen how Althusser rejects the claim that individuals are intentional subjects, and argues instead that this self-perception is a result of ideological practice.
He now launches a parallel attack on the idea that individuals are by nature the sort of creatures who can come to know things through their experience of the external world.
Rather, knowledge is gained within the context of practices, which determine what a given individual knows and also contain certain standards as to what counts as knowledge.
Thus, although we may say of individuals that they know this or that proposition, we can only explain this fact if we take into account the network of practices in which they live.
Once again, the individual is not a suitable starting-point, and once again Althusser argues that there is no such starting-point.
There is no subject of knowledge.
Nevertheless, ‘knowledges’ are products like any others, and are thus the results of certain processes of production, made up of the usual elements.
They require labour, an object on which labour is expended, and a means of labouring, as well as involving the expenditure of labour power to transform the object of labour into the product, knowledge.
Althusser is emphatic that the means of production are just as essential to the fashioning of theoretical products as to something like shoemaking, which plainly requires leather, tools, etc., and he points out that the Marxist concept of labour is in this sense irreducibly material.
Because it always involves raw materials and techniques it is always dependent Upon a context, and is not to be thought of, in humanist vein, as an isolated expression of the essential creativity of human beings.
Knowledge is therefore the result of a mode of production, and the product of a particular kind of practice.
However, this has to be made compatible with Marx's claim that knowledge is produced in thought (it is a thought-object) a statement which seems to imply that it is, after all, produced by individuals.
Althusser synthesises these two statements in the following way.
This is not to deny that individuals are able to think, that they have ideas, build theories, etc.
But once again it is to deny that they can do this by virtue of their intrinsic properties as individuals.
The object on which an individual expends mental labour is never a ‘pure representation’, any more than he can transform it into knowledge just like that.
Both the problems which individuals fix upon, and the methods they employ to solve them, are part of their theoretical heritage, so to speak, enshrined in the practices of which they are the supports.
Thus theory and practice cannot be separated.
For even the most primitive practices are dependent upon a certain amount of theory, and even the most ‘theoretical’ activities can only take place within practices.
Now the structures of practices are not always the same, but rather depend upon the various elements of the production processes they contain.
Nevertheless, there must be some feature which distinguishes the production of knowledge from that of political slogans, for example; and we have to try to understand how the real object is transformed into the thought object.
Althusser faces this question, but warns that it has to be carefully formulated if it is to illuminate the process of the production of knowledges.
In particular, we must avoid giving an ideological answer.
Broadly, practices, propositions, beliefs, and so forth, are ideological when they present a state of affairs in such a way as to render it attractive or self-evident to a specific audience.
They therefore cannot be fully understood if they are taken at face value, and an investigator must find out what social situations sustain and are reflected in them.
‘It is not their real conditions of  existence, their real world, that ‘men’‘represent to themselves’ in ideology, but above all, it is their relation to those conditions of existence which is represented to them there.’
Furthermore, the investigator must uncover the questions to which a set of ideological propositions are the answers.
This last piece of methodological advice is important, because it reveals a central feature of Althusser's definition of ideology.
Ideologies do not just appear in societies; their function is to legitimate practices, and they are formulated for this purpose.
Because they are designed to justify certain propositions, the questions they ask are formulated in such a way as to prompt the desired answers.
In short, they do not begin with a question and seek an answer; they rather start with an answer and devise a corresponding question.
This self-sustaining quality is said to be exemplified by current epistemologies.
Empiricist theories of knowledge, for example, are presented as a legitimating ideology for individualist social theories which in turn are part of a bourgeois outlook, and are said to pose questions designed to justify the individual as knower and as agent.
But this epistemology itself is parasitic upon other practices, which serve the same ideological function.
Indeed, Althusser claims to identify the origins of such an attitude in the law; he suggests that the ideological notion of the legal subject as the owner of property was taken over by Kant and Descartes and transformed into the philosophical categories of subject and object.
A serious attempt to understand the relation between the real object and the thought object must therefore avoid the trap of giving an ideological answer, and this in turn demands that questions about the character of the relation should be open-ended; they must not presuppose any one conclusion.
Since ideology works in a mysterious way, it is not easy to see what would count as meeting such a standard, but it is clear that Althusser himself does not succeed.
For while he goes to some lengths to avoid formulating a question which presupposes the distinction between subject and object, he is frankly concerned to provide an answer (and hence a question) which will be compatible with the claim that social changes are overdetermined by the complex whole, and which will therefore embody a particular view of the production of knowledge.
To this end, he argues that we must shun the temptation to think in terms of specifying conditions  which guarantee knowledge, because this approach assumes a subject for whom it is guaranteed.
Instead we must ask in more impersonal terms about the ‘mechanism’ by which the real object is ‘appropriated’and becomes the thought object.
The power of this move lies in the implication that a ‘mechanism’ is not a feature of a subject, but of a structure.
Putting the problem in these terms already suggests that criteria of knowledge only arise within some set of related concepts, which in turn are connected to certain activities.
Althusser's question therefore paves the way for his view that a corpus of knowledge is the outcome of practices.
To present these views clearly is exceedingly difficult, and Althusser's own account of them is far from luminous.
However, to get a better grasp of the holism they embody, it is helpful to view them in a more critical spirit.
Since it first appeared, Althusser's work has attracted a great deal of attention, and his opponents have focussed in particular on his holist stance.
Some of their objections are easily disposed of, but others reveal serious lacunae and inconsistencies which require to be dealt with.
They present both a problem and a challenge; for any theory which overcame them would vindicate a form of holistic social explanation of a power hitherto unaccepted.
Althusser's holism consists, as we have seen, in an attempt to explain all social phenomena in terms of certain aspects of social structure, at the expense of explanations which appeal to the properties of individual subjects.
His abolition of the subject carries with it the demise of the individual as the locus of knowledge and agency, and places him in a position where, as we saw, there can be no question of compromise with individualism.
For rather than being the locus of action, choice, etc., the individual is to be seen as a ‘conjuncture’ of social practices; each person's intentional properties can be ‘explained away’as the result of constraints imposed upon them by the structured whole.
It is important to recognise that this view is not incompatible with the mention of individuals in explanations; it is only incompatible with the mention of individual subjects.
Althusser actually says that an ideal explanation would map out the relations between different factors down to and including individuals, and thus outlines a programme for a perfect social theory which would  account for the parts played by individuals in social organisation and change.
Although Althusser's interpretation of Marx cannot, in the nature of things, live up to its own ideal of a theory which has no starting point, it follows the life-cycle of persons who are born into a web of relations and social conventions in starting out from a complex whole made up of practices.
Rather than concerning itself with the way in which the properties of this structure emerge from its components, it takes the structure as given and asks how it reproduces itself and changes.
The properties of individuals emerge from the many aspects of the complex whole.
Having seen how Althusser presents this idea, and the extent to which he develops its consequences, it remains to ask whether it is coherent.
To make sense of it one would first of all have to distinguish between, and learn to identify, the various kinds of structural constraints which form individuals and social groups into the ‘supports’ of the complex whole.
Many of the dichotomies traditionally employed in this area — for example between constraints operating through reasons and constraints due to other factors — are formulated with individual subjects in mind, and so do not apply, while others, which were originally intended to apply to only some properties of individuals and collectives, must bear extra weight.
Since individuals are said to be altogether determined, constraints must be found to explain all their actions and intentions.
Their opportunities, their perception of their opportunities, and their choices among their opportunities must all be determined by the complex whole, as must the fact that a ruling class opts for a particular ideology, and the fact that it opts for any justificatory ideology.
For the theorist must be able to ‘translate’ with confidence an ‘everyday’account of social events, into a suitable subjectless form.
There is obviously no a priori objection to such a procedure, and it would be naive to insist that a social theory must accord with our intuitive understanding of the social world any more than physical theory must.
But many of Althusser's critics have roundly asserted that it is neither feasible nor desirable.
Of these, some have quarrelled with his view that individuals are determined by practices on the grounds that, as Lukes puts it, any theory built on such a foundation fails to deal with the  central problem of the relation between structure (i.e. the constraints on actors) and agency (i.e. the freedom of agents).
But, put like this, the objection misses its mark.
For Althusser does deal with this distinction — though not in a way Lukes can accept — by denying its validity.
Structure and agency do not have to be reconciled, because the latter is only an ideological appearance.
This question-begging objection, which assumes a mutual dependence between individual agents and social practices and then upbraids Althusser for failing to take account of it, is often made.
One author, for example, dismisses Althusser's view as ‘absurd and extreme’ on the grounds that 
These objections do not cut any ice; but there are nevertheless grounds for complaint.
Among them is the fact that Althusser himself has difficulty in applying his theory to his own exposition of Marx's work.
Throughout his discussion, terms such as‘individual’ or ‘person’appear in quotation marks, to indicate that they are only convenient figures of speech, not to be confused with the subjects of bourgeois ideology.
But he refers without any apparent qualms to ‘Marx's great achievement’, to ‘What Marx did’, ‘What Lenin saw’, and so on.
The fathers of Marxism are treated as subjects, and their names are not encircled by warning quotation marks.
Admittedly, explaining their achievements is not part of Althusser's project, and he might therefore be excused for failing to indicate the specific historical conjuncture from which Marxism arose.
But since it has proved notoriously difficult for determinists to account for the emergence of new and revolutionary ideas, it would surely be wise of Althusser to show how he proposes to do it.
What is needed, as one of his followers has  pointed out, is an account of theories which deals with changes ‘at the level of the limits and consequences of the epistemological configuration they represent’, rather than at the level of individuals.
Shifts from one ‘problematic’ to another, such as that from classical political economy to Marxism, must be explained so that‘later developments are determined by the structure of the ideological problematic from which they break, or the scientific problems which they recast’.
However, this is only a manifesto, and unless it can be implemented Althusser will have failed in his task of rendering Marx intelligible through Marxist philosophy.
For the philosophy will have proved too weak to solve what is, after all, a familiar and pervasive problem for Marxists.
Once doubt has been cast on the consistency of Althusser's interpretation of Marx, it is natural to probe what is perhaps the most vulnerable aspect of his theory more deeply: his account of the role and character of ideological practice.
As we have seen, the various ideological state apparatuses of a society are allotted the formidable task of constituting individual subjects, who then reproduce the practices which make up the structured totality of society.
And as one of Althusser's commentators reminds us, ‘Not only is there no special reason to believe that the subjects constituted and distributed by these mechanisms should be constituted so as to ‘understand’ the mechanisms by which they are constituted but, on the contrary, it is a condition of operation of many of the mechanisms that they are not understood by the subjects they ‘constitute’.’
This account gives rise to two questions, both of them large and difficult: first, how do ideological state apparatuses (ISAs) constitute individuals; and second, how can Althusser justify his claim that his theory escapes the tentacles of ideology and tells us how the world really is?
I shall consider his attempts to deal with these in turn.
At the heart of Althusser's work is a desire to understand how modern societies reproduce themselves — how, for example, the vast and complex structures of modern capitalist states are maintained — and he implicitly divides this process into two connected parts.
On the one hand a society must reproduce  various roles — there must be slots for postmen, steelworkers, parents and civil servants — and on the other hand it must produce people to fill them.
However, these requirements do not divide neatly between practices.
The reproduction of jobs for steelworkers and the reproduction of steelworkers as such are at least in part features of economic practice, just as the reproduction of lawyers is part of politico-legal practice.
But to fill a material role such as that of a steelworker or a lawyer, an individual must have been subjected to numerous other ISAs.
Schools, families, newspapers, unions and so on all contribute to people's sense of themselves as agents with unique characters and life-plans.
The feature of Althusser's view that repels his liberal critics is his neglect of what they take to be a central distinction between the essential and contingent properties of individuals.
As we saw in Chapter III, that a person does a particular job, lives in a particular town or is a vegetarian is usually regarded as a contingent fact about them.
Even their stormy temperament or compulsive generosity could have been different.
But the properties which make people into agents, such as their ability to exercise choice, to act on their intentions and so forth, are essential.
Without them we should not be who we are; we should not be recognisable as normal adult humans at all.
As we also found earlier, it is far from easy to specify exactly what being an autonomous agent actually consists in, although we have a firm conception of a kind of ideal type — someone moved by the pure light of reason who ponders the evidence before them and makes considered, unconstrained decisions.
In life, however, the light of reason is dusty and obscured, and it is unclear how far this ideal type can help us to explain the course of our social existence.
Partly as a response to this we distinguish between what we regard as essential capacities of humans and the question of how, or whether, they are exercised.
Althusser's view exploits this uncertainty over whether our conception of agency can carry much explanatory weight.
He believes not only that our particular desires, expectations and values are to be explained by the structured wholes in which we live.
The very line we draw between the contingent and essential properties of individuals is also the fruit of the same totalities, so that the traditional role of the distinction itself is abolished.
And yet there is no special ideological practice which gives us the idea  of it.
Rather, it is embodied in all the ISAs of capitalist society, so that we learn it in the course of learning what it is to be a parent, a democrat, a black, a steelworker, or a councillor.
Ideological practice does not constitute subjects as such, but particular subjects who have the belief that all subjects share some traits in common.
A persuasive account of ideological practice would have to begin by showing how this is done, and here Althusser's account is extremely weak.
For his concept of ‘interpellation’ fails to explain the mechanism by which subjects are constituted, and is really no more than a redescription of its own result.
All individuals are subjects, so all have by definition been interpellated.
But how?
And why does the process never fail?
Furthermore, the claim that ISAs serve to legitimate and maintain the delicate balance of power within a structured totality needs to be elaborated, and its limits explored.
When a society is stable, for instance, do all its ISAs fulfil their legitimating function, or do some work against the interests of the dominant classes of the society?
By speaking of ‘Ideological State Apparatuses’, with their resonance of central control, Althusser implies that they are a unified set of institutions, in the service of a single mode of production.
Yet his view that capitalist societies contain several overlapping modes of production and a number of classes and sections of classes, clearly demands something more complicated.
The dominance of the dominant mode must be legitimated.
But so must the subsidiary places of other modes and classes, despite their conflicting interests.
There must be ISAs capable of reproducing the dominated classes of society.
And at the same time their influence must be bounded by other, dominant ISAs.
Some of Althusser's critics have pointed out that this monolithic conception of the role of ideology cannot account for the vast variety of ‘ideological universes’ found in modern capitalist states, some conformist and others overtly subversive.
If the claim that they all legitimate the existing order is to be more than a dogma it must be refined, and Althusser's work offers no suggestion as to how this is to be done.
An analysis of interpellation and legitimation which would underpin the central claim that subjects are constituted by ideology is thus striking for its absence.
It then seems natural to ask how else the claim could be established.
A different approach might aim to show that our perception of ourselves as intentional subjects  has not always existed, and might then suggest that it arises as a feature of capitalist ideology.
Althusser does not attempt such an argument but his sole example — a glancing reference to Foucault's studies of asylums and clinics — suggests that he might have some sympathy with it.
For somewhat like Althusser, Foucault defends a ‘discursive determinism’ which looks to a wide range of institutions and academic disciplines as the determinants of conceptions of agency.
But again, Althusser's own account of the way in which intentional subjects are constituted by practices is undeveloped, and quite unsatisfactory as it stands.
These criticisms, which focus on what has been left undone rather than on what has been done, are inevitably inconclusive.
For while they indicate how complicated and taxing it would be to build inside the scaffolding erected by Althusser, they do not show either that the building would stand or that it is doomed to collapse.
In this respect they contrast with another set of objections, which point to ambiguities in the claims Althusser has actually made; and one of the most pertinent of these concerns his account of ideology.
This is intended, as we saw, to counter explanations of social phenomena grounded in a theory of human nature: there are no essential human traits of interest to social theorists since subjects are constituted by the structured totality.
But unless some assumptions are made about what people are like, it is not clear why communist societies contain ideologies at all.
This criticism is forcefully made by Connolly, in the course of a discussion of structuralist theories, of which he takes Althusser s to be a prime example: One of the two complaints aired in this passage has already been discussed the incredulous observation that we cannot view people as role-bearers who lead complicated lives in modern industrial societies and simultaneously regard them as determined.
The other, however, is less commonplace.
By allotting such a major place to ideological practice, Althusser supposes that people must somehow be cajoled, duped or persuaded into roles which do not reflect their true interests.
In order for a capitalist mode of production to perpetuate itself, for example, a majority of capitalists and workers alike must fail to comprehend it.
But why should this be so?
Only because it is assumed that if people understood the system in which they were involved they would not put up with it, and it would not go on.
But this is to assume that humans have a natural capacity to recognise and reflect on their interests, and that they will only stand so much injustice.
As a rebuttal of Althusser's account of the relation between individuals and structured totalities, this objection is incomplete.
Ideologies may be needed to neutralise ‘natural’ human characteristics which are prior to all practices.
But might they not also serve to overcome properties of the individual members of a society which are themselves the result of other social practices?
If this were so, the existence of ideologies could be explained without resorting to an ‘anthropological dimension’.
Furthermore, an Althusserean who faces Connolly's criticism directly will surely reply that there is no question of individuals who have certain ‘real interests’ being ‘duped’by ideology; to talk in this way is to revert to the very problematic Marx was striving to transcend.
The function of ideological practice is not to ‘deceive’ ready-made subjects, but to constitute individuals as subjects.
So although a different totality might produce subjects who were neither exploiters nor exploited, such individuals cannot be produced within capitalist societies.
For they would have to have escaped the very apparatuses which constitute subjects, and thus would not be subjects at all.
This is a strong answer to the question in hand, but it releases a sea of epistemological troubles.
First, as we have already noticed, Althusser's account must somehow explain the enormous variety of beliefs and judgments, many of them damaging to the status quo , that are found in capitalist societies (and others, for that matter).
For example, if the only way to be a subject is to be constituted by the existing ISAs, how are we to explain the fact that a theorist  such as Connolly is so convinced of the necessity of intentional subjecthood, while Althusser views it as a contingency?
Did the ISAs slip up in Althusser's case?
He might perhaps attribute the incompleteness of his account to the fact that he is a ‘bourgeois’ subject, who can only glimpse an alternative view ofthe individual; but this defence is still a problem, for even a glimpse suggests that the ISAs of the capitalist totality may be more or less effective, and this variation will have to be explained.
Furthermore, what I have presented as the Althusserean reply to Connolly emphasises the claim that ISAs constitute subjects, at the expense of the view that they legitimate a mode of production.
The reply, as I have imagined it, turns away Connolly's suggestion that ISAs somehow ‘persuade’ people into views and roles which do not reflect their own interest, on the grounds that these apparatuses constitute subjects rather than manipulating them.
But social practices only need legitimating if there is some chance that they may be rejected.
So it seems that this is a further reason for Althusser to allow that the process of constitution may be more or less successful.
On the face of it, two lines of defence seem to be open to him.
One alternative is to distinguish the constitution of individuals as intentional subjects who reason, choose and decide, from their constitution as capitalists, workers or lumpenproletariat, and to argue that it is the particular roles of a society which give rise to the need for legitimation.
But it is unlikely that Althusser would welcome such an option because, as we saw, he is anxious to reject this very distinction.
The other alternative is to claim that the very constitution of individuals as intentional subjects serves to legitimate capitalist modes of production, for only if individuals perceive themselves as free agents will these alienating arrangements seem tolerable.
The constitution of subjects, and the simultaneous constitution of the occupants of particular roles would then both be seen as forms of legitimation.
This approach to the problem looks the more promising of the two, but it prompts an absolutely central question: what is the status of Althusser's claims about the relation between individuals and structured totalities?
How does he know — or how do we know — that they are right?
Althusser's answer to this most pressing query has developed in the course of his work.
Early on, he was anxious to combine the view that our beliefs about the social world are determined by the structured whole with the claim that historical materialism  has achieved the status of a science, a body of knowledge which gives us a true account of the world.
Later, however, he conceded that this attempt had been unsuccessful, and his earlier rigorous separation of science and ideology misguided.
If we are constituted as subjects by the totalities we inhabit, then our beliefs about the divide between science and ideology (Althusser's included) will be determined too, and we cannot expect to arrive at an impartial, objective view of it.
Whereas Marx is usually thought to have envisaged a classless society in which people will no longer be deluded by false consciousness, Althusser has posited a determinism so strong as to be inescapable.
A classless society would no doubt constitute subjects who (like Miss Beale and Miss Buss), would be different from us, but they would be constituted nonetheless, and could not know that their own conviction of being unexploited was not mistaken.
In his later work, however, Althusser modified his account of the distinction between science and ideology, a shift which has had important  consequences for his analysis of the relation between individuals and practices.
For his more recent view suggests that we cannot expect to gain untainted ‘knowledge’ of ourselves and our relation to social practices, so that the claim that individuals are not subjects must be assessed, like its competitors, by appeal to various kinds of criteria.
Some of these, such as consistency, will be internal to the theory, while others will be decided from a more general conception of what social theories are supposed to achieve.
Whether it is possible to assess Althusser's view of the individual subject without implicitly reinstating it, remains to be seen.
Yet some attempt at assessment must surely be made.
One relatively straightforward approach to this task consists in trying to refine the theory through use — to discover, by applying it to specific problems, whether it can be consistently employed and what explanations it can yield.
It is this project which has been pursued with great tenacity by Nicos Poulantzas, who has applied Althusser's general theory to a specific case.
For further elucidation of the way in which this form of holistic theory actually functions I shall therefore turn to Poulantzas' work, aiming to explicate and assess the absolute holism to which he is committed.
THE FRAMEWORK APPLIED: POULANTAZ
Of the various attempts that have been made to apply Althusser's principles, by far the most wholehearted and discerning is the work of Nicos Poulantzas, who offered both an account of the state in capitalist societies and an analysis of what he saw as one of its exceptional forms fascism.
The justice of his interpretation of the fascist state has been, and is, fiercely disputed, and I will not discuss it.i For its contours are set by Poulantzas' more general conception of the state, and it is here that he is most explicit in trying to put Althusser's theory to work.
In order to understand his project and judge its success, it is important to grasp the problem Poulantzas sets himself: What question is he trying to answer?
What does he want to explain?
However, the complexity of his task is such that it cannot readily be summarised in a few words.
Rather than contenting himself with a specific and clearly defined puzzle, Poulantzas aims to give a broad account of the capitalist state, which will show what it is and what it does by revealing its connections with the various instances of the social whole.
By delineating its links with the various economic and ideological structures of society on the one hand and with the class struggle on the other, he hopes to cast light on its constitution and character.
The impetus for this undertaking derives from a lacuna in traditional Marxist theory — the fact that while the founding fathers acknowledged the importance of the state, their account of it as the tool of the ruling class is misleading.
Poulantzas frankly  sets out to ameliorate this condition with an interpretation which will accommodate the state's ability to curb as well as foster the interests of a ruling class while remaining true to the fundamental tenets of Marxism.
This is then used as a basis for understanding the various forms of the capitalist state, and the transitions from one to another.
The result, however, is not a ‘theory of the state’, an account of such generality as to be applicable to all societies at all times.
Because he believes that the ‘political instance’, which in capitalist societies can be identified as the state, is a function of its relations with the other instances of the structured whole, Poulantzas concludes that there can be no such theory.
The instances and their relations are subject to a degree of variation which would make it anachronistic even to posit a universal phenomenon called ‘the state’.
Poulantzas therefore confines his attention to capitalist societies, which he regards as sufficiently alike to be the subject-matter of a single theory.
As a means, therefore, of getting a firmer and more detailed grip on the kind of holism which Althusser and his followers have espoused, I shall begin by outlining the theory of capitalist states that Poulantzas has developed.
I shall then enquire, in a more critical spirit, how successful his application of Althusser's absolute holism has been, and how much explanatory weight the resulting theory can be made to bear.
Poulantzas' theory is formulated, as I have said, in opposition to the conventional Marxist wisdom that the state is the tool of the ruling class.
But his hostility to this view can be traced to the more general antipathy to voluntarism which we have already examined in Althusser's work, and which, according to Poulantzas, underlies the traditional Marxist account.
For the designation of the state as ‘a tool, is said to imply that it is an inert object which can be moulded and manipulated by the ruling class; and this in turn is said to carry the misleading connotation that the ruling class has a ‘will’.
These assumptions are criticised for having various unfortunate consequences; but most of all, they belong to an approach which Poulantzas, following Althusser, labels ‘historicist’.
Its distinguishing characteristics are first the view that a class is partly constituted by the perceptions of its members, and second the belief, held either tacitly or openly, that the passage of history is marked by the growth of class consciousness, until a point in the future when an enlightened proletariat will be able to grasp its real interests and make its own history.
This, however, is said to be nothing more than a scantily concealed voluntarism.
If we are to attribute to social classes the capacity to perceive their interests, we shall have to analyse this property.
We shall have to ask, for example, in what conditions classes recognise their interests and how observers can be sure that they have done so.
And once we start such an enquiry, Poulantzas claims, we shall be dragged away from the objective definition of classes, back into individualist accounts of the perceptions and intentions of their members.
The crux of this argument is the contention that it is impossible to attribute consciousness of its interests to a class (even to the revolutionary proletariat), without interpreting this notion in terms of the intentional properties of its members.
What, after all, could such consciousness be, other than the beliefs and desires of various individuals?
Since Poulantzas insists on an objective analysis of classes, and since he assumes that a satisfactory definition ought to characterise all classes without exception, he rejects historicism on the grounds that it has failed to escape from the problematic of individualism.
Whatever one thinks of this judgment, it is not immediately obvious that it entails the rejection of the more specific claim that the state is the tool of the ruling class; for the latter makes no explicit mention of a class's consciousness of its interests, real or otherwise.
But Poulantzas argues that the attribution of the power to manipulate to the ruling class elevates it to the status of a subject — an agent who does things — and thereby reintroduces the idea of collective intensions which cry out for individualist explanation.
As evidence of the difficulty of eschewing individualism he criticises a number of attempts to elaborate a conception of the state as the tool of the ruling class which are individualist.
Even at their most sophisticated these are based on the observation that individuals who hold senior government posts and individuals  who run major businesses often have certain things in common.
As Miliband explains,
While Poulantzas allows that the sort of research designed to sustain this view has some limited use's he first of all objects that it does not bear out the factual claim that government officials and leading capitalists belong to an identifiable group.
‘In point of fact, the hegemonic function has often been distinct from the governing class or function, and is so today in certain social formations.’
And in any case, this sort of information will hardly prove the point in question; for while it is true enough that capital can influence the filling of government posts, the formation of foreign policy and so on, this simply shows that the state is swayed by an interest group which may be one among many.
It does not show that it always favours one interest — in fact the contrary seems to be true.
Furthermore, it does not show that these are class interests, any more than the enumeration of cases shows that the government systematically protects the interests of what Poulantzas calls the hegemonic function of capital.
To sustain the more general claims one would first need to have a systematic account of the class structure of a society which showed that the interests promoted  by the state were in fact those of the ruling class.
Still more important, one would then need an account of the state as the sort of thing over which capital could exercise power — a set of institutions with no autonomy of their own.
This attack on the argument for what I have called the traditional Marxist account of the state begins by taking it on its own terms.
Even if it is agreed that a study of the aspirations, the jobs, the education and social background of certain individuals will elucidate the character of the relation between the ruling class and the state, the results are still far from decisive.
But it quickly develops into the full-scale criticism of this approach that one would expect from a follower of Althusser.
Rather thin trying to explain the capitalist state as an outcome of the actions of individual and collective subjects, Poulantzas argues that it should be seen in the light of a general view of social structures, classes, and their relations.
He then takes this brief to heart, and sets himself to provide an analysis of the state that avoids a formidable list of errors.
First and foremost, it must not be voluntarist, and must therefore eschew any hint of historicism.
Second, it must avoid economism.
Third, it must elucidate the relation between the state and the ruling class.
And finally,, it must remedy the common mistake of making the class struggle peripheral to the workings of the state.
(The importance of this last condition will emerge as we discuss Poulantzas' own approach, but it is initially justified in his work by an appeal to Marx's and Engels' claim that the class struggle is the motor of history.)
Aiming, then, to avoid both voluntarism and economism, Poulantzas adopts Althusser's conception of society as a whole structured in dominance.
Because agents are seen merely as the supports of this structure, their intentional properties do not enter into social explanation; and because its various components are interdetermined, the economic sphere does not have the straightforward primacy that economism requires.
Instead, the totality itself is said to contain three instances political, economic and ideological — one of which is dominant; and the identity of the dominant instance is in turn determined ‘in the last instance’ by the character of the economic mode of production.
Poulantzas, like  Althusser, believes that this arrangement remains constant and applies to all societies, but he argues that the more specific relations between instances vary with time and place.
In some cultures, for example, the political may be largely determined by the economic, whereas in capitalist societies it is relatively autonomous.
And even within a single formation the relations between instances are forever changing.
Societies are thus seen as made up of three interconnected structures, each of which is seen as a mode of production, transforming raw materials into commodities.
But of course they each depend upon the existence of individuals who carry out the tasks necessary for the survival and perpetuation of society.
To take an obvious case, modern manufacturing industries can only go on so long as there are capitalists and workers.
So it is important to ask how these role-bearers are to be characterised in relation to the whole structured in dominance.
In Poulantzas' view, this whole has the effect of dividing people up into classes: any mode of production ‘requires’ the existence of people who do jobs of various sorts, and who, by virtue of their roles, have implacably opposed interests.
In addition to structures, therefore, there are also classes, and Poulantzas is anxious to keep the two categories apart — a desire which is particularly clear in his discussion of the relations which bind entities of each type.
On the one hand, structures are marked by being more or less contradictory, due either to the strains of uneven development, or to the fact that societies usually contain several, overlapping modes of production.
Classes, on the other hand, are related in a quite different way, since they are engaged in struggle at the economic, political and ideological levels.
When he first wrote about this, Poulantzas rather disarmingly remarked that there was no theoretical homogeneity between these two notions; ii but he later took pains to explain that structures and class practices are not ‘ontologically distinct domains’.
The point of distinguishing them is to show that ‘social classes, although objectively determined (structures), are not ontological and nominalist entities, but only exist within and through the class struggle (practices)’.
So while class practices cover ‘the entire range of the social division of labour’ we can nevertheless separate ‘structural class determination’from ‘class position in a given conjuncture’.
The first of these categories — structural class determination — which is the principal defining characteristic of classes, fixes both their place in the division of labour, and also their interests.
But classes sometimes take up ‘class positions’ which are out of line with these interests — they form alliances with classes whose interests are antagonistic to their own, adopt strategies doomed to defeat, and so on— and the second of Poulantzas' categories is designed to accommodate this phenomenon.
It does not contribute to the definition of a class — for he is adamant that the class positions adopted by particular groups are not indicative of their true class membership.
As he puts it:
While this distinction is obviously important to Poulantzas, it is not immediately clear that it helps him to unite structures and class practices as he intends.
In fact, it appears merely to strengthen the divide between them, by defining structural determination in terms of structures and class position in terms of practice.
However, Poulantzas is emphatic that the two are interconnected, and his claim seems to be founded on a further belief about class position.
To return to the case of the labour aristocracy, even when its position is out of line with its structural determination, ‘this structural determination…is necessarily reflected in working-class  practices (‘class instinct’ as Lenin used to say)— practices that can always be discerned beneath its bourgeois ‘discourse’, etc’.
So while there may be a superficial disparity between the structural determination and the position of a class, the latter will always be responsive to the former at some level, and it will always be possible to discern the role of class determination in the class struggle.
The starting point of Poulantzas' theory is thus a view of capitalist society as a bipartite whole, made up of contradictory structures and class practices.
It now remains to ask what role is played by the state in this totality, and Poulantzas' initial reply is quite straightforward.
The state acts as a mediator, aiming to reconcile the contradictory forces and interests of the society so that it is able to function and reproduce itself.
Furthermore, because the state fulfils this function, the contradictions of the formation are ‘condensed’ in its own structure, so that it can be used as a sort of map of society at large.
According to this view, the state is a doubly important object of study, first because its institutions are a major and influential part of the political instance of capitalist society, and second because they are the key to the working of society as a whole.
Poulantzas therefore develops his theory by elaborating his conception of the capitalist state and tracing its connection with the class struggle.
So far, the state has been characterised as a structure — as part of the political instance, integrated into the whole structured in dominance.
However, Poulantzas argues that, in smoothing over the structural contradictions of society and rendering it coherent, the state simultaneously maintains existing classes.
In ‘constituting the factor of cohesion between the levels of a social formation,, it maintains in the ensemble of structures, that place and role  which have the effect (in their unity) of dividing a formation into classes and producing political class domination’.
The task of the state apparatuses is therefore to mediate between the conflicting interests of classes.
But in doing this they do not wield a power which is independent of the class struggle.
Rather,
In order to see what this involves, it is helpful to look closely at Poulantzas' account of classes.
Most important of all, he thinks of them as determined by political and ideological as well as economic factors from which they derive political, ideological and economic interests.
In some cases these interests match up, so that a course of events which realises a class's economic interests will simultaneously realise its political and ideological ones as well.
But more often a class will achieve an economic interest at the expense of an ideological one, or an ideological one at some cost to its political strength, and this interplay of interests in the course of the class struggle contributes to an exceedingly complex class structure.
Classes are divided into ‘strata’ and ‘fractions’, are forever making and breaking alliances, and are analysed now in terms of their structural determination, now in terms of their position in the conjuncture.
Poulantzas thus constructs what appears at first to be a morass of categories in continual flux; but he then extracts from it a pattern of relations which he regards as constant.
In any social formation there is at least one class which, by virtue of its various determinations, is dominant in the sense that it is better placed to realise its interests than its rivals.
Sometimes a single class may dominate at all levels, economic, political and ideological.
But in a more complex formation there might, for example, be a politically dominant class and a distinct economically dominated class, each divided into strata and fractions with interests which to some extent diverge.
Now, the stability of a social formation can only be maintained if no class with any means of imposing its interest is pushed to the point of revolt.
If the profit margins of manufacturers are too drastically reduced they may move their capital from the industrial  to the financial sector; if the political power of the unions is legislated against they may make their power felt at the economic level by going on strike, or at the political level by withdrawing from established parliamentary parties and so on.
If the state is to prevent the class struggle from destroying an existing set of structures it must be in a position to further class interests which are not too damaging to the formation as a whole, and to prevent classes from realising interests which would have gravely divisive consequences.
To achieve this, Poulantzas says, it must to some extent be independent of all classes, or as he puts it, it must be relatively autonomous.
The capitalist state is thus to be seen as an autonomous set of institutions, able to intervene at all levels in order to maintain the status quo .
While the state has to have some autonomy to fulfil its role, it is by no means completely independent.
It is true that it must be able to check the excesses of even the ruling class; but Poulantzas also has to account for the tendency of capitalist states to favour capitalist interests.
His explanation begins by assuming that, as a matter of definition, dominant classes are well placed to put pressure on the institutions of the state, so that the interesting question is why they should ever put up with having their interests thwarted.
The first part of his answer appeals to the class struggle.
One might think that a politically dominant class would be able to impose its interests on a formation as a whole and take control of the state.
This, however, is rarely feasible because such a class is generally too fraction-ridden to ‘realise its political unity on the basis of a politically conceived common interest’.
Only a force which stands outside the manoeuvring and hostility of the struggle can hope to make any headway in furthering a particular interest.
Poulantzas next distinguishes between the economic and political interests of the dominant classes.
The state, he claims, may sometimes fly in the face of the short-term economic interests of this class; but it will not damage their political interests, and in this way political order is maintained.
As it stands, this claim raises more problems than it solves.
Why, one immediately wants to ask, can the state be relied upon to foster the political interests of the dominant class?
Why should the other classes in the formation put up with it?
And why does the dominant class submit to leaving some of its economic interests thwarted so long as its political interests are satisfied?
In replying, Poulantzas ritually warns that these matters depend to some degree on the particular conjuncture — the extent to which the state can act autonomously varies with the balance of power within the class struggle.
But he also justifies his account in general terms.
Capitalist modes of production, he says, are marked by a curious paradox.
Their conditions of work bring people together more than ever before, in factories, offices and towns; and yet at the same time these people are isolated from one another.
As producers they are separated from their means of production; the law treats them as possessors of free will and responsibility, and the impression is strengthened by the dominant ideology.
The members of society thus perceive themselves as private individuals, each pursuing their own private and competing interests.
In the midst of this free-for-all, the state appears as the guardian of the common interest, a force able to check rapacious greed, protect the weak and defenceless and uphold the values of the polity; in short, a set of institutions which, though not neutral, are not allied with any one class.
This account of the state as it is portrayed by the dominant ideology of capitalist societies is held to explain why the dominant and the dominated classes both tend to put up with it.
They perceive it as standing for the interest of society as a whole, and are constrained by this ideological view to tolerate its infringements of their sectarian interests, providing that these are not too severe.
Of course, for the dominant class this does not require so much patience: its political interests are satisfied, as is the spirit — if not  the letter — of its economic ones.
The dominated classes need more ideological bolstering.
But where this is successful, they will link their fortunes to capitalism, and will not even see the state as an oppressive part of the class struggle.
Poulantzas' explanation gives a key role to the relation between the capitalist state and capitalist ideology.
But it remains to ask again why the state's policy of pursuing the common interest always fosters the political interest of the ruling class.
Why do the two always coincide?
Why does Poulantzas believe that the autonomy of capitalist states is always subject to this limit?
As usual, he is emphatic that the answer has nothing to do with the individuals who actually run the state.
Senior bureaucrats, it is true, are sometimes members of the dominant class, and sympathise with its aims.
But this does not explain the state's overall function,; for even when it is controlled by officials drawn from other classes, it continues to serve the political interest of the hegemonic fraction.
To get at the true explanation we must concentrate on the fact that the bureaucracy's ‘particular functioning is not directly determined by its class membership , by the political functioning of those classes and functions from which it originates: it depends on the concrete functioning of the state apparatus, i.e. on the place of the state in the ensemble of a formation and on its complex relations with the various classes and fractions’.
However, while this tells us how not to solve the problem, it is less clear what positive steps we are to take — a dilemma to which I shall return later in the chapter.
Although this brief outline cannot do justice to the complexity and detail of Poulantzas' work, it does convey enough of its character and aspirations to form the basis of a critical discussion, and in this part of the chapter I shall focus on three connected questions, all concerned with the explanatory power of the theory.
The first and most obvious point concerns the wide range of categories Poulantzas posits in order to capture the workings of capitalist formations.
Are these sufficiently closely defined for us to be able to apply them to particular cases?
The second question makes the same sort of enquiry about the relations between categories.
Are we able to test claims, for example, about the way the state mediates between classes in a particular conjuncture?
Poulantzas  himself is content to rely on counterfactual arguments in support of certain relations, but I shall suggest that these are less conclusive than he supposes.
Finally, it is important to ask whether his account of the class struggle avoids voluntarism as he claims it does.
For if his theory is to succeed in overcoming the evasions which mar Althusser's work, his critics must be satisfied on all these three heads.
My discussion of the first two questions will revolve around Poulantzas' notion of ‘pertinent effects’.
This concept has been much haggled over, and it may seem both unfair to Poulantzas and unrevealing of his work as a whole to pick on its Achilles' heel.
But although it is an easy target, its deficiencies are exhibited quite generally, if less glaringly, throughout the theory.
And it has the advantage of enabling us to consider the two problems associated with terms and relations in a single context.
Among the most striking features of Poulantzas' theory is the huge number of categories it posits in order to explain one aspect of capitalist society.
A formation, for instance, is a whole structured in dominance made up of various instances, each of which contains structures.
Among the effect of these are classes, subdivided into strata and fractions, some dominant, some subordinate, some hegemonal, all with practices, and with interests, economic, political and ideological.
The interplay of these terms is not always easy to grasp, but the point of positing them is comparatively clear.
For Poulantzas wishes to achieve two goals.
On the one hand his account must be sufficiently unified to provide simple, powerful explanations of the state and its role in the class struggle.
On the other hand it must be subtle and flexible enough to accommodate the diverse forms of capitalist society, and to be immune to refutation by counter example.
Poulantzas responds to this second requirement with what Laclau has aptly called ‘taxonomic fury’, and in doing so runs the risk of defeating his other goal.
For as he increases the number of categories in terms of which phenomena are to be explained, he at the same time multiplies the number of relations between them; and since each factor is in some way dependent on a large number of others, the resulting range of possible variations is immense.
This certainly makes room for the many capitalist configurations found in history But some of  Poulantzas' critics have complained that, instead of creating a theory, all he has provided is an overblown list a set of descriptive categories so various as to be applicable to any social formation, and lacking any explanatory bite.
The area of the theory to which this criticism seems most obviously to apply, and the context in which it has been most discussed, is Poulantzas' account of the defining characteristics of classes.
As we have already seen, classes are defined in the light of a variety of factors, political and ideological, as well as economic, so that, as he puts it:
But this only raises another question: how do we know a specific presence when we see one?
Poulantzas' answer is best introduced in his own words.
The concept of ‘pertinent effects’ is then used in the definition of several sub-groups of classes.
First there are strata groups that can ‘without being social forces, exert an influence on the political practice of these forces’.
Then there are autonomous fractions ‘which constitute the substratum of eventual social forces’.
Finally there are fractions —‘ensembles which are capable of becoming autonomous fractions, according to the criterion of pertinent effects’.
The fact that the definitions of these terms are extremely murky can in part be traced to the notion of pertinent effects.
How do we know, critics have asked, what effects are pertinent?
Surely  Poulantzas is simply relying on the intuitions of social theorists, assuming that they will be able to discern a set of connections that he is unable or unwilling to spell out?
Poulantzas' reply to this criticism is instructive, partly because it tells us more about pertinent effects themselves, but also because it casts light on his general approach.
He agrees, first of all, that he has not provided an account of the precise character of pertinent effects, but argues that it would be a mistake to do so.
It would be useless to lay down in advance what they are, since they vary with each particular state of affairs.
To some extent, then, Poulantzas concedes his critics' point.
As he says, ‘My text requires a certain sensitivity to the political problems of the class struggle on the part of the reader, since it is entirely determined by the theoretico-political conjuncture’.
But he does not regard the charge as a serious objection to his theory.
In this, however, he may be naive, for unless he is prepared to say what pertinent effects are, it is not clear what grounds he has for claiming that they always exist.
And this immediately raises a further difficulty.
It is clear that Poulantzas originally posited the idea of a pertinent effect in order to save a particular claim of Marxism.
His objective  
This passage helps us to understand the dilemma Poulantzas is trying to solve.
In order to avoid the pitfalls of economism he has argued that classes are defined at all levels, not just at the economic one.
But in some capitalist societies the working class seems to have no distinct political organisation or ideology, and so appears to lack any defining characteristics at these levels.
To offer purely economic criteria for its identity would be to slide back into economism.
And to argue, as some theorists have done, that the class has dissolved or been integrated into the bourgeoisie would be to abandon the hope of a proletarian revolution heralding the end of capitalism.
Poulantzas therefore takes a third way out: he claims that, despite superficial appearances, the economic position and practice of the working class does have ‘pertinent effects’ at the political and ideological levels, so that it can be identified as a class after all.
The difficulty with this is that theory and observation are unbalanced.
As often in Poulantzas' work, the motive for a particular claim is a theoretical one, and the world is forced to fit it.
Given his definition of class, Poulantzas has got to find traces of the working class in the political and ideological spheres.
But since this is sometimes exceedingly difficult, he would be unwise to say exactly what sort of traces they should be; for he would then be vulnerable to the criticism that in some capitalist formations these are simply not to be found.
By positing the vague conception of ‘pertinent effects’ Poulantzas overcomes this particular problem.
But it is still not clear why there must always be such effects in social formations, other than because their absence would upset one solution to a dilemma posed by Marxist theory.
The problem, then, is why one should accept Poulantzas' claim that pertinent effects are a constant feature of capitalist social formations.
And it might seem that it would at least be a start to discover whether they are in fact common.
But this brings us back to our original question: how do we identify them?
The vagueness of Poulantzas' definition, and his motive for positing the term at all combine to produce a considerable gap between theory and explanation which is by no means confined to this case.
Although Poulantzas does not give a direct answer to the question ‘How are we to know a pertinent effect when we encounter one?’, he does discuss an historical example which may throw light on the matter.
To demonstrate his criteria for class identity he chooses the case of the French peasantry during the eighteenth Brumaire, and asks whether or not they were a class.
As is well known, Marx himself gave a somewhat ambiguous answer; but Poulantzas' reply is quite clear.
Furthermore, we can imagine a hypothetical case ‘where the economic existence of the small-holding peasants is not reflected by Bonapartism.’
In this discussion, Poulantzas relies on a counterfactual claim to defend his view that the peasantry had a pertinent effect at the political level — namely Bonapartism — and were thus a distinct class.
If they had not exercised precisely the sort of power which is the distinguishing mark of a class, Bonapartism would never have arisen.
This sort of argument is so commonly used in the social sciences that it almost passes unnoticed; but as soon as one stops to think  about it one is faced with the problem in hand.
How does Poulantzas know that the counterfactual claim he proposes is true?
On what ground does he conclude that the form of the Bonapartist state is an effect of the small-holding peasantry, rather than of some other factor or factors?
On what grounds, therefore, does he identify Bonapartism as a pertinent effect?
The general function of the state as an instrument of social cohesion presumably justifies the assumption that its form will be tailored to an existing set of structures and class practices.
But why, in this case, should it ‘reflect’ the existence of the peasantry in particular?
Although the analysis of counterfactuals is both difficult and contentious, they are generally used in the context of a certain sort of theory.
If they are to have any explanatory bite it must first be possible to pick out particular causal connections against a fairly stable set of background conditions.
Some phenomena may simply not lend themselves to this kind of analysis.
Sometimes, for example, a factor which is identified as the causal antecedent of an effect may be so interlinked with numerous other conditions that, while it is true that if that factor had not been present the effect would not have existed either, it is hardly illuminating.
For had the causal factor not been present, everything would have been different.
Some of Poulantzas' own claims seem prone to this sort of problem: the hegemonal position of a class, for instance, is a function of its economic, political and ideological roles, of the form of the state, of its relations with other classes and functions, and the state of the class struggle.
The fact that it is hegemonal of course has numerous effects.
But to say of a particular consequence that it would not obtain if that class were not hegemonal does not tell us much.
Since another class presumably would then be hegemonal, all class relations would be changed, the state would be different, the dominant ideology would be different, and so on.
An instructive counterfactual must, therefore, pick out two causally connected events or states of affairs which are relatively independent of other factors.
And to do this at all one obviously needs a general account of the relation between them.
Unfortunately, Poulantzas' example does not satisfy the first of these requirements.
We are told that ‘the economic existence of  the small-holding peasants is reflected, on the political level, by the ‘pertinent effects’ constituted by the particular form of state of Bonapartism’.
And we are also told that there could be a case where the peasantry had no such effect.
But we are not told what features of the French peasantry are to be held responsible for Bonapartism, nor what features of Bonapartism are attributable to the French peasantry.
Neither does Poulantzas explain what the peasantry would have been like if it had not had this pertinent effect, except in so far as he stipulates that they would not then have been a class.
Here, the explanatory power of the assertion is reduced by the fact that a relation is said to hold between two very general terms — the peasantry and the state.
And because they are so general, the complementary counterfactual claims are unilluminating.
So much for the terms of Poulantzas' theory.
If we now consider the relations he posits between them we find ourselves facing a comparable problem; although he posits numerous interconnec-tions between the components of social formations, he neither explains how he arrives at them nor describes them in any detail.
In part this is due to a desire to avoid a rigidly causal account which will straitjacket capitalist societies into a single position, not allowing for their diversity and variation.
For example, although the Bonapartist state is a pertinent effect of the peasant class, this is not meant to imply that there is a unidirectional causal link between the peasantry and Bonapartism.
Rather, Poulantzas says, ‘What makes them function concretely as a distinct class, as a social force, is in fact the historical phenomenon of Bonapartism’, thus seeming to imply that the two are interconnected in such a way that each can only exist in conjunction with the other.
The relations Poulantzas appeals to, such as contradiction, determination or reflection, are therefore in a way deliberately vague, and intended to capture what Althusser calls ‘structural causality’.
But while there may be degrees of determination or contradiction, there must be some consensus as to what count as examples of these relations — what sorts of contradiction are there?
How do things determine one another?— and Poulantzas himself intensifies the difficulty by using these terms in an alarmingly general fashion.
Contradictions, for example, are said to plague the relations of classes, of structures, and even of individuals, as in ‘[The big  employers in France]have sought a policy of compromise towards the working class, in the context of their own contradictions with banking monopoly capital and non-monopoly capital — witness the contradictions between Giscard d'Estaing and Chaban-Delmas.’
Some of his well-wishers have pointed out that it is difficult to use relations as general as these to provide more than schematic explanations, and have attempted to define them more precisely.
Erik Olin Wright, for example, has broken down the concept of ‘determination’ into six distinct relations: structural limitation, selection, reproduction/non-reproduction, limits of functional compatibility, transformation and mediation.
These are still very general in the sense that they tell you what kind of relations you would have to look for to turn Poulantzas' scheme into an explanatory tool, rather than what relations of these types there actually are.
For example, structural limitation ‘constitutes a pattern of determination in which some social structure establishes limits within which some other structure or process can vary, and establishes probabilities for the specific structures or processes that are possible within those limits’.
And, even relations such as these may not be enough to back up counterfactual claims like the one Poulantzas offers.
For they are presented as holding between structures, or between a structure and the class struggle, and it is so far only an article of faith to suppose that they can be refined to a point where one can identify a specific connection such as that between an aspect of the peasant class and a particular form of capitalist state.
Starting from Poulantzas' counterfactual example, I have suggested that the categories and relations he discusses are, as they stand, too abstract to provide any grounds for such claims, and indeed are too schematic to yield detailed explanations of particular historical events.
But the argument might as well be put the other way round: his inability to formulate counterfactuals is just one consequence of the difficulties attendant Upon a theory of such scope and grandiloquent abstraction.
Yet Poulantzas' wish to argue hypothetically is peculiarly revealing; for as well as drawing attention to the slight explanatory power of his theory it raises the third of the questions with which I began — the question of  whether he has really succeeded in casting off voluntarism.
This issue is crucial to an assessment of thoroughgoing holism such as that developed by Althusser, and therefore deserves careful attention.
Theorists who reflect about the ways in which things might have been different are bound to consider the question of what might have made events take another course.
One class of variables — avalanches, sudden heart attacks, meteorites and so on— which can be loosely classed as natural disasters, are comparatively unpredictable and unlikely.
No doubt half the population of Paris could have been wiped out by a typhoid epidemic in 1788, and perhaps the king would not then have been sent to the guillotine.
But speculations of this sort are founded on such improbable premises that they do not help us to understand what actually happened, and merely prompt the rejoinder, ‘So what?’
The art of counterfactual analysis consists in formulating probable hypothetical claims which will help us to disentangle the roles played by disparate variables, and this requires a systematic view of the kinds of factors which might plausibly have been different.
Those social scientists who regard human actions as undetermined will look to them as the basis of counterfactual claims.
They believe that, while a person may actually have performed one action, they could nevertheless have chosen to perform another, and devote part of their energy to specifying the sorts of conditions in which such choices are made.
But this approach, which elevates individuals into subjects, is of course not available to Poulantzas.
He can blithely agree that, in other circumstances, individuals would have acted differently.
But he must go on to explain the sorts of variations which have this effect on individuals (or other subjects) if he is to rely on counterfactual claims about the actions of subjects.
To justify his view that there are ways in which things might have been different while at the same time avoiding voluntarism, Poulantzas argues that there are two sources of valid counterfactuals.
The first is the structures of a society.
A division of labour, for example, might have been different in ways that would have affected the system of education.
But while this suggestion is plausible enough, it raises the question whether the shapes of structures are to be explained simply in terms of one another, the political responding to the ideological, the ideological to the economic, and so on .
Poulantzas claims that  they are not and introduces, as a second source of variation, the class struggle.
In order to understand the history of capitalist societies one must look not just to their structures, but also to the balance of power between classes and the way this power is exercised .
What actually happens depends to some extent on the strategies that classes pursue and on the unity with which they organise themselves and seize opportunities to strengthen their positions.
For instance, if the working class parties of pre-fascist Germany had really represented the class itself, the latter would have been more easily aroused than it in fact was, and the rise of fascism would at least have been a greater struggle.
Poulantzas must therefore take into account both social structures and the class struggle to understand the course of events.
As he says:
However, it remains to be seen how the class struggle, and the part it plays in history, are to be analysed.
In particular, can Poulantzas explain specific conjunctures and the shifting relations between classes without tacitly relying on some sort of volun-tarism?
He, of course, does not admit any difficulty of this kind, but I shall suggest that his appeals to class strategy are treacherous, and reintroduce the conception of subjects that he is so anxious to stamp out.
This brings us to the third, and for our purposes  the most significant, of the problems laid out at the start of this section.
Scattered throughout Poulantzas' studies of the phases of capitalism are appeals to the strategies adopted by classes in order to realise their interests.
At first glance these appear anachronistic, for our ordinary understanding of the term ‘strategy’ embodies the idea of intentional action.
If a class is to lay plans there must be a strategist who assesses the circumstances, evaluates possible outcomes and decides what to do; and while these properties can be attributed to groups as well as individuals, an agent (what Poulantzas would call a subject) is needed in both cases.
Strategy, in this everyday sense, is incompatible with the abolition of the subject, and it is therefore reasonable to suppose that Poulantzas is not proposing to explain the course of the class struggle in terms of the ingenuity exercised by classes and class members in realising their goals.
But to avoid this return to voluntarism he must have in mind some further conception of strategy, and it is not surprising to find him talking about it in what might be called its objective sense: the strategy of a class — the course of action which will best enable it to gain power over other classes — is estimated in the light of its objective interests and its position in a formation, and is detached from the beliefs and aspirations of its members.
In discussing the rise of fascism in Germany, for example, Poulantzas claims that, ‘With the end of the First World War, a genuinely revolutionary period opened in Germany and Italy.
Revolution was on the agenda, in the sense that there were conjunctures of objectively revolutionary situations.
But the working class failed to take State power…and to secure its objectives in critical situations.’
He then goes on:
Hence the strategy of the working class is worked out in terms of the opportunities open to it in a particular situation — or rather in terms of the opportunities that Poulantzas claims would have been open to it had the class itself been quite different.
But strategy of this sort, while it is a useful analytic tool, does not contribute much to historical explanation.
For we still have to understand what makes the difference between situations where classes pursue their objective interests and situations where they stray from them.
Perhaps the most obvious course is to elucidate the strategies of classes by appealing to the constraints under which they labour.
Given its position in the struggle and the structures of a capitalist formation, a class may not be left with many options.
And as long as its strategy conforms to one or some of these, the task of explanation is relatively well defined.
Among the explanations given by Poulantzas which fit this pattern, his account of the transition from non-monopoly to monopoly capital is a case in point.
He begins by reminding us that monopolies have not progressively wiped out non-monopolies, as the traditional Marxist model predicts, but have tended to reach agreements with them instead.
This is sometimes taken to show that the process of monopolisation has come to a halt.
But Poulantzas argues that this interpretation is a mistake because the policy actually serves the interests of monopolies better than any available alternative, and is thus in line with their strategy.
In this case, the ‘strategic compromises’ of monopoly capital are said to be imposed by the balance of power between classes in the power bloc — a balance which might itself be explicable in structural terms.
But although explanations of this kind provide some understanding of the class struggle, it is clear that Poulantzas does not regard them as enough.
In the first place, they presuppose that classes correctly perceive the constraints of their situations and modify their strategies accordingly, and Poulantzas elsewhere acknowledges that it would be extremely rash to make such an assumption.
Discussing revolutionary situations, for instance, he remarks a trifle sadly that ‘unless the revolutionary organisations have a conscious and adequate strategy’, which they frequently lack, opportunities for change will go unnoticed.
So the actual behaviour of classes must be taken into account.
Secondly, explanations of strategy that appeal only to external constraints do not allow for the possibility that a class may have a range of interests, not all of which can be satisfied by any single policy.
As an example of this problem Poulantzas cites the negotiations which resulted in the French Sixth Plan.
It would have suited the economic interests of monopoly capital if the plan had proposed a high rate of growth.
But its political interests would have been — and were — better served by a lower growth-rate; for this was less damaging to non-monopoly capital and the working class, and therefore did not provoke such hostility to monopoly capital.
Poulantzas comments that  
Faced with this dilemma, monopoly capital puts its political interests above its short-term economic goals, and compromises with the other sections of the bourgeoisie.
But it remains to ask if Poulantzas can explain this ‘choice’, ‘policy-decision,, or ‘process’ without treating classes, or even their members, as subjects.
Holistic explanations such as those employed by Althusser and Poulantzas are peculiarly prone to the charge of incompleteness.
We can learn an enormous amount from studying the constraints imposed upon classes, whether by structures or the class struggle, but they cannot resolve all the questions we wish to ask.
In trying to bridge the gap, theorists commonly resort to purposive forms of explanation, and Poulantzas' appeal to class strategy is an apt example of this phenomenon.
Strategies are usually made by strategists.
But if voluntarism is to be avoided, the tactics followed by classes, their members or representatives cannot be explained in terms of the qualities of either individuals or groups.
What they are capable of in the way of understanding and manipulating their own situation is itself determined by the whole structured in dominance, and the idea of strategy itself must be understood in holist terms.
Poulantzas recognises this, but is unable to put the principle to work.
For in his analyses of the classes of capitalism he resorts to purposive terminology, without giving any hint of how this is to be understood except in an everyday, voluntarist manner.
Many examples could be given, of which I shall mention two.
First, German National Socialism is said to have 
Secondly, Poulantzas denies that the falling rate of profit characteristic of capitalism is an inevitable feature of the mode of production.
Rather, the continuing tendency to a falling rate of profit  
In the first of these passages National Socialism has ‘a calculated plan’.
But calculation, in the ordinary sense, requires individuals to assess, judge, choose and decide.
In the next passage Poulantzas argues that the course of capitalism partly depends on what the working class ‘allows’.
Yet our everyday understanding of this term is intimately connected with the idea of choice.
By drawing attention to these links I have no wish to insist on the virtues of ‘ordinary language’ analysis.
Instead, I hope to show that Poulantzas relies, for the explanatory force of these claims, on our pre-theoretical, voluntarist understanding of them, and thus fails to provide us with examples of the holistic form of explanation he advocates.
Each of the two passages raises rather different problems, and together they will enable us to connect the issues of counterfactual analysis and voluntarism which have so far been treated separately.
The claim that a class may or may not allow itself to be exploited is another case of Poulantzas' belief that the course of the class struggle is not altogether determined by the structural constraints of a particular phase of capitalism.
A hegemonal class may be more or less ingenious at furthering its political interest while maintaining its position in the power bloc; the working class may make better or worse use of a revolutionary situation.
However, Poulantzas would presumably argue that in any given case the course of events is determined by antecedent factors.
In Germany just after the First World War, for example, working class organisations were so far removed from both the objective interests of the class and the concern of its members that they were incapable of seizing the revolutionary opportunities open to them.
The point of counterfactuals, on this view, is not to suggest that at any particular moment something else might have happened, but to indicate and test the relations between causes and consequences.
The belief that any particular event is determined, although the course of events as a whole is not, is problematic in itself.
But if  that is put on one side we are brought back to the question of what kinds of determining factors Poulantzas invokes in order to explain what actually happens.
Sometimes, as we have seen, these include the strategies adopted by classes — for instance, National Socialism's calculated plan to divide the working class.
And since we are familiar with Poulantzas' rejection of voluntarism, we shall assume that this in turn is to be explained in a way that avoids treating either individuals or classes as subjects.
The choices, assessments and selections which go into formulating a strategy, and the ingenuity or crassness displayed in implementing it, must themselves be shown to be determined by factors other than intentions.
This, though, is where Poulantzas lets his readers down.
For instead of taking the final explanatory step, he leaves them with an unanalysed notion of class strategy.
They know how not to analyse it, it is true, but are given no positive guidance which will enable them to get around the menace of voluntarism.
If we now ask how we are able to get any grasp of the explanatory role of class strategy in Poulantzas' theory, the answer is that we rely on our everyday, voluntarist understanding of it.
We use this to cast light on a metaphor of which we are given no other interpretation.
But this, of course, does not yield explanations of class strategies, and thus of the class struggle, which are in line with Poulantzas' theoretical principles.
And the assumption that they can be given is grounded on faith alone.
Practice: holism in social explanation
CONCESSIVE HOLISM AND INTERESTS: THE ANNALES SCHOOL
The claims of absolute holism explored in the two preceding chapters are clearly both interesting and provocative, and have given rise to a series of fertile debates within the social sciences.
It remains true, however, that we do not now have the means to deploy this approach wholeheartedly, so that anyone who insists on its universal applicability must be taken, at least for the moment, to be committing an act of faith.
Whatever understanding of societies we gain in future, we do not now have a theory of ideology capable of explaining the myriad ways in which individuals perceive their situations, nor a theory of the social determination of character that will account for the vicissitudes of history.
As a result, theories of the type proposed by Althusser and Poulantzas cannot honour their own claims to completeness.
The kinds of difficulties that we encountered in Poulantzas' work continually crop up, and the tacit use of counterfactuals which rely on individualist premises is a perennial stumbling block.
These difficulties are sometimes tolled as the deathknell of holism and the victory of individualism.
However, the problem can by no means be so readily dismissed.
As we have seen, the divide between individualism and holism is too deep for the inadequacy of one approach to provide an automatic vindication of the other; and more important, holism is not so easily killed off.
The recognition that we cannot give complete holist explanations of social phenomena does not undermine the centrality of the intuition to which the doctrine, in its various forms, is a response: the sense that many properties of individuals, whether tastes, aspirations, beliefs, expectations or habits, are to an over-whelming extent formed by society.
The question of how we are to construct explanations that reflect this insight is not swept away by the conclusion that one approach to the task is inadequate, and the problem therefore remains as pressing as ever.
In a further attempt to come to terms with it, a number of social theorists have concentrated on exactly the sort of counterfactual analysis that we found used, but not discussed, by Poulantzas.
By asking what conditions would have obtained if particular individuals had behaved differently, they have aimed to give a clearer analysis both of the defining characteristics of holism, and of its relations to individualism.
As a result, they have arrived at a view which I shall call ‘concessive’ holism.
Exponents of this approach aim to overcome the deficiencies of absolute holism by sacrificing its claim to completeness, and their concession therefore consists in abandoning the Althusserean dogma that there is just one mode in which to explain all social phenomena.
They insist, nevertheless, on the distinctiveness and importance of holism, and, as I shall argue, their account suggests a way to resolve the dispute between holists and individualists.
The central problem with which holism has to deal — the problem that gives rise to the holist view I shall now examine — can be very simply expressed.
Social scientists aim to understand a course of events which is shaped by a diverse range of factors — by trade markets, the supply of raw materials, education, the bombs thrown by terrorists, government policies, and many other things.
It sometimes seems that individuals have a startling impact on this pattern which can only be understood by appealing to specific psychological traits.
Napoleon's military victories, for example, might just have to be attributed to his genius; Britain's adherence to a monetarist economic policy throughout 1881 might in the end rest on Margaret Thatcher's supreme obstinacy.
But we do not know how to account for these characteristics as the results of antecedent social factors, and, indeed, have very little idea what circumstances, if any, produce military genius or obstinacy.
So it seems that, to legitimate our appeal to such traits, we must allow an element of individualism to enter social explanations.
We must allow that the course of events is partly to be explained by appealing to individual characteristics.
Among social theorists who have attempted to defuse this type of individualist threat, two principal lines of argument have been followed out.
The first is based squarely on the suggestion that it is simply an illusion to suppose that any truth, or any significant role in social explanation need be assigned to counterfactuals of  the form, ‘If individual X had not had the psychological characteristic a, they could not have performed action b and event p would not have occurred.’
Such statements are in fact usually false, either because the combination of a and b is not a necessary condition of p, so that even if X had not done b, p might still have occurred, or because, even if X hadn't done b, some other agent would have done it instead, thereby bringing about p.
This view, if it could be adequately defended, would successfully stave off individualism by denying it a significant part in social explanation; but to establish the point is far from easy.
A representative and influential attempt was made by Plekhanov in his essay,The Role of the Individual in History , where he considers what effect the characters of prominent people such as kings and statesmen have on the course of events.
He then goes on to ask the same question about people with extraordinary talents, whether in physics, generalship or painting.
In the first part of his argument, Plekhanov allows that the psychological characteristics of individual actors can influence the course of historical events.
Powerful actors, especially, are able to make a difference to things; for example King Louis XV's lasciviousness made him indulgent toward Madame de Pompa-dour, who was therefore able to protect the position of the incompetent General Soubise in spite of the fact that his army was unreliable in defending France's military interests.
Had Louis been less concerned with sex, Plekhanov suggests, France might well have fared differently during the Seven Years War.
However, the causal influence of such characteristics cannot be considered by itself, and must be investigated in the context of particular societies.
For 
So far so good.
Plekhanov next goes on to claim that the character traits of individuals, whether causally efficacious or not, are  ‘accidents’ in relation to‘the historical destiny of nations’.
To keep to the same example,
Here, the psychological characteristics of individuals, the outcome of a person's childhood experiences and physical constitution, are contrasted with some other range of causal factors responsible for ‘the course of France's development’.
And in labelling the former causes ‘accidents’, Plekhanov implies that they are both an unpredictable and a comparatively unimportant part of the explanation of the course of historical events.
The question of the essay What effect do individual actors have on the course of history?— is thus partly answered by the very terms in which it is posed.
For we are told at the start that the effects of their psychological traits are ‘accidents’, as opposed to the main stuff of social explanation.
Having slipped in this normative bias, Plekhanov goes on to consider whether a series of accidents might not change the course of history.
Could an unusual concatenation of talents and characters, placed in a situation where they were able to exercise their influence, upset the destiny of nations?
He concludes that they could not, on the basis of two connected arguments.
He first claims that accidents are unable to outweigh ‘social needs’, which can be traced to the social relations of a society, themselves ultimately caused by its productive forces.
For example,
In this passage Plekhanov makes the straightforward claim that, while individuals can hasten or hold up the course of events, determined by the ‘social needs’ of a society, generated by its forces of production, they cannot change it.
He does not, however, explain why the causal influence of the forces of production is always, and necessarily, greater than that of individuals, and only takes up this point in a second argument, in which he shifts from the discussion of character traits to consider the role played by individuals of extraordinary talent.
Talents, he says, are themselves the product of social relations, and only appear when social conditions allow.
These arguments contain an embarrassing number of suppressed premises, invalid inferences and equivocations.
For our purposes, however, their most serious fault is Plekhanov's assumption of the truth of a thoroughgoing holism, which wreaks havoc with his reasoning.
Central to his argument is the claim that the course of events is principally to be explained in terms of the social needs of a society, needs which ultimately rest upon the forces of production.
‘Accidents’, while they have effects on political, social and economic life, cannot divert the trend of history.
To defend this view one has to explain why the causal power of individuals is thus limited.
Why is it that ‘accidents’ of personality or talent  can never outweigh the influence of the forces of production and social relations?
Why is their effect always short-lived and superficial?
In his two arguments, one dealing with accidents of personality, the other with individuals of exceptional talents, Plekhanov addresses these questions.
But his answers are far from satisfactory.
The first argument simply asserts that social factors outweigh individual ones.
And the weakness of this claim is compounded by his examples, which are far more individualist than the claim they are intended to illustrate.
The fate of Mirabeau, for instance, would have been sealed by the lack of sympathy felt for him by the people, on account of their irritation with the Court's defence of the old order.
Here psychological traits are invoked to account for the inability of psychological traits to alter the progress of history, a confusion of which Plekhanov seems unaware.
But leaving this muddle on one side, the main difficulty is the complete lack of any defence of the conclusion.
The second argument is a little fuller, but no better.
The talents of individuals, it suggests, are themselves the outcome of, and are explained by, various aspects of the social environment.
(Thus where talents are concerned a determinist story can be told.)
However, as we saw in Chapter V, this view is difficult to sustain, and certainly, should not be asserted in so cavalier a fashion.
In his discussion of accidents of personality Plekhanov offers no defence of his claim that these can never outweigh the causal influence of the mode of production and resulting social relations.
And in his discussion of the parts played by people of exceptional talent he simply asserts that these individual capacities are to be explained as the result of social circumstances.
What circumstances he does not say.
But in any case, the truth of this determinist claim is exactly what would have to be proved in order to substantiate Plekhanov's thesis.
If holist forms of explanation are to merit serious consideration, they must clearly be based on more than an uncritical acceptance of a crude version of historical materialism, and the claim that they are not threatened by counterfactuals such as those discussed at the start of the chapter must be given a less doctrinaire justification.
Underlying Plekhanov's argument is the central idea that, in order to explain a social phenomenon, one must understand not just why it did (or does) in fact occur, but why it would have happened even in the absence of the particular beliefs and actions that caused  it.
The imposition of this ‘necessity constraint’ on holist explanation is enough to separate it from the individualist view that to describe the individual traits which caused a social phenomenon is to explain it.
However, if this holist conception is to provide a standard for at least some explanations within the social sciences, and if it is to avoid the difficulties discussed in Part II, it is obvious that it will need to be greatly refined and elaborated.
Contemporary social theory, however, does not lack for attempts at elaboration.
One of the most interesting has recently been proposed by Richard Miller, who elaborates his claim by means of an example — the identification by capitalists of the bourgeois and national interests.
This disparity between the evidence available to major capitalists and the beliefs they hold suggests, according to Miller, that their beliefs are to be explained in the following way:
Some people will want to quarrel with this analysis; but for our present purposes its accuracy is less important than the use Miller makes of it.
For he distinguishes sharply between two questions.
We might ask, first of all, ‘Why do the particular people who are major capitalists, namely, John D. Rockefeller III, David Lindsay, Walter Wriston, and others, typically identify the bourgeois and national interests?’
And the answer to this may be given in terms of the individual histories of these men.
But if the spirit of the Marxist analysis is correct, we need to know the answer to a second question, ‘Why, in a modern capitalist society, would major capitalists, whoever they might be, typically identify the bourgeois and national interests, even if Rockefeller, Lindsay and the other actual capitalists were to have different life histories?’
And the answer to this is not to be found in the histories of individuals.
Miller's argument therefore hinges on a counterfactual claim.
He asks whether a general phenomenon would cease to be a feature of a society if particular individuals held different beliefs.
And he concludes that, since it would not, the individual beliefs cannot be the explanation of the general phenomenon.
While the example Miller discusses conforms to the type of explanation advocated by Althusser, the two theorists nevertheless defend very different positions.
For Althusser, as we saw, all explanations of social phenomena must be holistic.
Miller, by contrast, holds that holist explanations are appropriate whenever a specific condition is met — whenever a social phenomenon would persist if the relevant properties of particular individual members of a society were different.
His argument is therefore compatible with the view that there may be cases where this does not obtain, which require to be explained in individualist terms.
However, Miller goes on to cast doubt on the status of such individualist explanations when he suggests that holist explanations are the stuff of social science, whereas individualist ones are something else.
In Chapter ii we found that a good deal of social science has been informed by this view; but it is nevertheless natural to wonder why individualism should be excluded from the group of disciplines that aim to provide us with a grasp of the social world.
Why should we not derive from them an understanding which includes a knowledge of both the individual causes of particular social phenomena and the holistic forces underlying them?
In fact, if the social sciences are really to explain the social world, would it not be wiser to retreat from the demand that they must conform to a single standard of explanation, and allow instead that they may encompass a variety of projects?
Miller himself argues for his view that the distinction between holist and individualist explanations marks the boundary between science and non-science by claiming that it is an established feature of social scientific practice.
This seems questionable; the lack of consensus within the social sciences as to what sort of explanations they can and should provide rather suggests that both holism and individualism are fiercely adhered to.
However, it is interesting and important to consider whether there might be a theoretical justification for Miller's view, relatively independent of the present habits of social scientists: a reason for holding that social scientific explanations should satisfy a necessity constraint of the kind Miller describes.
For this would obviously ensure pride of place for holist explanations.
Unfortunately, perhaps, it is hard to see how Miller's demand that the social sciences should deal only in holist explanations can be reconciled with his (and our) account  of the difference between holism and individualism.
This difference, as we have seen, is between two kinds of causal explanation, and if both can have some force, as Miller believes, it is not obvious why social scientists should restrict themselves to only one of them.
Despite his desire to secure the dominance of holism by equating it with social scientific explanation, Miller's argument only sustains a weaker claim; for his distinction between holism and individualism suggests that there is a place for both types of explanation.
This may seem an innocuous conclusion.
In fact, however, it marks a major transition in the terms of the debate, and separates the concessive form of holism sharply from the absolute form considered earlier.
As we saw, absolute holists are opposed to the very idea of individualist explanations; they defend the supremacy of their own view, which they regard as incompatible with individualism.
Concessive holists, by contrast, look on individualism with more favour.
Aware that absolute holists cannot live up to their own tenets, they offer a different distinction between the two approaches so that, rather than being seen as strict alternatives, they are held to be complementary.
Instead of the question, ‘Which form of explanation is right?’, concessive holists ask when holist and individualist explanations are appropriate.
They therefore allow that some phenomena may be elucidated in individualist terms, while at the same time claiming a major place for holist explanations.
If the problem is interpreted in this way, the debate between holists and individualists centres initially on the relative scope of the two approaches.
How much can be explained in individualist terms, and how much in holist ones?
But it is an implication of concessive holism that there will be no hard and fast answer to this question; the reply will depend on our ability to establish the relevant counterfactuals, which will presumably change with our theories about the social world.
At first glance, therefore, concessive holists appear to take a purely pragmatic view of the relations between holism and individualism.
However, the matter cannot be left there.
If concessive holists are to provide a solution to the problem of holism rather than a mere rule of thumb, they must justify their claim that holist and individualist explanations are, if not complementary, at least capable of coexistence.
As we saw in Chapter III, much of the longstanding disagreement  between exponents of the two views stem from their commitment to distinct and incompatible conceptions of the individual (a commitment which gives rise, on one side, to absolute holism).
Concessive holists cannot simply ignore this divide, as Miller does, for this will leave their own position undefended.
They are therefore faced with the task of overcoming it.
How might one reconcile the two approaches, while yet acknowledging the deep-rooted differences between them?
The beginning of an answer to this question is implicit in the accounts of concessive holism we have so far considered.
For these suggest that holism and individualism can fruitfully be seen as serving different interests in social explanation.
Holists, according to Miller, aim to show why social phenomena would be as they are even if particular individuals possessed properties other than those they actually have.
And the explanations they offer go back to the social wholes which form and constrain individual people.
In a quite different vein, individualists who look to the properties of individuals to explain social affairs are inspired by a belief in a conception of autonomy.
Another way to express this motivating power of individualism is to say that we have a tremendously strong interest in explaining at least some social phenomena in individualist terms, since this enables us to explain ourselves to ourselves; to see what it feels like to be in someone else's shoes.
As autonomous actors we create and modify the social world, bringing about events and states of affairs which would not otherwise have occurred.
To explain a social phenomenon is therefore to capture its uniqueness and show why it happened when it need not have done.
These two projects — on the one hand a wish to investigate the constraining influence of social wholes, and on the other a desire to understand the shaping power of individuals — answer to different sorts of concern with the social world.
To regard these as distinct interests , each of which sustains a set of values, allows us to reformulate the question of the relative scope of holist and  individualist theories which we found to be such a pressing one.
For instead of aiming to divide the available explananda between two types of explanation, allocating some to holism and others to individualism, the extent to which either is applicable can be seen as relative to our interest in understanding the social scene.
To gain a fuller grasp of the strength and scope of concessive holism and of individualism we must ask what interests they serve and what kinds of enquiries they satisfy.
Only a richer conception of what they are trying to provide will enable us to make a sensitive assessment of their achievements and potential.
An appreciation of the interests which underlie holist and individualist modes of explanation cannot be gained by thought alone.
just as a desire to understand absolute holism led us to analyse the substantive claims of Althusser and Poulantzas, so we must now consider work inspired by an attachment to concessive holism in order to reach a clearer view of its guiding interests.
Among those whose practice can be shown to conform to this approach, there can I think be no doubt that the most important, in contemporary social science, have been the historians of the Annales school.
Their impact has of course been immense.
As a fellow historian sums it up,
For the purposes of my present argument, however, of even greater importance than the influence exercised by Les Annales is  the fact that their approach is clearly governed by the idea — definitive of concessive holism — that individualist and holist explanations are best seen as answering to different interests, and therefore as contributing, at least to some extent, to independent projects.
It is to the Annales school, and more particularly to the assumptions governing their work, that I therefore turn, aiming to show how they have successfully applied the precepts of concessive holism to a wide range of subject, and in this way to suggest how the idea that holist explanations answer to a certain interest can be developed and defended.
While it would be misleading to present the members of the Annales school as a wholly homogeneous group committed to a single methodology, they nevertheless hold in common a number of views about the study of the past.
Their work can be seen as a range of attempts to deal with a shared set of problems which have perhaps been most clearly formulated by the greatest among them — by Bloch and Febvre (the founders of the journal) in the first generation, by Braudel in the second, and more recently by Le Roy Ladurie.
In discussing the school I will draw on the work of the last two writers, who focus particularly clearly on the theoretical issue with which we are concerned.
The crusading spirit of the early members of Annales derived in part from their opposition to the way history was practised.
In the first place, diplomatic and political history were regarded as the centre of the discipline — the transaction of government business from month to month and year to year so that, according to the progenitors of the new approach, one could be forgiven for thinking that the only Frenchmen who had lived were cabinet ministers.
But even worse than this neglect of anything that happened outside the courts of Europe was the way that political history was distilled into a narrative, based on whatever literary evidence was at hand.
For not only was history of this sort anecdotal, prey to the prejudice and impressions recorded in diaries, letters or dispatches that happened to have survived.
It was also unduly limited in the kind of explanations it offered of the course of events, explanations which appealed overmuch to the actions and dispositions of individuals, stringing them together into a complex story of aims and intrigues.
In Braudel s words, it was a ‘refuge des passions et des jugements gratuits, domaine  du descriptif’.
If history was to become a respectable discipline, according to the contributors to Annales , it would have to eschew both this form and content.
Instead of an anecdotal narrative it must aspire to the rigorous standards of a science.
The narrow confines of political life must give way to total history, offering rich explanations of the multifarious aspects of the past.
These two aspirations are closely linked.
‘L'histoire totale’ is, for the members of Annales , in part the history of all sorts and conditions of men and women: of merchants and artisans, peasants and beggars, nurses and midwives, as well as ministers and aristocrats.
But it is also a history which tries to take account of the whole range of factors that shape human societies, from the character of their physical environments to sporadic peasant rebellions.
Rather than selecting the particular class of political events as the stuff of history, and then seeking to explain it by appealing to the play of national and personal interest, the Annales school advocates eclectic research into such diverse topics as economics, populations, social institutions, technologies and climate, designed to contribute to a complete picture of social life.
This demand for a broader perspective trenches on the form and content of history in that it involves both enquiry into new areas and novel modes of explanation.
However, because of their desire to promote the idea of history as a scientific discipline, the Annales school have not been equally well disposed to all aspects of the past.
Their opposition to political history stemmed in part, as we have seen, from their hostility to impressionistic narratives, and in their anxiety to escape this they have tended to favour subjects susceptible to quantitative analysis.
Thus much of their reputation is based on the results of statistical surveys of climate, demographic trends, price curves, and other quantitative indicators of growth and decline.
In defending this choice of subject matter Le Roy Ladurie has recently protested that it represents just whatever can be most readily understood in quantitative terms.
The study of politics, and ideas in general, which has so far lagged behind, must ultimately be incorporated into total history, and will become more accessible as the techniques of quantitative history grow in sophistication.
But that this is not the whole explanation can be seen from the fact that the members of Annales do not treat ‘l'histoire totale’ as a homogeneous body of facts and theories which all fit neatly together like a vast jigsaw.
Rather, they rely on a tripartite classification, originally set out by Braudel, to divide it into three distinct elements.
Braudel's categories are based on the idea that it is possible to distinguish various historical ‘times’.
Of course, the past constitutes a single ‘time’ in the sense that events can be arranged in chronological order.
But within this complete chronology we can discern some processes and states of affairs that are comparatively brief, others that last for an intermediate length of time, and some that go on for centuries or even millennia.
Within the first class of évenements , for example, are the brief spans of individual lives; within the second are economic trends and cycles lasting several generations; and in the third, the longue durée , are factors such as population size which may remain unchanged over long periods.
The choice of duration as the organising category of the past may seem arbitrary, or at best superficial; but Braudel implies that it serves to pick out states and processes of qualitatively distinct types, which have different sorts of impact on human affairs and demand to be studied separately.
In La Méditerranée he describes these three ‘histories’.
First comes the longue durée , ‘in which all change is slow, a history of constant repetition, ever-recurring cycles’.
Next comes the level of conjonctures , ‘of groups, collective destinies and general trends’, which must ‘meet two contradictory purposes.
It is concerned with social structures, that is with mechanisms that withstand the march of time; it is also concerned with the development of those structures.
It combines, therefore, what have come to be known as structure and conjoncture , the permanent and the ephemeral, the slow moving and the fast.’
Finally there are événements , ‘surface disturbances, crests of foam that the tides of history carry on their strong backs.
The history  of brief, rapid, nervous fluctuations, by definition ultra-sensitive; the least tremor sets all its antennae quivering.’
Total history must take account of all these — hence the organisation of La Méditerranée , which is divided into three parts.
But the historians of Annales have usually shown a preference for the history of the longue durée and of conjonctures , and Braudel, in particular, is hostile to the study of mere événements .
To understand the reasons for this choice, and to appreciate the work it has yielded, one must consider these fundamental categories more carefully.
At first glance it appears that Braudel has merely hit on a convenient fashion of dividing up the past, to bring it under control and make it easier for historians to encompass.
It goes without saying that a huge range of factors play some part in shaping the course of human affairs, and there are obvious advantages in a division of labour.
However, while this is true, it misses the point; for Braudel's choice of categories is guided by more than pragmatic considerations, and is based on a view of historical explanations.
The phenomena of the longue durée are background conditions that help to explain conjonctures , which in turn contribute to the explanation of événements .
‘Resounding events are often only momentary outbursts, surface manifestations of these large movements and explicable only in terms of them ’[my italics].
But what does each of these categories contain, and how are they related?
The idea of the longue durée , as it was originally formulated was quite straightforward.
Human life is affected and constrained by material factors that are comparatively permanent.
The climate partially determines what crops can be grown, the quality of the soil partially determines their yield, the size of a population partially determines the area of land it can cultivate, and so on.
Thus a detailed knowledge of the material conditions in which communities have lived will tell us about the constraints under which they have laboured; and this in turn will help us to understand some of their properties.
Such basic considerations, however, tend to provide more information about what was impossible than about what occurred, and their explanatory power is therefore limited.
We may know, for example, that vines cannot  be grown in areas where the average annual temperature is lower than 52°F, and can thus infer that they could never have been grown in Edinburgh.
But even if we discover that vineyards vanished from south east England at a time when the climate was getting colder, we still do not know for sure why they disappeared.
Perhaps it was because of the weather.
But the change might equally well be due to economic factors which made vine growing unprofitable.
The study of the purely material aspects of the longue durée , while fascinating in itself, and in some ways theoretically undemanding, is therefore only capable of telling us a little of what we want to know.
Perhaps it is for this reason that, in Braudel's work at least, it is much more generously defined to include various stable but non-material factors.
The trade routes of the Mediterranean, for example, and the volume of traffic they carried, help to explain the location, size and wealth of towns, which in turn affect their character as centres of commerce or industrial production.
Such features ‘become stable elements for an indefinite number of generations’.
Or, a more surprising inclusion, ‘examples of permanence and survival are to be found in the immense domain of culture’: the Latin civilisation of the late Empire, the ‘outillage mentale’ of the sixteenth century outlined by Febvre, or the geometrical treatment of pictorial space.
Additions such as these certainly enrich the idea of the longue durée ; but at the same time they complicate it by broadening the notion of constraint on which it depends and obscuring its relationship with conjonctures .
As we saw, geographical conditions are of interest to historians because they put constraints on society.
The same can no doubt be said of any ‘outillage mentale’.
But the relevant sense of constraint, and the aspects of society that are constrained in the two cases, are vastly different; and if the longue durée is to be more than a ragbag of everything that endures these disparities would have to be elucidated.
An awareness of these pitfalls has encouraged Braudel's successors to use the notion of the longue durée in a comparatively narrow sense to designate stable features of the environment which can be seen to constrain social conjonctures .
Moving on to consider the category of conjonctures , we find  problems parallel to those we have discussed occurring in, if anything, an exacerbated form.
The first is the question of its scope.
Conjonctures were originally viewed, it seems, as structures and processes of intermediate duration.
Unlike their counterparts in the longue durée , they were seen not so much as steady constraints with which societies had to contend over long periods, but as patterns of change which were themselves part and parcel of social life.
Thus among the most frequently cited examples of conjonctures are the increase in the population of western Europe during the sixteenth century, the rise and fall of European prices from 1791 to 1817 and 1817 to 1832, and the pattern of wages during the same period.
Apart from the fact that they can be measured, movements such as these are interesting because they can be used to explain other conjonctures , particularly changes in social structure.
The size and character of Mediterranean towns, for instance, responded to population growth, as did the size of land-holdings among the swelling ranks of the peasantry.
Because social changes which can be fitted into comparatively lengthy processes are yoked together with some structures in a single category, much of the history of conjonctures consists in relating one to another.
And this enterprise has proved extremely fruitful.
There remains, however, an interesting problem of definition.
In the case of processes, the division between those that make up the longue durée and those that belong to the sphere of conjonctures is bound to be rough; there is no absolute division between a gradual increase in population lasting for a century and a cycle of growth and decline lasting a mere seventy-five years, a fact reflected in the organisation of La Méditerranée .
And the same can be said of structures .
In practice, the distinction between the two categories seems to reflect, as I have suggested, the existence of two kinds of interest in the past: on the one hand a concern with steady constraints on social life, and on the other an interest in large-scale patterns of change.
But the relevant changes are further defined by being unintended and at least to some extent beyond the control of the societies they affected, either because of their intrinsic character, or because of the scale on which they occurred.
The increase in the size of the European population during the sixteenth century provides a particularly striking example of such a transition, for while it can be fairly accurately  charted and measured, its causes are not well understood.
We do not really know why a greater number of people began to survive into adulthood during this period.
Nevertheless, the fact that there was such a change casts light on a number of other conjonctures which permanently altered the character of European society.
Le Roy Ladurie argues, for example, that the pattern of land-holdings in the south west of France was affected they were increasingly divided up among the members of expanding families, so that the income of peasants fell.
On a broader geographical scale, the level of food production ceased to be enough to feed everyone, so that famine became an endemic problem, and institutionalised ways of dealing with vagrants and paupers began to be established throughout Europe.
Also on an international scale, the price of grain rose in response to demand, and this in turn affected wages.
History of this sort, which offers to explain the relations between properties of societies, has been enormously successful in the past thirty years or so and provides a clear conception of how the underlying interest of holism can guide social enquiry.
We may be more anxious to understand the constraints on individual actions and intentions, as well as the various kinds of factors that bypass them altogether, than the actions and intentions themselves.
However, in order to discover whether the history of the longue durée , and of structures and conjonctures , can be couched in the strongly counterfactual form spelled out, for example, by Miller, and can thus qualify as an example of concessive holist explanation, we need to consider its relations to the actions and intentions of individuals much more carefully.
The Annales school attempts to deal with this issue by appealing to the third category identified by Braudel — that of événements ; but to say quite what événements are is no easy task.
Braudel himself seems to think of them as brief episodes without significant consequences.
‘Personally, I should like to imprison [the term]and restrict it to the short-term.
The event is explosive, it is something new…
It blinds the eyes of contemporaries with clouds of smoke; but it docs not endure, and its flame is hardly visible.’
This definition is marked by an evasion which runs through all Braudel's work: first,événements are brief; but in addition, they ‘do not endure’, they are surface  manifestations of…larger movements.’
The implication that they are determined by other factors and of slight consequence occurs again and again; but Braudel can never bring himself to say it straight out, and indeed undercuts it in the third part of La Méditerranée where, for example, the defeat of Charles V and the Venetians by the Turks in 1538 is said to have had consequences which lasted over a third of a century.
This vacillation arises, in part, from the fact that such a variety of phenomena are classed as événements .
Wars, battles, the processes culminating in the breakdown of alliances, individual judgments, decisions and actions are all included, and the various tools of the traditional political historian are used to explain them.
Individuals, by the force of their personalities, are held responsible for the breaking of truces: ‘It was thanks to [the Pope]at any rate, that [the truce]was broken.
That one man should have revived, alone and with such speed, a still smouldering war, gives one to reflect on the role of individuals in the dramatic episodes of history’(sic).
Imperial policies are explained by individual passion and affection.
‘And yet this man [Charles V]was still possessed by one passionate desire: to pass on to his son Philip, the inheritance intact.
It was a dream dictated both by politics and by affection, for he loved this orderly, thoughtful and respectful son, the disciple he had schooled himself, both personally and from a distance.’
Similarly, a Spanish defeat by the French is put down to Charles V's stubbornness; the lackadaisical course of the war with the Turks is attributed to the Spanish lack of funds; and so with many other examples.
The catchall character of this category undoubtedly makes it more difficult for the members of the Annales to develop any clear sense of its relation to the history of structures and conjonctures .
Yet, if the central issues of both the nature and scope of holist explanation are to be investigated further, it is vital that such connections should be unravelled.
If we want to know when the counterfactuals definitive of holist explanation can be sustained, we shall have to study the links between constraints such as those imposed by the longue durée and the attributes of individuals in considerable detail; and this in turn requires the separation of the latter from the mélange of événements .
The failure to come to terms  with this task casts light on, though it does not excuse, the hectic character of the final part of Braudel's Méditerranée : even when connections are traced between conjonctures and the actions of individuals, they tend to leave the actions heavily under-determined — so much so, in some cases, that they are barely explained at all.
It remains true, nevertheless, that if the members of the school wish, as they say they do, to write ‘total history’, they must perforce deal with the relations between the properties of social wholes and those of individuals, which are the main focus of concessive holism.
This problem is most explicitly addressed by Le Roy Ladurie, and I shall reconstruct his view from his study The Peasants of Languedoc .
The opening chapters of this book trace the economic and demographic forces that shaped rural life in Languedoc throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries: the steady growth of the population, its effect on landholdings, the agriculture of the region, the  deterioration of real wages, and so on.
The central section, ‘New States of Consciousness and Social Change’ then deals with a range of beliefs and attitudes which are said to have followed in the wake of these developments, and in particular with what Le Roy Ladurie calls ‘a deep and sometimes lasting permutation in peasant mentality’.
The most dramatic outward sign of this change, according to Le Roy Ladurie, was a series of peasant rebellions which occurred at intervals throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Whereas country life had before been relatively quiescent, it now became unsettled and the foci of dissatisfaction altered; protests against taxes were regularly staged from about 1540, and after 1550 gave way to larger-scale insurrections such as those at Romans in 1580, in the south west during the 1590s, and, much later, the Camisard rebellion in the Cévennes which began in 1688.
Le Roy Ladurie's explanation of this transition invokes, first of all, the rapid spread of the French language to the land of the langue d'oc during the sixteenth century.
Because this diffusion was not even, and was far more marked where levels of literacy were comparatively high, it resulted in the growth of two cultural zones: on the one hand, French-speaking regions receptive to ‘foreign’ ideas, and on the other, rural areas  which retained the old language and the old ways of life.
This change paved the way for Protestantism, which first took hold where French was spoken — in a number of towns, and in the socially' atypical mountains of the Cévennes — and then spread to other rural areas.
The opposition to the Catholic church fostered by Calvinism was thus one important cause of anti-tithe strikes.
But it coincided, as Le Roy Ladurie is quick to point out, with the economic interests of the peasantry, whose standard of living was steadily declining.
Economic and religious factors are therefore held to play important and complementary parts in the explanation of peasant unrest: for those who lived off the land, conditions were grim and unyielding, and Calvinism offered a way of life which might, among other things, free them from the burden of the tithe.
However, Le Roy Ladurie sees the strikes and uprisings of this period as expressions or frustration rather than campaigns for political change.
In his view the peasantry (and indeed society as a whole) was caught in a conceptual bind; for although Protestantism provided the rudiments of a revolutionary ideology, it also distracted attention from the economic and political conditions which were the real source of their plight.
Intellec-tually unequipped to understand their position in society, peasants were correspondingly unable to see how to transform it, and their protests tended to take one of two forms: they were either aimed at specific local abuses, or grew into passionate, symbolic outbursts against a society they did not fully comprehend.
This perception leads Le Roy Ladurie to contrast the revolts of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries with what he regards as the national revolutionary movements of the Enlightenment:
Instead,
This teleological approach, which presents revolutions of the sixteenth century as failed attempts to realise the political programmes of the Enlightenment, runs through Le Roy Ladurie's work, and informs his attitude to specific classes of phenomena.
It is particularly noticeable in his discussion of what he regards as ‘irrational’ protest movements, such as those associated with witchcraft and satanism, and for our purposes these are of special interest since they highlight the strategy used by the members of the Annales school to explain individual beliefs and actions.
In The Peasants of Languedoc , satanism, witchcraft and possession are consistently treated as aberrant social practices.
They are seen as the ‘primitive’ side of the peasant consciousness and are contrasted with ‘the progress of Enlightenment’implied by the Reformation.
In charting them, Le Roy Ladurie frequently uses the device (a favourite of his) of describing them as infectious diseases, and, indeed, relies on a whole range of similar metaphors.
‘Beginning in 1850…the whole chain of bewitched mountains began to stir once more, the chimneys of these great factories of mass delirium started to smoke, and lines of force of demonic influence spread from the Pyrenees to the Jura across the langue d'oc- speaking heights of the Massif Central.’
In these ‘frenzied uprisings’‘the peasant consciousness suddenly broke loose from its moorings, fell prey to ancient deliriums, and abandoned itself to all its demons.
In default of a veritable liberation it embarked on the adventure of a satanic revolt.’
This way of thinking about  witchcraft and possession as manifestations of conscious and unconscious psychological states puts them in a particular light.
Some questions seem obvious and others peculiar.
Le Roy Ladurie himself characterises peasant witchcraft as expressing the frustration, anxiety and fear of people who were ‘disillusioned with ideologies of urban origin, brutalised after 1560 by war, and haunted by the spectres of misery and death — and often by fears of sexual failure’.
He therefore pays attention to some of its most spectacular and to our eyes irrational forms, such as a widespread castration complex and symbolic inversion.
And possession by the Holy Spirit, which was common among the Camisards, is put in the same light: riven by sexual frustration and guilt, this group suffered from mass hysteria in the form of fits and prophecies.
These explanations are fascinating in themselves, but nevertheless incorporate a certain bias.
For witchcraft as exemplified by a fear of castration, and the Camisard revolt as exemplified by hysterical symptoms, are seen as irrational practices.
They are fallings away from reason beyond conscious control, which require to be explained by an appeal to the unconscious.
In the course of his study Le Roy Ladurie thus employs two kinds of explanation.
On the one hand, his book contains accounts of various structural constraints such as population size, wage levels, the sort of crops that could be grown, and so forth.
Changes in these factors affect social organisation so that, to take a simple example, a greater number of people and a more or less constant amount of fertile land combined to reduce the size of holdings, which were divided among family members.
This answer to the problem of overcrowding is not thought to need any further explanation because it is assumed to be the rational course of action: people saw that it was the only feasible thing to do, and acted accordingly.
In this case individual beliefs and actions — the stuff of événements — are thus treated as an unproblematic response to structural variations.
On the other hand, Le Roy Ladurie employs a second sort of explanation to account for what he regards as irrational beliefs and behaviour.
Practices such as witchcraft are treated as the outcome of structural features, filtered  through the unconscious, and manifested in uncontrolled expressions of fear, guilt or frustration.
So between them, the two sorts of explanation treat beliefs and actions as either rational or unconscious responses to structures.
The fact that Le Roy Ladurie takes this dual approach is, I think, unsurprising, and derives from the problem of relating structures to individual beliefs and actions.
We saw earlier on that Braudel, faced with the need to explain particular événements , resorts to a disorderly assortment of intentional explanations.
Although Le Roy Ladurie's approach is less haphazard, he too switches back and forth between structural explanations that assume the rationality of individual agents, and those that appeal to the psychology of the unconscious.
The abruptness of these transitions is partly concealed by the categories imposed on the data: by the assumption, for example, that rebellion in pursuit of economic gain is rational, whereas a belief in witchcraft is irrational and escapist.
The fact that peasants seized opportunities to enrich themselves is put down to sheer good sense, an unproblematic response to structural changes, while the conviction that the Camisard prophets and prophetesses spoke with the voice of the Holy Spirit is regarded as obviously serving some psychological function.
To this extent Le Roy Ladurie simply foists off our own values on the peasants of Languedoc, and exploits the prejudices of his readers about what does, and does not, need explaining.
Le Roy Ladurie therefore offers explanations in which an appeal to structural constraints is complemented either by an unexamined presumption of individual rationality or by an equally unexamined conception of the unconscious.
But because the connections between these diverse types of explanation are not analysed, they do not throw any more light on the idea that holism and individualism answer to distinct explanatory interests.
We still have to ask how these are related, and how they function.
Le Roy Ladurie's assumption of rationality, unanalysed though it is, is used to bring the interests of holism and individualism in line.
The holist is enlightened by an account of the factors constraining people's actions.
The individualist interest is served by the assumption that people see the constraints as binding them and act accordingly.
Since there is no suggestion that their perception of their own situations may itself be explicable in holist terms, the two accounts are distinct, but are also complementary; the conceptual space occupied by agents reflects the constraints under which they labour.
Such a harmonious union between holism and individualism may sometimes be achieved.
But it may also be an uneasy truce, which can only be sustained as long as certain questions are not asked.
Once we enquire, for example, what range of options are available to individual agents, or why they make the particular choices they do, the unsettled differences between the two views begin to emerge.
Individualists who concede too much give up the very explanations which, from their perspective, make the phenomena intelligible.
And holists who allow the individual agent too much ground leave their interest unsatisfied.
Frequently, therefore, their explanations will not fit together into a single picture.
This tension is interestingly brought out by Miller, when he argues that even if holist and individualist stories can both be told, the latter lacks any explanatory force without the counterfactual backing characteristic of holism.
He elaborates the claim with the help of an example:
Miller's argument in this passage raises a number of issues.
First, and parenthetically, it serves to remind us that the difference between the interests underlying individualism and holism is not merely the difference between showing why something happened to happen and why it had to happen, and thus between descriptive and counterfactual forms of explanation.
In addition, as we saw in Chapter III, it concerns the kind of factor which makes the relevant counterfactual claims true.
Thus the view that stainless steel knives would have replaced carbon steel ones even if individual industrialists had acted differently is justified by appealing to the competition inherent in capitalist production.
This way of showing why a phenomenon is likely to occur by citing some social factor is what is characteristic of, and essential to, our interest in holist explanation.
But Miller's analysis of his example also invites us to consider in more detail how this is related to an individualist interest.
For when he spells out his conclusion, it appears to amount to the claim that, since people are not in general stupid, most cutlery executives would have seen the advantages of changing to stainless steel.
On the whole people can be expected to have ‘seen the facts’ and assessed the evidence correctly, and it is this generalisation that guarantees the truth of the counterfactual in question.
However, this judgment embodies a conception of individual rationality which is quite compatible with the individualist case, and thus obscures the point that holist explanations, while they may be complemented by individualist ones, need not be.
This feature of holism is brought out more clearly by G. A. Cohen who, in the course of discussing Marx's theory of history, gives an account of the kind of functionalism implicit in Miller's examples.
To take one of his cases, there are some industries in which an increase in the size of factories or workshops reduces the cost of production.
We may explain the fact that the production units of a particular industry have grown larger over a period of time by appealing to the economies this yields, and in doing so claim that a cause (increase in scale) occurred because of its propensity to have a certain effect (economies of scale).
Now, this example is analogous to the holist explanations proposed by Miller.
In the first case we considered, a belief shared by leading industrialists (their tendency to identify the interests of their own class with those of their country was attributed to the system of education, the media and so on.
We could now go on to attempt to explain the character of these institutions by citing their effect on leading capitalists — they are as they are partly because they encourage a belief which is functional in relation to the system as a whole.
Similarly, in Miller's second example, the shift by particular cutlery businesses from carbon to stainless steel is explained by its tendency to make their enterprises more competitive.
And the same change throughout the industry can be accounted for by the functional fact that only those firms which made this change would have survived the competition.
Although these instances serve to illustrate the character of holist explanation, and to show how it can occur without any individualist counterpart, they may be too isolated to be persuasive.
It is important to remember, however, that explanations of this type are also the stock-in-trade of such subjects as demography and criminology, which aim to establish generalisations relating social factors to human behaviour.
In these fields, too, we are sometimes able to identify social phenomena such as an increase in population size, which we can use to explain other phenomena, while at the same time being unable to identify any corresponding regularities in the behaviour or attitudes of individual agents.
It is true that, in all these cases, individualists will deny that we have arrived at an explanation.
We have discovered a connection, they will say, on the basis of which we can predict.
But until we have found out why the generalisation holds by complementing it with an account of the actions and attitudes of individuals, we will not have explained what is going on.
It is open to holists, however, to resist this conclusion, and Cohen distinguishes two ways in which they can do so.
First, although it may be true that functional explanations of the kind he discusses remain incomplete until we understand the mechanisms which sustain them, they may nevertheless be explanatory.
The justification for this view is partly pragmatic; as Cohen puts it, ‘it would be a mistake to refrain from taking those explanatory steps which are open to us, just because we should prefer to go farther than our current knowledge permits’.
But a willingness to accept claims about the functional relations between the properties of social.wholes and those of individuals as explanatory also stems from a sympathy with the underlying interest of holism.
Individualists who deny that these claims explain anything at all are, in effect, simply reasserting the hegemony of the interest from which individualism draws its life, while holists are pursuing their own concern with the constraining power of society.
Exponents of the two approaches are therefore at odds with one another.
But they are nevertheless able to agree that it is sometimes possible to elaborate functional relations of the sort we have considered.
For the individualist, the way to do this is clear: a complementary individualist story must be told.
But as Cohen suggests, echoing Miller's point, there are also cases where an individualist account adds nothing to the explanation.
This comes out most clearly in Cohen's own example of the connection between increases and economies of scale within a competitive economy.
As we saw earlier, the fact that the producing units of an industry increase in size over a number of years may be explained by the functional relation between their size and the cost of production.
Larger firms, by virtue of having expanded, are better able to survive in a competitive market.
If we ask in this type of case why businesses expanded, there may sometimes by no systematic explanation to be given.
Some firms may have grown in an unplanned, unforeseen manner, others may have expanded in order to acquire greater prestige and so on.
Suppose that, in the first case, we can give a detailed account of how expansion occurred, and in the second can recount the calculations and decisions of the firm's executives.
These histories, taken singly or  together, do not seem to tell us what we want to know, since they do not help us to understand why cutlery firms in general increased in size.
Rather, they reveal what Cohen calls a Darwinian mechanism: in a climate of scarcity, competition will select for firms that are efficient, whatever the reasons for their efficiency.
Cases such as those discussed by Miller and Cohen provide evidence for the claim that holist explanations are sometimes autonomous in the sense that no individualist account serves to supplement them.
In this chapter, I have sought to defend this concessive holist view by drawing attention to the explanatory interest underlying it.
Adopting this pragmatic approach, I have thus sought to justify the main general conclusion to which my whole argument has been directed: that the way to heal the rift between holism and individualism is to recognise that concessive holism offers a superior approach to the business of social explanation.
CONCLUSION
Holist explanations are widely acknowledged to play a vital part in our understanding of the social world.
Before their status can be assured, however, the challenge traditionally posed by individualism must be overcome, and the entrenched opposition between the two views transcended.
In the course of this book I have argued that, despite its unyielding appearance, the problem of holism can indeed be resolved: the stalemate between individualists and holists stems from their failure to perceive a number of dimensions which, once they are made explicit, point toward a solution.
The aim, then, has been to see the problem afresh, and a first reformulation of it was offered in Chapter iii.
I claimed there that holists and individualists are not in fact disagreeing principally over the issue of reduction as has generally been supposed.
They are more fundamentally divided by their disparate conceptions of the human individual — a fact which lies at the heart of their views of explanation.
Crucial to individualism is the conviction that people are agents who determine the course of events both by choosing between existing options, and by creating the options themselves.
Good explanations must accordingly respect this vision by giving pride of place to the individual beliefs and purposes which shape the social world.
Holists, on the contrary, are concerned to understand the ways in which individuals are constrained by their social environments and argue that the best explanations are informed by this standpoint.
The main difference between the two approaches is thus their commitment to discrete ranges of causal factors — to the beliefs, actions and intentions of individuals on the one hand, to the constraining properties of social wholes on the other.
Having identified this implicit feature of the debate in Part I, I went on in Part II to ask how the holist approach has fared: how  powerful and wide-ranging are the holist explanations currently proposed by social scientists?
I argued in Chapters iv and v that the ambition of absolute holism to supplant individualism completely is too strong to be realised.
We cannot now implement the whole of that programme and must look for a more concessive approach, capable of accommodating the competing strengths of individualism.
Holists therefore face the pressing task of effecting a compromise: they must somehow overcome the opposition between their own view of the individual and that held by individualists in order to arrive at a coherent theory.
In Chapter vi I suggested a way in which this can be achieved.
Since the conflict between holism and individualism runs so deep, the two modes of explanation cannot be simply amalgamated, and no metaphysical resolution is forthcoming.
Each approach reflects, however, a particular kind of concern with social explanation, and the two views are most fruitfully regarded as the outcomes of distinct explanatory interests.
These motivate the separate preoccupations of holists and individualists, each with a characteristic type of question, and account for the fact that they are satisfied by different sorts of answers.
For the individualist, the central task is to understand individuals as agents, and thus as far as possible to understand the social world as the outcome of options and choices taken and made by particular actors.
Holists, by contrast, have a different interest.
Instead of cherishing a liberal conception of the individual, they direct their attention to the social regularities which control classes of people.
By isolating these features, they argue, we can arrive at explanations which either elucidate the relations between large-scale social phenomena, or relate these to individual actions and attitudes.
Once we recognise that holists and individualists are pursuing separate interests, it becomes clear that we need a scheme which will accommodate them both, and I have argued that the Annales school offers us the seeds of such an approach.
Their categories of structure and événement (though not designed for these purposes, and thus serving them only crudely), allow a place for both holist and individualist explanations without requiring that they should always fit neatly together.
The charge that Braudel fails to relate événements to structures is, as we saw, amply justified; but it comes to seem less destructive once we think of holists and individualists as engaged in separate projects.
This  point comes out most explicitly in Le Roy Ladurie's work on Languedoc, where the explanations he offers have two kinds of appeal.
From a holist perspective it is Le Roy Ladurie's analysis of the impact of structural factors which is illuminating, whereas, as far as individualists are concerned, it is his implicit assumption of instrumental rationality which does the real explanatory work.
In some of the cases he deals with these interests supplement one another; but they nevertheless remain distinct.
It may be objected that my argument defines individualism too narrowly; for rather than contrasting the properties of individuals as such with those of social wholes, I have focussed on a particular range of traits, and in doing so may be said to have neglected properties to which the individualist can legitimately appeal.
But this omission is a consequence of my claim that individualism is fundamentally designed to sustain a conception of individuals as agents.
The resulting emphasis on their purposive properties — on their choices, decisions, intentions, actions and beliefs — is, as I have argued, what divides individualists from holists.
This means that, while we can acknowledge the existence of other kinds of individual properties, they are relatively incidental to the problem of holism.
If humans were not perceived as capable of autonomous action, the question of how we should explain the social world would be transformed, in a way that — as Althusser's work reveals — it is hard to imagine.
Perhaps we might then be concerned with issues such as the relative merits of explanations that appeal to behavioural drives and those that appeal to ideological struc-tures; but the problem of holism as we now know it would simply not exist.
My account of individualism therefore emphasises a set of features, central to this problem, which also define a distinctively individualist interest in explanation.
To invoke the idea of an interest, as I have done, to resolve the dispute between holists and individualists is to allow that the canons of explanation in the social sciences are both pragmatic and normative.
Holists and individualists may both be said to have an overarching interest in understanding the mechanisms which operate in the social world, but beneath this unifying umbrella their eyes are fixed on different features on the landscape, and their respective theories are to be judged in relation to the tasks they set themselves.
A theory which provides wide-ranging holist explanations, for example, will be successful, not in the light of any general conception of what it is to explain things, but in the light of the much more limited interest guiding holism.
So in this sense the approach is a pragmatic one, which bears on the here and now rather than on eternity.i At the same time, to formulate the problem in terms of interests, as I have done, is to focus attention on the moral priorities embedded in holism and individualism.
To pursue one of these modes of explanation is inevitably to adopt a strongly normative picture of what the social world is like and why we should bother with it.
So the claim that there can be more than one legitimate interest brings with it the corollary that explanation can be underpinned by more than one set of norms.
Anyone who follows this approach wholeheartedly must therefore be prepared for eclectic results: on the one hand theories inspired by a commitment to a moral ideal of autonomy and individual responsibility; on the other, work which aims to subvert that very view.
This moral variety may seem a high price to pay for the resolution of the problem of holism.
But it is a central implication of the argument I have presented that this price will have to be paid.
This being so, it is all the more important to end by underlining what I take to be gained by the acceptance of my proposal that concessive holism should be adopted as the most fruitful approach to social explanation.
The argument I have advanced aims to shake a widespread and intuitive adherence to individualism by putting it on a par with its holist rival.
As we have seen, individualists faced with holist explanations commonly ask for more.
All they have been offered, they feel, is a gesture toward an explanation — a menu of dishes whose aromas and flavours have yet to be tried.
They are inclined to forget that holists, when served individualist explanations, are assailed by a like hunger.
To satisfy their interests they too need to know more, and in the meantime suffer the same sense of incompleteness.
This insensitivity on the part of individualists is due, as I have argued, both to a failure of imagination and to moral nervousness; they are alarmed by an approach which, as one commentator puts it, sees ‘human individuality as the fantasy of a creature constitutionally unable to apprehend its rigidly social location’.
But to attack holism on  these grounds is, as I have sought to show, merely to reassert the alleged hegemony of the individualist interest.
Why this should be our only or even our overriding concern remains as opaque as ever.
In effect it is merely to restate the fact that the intuitions that sustain the case for individualism in explanation are largely our intuitions.
It has been the main argument of this book, however, that this objection ought not to be allowed to have the last word.