

Professions, Knowledge and Power
THE RIVALS: AN ESSAY ON THE SOCIOLOGICAL TRADES
P. M. STRONG
One of the many problems that sociology faces is the sheer number of its rivals — unlike, say, physics, which may be reserved mostly for physicists, anyone can play.
Not only are there competing social sciences, but everyone has to be something of a social scientist just to get by in this world.
Everyone, that is, is obliged to gather data and test hypotheses.
Although there may be more or less rigorous ways of doing this it cannot be denied that the central activity is the same.
Thus, as well as an ethno-methodology, there is an ethno-sociology, an ethno-psychology and so on.
There is also a third form of competition, one which comes neither from the academy, nor from the laity, one by which we are all influenced but which rarely receives the attention it deserves: novelists, journalists, film-makers and dramatists are, at least in part, also professional students of the social world.
Their primary audiences may differ, as may some of their aims and, in consequence, their modes of analysis and communication, but quite a few of their findings and methods are the same, a fact which is all too often ignored, at least by ourselves — the consumers of our wares often make far less of a distinction.
Here, as elsewhere (Bittner 1965), we seem to have been misled by an essentialist definitional procedure which concentrates on the differences between phenomena and neglects those other matters which they have in common.
There may, of course, be other motives in all this.
We  sociologists have had good reason to be stand-offish.
To breach the university's walls and claim a serious place therein, sociology, like the other social sciences, has been obliged to draw a fairly rigid line.
Its demarcation from those other professional analysts who cater to the mass market, has had to be made as severe as possible.
We have felt obliged to play up those special things which we alone do and to keep quiet about those which we hold in common.
However, now that we have gained some sort of place within the academy, another possibility suggests itself.
Might we not learn something from a closer look at our rivals' activities?
This is not, of course, a new suggestion and, to a rather limited extent, it is one which has already been followed.
What I wish to argue here is that far more could be gained from a serious study of others' methods and findings.
At the same time, such a study might throw an interesting light on the way we currently analyse our popular rivals.
There is some evidence that sociology's analysis of professions such as medicine is biased by its own ambitions (Strong 1979b).
How much more may we be biased against direct competition?
How far, for example, are scathing exposés of media bias simply knocking copy (Anderson and Sharrock 1979).
What relevance has this to law and to medicine?
Two answers may be given: first, just as they  illuminate many other areas of social life, the methods and findings of our rivals may help us understand the work of the professions (to illustrate this, some of my examples will be drawn from medical novels; no doubt legal novels will be equally instructive); second, it is not clear how far we can go in understanding other occupations' behaviour unless we grasp that of our own.
SOME SIMILARITIES
We may begin by considering some of those traits which, perhaps unexpectedly, the sociological trades share in common.
Here, the first point to note is their mutual influence.
On the one hand, large parts of sociology have grown directly out of the literary and journalistic traditions.
The most obvious example is that of Park, a central figure in the Chicago School, who had been a journalist as well as having studied at Heidelberg (Dingwall,et al .
1980).
But there are many other, rather more neglected influences.
Steiner  (1978) has argued that the study of both internal and external speech derives from the novel, and before that from the letter and the diary, and, before that even, from meditational religious exercises.
Moreover, not only techniques but whole analyses have been borrowed.
Trilling (1972) argues that Diderot was a crucial influence on Hegel.
Likewise, Kumar (1978) sees Dickens and other nineteenth-century novelists as centrally informing the sociological vision of the industrial revolution.
Similarly, although the ethnography of British rather than colonial life is only a recent development within academic sociology, the discipline having been associated with the statistical method from its earliest beginnings (Abrams 1968), there has been, for over a century, a major tradition of such work by novelists, journalists and social reformers (Keating 1976); a tradition which culminated in the work of Orwell, perhaps the most influential British social analyst of this century.
At the same time, one may, tentatively, argue that social science, in its turn, has begun to affect its competitors' production, at least in the United States.
Two distinct trends may be discerned, though the same writer may work in both conventions.
On the one hand, the growing cult of the fact may well account for the modern American cultivation of its opposite, the surreal fiction of Heller, Pynchon and Doctorow; if realism is captured by sociology, some novelists may take refuge in surrealism.
On the other hand, there is the development of increasingly ethnographic forms and methods within both the novel and journalism.
Discussions of this hybrid, called ‘faction’ or ‘the new journalism’by some (Kakutani 1980; Wolfe 1975), focus principally on the overlap and rivalry between the novel and journalism.
One may also surmise a sociological influence.
This emerges most clearly in ‘Radical Chic’(Wolfe 1975) where Wolfe's ethnography is prefaced by a review of the sociological literature, but the genre as a whole, though typically lacking such overt ambitions, has some of the flavour of social science research.
It emphasises lengthy and direct involvement with one's subjects, sometimes over a period of years; it places great stress on the recording of actual speech; and it stresses the need to consider the apparently trivial, the story behind the story, the background that is normally omitted from conventional journalism.
This mutuality of influence is matched by a mutual ambition.
Even if social analysis is something which everyone does, those  who engage in it professionally are still tempted by delusions of grandeur.
Indeed, perhaps the principal occupational deformation in the written arts, the social sciences and in journalism is the belief that one's particular profession holds the key to the meaning of social life.
Though some apparently think otherwise (Runciman 1970), there seems little doubt that most sociologists have a very high opinion of their calling (Collins 1975).
Indeed, there is a touching tendency for each social science to assume that it, quite plainly, is the Queen of the Sciences.
This egocentric, if understandable, belief can be found elsewhere too.
Poets seem no less ambitious on occasion.
There is Shelley's famous claim, in ‘A Defence of Poetry’, that ‘poets are the unacknowledged legislators of mankind’, the equally grandiose claim of the French poet René Char, ‘A chaque effrondrement des preuves, le poète répond par une salve d'avenir’, which very roughly translates as, ‘Wherever man's knowledge is found wanting, the poet sallies forth with a vision of the future’(cited in Steiner (1971)), and the German cult of the Poet or Dichte (Gay 1970).
Journalists, likewise, scarcely seem reticent in their claims.
Of course, just as sociologists and poets worry a lot about their actual influence, journalists may often see themselves as hacks and hackettes.
Nevertheless, to call oneself the Fourth Estate is hardly unambitious, while the very names and nicknames of newspapers tell us much about their occupational pretensions —The Times (the Thunderer), the Guardian , the Globe , the Tribune , the Observer , the Examiner , the Mirror and Le Monde .
As this list also reminds us, journalists seem to worry as much as sociologists about their proper analytical role.
Should one simply observe, examine, or, if a mirror, reflect the times, or, should one be a guardian or a tribune of the people?
Similarly, just as sociologists or some of them, develop revolutionary tendencies from time to time, so too do poets from Wordsworth to Blok.
More common, perhaps, is a desire to reform.
Recent medical novels, for example, such as those by Shem (1980) and by Douglas (1977, 1980a, 1980b) share a suspicion of high-technology medicine and a desire to treat patients in a more humane fashion which is very close to their counterparts in medical sociology.
At the same time one may suspect that, despite these occasional ambitions, whether revolutionary or reformist, journalists, novelists and sociologists are typically analysts rather than practitioners.
Advocacy is of course a central component in each, without which they would be weaker, but so, at the same time, is a certain scepticism and distance.
Each is marked by an engagement with and a retreat from the world, a constant movement backwards and forwards which ends, if one stays in the profession, largely, though not wholly, in a withdrawal, for these are the picturing not the tinkering trades.
Commentators who are too committed to particular types of action limit their appeal.
We also share, at least in part, a common location in the academy.
Sociology has come very late to the university, compared with the other social sciences, and although it has found a base there in a way which the arts or journalism have not, even they have increasingly strong academic connections.
Not only are there now departments of journalism and creative writing but the academy is now a central source of employment for many writers (as witness that modern phenomenon the university novel); its members and ex-members increasingly comprise the major audience for many arts; and, ‘English’ has become a theoretical subject like any other.
Since they are analysts not practitioners, sociologists, writers and journalists all have relatively weak professional organisations in bourgeois democracies though, given their different working conditions, the NUJ is much stronger than the BSA or PEN.
They also share a common interest in free speech or, more accurately, freer writing.
All three trades are vulnerable to censorship and where that is not practised overtly each, in their different ways, can be bought.
Jobs, commissions, grants, pensions, patronage of one kind or another, all pose common dilemmas.
National traits are also important.
Just as there are distinctive national sociologies, even if the differences are somewhat less marked than formerly (Shils 1980), so these are mirrored in the arts (and, to a somewhat lesser extent, in journalism).
Shem's technique for describing the life of the junior hospital doctor, derives from that modern American surrealism described earlier, while Douglas's more restrained, more documentary style stems from the British tradition of Powell, Isherwood and Amis.
To this list of common origins and influences, of shared ambitions and institutions, one must also add a common interest in research, a keen theoretical ambition — on some occasions at least— and a fascination with speech and what it may reveal.
Research is paraded as strongly by many journalists and novelists as it is by sociologists.
Journalists conduct interviews, research  documents, undertake joint projects with Insight teams and hire quantitative researchers to undertake polls.
And so it is with novelists.
Le Carré flies to Hong Kong; Arthur Hailey studies Ford and airport management; historical novelists like Farrell produce meticulous reconstructions of the Indian Mutiny and the Irish troubles; traditional crime writers check on poisons, and novelists of manners keep diaries to record events and people in much the same fashion as ethnographers.
Theoretical ambition is perhaps less obvious amongst journalists and writers but, in a way, this is no less true of sociology, where a lengthy tradition and major career constraints keep most research and theory well apart.
For all this, some practitioners of each trade still manage to combine the two.
One can, however, be misled here.
Sociologists and journalists with theoretical ambitions typically announce these in a somewhat ponderous fashion.
In the novel, by contrast, such aims may well be concealed.
An example may, in consequence, be worth considering at some length.
Take, for instance, the series of twelve novels by Anthony Powell,A Dance to the Music of Time .
Many reviewers have seen this as a study of the author's times, as an amusing documentary record of literary and bohemian life in London from the 1920s to the 1960s, and so it is.
However, more specifically theoretical concerns may also be discerned, though extensive theoretical passages are rare (Spurling 1977).
On my reading, the series is also a study of character, or characters.
What sorts of people are there in this world?
How far do they change?
To what extent is character immutable?
These are the questions to which the series is addressed.
This theoretical concern is more readily seen if we consider the series, not as a piece of psychiatry or social psychology, the only social sciences to have considered character thus far, but instead as something more akin to interpretative sociology.
Thus, while Freud receives some attention, as in Powell's respectful treatment of General Conyers, a late convert to Freudianism, his most favoured analysts are the English Renaissance writers on character, Aubreys and Burton, who prefer a more naturalistic description of the range and variety of adult character.
In line with this, his observations are drawn, not from the consulting room, but from the mundanities of everyday intercourse, while very great pains are taken to record only what the narrator directly  observed, or had reported to him on good authority.
He certainly engages in speculation as to what might have happened but treats it as such, continually emphasising that multiple interpretations of the data are possible, that there are many important matters to which he has not had access and that only limited and tentative conclusions may be drawn.
His method is to record what happens, over the course of sixty years of the narrator's life, to the large group of people that he meets and meets again during this period; what they made of themselves and what he made of them.
This explicit treatment of his own life as data is further exemplified by his treatment of dialogue.
Like several other British novelists in the realist tradition, he presents dialogue directly, and unadorned by any authorial comment.
As in qualitative sociology, dialogue is seen as evidence and, therefore, to be presented and digested on its own.
Interpretation and comment come either before or after the evidence, not during, and are explicitly defined as such.
Dialogue is treated as an actual record of what happened, to be carefully distinguished from the observers' reactions and speculations.
Finally, he makes considerable use of ‘natural experiments’, the sociological, or in this case literary, device, of studying those natural contrasts which crop up from time to time.
Two comparisons are central here, the first being those incongruous occasions, of which the book is full, when characters that he has previously encountered in quite disparate walks of life, happen to meet.
A further, equally powerful device, is that of the Second World War.
Prior to this, he has introduced a series of characters from a great range of settings.
War-time mobilisation acts as a single institution which grades them all according to its distinct purposes, thus serving as an external check upon their nature quite separate from the whims of the observer and the contingencies of their previous situation in life.
It is therefore possible to see Powell as making a serious empirical and theoretical contribution towards the development of a sociology of character.
Indeed, for those interested in observational methods, it is hard to see how a longitudinal study of any magnitude could be carried out in any other way.
One might, however, still argue that this work, and novels like it, merely ape social science conventions: that, whereas sociologists actually have research designs, cite data and distinguish between warranted and more tentative conclusions, novels are simply works of fiction, mere simulacra of the real thing.
There is, of course, something to this argument and some crucial differences between literature and social science will be considered later.
For the moment it is worth concentrating on the shared concern for speech which is typical of both the written arts and, increasingly, of sociology.
For Powell, as for many modern sociologists, speech is the central data source, indeed the most characteristic human product.
In consequence, both share a central belief in displaying speech as evidence.
Of course, novelists have a license to invent their speech, and thus to heighten its qualities for dramatic impact, which is not granted to the journalist or sociologist.
Whereas in sociology dialogue is a found object, produced ideally by forces external to the writer, it is the creation of literary authors.
However, in several respects this divide is not as great as might appear.
Not only is the method of demonstration the same but, given the research that novelists do, it cannot be claimed that their dialogue is wholly invented.
Even the surreal speech that is so distinctive a feature of Orton's comedies was based in part on the systematic collection of real-life instances (Lahr 1980).
Moreover, the methods followed by interpretative sociologists in the selection and analysis of speech bear certain other important resemblances to those used by literary artists.
If the sociologist is present at the moment of speech-production, whether as observer or interviewer, then he or she plays some part in the creation of the dialogue.
Unless mechanical recording is used, sociologists necessarily invent at least some of what they report.
Besides, though sociologists may not legitimately seek to heighten or improve the speech they collect, for purposes of quotation they certainly seek out the most concentrated, the most dramatic instances they can find.
Finally, in informally analysing their material with colleagues, they commonly exaggerate for dramatic effect, using a whole range of literary devices.
Often, it is only after the story or the joke that they realise that this was no joke, that this contained important elements of the truth.
In the preliminary stages of analysis, dramatic methods can therefore play a central part in hypothesis-generation.
If the quotation used by the qualitative sociologist is not too far from the heightened dialogue of the literary artist, it follows that, with only a little licence, one may use the work of at least some novelists much as one might use that of fellow ethnographers.
A personal example can be drawn from my own observational study of doctor-patient consultations (Strong 1979a).
One of the central interpretative difficulties that I faced was the lack of comparable material from other studies.
In particular, whereas I had fairly strong evidence that one particular set of rules, the bureaucratic format as I called it, was standard in NHS consultations and common in the American consultations on which I had data, what I took to be a further distinct mode, the ‘charity’ format, was used by only one of the American doctors in the study.
Was this simply an  idiosyncrasy of this particular doctor, or not?
Consultations with other doctors in Britain suggested that something like this format may well have been fairly common in the past with the very poorest patients, while modern studies of casualty departments revealed that something approximating to it was still used with the most stigmatised of patients.
I therefore included it as a separate mode although my analysis remained highly tentative.
The following dialogue, however, which in certain respects closely resembles the charity format, suggests a wider incidence of the form, and in turn, a broader analysis of its origins:
Dr
How long has she been ill?
Mother (M)
Five days now.
Dr

(Whispers to Feldsher)Diphtheria.
Why have you left it so long?
(To Mother)
Grandmother (GM.)
Five days, sir!
Five days!
Dr
Quiet, woman, you're only in the way!
Why have you left it so long?
Five days?
Hmm?
(to M)
M

(Sinking to knees and banging head on floor)Give her medicine.
I'll kill myself if she dies.
Dr
Get up at once or I won't talk to you.
(M. gets up.
GM. starts praying).
Feldsher
That's what they're all like.
These people!
M.

(Furiously)Does that mean she's going to die.
Dr

(Quietly)Yes, she'll die.
M.
Give her something!
Help her!
Give her some medicine!
Dr
What medicine can I give her?
Go on, you tell me.
The little girl is suffocating, her throat is already blocked up.
For five days you kept her ten miles away from me.
Now what do you  want me to do?
GM.
You're the one who's supposed to know.
Dr
Shut up!
This dialogue is from a story by Bulgakov (1976).
I have left the dialogue unchanged but removed some of the author's comments and set it out in sociological rather than novelistic conventions.
The story was first published in Russia ten years after the revolution.
Bulgakov had trained as a doctor and had spent 1917–18 working in a remote peasant community, an experience which formed the basis for a collection of short stories.
Whereas I had seen the doctor who used the charity format as something of a villain, Bulgakov portrays himself as a hero in these stories and plainly expects his Soviet readership to do the same.
I had explained the open abuse of patients in the charity format as largely the product of the doctor's belief in the idleness, immorality and stupidity of her patients; she was white, her patients black and poor.
For Bulgakov, by contrast, though he certainly views his patients as culturally primitive, the point of such a style is to force the benefits of modern medicine on an ignorant, superstitious peasantry.
Only by being so aggressive will his patients learn to consult immediately, to take proper precautions and so on.
Thus, this particular story ends happily.
The doctor performs a tracheotomy, much against the women's will; the little girl recovers, and as the Feldsher remarks later, from then on his practice flourishes.
The peasants believe he has performed a miracle and, thereafter, flock to him.
He in turn comforts them as best he can with modern medicine.
And here again there is a link.
For, of all the doctors I observed, the doctor who used the charity format was the most concerned to emphasise the scientific basis of western medicine, not just to me but to her patients also.
She, above all, was concerned to root out ignorance and dispel superstition.
SOME DIFFERENCES
Having argued that sociology is rather closer to journalism and the literary arts than some might imagine, I now turn to consider those differences that do, after all, divide them: in particular what makes social science scientific?
Perhaps the most central differences between the conventional literary artist and the journalist or social scientist is the very different nature of the truth which they claim to serve.
The journalist and social scientist seek to establish that their claims are firmly based on actual incidents and specific individuals.
Thus, even though they may for professional purposes, guarantee their subjects' anonymity in return for access, they nevertheless stress that behind the ‘sources in Whitehall’ or ‘the people of Hicktown’there are indeed real people; thus establishing both their veracity and their morality.
By contrast, artists normally strive, at least supposedly, for a general but not a specific truth, for a truth to life — however defined — but not a truth to particular individuals.
Thus the morality of artists is often established in quite the reverse fashion to that of sociologists.
Instead of guarantees that the story really happened, we get promises that it has all been made up.
Here is an example, picked at random, of this somewhat implausible claim:
The persons and incidents described in this book are fictional: any similarity to specific individuals and events is unintended by the author.
The places too — with the exception of certain points of interest in New York — are imaginary and not intended to represent specific places.
Thus one exalts facts, the other the imagination; both conceal the extent to which they necessarily make use of the other's procedures.
At the same time, such rhetoric does point to a very real difference.
Gellner (1974, p.28) puts it this way:
In any system of ideas or convictions, truth is the first and pre-eminent consideration, and its absence cancels any other possible virtues.
This point may now seem obvious or even trite.
Yet its sustained and ruthless application is anything but innocuous.
It is radical, revolutionary and deeply disturbing.
It requires that we look not to things, not to the world, but instead to the validity of what we know about things or the world….
So real intellectual sovereignty lies in the norms of cognition…
A sustained concern for truth therefore entails the public display of one's methods, for only in this way does one reveal not what one  knows but how one knows it.
And it is this public display which is the essence of science.
For what is displayed can be checked by others, and, if possible, reproduced by them.
Whereas writers and even journalists aim to construct individual works, works that stand on their own, the only novelty allowed the scientist is to be first.
After that, ideally, everyone should be able to do the same.
All they have to do is follow the methods.
Scientists' methods are public, available to everyone after publication; those of artists are trade secrets, part of their mystery, and are typically concealed.
Here, then, is a vital difference.
At the same time, one cannot go too far with this.
Not only may some modern novelists display at least some of their methods, but it would appear that even the hardest of natural scientists fail to spell out all of the procedures which they follow in their research, indeed that they are sometimes unable to do so (Mulkay 1979).
A central part of methods it would seem is tacit knowledge, developed and shared by those who work together but resting unformulated and thus unavailable to those without personal contact.
Finally, at least in the social sciences, there would seem to be strong social influences on which methods do get displayed and which are ignored.
In sociology, for example, we are most explicit about those procedures which we ourselves have invented or developed, that is quantitative procedures.
Most qualitative methods, however, since they pre-date the discipline, are largely ignored in qualitative reports.
There has been little methodological writing about them until very recently; there are major researchers, such as Goffman, with many volumes to their credit, who have not published a single line on their techniques; and, while quantitative data are conventionally available to other researchers for re-analysis, no such traditions exists in qualitative research; field-notes, indeed are often jealously guarded.
Science is therefore public, or at least normally strives to be.
However, in another, crucial sense it is closed off from the world.
Indeed, it is this central ambiguity in its relation to the world, and the specific form that this ambiguity takes, which is one of its most distinctive features.
Its isolation from the world stems from the revolutionary nature of the search for truth.
All radical movements, as Bittner (1963) notes, seek a unified and internally consistent interpretation of the meaning of the world.
As such, they require for their survival and growth a fairly strict demarcation from the fuzzy, ad hoc and heterogeneous meanings  of everyday life.
An active segregation from the world is the standard radical policy.
However, the very procedures by which the radicalism so necessary to science is maintained, may also serve to limit and curtail scientific investigation.
This problem is but one instance of the general paradox which confronts any kind of radical movement or occupation which is more than purely self, regarding.
Radicalism can only be maintained by separation from the world and yet, where this outer world is still of interest to the inner group, whether as object of study or object of practice, it must also be constantly admitted, a process which continually threatens either the faith of the practitioner or the rigour of the analyst.
Since science's primary role is that of commentator rather than practitioner, the set of transformation rules and practices by which the radical's dilemma is resolved have taken a special form.
Whereas radical movements of a more practical nature often proclaim that they have found the truth and try to establish a world-order based upon this, doubt is firmly institutionalised within the scientific realm.
Science travels hopefully but rarely claims that it has arrived.
It allows the world the chance of proving it wrong, though ‘the world’ can only do this on the scientists' terms.
To put this more concretely: scientists try to enforce a set of rules which place strict limits on the entry of the outside world into their realm.
Every scientific paper, be it ever so short and its subject ever so tiny, is nevertheless supposed, at least in principle, to make claims about and build upon, in a logical and verifiable fashion, our knowledge of the rest of the entire natural and social world; an ambitious aim.
Thus, supposedly, nothing can be admitted to our writings unless it is capable of being checked by the reader, either via the presentation of original data and a methods section or through reference to other work which upholds similar standards.
Everything else must either be explicitly held in abeyance or overtly assumed for present purposes (the ceteris paribus or etcetera clause in science).
In this fashion the outer world is admitted to the corpus of scientific knowledge only after it has, at least in theory, undergone the most rigorous scrutiny; a scrutiny which is practically embodied in the use of external references by scientific journals.
Moreover, every member of every discipline has a right, even a duty, to challenge, disprove or  modify what has earlier been agreed or just taken for granted.
Nothing is sacred, even after it has undergone positive vetting.
These sceptical, cautious and cloistered arrangements constitute the distinctive institutions of science which separate it from other more worldly activities.
Within it, ideally, one's audience and judges are solely one's colleagues who, again ideally, have, like oneself, a purely disinterested commitment to truth.
By contrast, sociology's more popular rivals are necessarily constrained by the requirements of their own, rather different, audience, the mass audience, whose interests are more practical, more ideological or more aesthetic.
At the same time, of course, one must remember that these are only idealisations.
The peculiarly disinterested institution of science develops only in special circumstances and remains constantly vulnerable.
According to Collins, the collegial pursuit of independent truth arises under the following three conditions: the development of an educational system large enough for teachers to become inward-looking; a relative autonomy from outside control; and some degree of internal differentiation within the school system — the key group in the development of science are those most insulated from the outside world, the teachers of teachers (Collins 1975).
But, even given these conditions, and the firm creation and institutionalisation of science, the outer world constantly presses upon it.
Scientists face a constant struggle to segregate themselves from the inducements offered by governments, pressure groups and publishers, all of which may provide alternative sources of funding and prestige to those of their colleagues.
There is a never-ending struggle to ensure academic control of, or representation upon, grant-giving bodies; to ensure freedom of publication — and to make sure that the line between academic and non-academic publishing is distinct.
A struggle that is made all the harder by the fact that, at least within the social sciences, the majority of academic practitioners have many other aims besides the scientific.
The pursuit of ideological, practical and aesthetic aims dominates large areas of social science and constantly threaten the distinction between the different types of picturing trades.
Just as journalists and novelists may have theoretical ambitions so, in their turn, academics often write with others in mind besides their colleagues.
In actual practice, audiences, interests and markets overlap quite considerably.
Nevertheless, despite such blurring, the constant academic struggle does achieve something.
The peculiar cognitive emphasis of science is made socially manifest in that isolated collegial structure which renders science distinct.
The other features which are often claimed as defining characteristics are at once both subordinate to this and, on closer examination, clearly visible in many non-scientific enterprises.
Certainly within science they are to be found in a highly concentrated form and used in a far more rigorous and systematic fashion.
But the system and rigour is the product of the peculiar institutional and ideological form that science takes.
Cumulativeness, for example, the way in which scientists explicitly build, via references and reviews, on the work of their predecessors and competitors, although clearly a central feature of science, can nonetheless be found in somewhat different form in literary traditions.
Not only do writers develop the innovations of their predecessors but they may also make more or less explicit references to their works, sometimes in highly elaborate forms.
Thus the central theme in both the works of Steiner referred to earlier is the nature, and very recent decline, of classical literary culture which, for the classically educated reader, formed a complex web of allusions and developments.
Likewise, though Collins (1975) stresses as fundamental the scientific aim of explaining everything and of doing so via the method of controlled comparison, such aims and methods can, as we have seen, be found elsewhere.
All radical groups have such an aim and the method of variation can be found in all who reflect upon the world; it is certainly central to Powell's method.
What makes science distinct is not the unique possession of these features but the unique rigour with which they are pursued, even though not all scientists are as rigorous as they might be.
So it is also with quantification.
Quantification, of a kind, can be found in every type of writing about the world, while qualitative work is still central even in the most mathematised of sciences.
Certainly, sophisticated quantification is characteristic of science in an advanced stage of development, and even so-called qualitative sociology is increasingly far more quantified than its literary counterparts.
Such developments occur, so Kuhn (1961) suggests, because of their advantages in setting disputes.
By contrast, as Collins (1975) points out, more literary styles trade off an essential ambiguity.
It is their very complexity and ambiguity of meaning which renders literary classics re-readable and thus  classics.
This same complexity and ambiguity creates the possibility of literary criticism as an organised enterprise.
It is not merely that classics are ambiguous; it is also that ambiguous texts are more available for the debate which elevates literature to classic status.
The clarity of science and the fuzziness of art both serve collegial purpose.
So finally, it is with literary style or dramatic mode.
On the one hand, the best scientific writing is practical, precise and orderly, it is both usable and disposable.
It serves, not as a monument to itself but as an aid to collegial communication.
Once this has been achieved it can be dispensed with.
Likewise, though there is some truth in Walpole's observation that ‘the world is a comedy to those that think, a tragedy to those that feel’, such genres are typically barred from science.
At the same time, the distinction is not wholly clear.
Sociology has both tragedians and comedians; scientific style also has its rhetorical side (Gusfield 1976).
CONCLUSION
Science is a particular tune played on a set of instruments which all of us share in common.
Some instruments receive far more prominence than they do in more everyday tunes, others get merely the lightest, occasional touch.
Care, precision, consequence, reliability, parsimony, focus and contrast are turned up, emotion and prescription are turned down, though they never completely disappear.
Within the austere collegial melody of science even the slightest emotional shading can have a suitably dramatic effect.
What renders science distinctive, then, is not so much the instruments that are played, for crude variants of these can be found wherever we look; nor even the particular tune, for everyone plays brief snatches of this from time to time; it is rather the sustained and collaborative elaboration of this particular melody in preference to all the others one might play.
For all its fragmentary ubiquity, getting to play this tune in any serious manner can be a most difficult task and in some areas, of which sociology is one, the band as yet plays in a rather halting and ill-coordinated fashion, while there is some confusion over the choice of instrument.
However, the need for more practice should not prevent us, as it so often does, from listening to that same  melody when it is played by our more popular rivals.
They may play in a different key and with a somewhat different emphasis but the tune can often be heard all the same.
The very fact that some topics and methods are conventionally the preserve of artists has meant that many have shied away from them in their eagerness to establish their own practice as scientific.
But dependence on a mass market is not always a bad thing.
Scientists must proceed cautiously, moving ahead only with the assent of a fair number of their colleagues.
Artists and journalists are not so dependent upon their colleagues' approval but can appeal directly to the laity.
Sales are the only criterion.
In consequence, they are freer to experiment with new forms and new techniques such as film, audiotape and video-methods that only now are inching their way into sociological approval.
The purity of science is brought at the cost of a certain conservatism.
What can we then learn from literature and journalism?
Clearly the popular genres are normally restricted to the more descriptive or ethnographic side of social comment though, bearing Powell in mind, we should pay attention to their more elaborate theoretical constructions.
As far as methods go, we may learn as much from their old techniques as from their new ones.
Keeping a diary is still a profound method of studying daily life and one far too little utilised in sociology.
And as for topics there is much to a learned.
Such commentators can often gain access to many of the places which sociology itself is unable to describe by any except the most remote methods.
Leys' (1978) recent account of China; Crouse's (1974) account of American presidential campaigns and the role of the mass media; and Wolfe's brilliant essays on such topics as navy fighter pilots in Vietnam; all these represent areas to which sociologists would find access rather difficult.
For in such work it is often the writer's special job, whether as journalist or as art historian/diplomat (Leys), or else their very fame as popular writers, that gives them their entry.
Sociology is also a lengthy business.
Its characterisation as ‘slow journalism’, or the view of the latter as instant sociology, are both apt.
We often take a long time to hear of what is going on in the outside world and when we do find out, it can take even longer to get into the field.
Finding money, time, contacts and doing some reading: all this is a slow business.
For a discipline which has made a speciality of the modern world we are somewhat at a disadvantage compared to journalists.
The pressure for daily or  weekly production may often trivialise their comments but it does keep them in touch with what is going on.
Artistic ethnographers also write about many subjects which sociologists find it practically difficult to investigate.
The obvious example here must be that of the family, not one of sociology's high points but the setting for much of the greatest work in the novel, film and drama.
Families, being private places, are rather difficult for the self-styled observer to cope with, but seem quite manageable for the more discreet artistic observer who, of course, only writes ‘fiction’.
Finally, there are many important topics in micro-sociology which till now have been far better explored by artists than by sociologists.
Character, consciousness, emotion: all these have received a far more subtle empirical portrayal by our rivals and we have much to learn from them.
A moral: Our literature reviews should not ignore literature.
Professional Work
In the second part of this volume we move to a group of papers dealing with specific institutional settings for professional work.
Gordon Horobin and Maureen Cain both address aspects of general practice.
Horobin begins with a discussion of the shades of meaning around the notion of professionalism and its opposition to the concept of the amateur, one who performs services for satisfaction rather than gain.
In bourgeois society, the professions hover on the margin between tradesmen and gentlemen.
Their appeals to the morality and mystery of their work in an attempt to establish a charismatic authority may be seen as a defence of their status since, as Paterson's discussion of judges reminds us, there are social strata above the professions.
Hospital medicine has become routinised, but general practice still has substantial elements of charisma.
This poses problems for clients, arising out of the issue which Rueschemeyer identified, of the social control of expertise: the impersonality of bureaucratised hospital doctoring and the creeping paternalism of general practice are equally unacceptable.
These are, however, necessary consequences of the division of labour and the consequent role of trust in social relationships.
The general practitioner can only act as a, necessary, mediator between layman and specialist by cultivating that trust to a degree which makes paternalism unavoidable.
The concept of mediation or translation between presenting problems and available remedies is also central to Cain's paper.
Again starting from the problem of expert knowledge in the division of labour, Cain addresses the radical critique of law as an instrument of social control, that lawyers' work is founded on the suppression of clients in the interests of a ruling class.
She points out, however, that the principal clients of lawyers are the bourgeoisie, whether as individuals or as corporate bodies.
While policing may involve social control, lawyers' work is that of translators, taking everyday problems defined by clients and resolving them by reference to the body of legal discourse, a reference which may, of course, involve considerable creative elaboration.
The failing of the more usual critique lies in its insufficient attention to empirical practice.
The analysis of practice is the necessary preliminary to attempts to  classify occupations on the basis of identifiable rather than supposed similarities and differences.
The next two papers, by Phil Thomas and Geoff Mungham, and Marc Galanter, consider the changing market for legal services and its effects on practice.
Thomas and Mungham present a detailed analysis of the legal community in a British provincial city.
Their paper returns to a theme raised, as we have seen, by parsons, namely the similarity between professions and businesses as economic enterprises and the place of altruistic and self-interested motives.
They show how the market for solicitors' work has altered with the development of criminal legal aid and the threat to established sources of income from divorce, conveyancing and personal injury claims.
Where the returns from criminal work had been too limited to support more than a small number of firms, they had now increased while other firms felt under economic threat.
The original specialists had, however, established an effective cartel.
Thomas and Mungham show how the duty solicitor scheme was created and evolved, ostensibly as an act of public service but chiefly as a significant part of the struggle by outsiders to break into the cartel.
Galanter charts the rise of mega-law in the United States.
He notes the parallel development of large corporations and large law firms, with increasing internal specialisation and stratification, wider geographical coverage and exhaustive tactical and strategic involvement with clients.
The source of the demand for legal services lies in the proliferation of laws and regulations promulgated from a variety of sources, and the simultaneous waning of belief in the determinacy of legal doctrine.
Corporate bodies are in continuing tension with legality, seeking to arrive at some accommodation with attempts to regulate their own affairs and to exploit its possibilities for defending or advancing their own interests against rivals.
The demands of such actions for lawyers' services are such that only a large and complex firm can meet them, with corresponding implications for costs, restricting, in turn, the availability of such services to all but the wealthiest.
At the same time, Galanter observes, the scale of finance both makes the highest quality lawyering possible and frustrates those involved by the organisational implications.
The work settings of professionals are the subject of contributions from Celia Davies and Topsy Murray, Robert Dingwall and John Eekelaar.
Both papers reject the supposed  necessity of conflict between professionals and bureaucracies.
Davies uses data from a comparative study of the development of nursing in the UK and the USA to consider the historical experience of the different societies and its implications for hospital and community practice.
She demonstrates the limitations of approaching this analysis from too narrow a concern with professions and bureaucracies, a concern which tends to muddle and obscure the immanent logic of these developments.
In particular, we need to set occupational development into a societal context, against evolving class and gender relations, the prevailing political culture and the economic basis of practice.
Murray, Dingwall and Eekelaar take a somewhat different tack.
They present comparative material on solicitors in private practice and in the employment of local government authorities to show the continuities in the rhetoric adopted to describe their work.
Professional work has a Janus character, a public face of resolving problems of social or natural order and a private face of personalised service.
The ‘natural’ mode of fee-for-service private practice by a strongly organised occupation is a structural realisation of this ambivalence.
How is this reconciled with the hierarchical bureaucracy of a local authority?
The authors point to the lawyers' success in reproducing for themselves the conditions of private practice and its implications for other departments and for the workings of local democracy.
PROFESSIONAL MYSTERY: THE MAINTENANCE OF CHARISMA IN GENERAL MEDICAL PRACTICE
GORDON HOROBIN
INTRODUCTION
This paper is for the most part about medical practice, particularly  general medical practice of the British variety, within the context of a more theoretical discussion of some aspects of professional work.
I do not fully share the concern of those sociologists (and others), who wish to address the question of what differentiates professions from non-professional occupations.
Freidson (1970a) has already written probably the best account of the essential features of professional work in his ‘Profession of Medicine’ and Roth's (1974) sardonic look at the ‘attribute school’makes me very wary of following that path.
Nevertheless it is necessary to start somewhere and it might be useful to take off from those analyses.
I shall begin therefore with a consideration of some of the characteristics of ‘profession’ as both an analyst's and an actor's concept.
This will lead me to take seriously some of those attributes of professional work which have perhaps been dismissed too lightly in recent work as mere political rhetoric.
In attempting to apply this reasoning to British general practice I shall use some of the field-data collected by Jim McIntosh and myself (Horobin and McIntosh 1977) but I shall also be trying to apply a sociological perspective to the mundane background knowledge which we all possess as societal members.
THE MEANING OF PROFESSION
Whilst it is perfectly true, as Roth points out, that any of the attributes of profession listed by such writers as Greenwood, Gross and Goode can also be found in occupations not usually assigned to the category ‘profession’, we all (Roth included), use the terms ‘profession’ and ‘professional’both descriptively and analytically.
Thus Roth (1974, p.2 1) quotes Friedman (1965) approvingly: ‘This essay avoids, in general, the uses of the term profession as an expression of a discrete category of occupations.’
Perhaps sociologists would benefit from avoiding the term also’.
He then, one paragraph later, says: ‘Because of the centrality of professional services in a complex society, professional control over professional affairs affects the general welfare’(p.22).
I do not want to get bogged down in a semantic quibble but it does rather look as though sociologists have just as much difficulty as anyone else in doing without the word ‘profession’.
This is not surprising since we have to think and write with a vocabulary which we share with lay persons.
(I should add that my dictionary  defines ‘lay’ as ‘non-clerical’or ‘non.professional’.)
More than that, the occasioned uses of everyday concepts constitute part of the data on which we then perform sociological analyses, which we, in turn, reflexively validate by our own background members' knowledge of the world and our own everyday social reasoning.
‘Professional’ sociological usages and everyday theorising (‘lay sociology’) interpenetrate.
In particular, the spokesmen of professional and professionalising occupations formulate and reflexively construct their work, just as members of those occupations accomplish profession in their day-to-day work and contact with other occupations.
One example of the former is contained in a recent book by a general practitioner about general practice.
The first chapter on ‘the role of the doctor’ begins with a section headed ‘medicine as a profession’.
Professions are distinguished from trades by the length of training, the depth of special knowledge and by codes of behaviour.
Medicine is different from most other professions not by virtue of the length of training (which is extremely long), or the depth of knowledge but by its code of behaviour and by its concern with people, rather than buildings, structure or accounts.
This involvement with people is shared with priests, nurses, teachers, social workers and to some extent with lawyers.
It is not characteristic of architects, actuaries, accountants and engineers.
(McCormick 1979, p. 13)
Such an interpenetration of analysts' and actors' theorising does not, of course, imply that spokesmen read and use sociological works; some may do, but most probably do not.
This extract from McCormick's book could easily be mistaken for the work of almost any of the ‘attribute school’ writers.
Freidson's discussion of professionalisation begins with an important aspect of profession often ignored by the ‘attribute school’.
This is the broad distinction between ‘professional’ and ‘amateur’, a distinction which Freidson sees as that between work and non-work.
‘What makes the activity, ‘work’ is its exchange value.
What makes a performer a ‘worker’ or a ‘professional’is his relationship to the market' (p.17).
From this point of view, professional is not distinguished from amateur by any intrinsic features of the activity, nor by differences in skill, but solely by relationship to the market.
I am not sure about this.
In everyday language, ‘professional’ is often used adjectivally of any performance to denote features of that performance which have nothing to do directly with exchange value.
An amateur, do-it-yourself home decorator can ‘do a professional job’, just as an amateur footballer can bring off ‘a professional foul’.
This usage of ‘professional’ does indeed have connotations of skill or excellence or efficiency and, perhaps, of commitment to an end to which the activity constitutes the means.
Freidson (1977, p.15) warns us that ‘…confusion lies in the fact that the word profession is used to refer both to concrete historical occupations and to an intellectual construct or ideal type, without consistent attention to the relationship between the two’.
We may say that, whilst typically professional work is undertaken in the context of the market, any given concrete activity may have professional and amateur features attributed to it.
The notion of market value is not wholly unambiguous.
The ‘amateur’ athlete who has travel expenses to meetings paid by sponsors and is compensated for loss of earnings, has market value to promoters and is an integral part of a market economy.
Housewives and volunteer workers, to whom Freidson denies strict market value and hence the status of performing professional work, do sometimes have exchange value granted them: in courts of law household tasks have been assigned wage values and the voluntary sessions ‘given’ by consultant physicians and surgeons in the pre-1948 ‘voluntary hospitals’had their work costed when they joined the NHS.
It is also true, of course, that these doctors' free services were given partly for research and clinical experience, partly from strictly charitable motives and partly to establish marketable reputations in the private sector of pre-NHS British medicine.
We would be purists indeed if we called their hospital work ‘amateur’.
‘Professional’ as against‘amateur’may also have connotations of discipline, of the instrumental rather than the expressive.
This meaning is obviously allied to, but not identical with, those mentioned above.
For example, in a recent book review Robert Towers (1979) writes:
There is a hint of amateurishness in Birdy , sometimes inspired, sometimes not.
The obsessive vision that propels and sustains Birdy on his long night has a once-in-a-lifetime quality about it, a quirkiness that does not augur well for a successor…
The Cement Garden , by contrast, seems entirely professional in its execution, the work of a young man whose private demons, however unruly, have been successfully harnessed to a career.
To call an activity, or aspects of an activity, or even a person ‘professional’ is not necessarily to apply a seal of approval.
In sport, for example, the professional player is often held to be socially inferior, if at the same time technically superior, to the amateur.
In English cricket until recently, ‘gentlemen’(i.e. amateur) and ‘players’(i.e. Professional) had separate pavilion facilities, and professionals seldom achieved the captaincy of their clubs.
In more individual sports, such as tennis and golf, professionals hold respected but wholly separate, socially inferior positions.
This is even more the case in the aristocratic sports of hunting, shooting and fishing where the ‘professionals, are literally servants — hunt-servants, stalkers, gillies.
Of course, this class of non-productive labourers are not, and were not, regarded as members of ‘the professions’, but they performed professional services for their amateur and socially superior employers or clients.
Such relationships took their shape and meaning from the distribution of power, wealth and status in aristocratic society.
Professional work in bourgeois society had different origins and different meanings, but the two ‘professionalisms’ have co-existed since the alliance and interpenetration of bourgeoisie and aristocracy began.
‘There is no real contradiction between privilege bestowed by blood and privilege bestowed by gold in constitutional balance.
Blood, for instance, decides in the case of certain army posts, whose incumbents hold them by virtue of family connections, nepotism or favouritism; but gold gets its due through the circumstance that all army commissions can be bought and sold for coin of the realm’(Marx 1953).
Even in our more ‘meritocratic’ society, the notion that members of a certain class are good at ‘leadership’, for example, is widely held, and is scorned only by ‘professional, sceptics such as sociologists and trade unionists.
My contention is, then, that ‘profession’ in the bourgeois sense of a special kind of occupation also carries ambiguous connotations of ‘professional’as non-amateur, as describing services performed for gain rather than satisfaction or obligation, of skills acquired rather than naturally endowed and of lowly, client-dependent status as against the honorific independence of  the gentleman.
PROFESSION AS MORALITY AND MYSTERY
Turning now to the issue of occupational differentiation we can see that those occupations which are generally accorded the title of professions base their claims to special status on a number of grounds which together or separately might be used by any other occupational group.
This is why the attribute game has provided endless fun, if not profit, to sociologists.
As Roth (1974) points out, the notion that only professions have subcultures is negated by the ‘distinct and pervasive patterns of occupational life’ found amongst dockers, seamen, miners, etc.; prostitutes also claim that their service is a social good and a community service; a lack of demarcation of work and leisure is equally true of policemen as of dockers; and so on.
These claims rest less on profession as an objective category of activities and more on moral evaluation of work (Becker 1970).
‘Proper conduct’ is crucial in this.
Dingwall (1976, 1977b), writes of ‘accomplishing profession’, drawing on his analysis of the uses of the term by health visitors.
Their uses included those familiar attributes of autonomy, special skill and knowledge, but also ‘commitment’ and ‘comportment’.
For the health visitors, being professional meant having a particular orientation to the job and displaying oneself as a particular kind of person.
These aspects of ‘mystery’ are nicely illustrated in the exchange between the pimp and the hangman in Measure for Measure , quoted at the beginning of this paper.
The use in this of ‘mystery’ as articled trade and as ‘enigma’precisely makes my point that our own usage of ‘profession’carries both meanings (as well as others).
This is most apparent when the label ‘professional’ is used, stripped of any connotation of high moral purpose or high social standing, for the killing trades — hangman, professional hit-man or soldier (‘Join the Professionals’, as the Army recruiting slogan has it).
From this point of view, then, the professional-amateur distinction becomes again a dominant theme.
In the course of fulfilling our social contracts we make moral judgements of work.
These judgements use a variety of cross-cutting (and often contradictory) criteria, including productiveness, social importance, scarcity value, degree and type  of mystery.
We also judge work performance by the quality of the product (in so far as we can assess this) and by the work style of the performer.
The amount of trust we feel justified in placing on the work done for us is a measure of both the moral status of the occupation and of the work performance we can expect.
The point that the so-called professions themselves appeal to the moral status of their work is well argued in a recent paper on the creation of a professional ideology in the nineteenth century.
Central to this process was the formulation and diffusion of a unique ideology based on the concept of service as a moral imperative.
This provided doctors, lawyers, clergymen and the members of an evergrowing number of other occupations with an article of faith with which to justify their claim to superior status and special privileges, such as self-discipline.
The ideal of service allowed the professions to reconcile the concept of the gentleman with the necessity of work for a living and to formulate a definition of their relationship with clients and with society.
(Duman 1979, p. 114)
PROFESSIONAL AUTONOMY
The notion of self-discipline or autonomy has been a central one in recent work on professionalisation.
There is little doubt that doctors have been very successful in establishing high status, protection from lay criticism and favourable terms on which to define and monopolise work tasks.
Medical work is what medical workers say it is.
Medicine is, by common assent, the archetypal profession.
Yet it is also important to recognise the limitations on this collective monopoly of power and to assess the degree to which differentiation within the collectivity may affect the locus of that power.
We must also examine critically the notion that individual practitioners enjoy an autonomy which is somehow derived from that of the collectivity.
In Britain the divisions between the public health, general practice and hospital sectors have a long history of often quite bitter dispute.
The National Health Service Act of 1948 only acknowledged and institutionalised those divisions, it did not cause them, just as the 1974 reorganisation has done nothing to  diminish them.
The different degrees and sources of political power of the hospital consultants on the one hand and the general practitioners on the other were skilfully exploited by Bevan in setting up the NHS.
The GPs were as divided as they were independent, and being geographically isolated from each other were rather like the French peasants described by Marx (1953) as ‘potatoes in a sack’.
In so far as millions of families live under economic conditions of existence that separate their mode of life, their interests and their culture from those of other classes…they form a class.
In so far as there is merely a local inter-connection among these smallholding peasants, and the identity of their interests begets no community, no national bond and no political organisation among them, they do not form a class.
To continue the metaphor, the hospital consultants, already heavily unionised through the Royal Colleges, bargained more cohesively and thus successfully with the Minister.
They formed already ‘a class for itself.
This is only a metaphor, but the point is perhaps worth making that the insistence on ‘independent contractor’ status on the part of the GPs and local competition for patients (which necessitates collective regulation through ‘professional ethics and etiquette’), weakened their bargaining position with both their hospital colleagues and with Government.
While they remained relatively free to organise their own practices, they had little power to influence recruitment, selection, training and licensing.
In comparison, doctors in the hospital sector had a much greater measure of influence over these issues, but because of the combination of bureaucratic and collegial control, relatively less freedom over their own work practices.
It would seem, therefore, that in a health service financed from taxation, and under the ultimate financial control of government, there are some quite powerful constraints on the ability of the dominant occupational groups to determine the conditions under which they work.
In Britain, the doctors collectively have by and large retained the right to determine what conditions shall be deemed ‘medical’, and, as individual practitioners, what treatment any given patient will receive.
But they have increasingly had to cede ground to government and to  ‘administrators’ over issues of policy and resource allocation.
Health Board administrators with a predominantly managerial ideology can and do take decisions which profoundly affect patients and staff, including medical staff.
Finally, in the past few years, so-called ‘ancillary staff’ have begun to use their collective power in such issues as private beds in NHS hospitals and, in pursuit of their own economic interests, have defined ‘medical emergencies’(Manson 1976).
The degree of professional autonomy would appear to have been higher in the United States than in Britain, and the imbalance in favour of specialist medicine over general practice or family medicine greater still.
Specialists organised themselves earlier — the American College of Surgeons and the College of Physicians were formed in 1913 and 19l5 respectively, while the Academy of General practice did not appear until 1947 — and, despite the recommendations of the Mills Commission and the Willard Committee in 1963 and 1964 for more broadly trained physicians, there was little response from the medical schools (Stephen 1979, p.266).
It was left to the Federal Government through the 1976 Health Manpower Ball, to try to force compliance on the schools by making federal capitation grants conditional on the schools increasing the proportion of primary care graduates to 50 per cent by 1980.
Even an American government can limit professional autonomy in this way, though whether it has the political will to back up its threat remains to be seen.
PROFESSIONAL CHARISMA
A related theme to that of mystery is that identified by Kosa (1970) as the ‘professional charisma’ of medicine.
For him ‘medicine has two ancient links with the original, undifferentiated and unprofessional charismatic authority.
One is represented by the Biblical ‘power to heal sickness and cast out devils’(Mark 3: 15)…the other is represented by the Hippocratic oath…which refers to that ability of healing and that mastery over death which no profession save medicine can claim.
It does not matter whether or not that ability and mastery are real; at times of distress the public perceives and invokes them’(p.31).
Kosa sees this charismatic character as peculiar to medicine and  clergy, although he notes that some Protestant denominations have weakened or eliminated the charismatic authority of the clergyman.
He compares medicine with law and accountancy, and finds that neither of these has, in the ‘public mind’, the same aura.
The accountant ‘deals with the business, but not the personality, of the client’ and ‘a wilful activity necessitates legal services which are initiated, and can be terminated, at the will of the client; but the necessity of contacting a doctor emerges out of circumstances which are beyond human control’(p.27).
To extend Kosa's argument, I see the moral quality of medicine as residing in the alliance of public and profession against the common enemy, ‘disease’.
There is no conflict over ends — by definition, disease is an evil — although there may well be conflict over means as evidenced by disputes about ‘unnecessary’ medical procedures or operations.
By contrast there is no common objective in law, unless it be some relatively abstract, though powerful, conception of ‘justice’, or of the ‘Rule of Law’.
In practice, there are lawyers for the ‘good guys’ against those for the ‘bad guys’, so that the moral position of the advocate is uncertain.
Lawyers tend to play in a zero-sum game; doctors do not.
This difference has, of course, been noted by Parsons (1954) and Rueschemeyer (1964), and I believe it to be a very important one.
Not all lawyers, of course, actually engage in advocacy but their work is predicated on the possibility that competing interpretations of fact and of law arising from competing interests will have to be represented and argued in court or tribunal.
There is always an antagonist, actual or potential, and whilst the law may be impartial, lawyers are not.
Reverting to the earlier argument, the morality of their work is suspect, and with it their charisma.
Judges may still be accorded charismatic qualities, however, partly because of their high social and economic standing, partly because of the mystique of the legal ritual and partly because they embody the law's impartiality.
They are not automatically exempt from criticism and occasional ridicule, however.
If, as Paterson suggests in this volume, the judges are in certain respects ‘above the professions’, their status derives from these charismatic qualities and is reinforced by their more aristocratic origins (at least in Britain) and style of life.
Rueschemeyer's other main distinction between the law and medicine is less convincing.
His argument is that medicine rests on the discovery of natural laws while legal norms derive from  decisions, influenced by the actions of lawyers themselves.
Further, he claims, much of a lawyer's competence comes from general rather than specifically legal knowledge, and from his interpersonal skills.
I think this difference is overstated.
Medical knowledge is also in large measure constructed, whilst Rueschemeyer's characterisation of legal competence as ‘…generalised intellectual skills, various areas of knowledge outside his speciality, and skills in handling interpersonal relations…’ could almost as well describe the work of the British general medical practitioner (p.22).
If, however, Rueschemeyer were making not a positive statement about substantive differences between law and medicine in this respect but a statement about general beliefs in such differences he would be on surer ground.
There is certainly a generalised public belief in the scientific basis of medicine precisely because disease and illness are perceived as natural, malignant phenomena.
The knowledge gap between doctor and patient is not greater than that between lawyer and client — indeed there is probably much more do-it-yourself medicine than law — but the gap is less resented in medicine.
Lawyers are seen to create the circumstances under which their knowledge and skill are needed whereas doctors are seen to use their knowledge and skill against the natural enemy.
Special knowledge is important, though, as a characteristic of many trades, but in some it goes beyond mere ‘know-how’ or the tricks of that trade.
Apprentices in the middle ages were instructed in the art and ‘mystery’ of their craft.
In our more sceptical age, mystery surrounds especially those crafts which seem to shape our world and deal with matters which seem beyond our control and comprehension.
Medicine and Science with a capital ‘S’ are perhaps the most obvious examples of such esoteric worlds.
MEDICAL PRACTICE AND PUBLIC ESTEEM
My argument thus far is that medicine bases its claim to be a profession on several grounds and that its claim is honoured by the public on similar grounds.
Whilst I do not want to argue with Freidson and others that autonomy is an important ground, claimed by and often fought over, by the collectivity itself, I believe that in state financed health services there are similarly  important limitations on that autonomy.
‘Profession’ and ‘professional’as actors' categories draw less on that aspect than on those which critics of the attribute school have tended to throw out.
Amongst these characteristics are what I called ‘morality’ and ‘mystery’which contain, I think, the charismatic elements to which Kosa drew our attention.
None of this is to deny that we may often regard doctors' claims to special privilege with some cynicism and distrust.
The growth of self-help groups in society at large may also be cited as evidence that a sizeable minority find medical services inadequate for some purposes.
But I do not believe that these trends fundamentally affect my case, for the most radical criticisms of medicine come, not from such illness groups, but from ‘minorities’ who have seen medical dominance as reproducing the class relations which have brought about their oppressed status, e. g. radical women's movements and black urban Americans.
Here too the most common solutions appear to be women doctors and black doctors, albeit organised in collectives rather than on entrepreneurial, bureaucratic or capitalist lines.
Such radical criticism appears to have gained less support in Britain than in the US and I would suggest that the NHS is largely responsible for this.
After all, paying for something that does not work is presumably more likely to produce frustration than receiving the same ineffective care ‘free’.
A great deal of care in both societies, however, can be seen to be effective, and a good deal more cannot be evaluated at all.
Thus, perhaps not surprisingly, medicine and medical practitioners still enjoy considerable public esteem.
GENERAL PRACTICE
With the continuing growth of specialisation in medicine, the survival of general practice may appear as a paradox to be explained.
There are good grounds for suggesting that general practice in Britain has done more than merely survive.
It has staged a remarkable recovery from the apparently moribund state of the late fifties and early sixties.
This is not to say that general practice has solved all its problems, for an old contradiction remains unresolved.
This is the contradiction between the GP as ‘Primary Care Specialist’, and the GP as ‘family counsellor’.
Both  conceptions are contained in the political rhetoric of the Royal College of General Practitioners and attempts at being both produce practical dilemmas for the doctors.
It is perhaps not strictly correct to call it an ‘old’ contradiction for, in the pre-NHS days when solo practice was the norm and many GPs also did hospital work, the tension between medical care as technical work and as supportive counselling was relatively unimportant.
Of course, as Jewson (1976) and Armstrong (1979) have argued, the rise to dominance of hospital medicine in the nineteenth century placed the general practitioner in a position of clientship to the hospital while remaining in an entrepreneurial, patronage relationship with his own clientele.
The two systems of medical work, say these writers, produced and sustained two cosmologies of medicine.
They differ, however, in that while Jewson claims that hospital medicine superseded ‘bedside medicine’, Armstrong sees the latter, ‘biographical medicine’, as he names it, as remaining in exchange relationships between hospital doctors and general practitioners to re-emerge in recent years as a separate, but not necessarily subservient specialism.
Armstrong sees the ‘emancipation of biographical medicine’ as having occurred through the break with hospital medicine.
Blocked mobility into consultant grades forced the GPs to organise themselves through the Royal College of General Practitioners.
Perhaps, in this way, ‘the potatoes in the sack’, the ‘class in itself, did become something of a ‘class for itself’.
In its ‘strong’ form, this emergent cosmology of biographical medicine places the patient and his biography at the centre of ‘the medical gaze’and relegates hospital medicine to a purely technical role; in its weaker form, the two cosmologies are different, but equal.
To what extent, though, do ordinary GPs conceptualise their tasks in this way?
And what about the public?
Or, to turn these questions around, what relevance do these intra-collegial debates over the ‘proper place of general practice’ have for everyday medical work and the participants' views of it?
Data from general practitioners suggest that the dilemma or contradiction mentioned earlier is very much a feature of GPs' theorising (McIntosh and Horobin 1977).
On the one hand medicine is seen as a body of scientific knowledge and as a set of techniques, for which the GP feels himself to be relatively poorly equipped.
On the other hand the tasks of counselling are also regarded as specialised activities which potentially bring him into  competition with social workers, nurses, marriage guidance counsellors, psychologists and psychiatrists.
Here are some examples.
Dr ‘Patterson ’…patients here are very much consultant oriented, and no matter how much you may feel you're on the right lines for treatment, they do expect to go along and see a consultant.
…I think that this being very much a teaching hospital area…the GP becomes a second or third rate citizen.
This is never by a direct assault, but more by implication….
Dr ‘Smith ’ You see, to me, a doctor is a scientist.
He should try his best to be a scientist all through and only then can he do justice to his profession.
However sympathetic or kind one wants to be towards a family, he can't be a social worker.
If I am a social worker, I am doing an injustice to my profession.
Dr ‘Bothwell ’ Because we're so over-burdened by relative trivia and social problems, we cannot utilise the skills for which we're trained…we're trained to treat medical problems…
I would think that 30 to 40 per cent of my time is spent on what I've been trained for.
The bulk of the rest of the work could be done by health visitors, social workers, district nurses — who are much cheaper and who are even trained for the job.
Drs Smith and Bothwell appeared to represent a minority view amongst our sample; most of the respondents appealed to a different set of work orientations which emphasised personal involvement with patients' problems, ‘family doctoring’ and continuity.
Dr ‘Richards ’ There's much more than medicine in it…we're not general practitioners, we're family doctors, which means you're a family friend.
Dr ‘Jackson ’[These problems]are not non-medical; they're part of life and really that's what we're dealing with.
Dr ‘McKenzie ’ People come here for a reason and I am prepared to deal with anything.
These respondents for the most part endorsed those parts of the official rhetoric (see e.g. Royal College of General Practitioners 1977) which incorporate the roles of family doctor or counsellor and specialist in ordinary disease.
While there were differences  between urban and rural, and between solo practitioners and members of group practices, they were differences of degree only.
What most of the practitioners seemed to be saying was that the satisfactions of practice lay in ‘helping people’, whatever the problem, whereas the frustrations lay in their inability to exercise their technical skills more fully because of the pressure of time.
Dr ‘Macmillan ’ The satisfaction is derived from the whole purpose of the job which is to make people better in all senses…there's still some sort of fascination in trying to work out people's problems and deal with them.
Dr ‘Lawrence ’ The reward I think is knowing that perhaps you've done your best for your patients and if the patient at the end of the day says ‘thank you’…[but]you could do a lot more given the opportunity and time is the great factor here.
It would be nice, for example, to do all your own minor operations…remove cysts, do stitching and all these sorts of, eh well, do a complete work-out for somebody with say cardiovascular problems — but this needs half an hour at least ….
These doctors have given up the notion of being specialists and of being involved in hospital medicine but the idea of coping with the medical problem is still a potent force in their ideologies.
They accept that their work is less technical than they would perhaps like, but ‘craftsmanship’ is still possible in accurate diagnosis and illness management (Freidson 1975).
And the gratitude of ‘deserving’ patients counterbalances the irritation of dealing with ‘trivial’presentations.
There is, however, another element in the GP's ideology and with this I want to draw out one of the most powerful of the myths of medical work and relate it back to my earlier theme of profession as mystery.
This is the myth of ‘heroic intervention’.
THE DOCTOR AS HERO
In Marcia Millman's (1976) fascinating account of ‘the backrooms of medicine’ there is a chapter called the ‘Great Save’.
Standing around, waiting for the police to arrive, the resident and the intern made bets on whether the case would be a real  emergency or just a teenager who had swallowed too much aspirin.
But at least, they assured one another , this time they knew it wouldn't be some old alcoholic who would ‘waste’ all of their time in the Coronary Care Unit.
(p.49)
Most GPs have little or no opportunity for heroic intervention for, generally speaking, life-threatening illness is referred immediately to hospital.
Even those doctors who practise in areas remote from hospitals do relatively little life-saving.
But the realities have not destroyed the myth.
One of the respondents expressed this theme very clearly.
Dr ‘Scott ’ You come to a house where something awful has happened and there's the mother and a couple of daughters and the neighbour from next door and they're in a terrible state.
Now I suppose this is just appealing to my sense of power or something, being able to walk in and take charge and in a minute or two they've settled down and they're not panicking because you've arrived and all their burdens are on your shoulders and they don't have to worry any more because the doctor's there…this I find profoundly satisfying as long as I can, in fact, cope with what's happening.
By this I don't mean that I can cure the patient, but that I can cope with the situation.
If he's dying, of a coronary, well I can't stop him dying, but I can maybe help…the number of people whose lives you save in the course of your career, you can probably count on the fingers of one hand — it's scientists and public health people that save lives.
Most doctors merely alleviate suffering, whether physical or mental, and it's being able to do that…we alleviate by technical skill (or) by presence or personality….
When I went in for medicine I had the feeling that maybe I would take out an appendix on the kitchen table…now this has been a big disappointment of my life as a GP that whatever I can do, there's someone else who can do much, much better.
I can diagnose tonsillitis, there's an ENT surgeon who is far better than me at that; I can diagnose appendicitis, hearts, whatever you can think of, there's someone who is much better than me at it and these people are all now available to the population.
It's not as much fun being a GP nowadays as it used to be.
The only thing is that if it's fun anywhere, it's fun out here.
At least, out here, I have — I admit this with shame — I  have delivered an extended breech with the nurse giving chloroform at one end and praying and me delivering at the other end and swearing, and the baby lived, the mother lived, and everything was all right .
Now when you've done that, it's almost like winning the pools.
I shouldn't ever have got myself into that position but it's a wonderful feeling when you get yourself out of it.
Now this, I think, GPs had in the old days, they had much more exciting lives….
I am not trying to say that Dr Scott is typical of general practitioners — in some ways his willingness to bare his soul makes him unique.
But there is no doubt that many of his generation did and do still appeal to the heroic myth.
Whatever tasks a doctor performs, whether routine or unusual, he seems to measure it against this standard of ‘the great save’.
Nor, probably, is this confined to doctors.
Nurses, ambulance drivers, policemen, even boy scouts no doubt cherish the hope that somewhere, sometime the chance will come to bring off such a coup.
But what is peculiar to the doctor is that the successful action, the save, is seen to be brought about through the use of the esoteric skills for which he trained and which, by and large, remain untested and unused.
In practice, the policeman, the nurse and the ambulance driver probably perform more life-saving actions, but they perform them through skills anyone can learn.
They lack mystery.
On the less dramatic level, we can see in Dr Scott's account the more usual performance of mystery — the acceptance of responsibility by mere presence.
However sceptical we may be of the claims of medicine and its practitioners, we do, as Kosa said, place our faith in them when we cannot cope by ourselves.
It is true, of course, that we invest hospital medicine with technical powers additional to those more home-spun ones of the GP, but we attribute those powers to the institution rather than the person.
Hospital staff may possess charisma, but for the most part it is routinised; it is the charisma of office, not of person.
There are exceptions, of course; anyone can quote the names of a few specialists who have attained local or even national eminence.
But they remain ‘doctors’ or more anonymously still, ‘the hospital’.
‘The doctor’ remains, for most people, their ‘own’general practitioner.
I take the reasons for this to lie in the heroic myth shared by doctors and public.
For both, the archetype is the solo  practitioner, disparaged by that label ‘horse and buggy doctor’, who, in the myth, brought us into the world, smoothed our fevered brows, and eased by magic potions the anguish of illness.
By contrast, in this folk memory, the hospital was the hospice, the infirmary, the place to which the dying were sent.
I always suspect that the proverbial gratitude which patients express to hospital staff is really gratitude for having got out alive!
The strength of the GP's charisma- is also derived, paradoxically, from his familiarity (the friend of the family function) and from his ‘moral superiority’.
By this I mean that, like the priest, he deals in sacred matters, converting mundane problems to moral issues.
He has the power to induce guilt by opening up our private lives for inspection, but by transforming pain and fear into illness, he can also absolve us.
Like the policeman and the clergyman, he is ‘never off duty’, so that he must be seen to lead a life of probity.
Thus we, as patients, are faintly surprised when ‘the doctor’ treats us as equals and demonstrates his own ordinariness.
This moral superiority, of course, is a potential weapon, available for use by the GP, on ‘suitable occasions’.
What occasions might be suitable, however, are not clearly apparent, and are certainly not part of what is conventionally regarded as diagnosis and/or medical decision-making.
The point that moral judgements are made in medical practice and that patients are engaged in doing moral work in their encounters with doctors is probably a commonplace of contemporary medical sociology.
I suggested some years ago that
despite the claims of many both within and outwith the profession that the role of the doctor is ethically neutral, it is extremely difficult to see how such (moral) judgements could be eschewed….
If patients wish to be treated ‘as human beings’ and not simply as bodies to be mended or diseases to be cured, then they cannot object to the social nature of their humanity being scrutinised and its relevance to therapy assessed.
(Horobin 1973, p.367)
Of course we do, as patients and as critics of medical hegemony, complain about both the impersonality, the ‘objectification’ of the person in hospital medicine,and the pressure to uncover the private, undiseased parts of our lives which is inherent in  biographical medicine of the Balint variety.
This is to say no more than that the patient's agenda, derived from his own theories of illness and his own biographical relevances, may conflict with the doctor's agenda.
We know they are different — if they were identical we would not need to consult the doctor for purposes other than access to resources — but we cannot understand why they differ in these particular ways.
Our response to expertise is therefore ambivalent.
The division of labour is the division of expertise which depends on the shared assumption that almost all work needs special skills, that we do better to concentrate on our own skills, leaving others to their own, and that this arrangement is functional for the community.
As Simmel (1950, p.313) argues:
Our modern life is based to a larger extent than is usually realised upon faith in the honesty of the other.
Examples are our economy, which becomes more and more a credit economy, or our science, in which most scholars must use innumerable results of other scientists which they cannot examine.
We base our gravest decisions on a complex system of conceptions, most of which presuppose the confidence that we will not be betrayed.
We all have to trust members of other trades to ply their trades on our behalf, and this applies to bus drivers, food packers, and car mechanics as much as to doctors, dentists and lawyers.
We license each other, albeit with misgivings and with institutional or legislative safeguards, to tell us what we need and to produce it for us.
Of course expertise places the non-expert in an exploitable situation, hence our ambivalence towards it.
All experts claim legitimacy for their contribution to public welfare, but this is not, or at least not primarily, a confidence trick played by the professions in pursuit of autonomy and monopoly power.
It is rather an inherent feature of the division of labour.
If we have to agree to others performing tasks in exchange for the tasks we perform, we at the same time grant licences to them to become expert and to use their expertise on our behalf.
We also expect the expert to inform us what is in our best interests, for how can we know this when the technical grounds for such judgements are, by definition, outside our competence.
Even when experts leave us with choices, we are more often than not reluctant to exercise such choice; ‘what do you recommend?’, we ask.
Of course, ‘experts’ pursue their own self-interests at the same time and we can seldom know when interests coincide and when they conflict.
Nor can we rely, if we ever could, on the free play of market forces to effect a coincidence of public and private good.
We can only maintain a healthy scepticism of any claims to place public welfare above private interest.
Duman (1979) points out that the ideal of service served in the nineteenth century as a counterweight to the ascendant laissez-faire business ideology.
In so far as the members of the professions themselves believed in such an ideal and oriented their behaviour in accordance with it (and therefore against pure self-interest), they created the conditions under which trust could be offered and accepted.
It is part of my argument that this notion of service is still a fundamental part of the actor's conception of professionalism, constrains professional behaviour and is built in to the ‘contract’ between profession and public.
Other occupations have adopted the professional rhetoric and even if they have done so in order to enhance their status and monopoly or guild power, they have had to accept the concomitant constraints on self-interested behaviour.
If we, the public, see ‘profession’ as more trustworthy than ‘trade’, we help to institutionalise trust-worthiness as part of the licence we accord to those who set up as experts.
The rhetoric becomes an integral part of the reality.
This is not to deny the reality of such self-interested behaviour as that discussed by Thomas and Mungham in this volume.
We need always to ask the question,cui bono ? or, as I said earlier, to maintain a healthy scepticism.
But the fact that the medical profession has, for example, tended to restrict entry to the profession so as to preserve status, jobs and income, does not imply that I should withhold my trust in the ability and intention of my doctor to act in my best interests.
Scepticism and trust are not necessarily incompatible.
In the case of general medical practice, then, the logic of expertise forces the expert to adopt a paternalistic stance and the non-expert patient to accept it.
The position of the GP, however, is not straight-forwardly that of expert in relation to the non-expert patient, for beyond the GP are the specialists.
In some respects one could regard patients, GPs and specialists as, in Schutz's (1964) terms, man-in-the-street, well-informed citizen and expert respectively.
But clearly some patients are well-informed citizens or even experts in their own illnesses (Macintyre  and Oldman 1977).
Further, it is probably only when the GP has performed the initial expert task of transforming signs and symptoms into an organised illness, that the patient can formulate the help he requires as possibly beyond the competence of his GP.
Alter all, even GPs and hospital specialists consult their ‘own’ GPs about their illnesses.
I would further argue that it is precisely in these circumstances where further specialisation and sub-specialisation has occurred that the ‘intermediate expert’ is constrained to adopt a paternalistic stance.
However, the ‘trade unionisation’ of general practice ideology which turns the GP into a primary care specialist, operating in group practice with a so-called ‘team of ancillary workers’threatens to undermine the basis of biographical medicine by fragmenting care still further.
This creates a dilemma for health service policy of choosing between fragmentation plus a possible increment in consumer choice and a more thorough-going version of family doctoring with its concomitant problems of paternalism.
Meanwhile the GP's charisma is maintained through the paradox that increasing knowledge and control through science creates new uncertainties (the more we know, the more we realise how much more there is to know).
Such an argument runs rather against the more usual one that science, in the long run, reduces uncertainty.
As one writer has it,
Magic and experimental science advance hand in hand, often indistinguishable, setting up their flimsy ring-wall against chaos.
As human control widens and is consolidated, the resultant shrinkage of the unknown will curtail divine prerogatives.
All weather-gods are diminished by meteorology.
(Green 1979)
We place the GP in the position of the well-informed citizen who can mediate between the world of science and our own mundane concerns.
But we also attribute to him the power to mediate between those same concerns and the hostile forces of disease.
He is the weather-god that is not diminished by meteorology!
THE GENERAL PRACTICE LAWYER AND THE CLIENT: TOWARDS A RADICAL CONCEPTION
MAUREEN CAIN
INTRODUCTION
In this paper I use some of the results of a very small scale piece of research to address one theoretical and one more practical problem relevant to the sociology of lawyering.
I shall argue that the concept of profession, even in its most radical formulations, obscures more than it reveals about the work people do, and that alternative concepts based on the specific practices of various occupational groups should be substituted.
A completely different classification of occupations would of course result.
I argue that the alternative formulation situates jobs in a general theory of social structure, whereas the sociology of the professions has either been confined to ‘middle range’ theorising and ignored this problem or sought to bridge the gap between jobs and the social order by empirical statements based on implicit and (therefore) ill-formulated theories.
Radical formulations have asked about professions in the class structure, but have presumed  the usefulness of the notion of profession itself.
I claim to be able to theorise the relationship between some ‘professional’ jobs and social structure in a way that opens up new avenues for empirical research.
The practical question which this paper also addresses is ‘how can one tell when and whether a lawyer has done a good job?’.
The legal profession offers only a limited range of negative criteria, although there exist many eulogies of good practice from which rules of conduct could be extrapolated by a neophyte practitioner (e.g. Malcolm 1966; Megarry 1962).
But the main concern of these works is to inhibit legal deviance rather than to encourage legal competence — whatever that may be.
Another approach to the competence question has been to ask clients, retrospectively, how satisfied they have been with the service they have had (Rosenthal 1974).
Such measures are often not independent, for many lawyers advise clients what it is ‘reasonable’ to want, and thus supply the criterion by which they are to be judged (although Rosenthal did construct an independent measure).
More important, no survey of clients (or lawyers) could yield a sociologically relevant analytic category.
Such research can only discover whether lawyers are doing a good or a bad job in terms of common sense criteria, themselves embedded in, if not derived from, the ideology of lawyers themselves.
Only if the sociologist constructs her own categories, and constitutes her data in terms of them, can the terms of debate as defined by lawyers be avoided, and a genuinely independent measure be created.
PROBLEMS WITH THE CONCEPT ‘PROFESSION’
Given the limited scope of a paper, I will for reasons of economy develop a critique of the concept ‘profession’ in relation to the work of Terence Johnson (1972).
Criticisms made of it are here being required to stand for a more general critique.
Johnson's work merits this special position both because it has been influential in this country — Bankowski and Mungham (1976) use it, for example, and it routinely appears on ‘English Legal System’ booklists — and also because he explicitly takes issue with ideologically determined empiricist and common sense definitions of professionals in terms of the ‘traits’which they possess.
For Johnson the basis for differentiation between occupations is control over the producer-consumer relationship.
Thus he defines professional jobs as those of producers who define both the needs of the consumer and how those needs should be met .
Typically, he says, this position of control results from the fact that the clientele (consumer group) is large and heterogeneous.
Conversely, producers in this situation tend to be a relatively homogeneous group, collegially organised.
Control is exercised in terms of the rhetoric of a diagnostic relationship.
Johnson's approach represents an advance on classic statements such as, for example , that of Carr-Saunders and Wilson (1964); first, because it is relational ; second, it questions the taken for granted desirability of professionalism and third, it departs from empiricist nominalism .
The last point is demonstrated by the fact that according to Johnson's definition neither a lawyer working for a company nor a lawyer working for a neighbourhood centre would be a professional.
The fourth merit of Johnson's approach is that it allows for mobility of jobs between categories , although he does not attach as much significance as Hughes (1958) to the efforts of the ‘professionals’ themselves in this regard.
There are, however, crucial difficulties with Johnson's argument.
First, he assumes a theoretical need for a concept of profession, yet does not indicate the body of theory which requires and situates this concept.
Secondly, and as a result, his formulation is reactive .
Certain occupational groups style themselves as professions and the concept is defined in terms of a set of purported characteristics.
In the standard works the need to protect the client from the consequences of his own ignorance have been emphasised.
High standards of technical skill and of ethics, for example, are argued to be necessary because the client cannot judge the service he receives.
Professions are treated as necessary deviations from the free market model of supplier-consumer relations.
Johnson says no, it is not like that.
Rather, the characteristic of professionals is their control over the client.
He substitutes an alternative, indeed a radical alternative, but he does not transcend the debate.
Thirdly, Johnson posits certain kinds of relationship as a permanent, i.e. non-historic, logical possibility.
The ideal definition remains, while in historical time various occupational groups move in and out of the category.
The concept of profession itself is timelessly correct.
Plainly this error too derives from the first one, for if the concept ‘profession’ has no  theoretical existence, and yet is recognised as a concept, it lacks all material grounding.
In sum, Johnson falls victim to the same snare which he saw to have trapped his predecessors.
People doing certain jobs have characterised themselves — and been characterised — as professions: this concept with all its ideological trappings has been incorporated into sociological analysis so that even its harshest critics are incapable of transcending it, and conduct their discourse in its terms.
Thus Johnson replicates these occupations' concern with their own organisation and their rhetoric of the ignorance (vulnerability) of the client.
His analysis reinforces the notion that there really ‘are’ professions, and by claiming the mantle of radicalism for a perspective which emphasises professional control over the client inhibits the development of an adequately theorised alternative to the conventional view.
More recent work (Bankowski and Mungham 1976; Illich 1977; Medcalf 1978; Scheingold 1974) emphasises that lawyers control not merely, or even at all, by over-the-desk domination of clients, but more subtly.
Lawyers peddle the language of the law, legal symbols.
Lawyers coerce the experiences and life situations of their clients to fit these definitions.
Lawyers are responsible for individualising and de-politicising issues.
This is inevitable if an issue is to be constituted in terms of legal discourse.
Law is hegemonic, and subjects all who come within its scope to a reconstitution of their problems in terms of a fundamentally bourgeois set of ideological categories.
The struggles of radical lawyers to get off this hook are well documented, most classically perhaps by Lefcourt (1971).
Two points are more interesting for the current argument.
First, there is the recognition that to trade in categories and interpretations must necessarily be to trade a way not just of perceiving but also of constructing situations.
This point of view recognises that language is never value free, that discourses are creative.
These points are accepted in the current argument.
Secondly, there is in these works the assumption, not demonstrated, that therefore lawyers are to be thought of as social controllers.
This view, indeed, is shared with scholars of many political and sociological persuasions.
As O'Gorman (1963, p.5) has put it ‘sociologists from Ross to Parsons have described the legal profession as a major mechanism of social control’.
It is with this view that this paper take issue.
So far radicalism both in  defining lawyers as controllers of individual clients and in defining them as controllers because of the ideological discourse which they sell has reached a position from which only negative statements can be made: lawyers don't help, they control; professionalism does not protect clients, it defeats them.
Radicalism can and should offer an alternative formulation which is positive, which makes it possible not just to see that one's previous knowledge was incorrect but also to understand more about the world.
Without such positive formulations and theorisations the world cannot be changed.
Such an alternative formulation cannot be achieved without an examination of the various concrete practices of people doing jobs.
Ideologies cannot be transcended in the realms of thought and reason.
Identifying the specific concrete practice of an occupational group is, of course, a theoretical as well as an empirical task.
When the specific concrete practices of several such groups have been identified, then a new and theoretically grounded basis for their classification may be achieved.
The research on lawyers, presented below, could have provided a basis for continuing to classify together lawyers, doctors and vicars.
But it did not.
An approach to the material world — research — can yield both a theoretical alternative and a concrete rebuttal.
THE SPECIFIC PRACTICE OF LAWYERING
Sociological wisdom, then, whether conventional or radical, has emphasised the importance of lawyers as agents of social control.
Some, like Parsons (1962) saw this as a positive function of the law and its practitioners.
The social control function of lawyers then takes on moral overtones.
‘Attorneys mediate between the established normative order guaranteed by the state and divers interests and developments in society’(Rueschemeyer 1937b, p. 173), it has been argued, following this basically Durkheimian line of reasoning.
By contrast, the radical position has interpreted control as suppression, and has focussed attention on the ways in which lawyers appropriate the right to know what their clients need.
Thus the corollary of the expansion of access to lawyers is a limitation on people's confidence and ability to assert their own needs in their own way.
Thus not only Johnson (1972), but Rosenthal (1974), Bankowski and Mungham (1976), Foucault  (1977) and Illich (1977) emphasise the controlling function of lawyers.
This controlling and canalising of experience, it is argued, is carried out for the benefit of, if not directly on behalf of, the ruling property-owning class.
By contrast, the research reported here suggests that controlling is not what British solicitors — even those at the bottom end of the market — spend most of their time doing.
Indeed, to anticipate a little, in sixty-seven of the eighty-two cases which I observed and recorded the client announced his need and set the objective for the solicitor.
There was a significant minority of exceptions (ten), and some doubtful cases (five).
These are described and analysed in the final section of this paper.
But certainly the predominant evidence was not of clients being subordinated.
The specific practice of lawyers which was identified was that of translating .
Clients bring many issues to the solicitor, expressed and constituted in terms of a variety of everyday discourses.
The lawyer translates these, and reconstitutes the issues in terms of a legal discourse which has trans-situational applicability.
In this sense law is a meta-language.
Its material significance, however, derives from the fact that it is also the workaday language for certain state authorised adjudicators.
So far this argument has not departed far from the ‘radical social control’ position outlined above.
The thrust of that position, however, is that clients' needs are taken from them (the transitive verb to need becomes a noun) and adjudicated by alien authorities, often to the disadvantage of the client.
But clients are typically the institutions (legal persons) of capitalist society, and middle class people : the model professional in the occupation's own terms deals even more disproportionately with clients such as these (Smigel 1969; Carlin 1962; Handler 1967).
A small part of law work, and that of a very low status, is concerned with the working class.
Does not this call into question a view of lawyers as controllers of the masses?
Does not this necessitate a definition which is based on neither lawyers' rhetoric nor a reaction to it but on what they actually do?
The view which I share with such disparate theorists as Antonio Gramsci and Max Weber is that the model of lawyers as both agents of the bourgeoisie and translators is correct theoretically as well as empirically.
Lawyers are translators — that is their day-to-day chore.
They are also creators of the language into which they translate.
The radical position is not to argue against the evidence  that lawyers are (a) primarily controllers of (b) the masses, and that this effect is achieved by the appropriation of clients' needs.
The radical position argues rather that lawyers are conceptive ideologists (Marx 1976, p.60)who think, and therefore constitute the form of, the emergent relations of capitalist society .
The remarkable correlation between the increase in the number of lawyers and the increase in the volume of capital (Smigel 1969; Auerbach 1976) is thereby explained.
To think, for the first time, a debenture share, say, is a creative act which the antecedent development of capitalist relations had made possible, and, in some form or other, necessary.
It is in this sense that lawyers are conceptive ideologists.
Their primary client is the bourgeoisie, in its various forms of organisation.
Weber too (1954, p.291) pointed out how finely attuned to the typical problems of the middle classes are those areas of law which lawyers have refined, polished, and expanded on behalf of their typical clients.
It is in this sense that lawyers can also justly be characterised as the organic intellectuals of the bourgeoisie (Gramsci 1971, pp. 5–23), thinking the class's advance through a close institutional relationship with its day-to-day practical concerns.
These points are elaborated elsewhere.
Here the position may be summed up by saying that the control task may recently have been added to the conceptive ideological and translating practices, but it is these latter which constitute the lawyer's work, and in terms of which his job should be sociologically defined.
This paper uses research to demonstrate the meaning and possibility of translation and its typicality within legal practice — a crucial point if it is to be identified as the specific practice and thus theoretically the defining characteristic of lawyers.
Situations in which translation did not occur are accounted for.
Creative translation — conceptive ideological work — is not discussed in any further detail here.
Such work is undertaken primarily for large institutional clients and is discussed more fully elsewhere.
Thus this paper supplies only a part of the substantiation which the foregoing analysis requires.
What it does is demonstrate that even for ‘one off’ individual clients the most common practice of lawyers is translation rather than control.
Control, in the form of either transformation or refusal to translate, is a minority practice even at this ‘bottom’ end of the occupation.
It is therefore argued that translation is the specific practice of lawyers in terms of which  their place in the social structure should be theorised.
Indications of how this latter task might be done are offered but not developed in this article.
THE RESEARCH
The research was begun in January 1974, and was designed as a pilot study for a larger project which was not, in the event, carried out.
Cases started during the research period were followed up to their conclusions, in one case four years later.
Observation was carried out for a total of nine weeks in the offices of four solicitors.
The two metropolitan solicitors were found by personal contact.
The two provincial solicitors were the only two who agreed to the research following a random mailing of solicitors in the town.
Given this data base the research perforce aims at conceptual rather than theoretical generalisation.
This in any case is a correct objective for a pilot study.
A total of 82 cases was collected for analysis.
In most cases I was allowed to read the case file as well as to observe solicitor-client encounters and to attend court.
The first lawyer with whom I worked, however,(Lawyer A) did not allow me to examine files.
Details of the cases are set out in Table 5. l.
Firm A was a one-man practice in the metropolitan centre.
As Table 5. l shows, he dealt with a lot of litigation work.
Firm B was a high street practice in a suburb, which had five partners.
Here litigation was a separate, specialised job.
However, the partner with whom I worked claimed to be a general practitioner, and the distribution of his cases supports this.
He also — and this is important — attended the local county court on behalf of his firm.
Firm C was a provincial branch practice in a north country town, carried largely by a managing clerk.
The firm had several offices in small towns in the rural hinterland, and a partner from one of these would attend ‘my’ branch office on two days per week.
This firm depended heavily on conveyancing.
Indeed, all but one (the compulsory purchase) of the non-conveyancing cases came to the firm because of associated conveyancing work.
In the larger provincial firm (D) the research was done with the probate partner.
His debt gathering work was handed over to a colleague once the legal aspects of it had been sorted out.
One of these involved the sale of the lease of a sea front catering   concession, which was eventually repossessed by the vendor.
The other was part of dealing with the affairs of a builder who had emigrated.
The researched partner also conveyed his house and negotiated with the Inland Revenue Department on his behalf.
Thus both the provincial lawyers dealt primarily with undisputed matters, while disputes represented the bulk of the work of the two metropolitan firms.
This was emphasised by the distribution of cases in which there was no second party or ‘other side’.
The characteristics of clients are also important in any account which seeks to refute ‘domination of the masses’ as the most useful   way of theorising lawyers' practice.
Unfortunately, the social class of the private citizens could not be determined.
In the table below ‘property owner’ means someone making a living by buying and selling houses and flats.
Solicitors A and D each had a client in the category ‘business/commercial’ which had more than two directors.
The rest of the clients in this category were working on their own or in partnership.
In firm B this was because the senior partner had the larger company clients; in firm D it was because larger clients were more rarely involved in probate matters.
In the two smaller firms the distribution of types of clients in the sample is likely to be a fairly accurate reflection of the clients of the firm.
This considerable dependence on private people as clients meant a large number of ‘one off’ or at best occasional clients.
A problem of continuity of workload was posed for the lawyers (Carlin 1962; Galanter 1974).
Lawyer A resolved this problem by building up a reputation .
This was possible because his clients were part of loose knit but effective networks of relationships.
Because he had a largely immigrant clientele he was in a position analogous to that of a lawyer in a small town where networks are complex and gossip channels effective.
Eight of the 16 clients of lawyer A were West Indian, and two were Asian.
Lawyer C was new to the town and aware of both this problem and that of breaking into an established market.
The problem of getting work was tackled in three ways.
First, a gap had been found at the bottom end of the market, conveying (or transferring) small terraced houses with local authority mortgages.
Secondly, the firm prided itself on speed and efficiency, both as a profitable  practice in itself, and as a means of building up a reputation with estate agents.
Files of this firm would contain 30 letters on average for a conveyance, roughly half being despatched by the firm.
(In firm D by contrast, a conveyance file could contain over 90 letters.)
Finally, this firm (C) depended on the patronage of certain key land and estate agents who acted as brokers for clients and cases.
Some of the consequences of this are discussed in the section on outcomes, below.
I have no evidence as to how lawyers B and D got their clients.
They worked, however, in larger firms and in each the senior partner (with whom I did not work) had large commercial and industrial clients.
TRANSLATIONS
Discursive translation is a lawyer's defining skill.
Even a simple conveyance of a newly built estate property — easy money for the lawyer, with a standard form of contract — involves some translation work.
In drafting the contract a planning authority condition that the future occupants do not erect fences has to be translated into a restrictive covenant.
Client purchasers require that this be translated back into everyday discourse.
In the language of everyday it emerged that ‘no one is going to say anything if you don't let it (the hedge) get too high’.
The existence of the covenant, however, provides the possibility of its future invocation.
Its breach would make possible a future legal solution even if the real grounds of complaint were quite other.
Translations undertaken on behalf of clients involved both translations of objects and of concepts .
The skill of the lawyer existed in ensuring that the relationship between the statements in his legal discourse was such that it would lead to a legal outcome which would translate back directly into the outcome chosen by the client as formulated in his or her own, non-legal discourse.
At the intermediate stages such direct retranslation is not necessary, and quite often not possible.
Three examples are taken from the research outlined in the previous section as illustrative materials showing what is here meant by translation.
While these examples are not meant as proof it is still necessary to describe the data from which they are drawn.
In the final section an analysis of the fifteen deviant cases is  undertaken.
In will making the client's choice of outcome was given centrality more regularly than in any other branch of law work which I observed.
This was true for all the lawyers.
The case below illustrates well what is involved.
A client told Lawyer D that she wished to bequeath her money to her children, including her share of a house owned jointly with her husband.
She was particularly concerned to secure these monies for her children in the event of her husband remarrying after her death.
Lawyer D told her that a jointly-owned house would become the sole property of her husband after her death, and she could not in any way guarantee her share of the money invested in it for her children.
However, the woman was pressing.
Lawyer D then suggested to her that changing the ownership of the house to a tenancy-in-common would enable her half to be secured for the children.
He explained that this was unusual, and would require her husband's consent.
It was arranged that the husband would telephone Lawyer D, after discussing the matter with his wife, so that Lawyer D could explain what was involved.
Eventually the husband agreed.
The form of ownership was changed and the will was appropriately drawn.
In this case the objects in the client's discourse were her money (which for her existed now as part of a house, now as cash again), her children, her husband, her husband's possible future wife and family.
The principal objects in the lawyer's discourse were the jointly-owned house and the possible tenancy-in-common.
The client's discourse was dominated by conceptions of kin-based relationships; the lawyer's discourse was dominated by conceptions of relations involving ownership potentialities and capacities.
Thus the husband and wife became joint owners and possible tenants; the children became beneficiaries; the possible future spouse did not figure at all.
The house which in everyday discourse the wife and husband regarded as ‘theirs’ turned out in legal discourse to be capable of being theirs in many different ways.
In other words, if the legal discourse had exactly paralleled the everyday discourse it would not have been possible to achieve a solution in one but not in the other.
The discrepancy between the discourses is necessary, not a redundant mystification.
The only  point at which exact translation is required is translation of the objective in legal discourse into the client's chosen outcome.
Clients do know and are entitled to know what they want; a good lawyer will achieve an exact translation of this in another discursive realm.
[Further examples of translations are presented here in the original paper (Eds .).]
Ability to translate is the specific skill of lawyers, and, it is argued, their definitive practice.
None the less, they are not always willing or able to deploy this skill.
The next section of the paper deals with these exceptional situations.
OUTCOMES
CHOICE OF OBJECTIVE
If the defining practice of a lawyer is translation, how then is the second question addressed by this paper answered?
What is a good lawyer?
All the non-matrimonial cases of which the start was observed were concluded without litigation — although four years later one was settled within a week of a scheduled county court hearing.
Law is not, in most cases, a zero-sum game.
The question cannot be answered, therefore, by totting up the number of a lawyer's victories, for in most cases there are no clear winners and losers.
Retrospective appraisal by clients has already been rejected as a lawyer-influenced criterion.
Appraisal by panels of other lawyers is hardly independent of the occupation's own biases.
Paradoxically, the most useful criterion is that suggested by inverting Johnson's definition, with which this paper started out.
If ‘professionals’ are those who determine both the needs of their clients and how these shall be met, are lawyers professionals?
Is this in fact what they do?
Rosenthal (1974) has already considered a related question, that of client participation.
In this paper the measure of who sets the objective for the lawyer is used.
The choice of this measure is not arbitrary, for the argument now is that typically a bourgeois client brings an issue to a lawyer, which the latter translates into a meta-language in terms of which a binding solution can be found.
The lawyer may have to extend the concepts and objects of that  discourse in order to achieve such an effective translation .
Plainly such an argument would be nonsensical if the client were not the one who stated the outcome which he wished to achieve.
A ‘good’ lawyer is therefore one who accepts his client's desired outcome as his own objective.
An analysis was therefore undertaken of whose chosen outcome was adopted by the lawyers studied.
Table 5.4 makes several points very clear.
First, most clients tell the solicitor what they want and he sets about getting it for them.
Secondly, none of the recurring clients, those who bring regular business, had his objective rejected.
This happened only to private citizens bringing ‘one off’ cases, Galanter's ‘one shotters’rather than‘repeat players’(Galanter 1974).
VARIATION BETWEEN FIRMS
This pattern was apparent for all four solicitors, but it was most marked for solicitor B (the suburban practitioner) and least marked for A (the central metropolitan solo practitioner) and D (the practitioner in the large provincial firm).
An additional variable is needed to account for the variation between the firms in the extent to which clients' chosen outcomes were retained or transformed.
While the private person/other distinction accounts for most of the variance, it does not explain it all.
This residual explanation is provided by an examination of the structural position of the practitioner and his firm.
Two structural dimensions were of paramount importance.
These were: first, the  dependence or independence of the lawyer.
This dimension examined whether or not the firm had a patron which disproportionately supplied it with work.
The patron could be either a large client or a ‘broker’, in the case here a firm of land agents.
The second structural dimension was occupational control, analysed as professional integration or professional marginality.
This led to the typology set out in Figure 5.1 below.
DEVIANT CASES
The reasons for this allocation of lawyers to cells will become apparent as the deviant cases — those in which the client's chosen outcome was rejected — and the doubtful cases are examined.
Firm A has already been presented as a dependent for its now of business on maintaining a reputation with its largely immigrant clients.
No single client was identified as having the status of patron.
The solicitor was strongly professionally oriented: he would regale one with legal anecdotes, the humour of which depended on a prior deferential attitude to barristers and judges; he was strict in his interpretation of professional ethics.
Yet a one man business for immigrants in the commercial centre of the city was an anachronism.
Moreover, although work was regularly provided for two sets of chambers there was no special tie with any other firm of solicitors.
This lawyer was therefore classified as professionally marginal, in a structural rather than an attitudinal sense.
He has no patron.
Thus this lawyer accepted his clients' chosen outcomes as his objective both because he needed to retain his reputation amongst his relatively organised clientele, but also because there were no countervailing pressures , or no alternative rewards.
His approach to clients was summed up in a remark I overheard him make to a colleague at the bar: ‘You know me — I believe everybody’.
He did.
Even in private conversation he would explain how his client could not possibly have broken into the house in the way of which he was accused, because he was far  too drunk at the time, and so on.
Thus he fought his criminal cases, accepting the client's wish to ‘get off’ as his objective.
Similarly, it was he who fought the photographs case [quoted in original paper]through to the Court of Appeal, and was successful.
A pre-war immigrant himself, he believed to the full in the rhetorics of democracy, equal justice, and innocence until guilt is proven — and he practised accordingly.
I suspect he believed that everyone else did too.
Given all this, the deviant cases require explanation.
In the one in which the client's objective was rejected the clients were a brother and sister whose father had died.
There was no will.
Lawyer A also worked for their late father's employer, a charity.
There was a growing argument about £3000 which the charity had, according to lawyer A, loaned to the deceased.
The children resisted this interpretation, claiming that it was an honorarium.
Several times in the two meetings observed lawyer A pointed out to the children that they could seek alternative advice, and that they need not be embarrassed to do so.
After the research period was over they did indeed change solicitor, and lawyer A withdrew from the case altogether.
Here, then, the exceptional case proves the rule, since it resulted from the lawyer's attempt to achieve another client's chosen outcome.
One of the two clients of lawyer A classified as doubtful was a personal friend of long standing in the throes of a divorce.
Lawyer A gave him a lot of advice about what was reasonable, but it was not invariably accepted.
The case is classified as doubtful because  the opinion of each party appeared to carry equal weight, and the advice was often about questions irrelevant to the legal issues of grounds, maintenance, and the house.
The second doubtful case was that of a man accused of driving while uninsured.
He thought he was covered to drive another vehicle, and said he had been told as much on the telephone by his insurers.
Lawyer A checked in his books, but said that it was as he had feared ‘You are either insured or you are not.
But the fact that you took the trouble to ‘phone is a point strongly in your favour…
I think we can save your licence’.
The case is classified as doubtful because lawyer A demonstrably attempted to adopt the client's objective (not guilty).
He discussed the matter with the client at length— I observed two three-quarter hour meetings — and examined the documents for a loophole with great care.
However, he decided it was impossible to deny the charge.
This client too eventually changed solicitor.
Lawyer A's failure to adopt the client's chosen outcomes involved in two cases (the children with the disputed inheritance and the uninsured driver) constituted a refusal to translate .
The third case involved an attempt to transform the client's chosen outcome by persuading the client to accept a ‘reasonable’ objective.
Lawyer B emerges as the most prone to reject his clients' chosen outcomes.
This lawyer was structurally integrated with the profession.
The three high street law firms, and others in neighbouring suburbs, did a lot of business together, and were observed to help each other out with agency court appearances.
Lawyer B also needed to maintain the good will of the local County Court if he were to remain a success.
Thus lawyer B has been characterised as professionally integrated, although this turned out to be a rather mixed blessing for his clients.
There was insufficient evidence to identify a patron.
Thus lawyer B was more dependent on the profession than on his clients.
This meant that he was not willing to fight matters if there were a risk of this being regarded as ‘unreasonable’ by Court officers or fellow lawyers.
He was not willing to take on cases with relatively unconventional chosen outcomes.
The six cases in which the client's chosen outcome was not adopted were:
(1)
A plea in mitigation rather than a defence.
(2)
A demand for ‘reasonable’ access, i.e. one evening, one week-end day and six week-ends per annum staying access.
The  client had wanted either custody or to see his child every day.
‘I don't want to feel I've twisted your arm,’ said lawyer B to the visibly shattered client.
He explained that he was tailoring his demands to what a court would regard as reasonable and be likely to allow.
(3)
A divorce case.
The client was dissatisfied with the amount of maintenance he would have to pay.
He was told, ‘You can always go back to the court if your circumstances change’.
Again the attempt was to persuade him that courts are very reasonable.
(4)
The fourth case also concerned a divorce.
This woman was very determined that no provision for maintenance by her ex-husband should be made.
Lawyer B insisted on a nominal maintenance being included, on the grounds that this could then be increased if, say, she became ill and unable to work.
The woman did not return to complete the divorce, although she had been separated for three years.
(5)
The fifth client whose outcome was not adopted was a man who was dissatisfied with the service he had received from a computer dating service.
He was told that within the terms of the contract nothing could be done.
(6)
Finally, a client complained about the noise caused by his neighbour.
Lawyer B wrote to the neighbour, who called in to see him.
Lawyer B then decided that the neighbour rather than his client was being ‘reasonable’, and wrote to the client suggesting various (expensive) building works which could reduce the noise.
Of these six cases in which lawyer B did not adopt the client's chosen outcome as his objective, numbers one to four involve an attempted transformation of the client's chosen outcome, and number five is a refusal to translate .
Contracts are always capable of re-interpretation, and of having their implications elaborated.
The sixth case also involves a refusal to translate.
Lawyer B, however, tried to resolve the issue in the terms of the presenting, everyday, discourse.
Solutions in terms of this everyday discourse could have and may have been thought of by the client, who had come to the solicitor for a legal rather than an everyday solution.
Such attempts to find solutions in the discourse of everyday were more typical of lawyer C.
Lawyer C was the legal executive/managing clerk who ran the small provincial practice.
He has been characterised as having a  patron and as being professionally marginal.
The patron observed was an old established firm of land and estate agents.
This firm did not pass all its legal work to lawyer C, but did pass two cases to the firm during the two-week sampling period.
The practice is classed as having been professionally marginal because at the time of the research it was new to the town.
Moreover, it was not popular because of its cut-price work.
Lawyer C was not amenable to informal social control from the very strong local Law Society, because he was not eligible for membership.
Most of lawyer C's work, as indicated in Table 5.1, was conveyancing — a task which can often be carried out in everyday discourse.
There were, however, three cases arising out of an original conveyance where a translation was necessary if the client's chosen outcome was to be achieved.
In each case lawyer C refused to translate.
In the first case he offered a solution in the terms of everyday discourse.
But, of course, the client had only approached the lawyer because the solutions she could think of — those available in everyday discourse — were inappropriate or had been tried and had failed.
The cases in which lawyer C rejected the client's chosen outcome are listed below.
(1)
A woman had sold her home and handed over to her son the £4000 proceeds, on condition that she could live with him in the house he bought with the money.
She was now unhappy living there, did not get on with the son's girlfriend, and wanted her money back so she could live elsewhere.
She said it was a loan.
The lawyer said there was no evidence that it was a loan and not a gift.
He offered common sense advice such as that she should ‘have a talk’ with her son, but refused to accept that the money was a loan and take the necessary steps to recover it.
‘She's been a silly woman and now she's regretting it,’ he said.
And on another occasion indicated that ‘All she wants is a bit of hand-holding’.
(2)
A woman had bought a terraced house with a local authority mortgage.
She then found that one of the walls bulged, and wanted to get compensation from the surveyor.
She was told she could not.
This may have been correct, but no alternative was suggested.
Her desired outcome was a bit of money to help with major structural repairs.
It was lawyer C's job to translate the issue into a form which made this possible.
Instead of this he left her to think of a solution and then rejected it as an inappropriate translation.
(3)
The third client wanted confirmation that he rather than his neighbour owned a bit of land, and that his neighbour had no use rights.
He was told he was wrong.
Thus lawyer C tended not to translate his clients' chosen outcomes, whereas lawyer B had transformed them so as to facilitate translation.
The three ‘doubtful’ cases of lawyer C are perhaps even more revealing.
They also need careful attention because they are the only cases brought by business clients in which the client's objective was not unequivocally adopted by the lawyer.
In two of them the outcome was in fact chosen by the patron — the broker land agents.
The two clients, however, were apparently happy with the outcome.
(1)
A man was buying a two-year sub-lease on some business premises.
He wanted a guarantee that he could renew the lease on expiry.
The freehold belonged to a local charity, of which the broker land-agent was secretary.
The freeholder refused to put in writing any guarantee, such as that no comprehensive redevelopment of the site was planned.
The client was advised of the situation, but, as lawyer C said, he wanted something cheap.
He agreed to take his chance.
The property had come to the attention of the lawyer through the broker.
The client had been acted for on a previous aborted purchase.
(2)
A man was offered an alternative plot of land with appropriate permissions, on to which he could transfer his small business, a ‘kennels’.
He would, of course, have the benefit of new drainage on the new site.
The exchange was contingent upon planning permission for building being given on the vacated site.
The client agreed, planning permission was given and the ‘swap’ went through.
The client was content.
However, the outcome had been chosen by the broker land-agent, who referred the client and explained what was needed to lawyer C.
(3)
The third doubtfully determined outcome was from a builder who had been in financial difficulties.
Lawyer C had conveyed his house in the teeth of a re-possession order from a loan company, and generally extricated him from the debts of his own dissolved partnership.
Thus the case could properly be classified as one in which the client determined the outcome.
Unfortunately, however, he did not pay lawyer C's firm.
The  firm recovered their money by retaining monthly instalments paid to the client via them from the buyer of the client's house, to whom the client had lent £400 to secure the sale.
As lawyer C explained to me, this was right in morality and common sense.
I agreed.
The surplus was of course paid to the client.
All of these doubtful cases of lawyer C were exceptional in that the client ran a one-man business, and was therefore likely to bring recurrent work to the firm.
In all other cases the chosen outcome of business clients was adopted by the lawyer.
This anomaly is now seen to be largely explained by the intervention of the patron — the broker land agent — who set the objective for both lawyer and client in two of the three cases.
The third case resulted from the willingness and need of the firm to take work from any source while it was establishing itself in a new market.
So lawyer C took on a notoriously troublesome client — and indeed, found a satisfactory way of handling the client himself, as well as his many debts and difficulties!
There is nothing to say about lawyer D, for he adopted his client's objective as his own in every single case.
This absence of anything to say is perhaps the most significant fact of all.
REPRISE: THE TRANSLATOR.
Lawyer D was professionally integrated, in that he was a member of the local Law Society and worked routinely with other solicitors in the town.
He is classified as having a patron/client because of the observed relationship with a large organisation which was one among a number of significant clients.
The importance of the relationship cannot be demonstrated without an analysis of the accounts of the firm.
There remains the possibility of a misclassification.
However, the concern of lawyer D to oblige this important client is shown by the case of the tenant farmer, summarised below.
In this instance it seems that the client needed not so much advice on a course of action as legitimation from its lawyer.
Once the client was in a position to show that it had received independent legal advice to the effect that the law was uncertain it went ahead alone to achieve its chosen objective.
Such legitimation could not be provided by other than a high status firm.
Thus this patron-client needed lawyer D's good standing in the local Law Society.
They needed the scrupulous professional  integrity which nearly proved such a stumbling block to them in this case.
Their need for legitimation may have benefited lawyer D's other clients.
Lawyer D's status was in part dependent on his willingness and ability to act as a translator for all his clients.
Lawyers have long recognised themselves that their key task is translation, and it is the practice of translation which is accorded respect within the profession.
The case of the large organisation versus the tenant farmer is summarised below from a file of 63 letters, plus documents.
The tenant had been in partnership with his father, who had died.
Lawyer D's client (the organisation) wanted to know whether it could release the tenancy on the land without the consent of the surviving partner (the son).
They had an offer for compensation.
D's reply was that this depended on whether the tenancy was an asset of the partnership: it was in the father's name, yet rent was paid by the partnership.
On balance D thought it was a partnership asset and therefore the consent of the surviving partner was necessary for release.
Much later (there were many other aspects to the case) the client organisation wrote to say that they were seeking the son's consent but as there was a possibility that the offer of compensation would be withdrawn.
‘We shall be pleased if you will give further consideration to the question of the release….
If you still feel the firm has no power to release the tenancy on the grounds stated we shall be pleased if you will advise us if there are any other grounds on which the firm could give the release without the surviving partner's consent…
. If it transpires that there are grounds we shall appreciate your advice as to what redress Mr Blank would have, if any…’
Under pressure from an important client, D gave his client organisation the legal loophole it required.
‘We still feel that our original opinion is correct….
However, we should point out that decided cases relative to the question all turn on the individual facts, and it could certainly be argued that the tenancy was not a partnership asset…’
The risk of litigation was pointed out, but the firm replied that they now intended to release the tenancy ‘with or without the consent of the surviving partner’, and did so.
The son, apparently, claimed that the partnership had been formed expressly to prevent this happening.
OUTCOMES EXPLAINED
This section has argued that desired outcomes are typically chosen by clients, and that the exceptions to this are disproportionately private people bringing ‘one off’ cases.
While this held true for three of the four firms, it was possible to account for the exceptions in firm C because of the business getting practices of that firm, and in particular its brokerage relationship with the land agent.
Explanations of the patterns for the other lawyers have been offered in terms of the degree of organisation of the clientele (lawyer A), dependence on the local civil court (lawyer B), and the need to maintain high status by performing highly regarded translation work, in order to be able to legitimate the practices of important clients.
This deviant case analysis, while yielding important insights, cannot be regarded as providing all the variables needed to explain firm by firm variations, as more research is necessary to construct a more refined typology, in particular one which could distinguish between the different types of professional integration here revealed, i.e. attitudinal, dependence on court, and dependence on the good opinion of high status practitioners.
But although more research is undoubtedly necessary, quite a lot has equally indubitably been achieved by this small enterprise.
It is these advances which are noted below.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper has argued that a sociological definition of an occupation should be in terms of the specific practices of that occupation.
Various materials, particularly those data constituted by research, should be used to identify these practices.
A classification of occupations — if it is wanted — can then be constructed in terms of these various practices.
The correct theoretical location of the occupation can then be identified.
This approach avoids the idealism lurking in other attempts to classify occupations, and in particular‘the  professions’, even when the attempt seeks to situate the professions in a radical theory of society.
In the case of lawyers the standard radical approach has been to assume the theoretical need for a concept ‘profession’, and then to redefine the content of this concept.
The theoretical object ‘profession’ has been the same as for conservative theorists.
In order to achieve this redefinition of the content of the concept ‘profession’, radical theorists have emphasised (i) the impotence of clients;(ii) the control of clients by professionals;(iii) the distortion involved in reconceiving issues in legal terms.
The direction for research generated by this formulation of the issues would be a comparison of working class and middle class clients to demonstrate the greater vulnerability of the former.
However, if the specific practices of lawyers are examined it is readily apparent that most clients are not working class.
To build a theory of ‘lawyers as controllers’ on an examination of their minority work with working class clients is therefore to miss the central point about what lawyers do, and it is this central point which should give them their place in a theory of the social formation.
Also an empirical examination of relatively low level lawyers reported here shows that by and large lawyers do not tell clients what they want; clients tell lawyers the outcome they wish for.
Moreover, the exceptions to this had to be explained in terms of the position of the lawyer in his local structure, including the structure of his relationship with clients; social class did not explain the deviant cases.
It was therefore apparent that the specific practice of lawyers cannot be theorised as social control.
By contrast it has been argued that lawyers' characteristic and specific practice is translation into a discourse which they both use and create.
Lawyers can thus be characterised as conceptive ideologists .
It was shown that translation work is undertaken even for impecunious clients.
However, since Llewellyn wrote in 1933 research has shown that lawyers do this work most and best for the haute bourgeoisie and the state which represents it.
It is also appropriate therefore, to theorise lawyers as organic intellectuals of the bourgeois class.
The radical error arose for two reasons.
One is the idealist scientific practice discussed above.
The second source of error is the preoccupation with repression as the task of the agencies of the bourgeois class.
True, there is a repressive task and there are repressive agencies; but for capitalism to be reproduced on an  expanding scale there are also other necessary tasks.
One of these is that of formulating and constituting new forms of relation appropriate to this expanding reproduction.
This is the task of lawyers and of other conceptive ideologists with whom they should properly be classified.
That is the end of the argument, but given the theme of the conference for which this paper was prepared, it is necessary to add a footnote about classification.
Soldiers, psychiatrists, and priests might on this basis be classified together as social controllers; doctors and perhaps teachers should be classified as sustainers: the proper theoretical place for them is as the maintenance engineers of labour power; playwrights, philosophers, accountants, sociologists, and lawyers must be classified together as conceptive ideologists.
SOLICITORS AND CLIENTS: ALTRUISM OR SELF-INTEREST?
GEOFF MUNGHAM AND PHILIP.
A. THOMAS
INTRODUCTION
The collective voice of solicitors is expressed through the Law Society, which combines the functions of a governing body and a professional association for practitioners in England and Wales.
This London-based institution undertakes the major responsibility of projecting a public image of solicitors based upon client service overriding the baser desires of self-interest.
The principle of altruism underpins the code of ethics and practice which provide regulatory guidance.
Should a solicitor deviate from the rules of conduct then sanctions can be imposed by the profession.
Throughout this paper evidence from a study of solicitors in Cardiff, a large provincial city, will be offered to show how the profession formally states that the client's interests should be, and are, put before its own.
This places the solicitor in a less favourable position than the businessman who possesses greater opportunities to exploit a commercial relationship, possibly to the detriment of the other party.
Caveat emptor may operate in the market place but not in the solicitor's office.
In exchange for this public commitment the profession receives special treatment from the state, the community and the client.
It is allowed by statute to undertake certain paid work to the exclusion of all others; it is a self-regulating body; its members are of high status and their financial rewards are considerable.
This paper deals with the relationship between the solicitor and the client.
We consider the rationale and the manner of the legal profession's projection of an image of altruism and focus upon one legal service, the duty solicitor scheme, which was set up ostensibly to serve the community.
Our research into the origins and operation of this service highlights the rhetorical nature of the altruistic model and illustrates the internal politics, both local and national, of the profession.
A TROUBLED PROFESSION
Everett Hughes (1958, p.83) states that one of the manifestations of social unrest is in challenges to the prerogatives of the leading professions.
The UK is currently experiencing considerable social unrest and the legal profession has been subjected to an unprecedented level of criticism and scrutiny.
The profession is well used to the  hostility , indifference or apathy of that majority of the people, who have traditionally been unable to avail themselves of its services because of insurmountable financial barriers.
Since issues of property dominate legal work the propertyless have had little cause to encounter it unless they interfered with the interests of those with property.
In the last thirty years, however, it has increasingly been the lawyers who have projected the legal solution to those who were previously estranged.
With the introduction of the Legal Aid Act 1949, the Welfare State has created an enormous potential class of clients to whom the professional has turned.
This discovery, of the reservoir of ‘unmet legal need’(Morris et al .
1973), has also resulted in a closer relationship between the disenfranchised and the solicitors.
The new clients have seen the profession at work and they are not pleased.
This groundswell of dissatisfaction was partially released during the 1960s and 1970s through inquiries into a number of key professional issues.
For example, in 1967 the Monopolies Commission investigated the general effect on the public interest of certain restrictive practices so far as they prevailed in relation to the supply of professional services.
In 1968 and 1969 the National Board for Prices and Incomes reported on the remuneration of solicitors.
The reports, whilst vindicating certain activities, stated that solicitors were overpaid for conveyancing, which yielded over 50 per cent of their income.
In 1967 the Monopolies and Mergers  Commission reported on the supply of solicitors' (and also barristers') services in relation to restrictions on advertising.
The ultimate embarrassment came in 1976 when the prime Minister announced the establishment of a Royal Commission to make a general inquiry into the law and practice relating to the provision of legal services in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
The Commission considered changes desirable in the public interest in the structure, organisation, training, regulation of and entry into the legal profession, although the final report has been seen largely as a vindication of the profession.
Nevertheless, this wide-ranging set of inquiries does illustrate that the level of concern has risen to incorporate many of the lawyers' traditional users and allies.
THE PROFESSION'S RESPONSE
Such institutionalised criticism demanded a response.
The profession, principally via its house journal, sought to account for the attacks in terms of a conspiracy theory.
The pages of the Law Society Gazette in the late sixties and early seventies suggest that the conspirators included such august bodies as the British Broadcasting Corporation, Her Majesty's Government, the political left and right, the popular press, university academics and ‘certain quarters’ which remained unspecified.
The Council of the Law Society's unfavourable reaction to critical reports was predictable but it is more interesting to note the strong sense of resentment that the profession should be considered a proper subject for such investigations.
This form of examination was seen as equating the professional relationship of solicitor and client with that of the market place.
Such an equation totally misconceived the relationship and was ultimately detrimental to both parties.
Law is not a business; nor merely is it a profession, which is defined in the Oxford Dictionary as a vocation or calling, especially one that involves some branch of learning or science, but is one of three learned professions.
Is it really suggested that it is in the best interests of the community that the proper approach to remuneration is purely on a time basis, and supply related to the question whether there are sufficient people prac-tising?
Is the Church to continue for ever to be under-remunerated because just sufficient hear the call?
Is the surgeon  to be remunerated purely on a time basis?…
No profession wor-thy of the name has ever been impelled merely by the monetary reward.
It expects, and has a moral right, to be paid properly for its skills and services.
(Conveyancer 1972, pp.81–2)
As one solicitor (Williams 1973) wrote, ‘did these eminent bodies have the slightest idea of the nature of the delicate area on which they were trampling with their feet?’
The concern with ‘greater productivity’, he asserted, would kill the idealism of the legal profession.
To practising solicitors law is not business.
Although the Law Society took the steps to establish a Professional and Public Relations Committee in 1971 and employed the public relations firm, Saatchi and Saatchi, to improve its tarnished image, it did not seek to present the profession on any sort of economic/productivity basis.
How, in fact, does the legal profession project itself for public consideration?
DESCRIPTIONS OF THE LEGAL PROFESSION
The Law Society has characterised the profession in a number of official statements.
The most common version is illustrated by its evidence to the Monopolies Commission of 1968 and repeated recently to the Royal Commission on Legal Services:
A body of men and women (a) identifiable by reference to some register or record;(b) recognised as having a special skill and learning in some field of activity in which the public needs protection against incompetence, the standards of skill and learning being prescribed by the profession itself;(c) holding themselves out as being willing to serve the public;(d) volun-tarily submitting themselves to standards of ethical conduct beyond those required of the ordinary citizen by law and;(e) undertaking to accept personal responsibility to those whom they serve for their actions and to their profession for maintaining public confidence.
The language used throughout these public self-descriptions reflected general visions of altruism and service: ‘public protection’, ‘willing to serve the public’, ‘public confidence’, ‘trust’, ‘special skill’, ‘the supply of professional services is very much  more than a business transaction’.
At the level of contentious and non-contentious business the Law Society has stated that
The duty of a lawyer…is clear and well understood.
It is his un-doubted duty to employ his skill, training and experience in order to ensure that his client's case is placed before the court to the client's best advantage and in the process thereof he must avail himself, on behalf of his client of every defence, be it technical or otherwise, which the law affords his client (1969, p. 1).
His (professional's) preoccupation must always be with the promotion of the interests of his client…(1968, p.5).
It is this special relationship, whereby the solicitor ‘like all professional men always puts his client's interests before his own’(Monopolies and Mergers Commission Report 1976b) that is said to take the profession outside the market forces of the business world.
This position of service is also offered as the primary justifica-tion for the special privileges enjoyed by the profession.
In order to protect the public from the charlatan or the quack, entry into the profession must be guarded, its standards polic-ed, and its rules of practice defined in the first instance by the profession itself…
The ground rules of completion are designed for the interests of the public and not for the interests of the profession alone.
(Hailsham 1971)
The purpose of self-regulation and the code of ethics is to protect the public from the vagaries of caveat emptor .
If the law is not a business then the controls of the market cannot be applied successfully and alternatives must be sought.
Given the specialised nature of law, it is argued that only the professionals themselves are properly qualified for the task.
The service nature of the profession means that self-control becomes the order of the day.
The public statements and rules of practice provide protection if, indeed, the profession does operate in accordance with them, placing client before self in compliance with the altruistic model.
Thus it becomes clearer why the Law Society is anxious to distinguish between professional services and business, to promote so vigorously an altruistic conception of the lawyer/client relationship.
Without these fundamental distinctions the economic  privileges of the profession are suspect.
This description bears marked similarities to those offered by a number of eminent sociologists who adopt the trait approach.
Although comparatively little has been written about the professions in the UK there are those who see these occupations in the same altruistic light.
The perceived breakdown of a traditional moral order during the industrial revolution and the expansion of the division of labour led to a search for new bases of moral integration.
One such was the proposed establishment of com-munities based upon occupational membership.
The professions seemed to offer a possible model.
T. H. Marshall stated in 1939 that ‘Professionalism is not concerned with self-interest, but with the welfare of the client’.
Common good was paramount while individualism and self-interest were of lesser importance.
Carr-Saunders and Wilson in their classic study of the professions endorsed the altruistic model:
The attitude of the professional man to his client…is one of pride in service given rather than of interest in opportunity for personal profit.
The professional man who gave a lower standard of service in necessitous cases, where his remuneration was little or nothing, would be regarded as an unworthy colleague by his professional brethren.
(p.471)
Millerson in The Qualifying Associations took the work of twenty-two scholars on the professions, including Carr-Saunders, Marshall, Parsons, the Webbs, Tawney and Whitehead.
He extracted the constant characteristics of their work to see which were considered essential to a profession.
The common features were found to be: skill based upon theoretical knowledge; training and educa-tion; demonstration of competence by passing a test; integrity maintained by adherence to a code of conduct; a professional organisation and service for the public good.
Underlying these definitions is the sentiment that the professional is a noble, independent individual who places public duty and honour before all else.
In regard to the legal profession Millerson states, ‘The lawyer emphasises the fiduciary nature of the professional/client relationship, the depth of learning, the cordial colleague relationship and sense of public service’(p.3).
However, people such as Johnson and Illich have rejected the trait/characteristic approach.
Such an approach, they argue, simply restates the professionals' own self-presentation in seem-ingly neutral categories.
To view them as members of a gentlemen's club, whose rules are predicated upon principles of service and public interest is to ignore the power structure of which they are a part.
Instead Johnson (1972) looks outside the professions and attempts to understand them in terms of their sources and use of power and authority.
He considers, for instance, the relationship between the state and the professions.
Lawyers are adamant about the need to remain independent of the state so far as licensing for practice is concerned.
Yet it is the state that ensures that only solicitors may be paid for transferring interests in land or that only doctors may issue death certificates.
It is the state which provides the opportunity to practise in a monopolistic or restrictive fashion and it is the legal profession which reinforces the existing social order.
Illich is also sceptical of professionals' self-descriptions and has described them as definers of reality in their relationship with clients.
They have the ability to determine a person's needs and thereafter hand over a solution to the problem in terms of their own definition.
He suggests that professional authority has three elements:
The sapiential authority to advise, instruct and direct; the moral authority that makes its acceptance not just useful but obligatory; and its charismatic authority that allows the professional to appeal to some supreme interest of his client that not only outranks conscience but sometimes even the raison d'état (1977, pp.17–18, emphasis added; see also 1975).
The altruistic model, where the solicitor acts only according to his instructions in the client's best interests, is the source of the profession's ‘charismatic authority’.
The protection of that model, and the benefits of legal charisma to individual clients, is the justifica-tion for the claims to power and privilege — power to determine the conditions of practice independently of the state and privilege in state protection for the monopolistic economic basis of that practice.
THE DUTY SOLICITOR SCHEME
All British criminal courts operate on the adversary system.
Theoretically, parties should be represented by trained, qualified legal advocates who set out their client's case to the jury in the Crown Court, or to magistrates.
Ninety-eight per cent of all criminal cases are heard in the latter courts.
It was upon them that the legal profession focussed in the early 1970s in an attempt to improve its tarnished public image.
The magistrates' courts provided an opportunity to do this while simultaneously bolstering flagging markets for solicitors, who were feeling the economic pinch of a depressed property and commercial market.
In 1971 ‘Justice’, a group of liberal lawyers, published a booklet entitled The Unrepresented Defendant in the Magistrates' Courts .
This publication, read in conjunction with several other contemporary research findings (Dell 1971; Zander 1969 and 1972), stated that only 4 per cent of defendants were represented by lawyers, usually solicitors.
Despite the fact that practitioners must have been aware of the low level of legal representation in these courts the Law Society, in its evidence to the Royal Commission, explained the establishment of duty solicitor schemes in terms of the publication of these research findings.
There were both overt and covert reasons for the support of the Scheme by the Law Society, and the regional bodies, local Law Societies.
The most important overt reason was this ‘discovery’ of a large group of people who were being effectively denied legal representation.
‘Unmet legal need’, an increasingly fashionable term, required action on the part of the profession.
The duty solicitor scheme was projected as a public service by the Law Society: ‘The prime object of a duty solicitor scheme is to provide unrepresented defendants with any legal assistance they may require and, in the context of the adversary system, to help ensure that justice is done and seen to be done.’
Spokesmen for the Law Society and local schemes endorsed this view and suggested that it was a natural consequence of a socially aware profession which had over the years staffed and administered schemes for indigents at little or no cost.
The idea of a duty solicitor scheme to operate in a busy metropolitan magistrates' court may seem to many to be a natural consequence of all the other paraphernalia of a socially  conscious profession.
After all, we have had for years Poor Man's Lawyer sessions, political legal advice sessions, the legal aid scheme itself, and now, more recently, the neighbourhood law centres.
It must seem natural that the profession should direct its attention to needs of prisoners appearing on overnight charges…
(Stevenson 1975).
The Lord Chancellor also supported the idea (Elwyn Jones 1974):
A further possible development in this field (legal services) would be the greater use of duty solicitor schemes.
These have the great merit of needing no further legislation…
So far as I know there is at present only one such scheme operating in London…and I would hope that it would form a pattern of similar schemes in other parts of London.
A number of local law societies have started such schemes outside London and I hope that many more will be initiated as soon as possible.
In Cardiff, which is the focus for the empirical data in this paper, the public statements followed a similar pattern of support.
The Organising Secretary of the scheme stated: ‘I suggest that solicitors who participate in the Cardiff Duty Solicitor Scheme are not motivated by money or profit.’
The scheme was promoted as providing a more equitable and efficient distribution of legal services.
Concern was expressed on behalf of those people in magistrates courts who were unaware of their legal rights and their entitlement to legal aid in certain criminal cases.
The image of public service was strong although from time to time a recognition of the public relations benefits was made by the solicitors we interviewed:
The scheme might do solicitors a bit of good since we don't get a particularly good press at the moment.
The general public seem to think we do nothing but skin them.
The scheme ought to be published more.
We generally get a picture of a money-grabbing solicitor which is not really true.
At least, it does not apply to me.
Nevertheless, the overriding impression left, after considering the public statements and documents of those involved in organising or endorsing the scheme, is the establishment of a service for that  element of the community unable to help itself.
The example of the bewildered, middle-aged lady accused of shoplifting was mentioned more than once in the interviews as the sort of person who needed help and made the scheme worthwhile.
Such statements support the model of altruism, placing public/client service before self-interest.
At a time when the credit of the legal profession was at a low ebb, the duty solicitor scheme could be advanced as practical evidence of its commitment to the theory of community service (Hillyard 1975, p.6).
Nevertheless, during the course of the interviews and our con-versations with friends and contacts in the profession it became apparent that the local law society's publicly stated reason for the promotion of the scheme provided only a partial explanation of its inception.
The covert reasons why the scheme drew widespread support from Cardiff solicitors was that it was part of an internal power struggle.
This struggle was of an economic nature concerned with the competition for clients.
Traditionally the criminal work in the busy city magistrates' courts had been dominated by three firms.
There is evidence that similar cartels operate elsewhere in the UK.
It could be argued that just as some firms specialise in commercial work, other firms concentrate on criminal advocacy.
However, some criminal lawyers were thought to ac-quire clientele by unethical methods.
By flouting the rules of practice, which prohibit touting for business, certain solicitors were alleged to be able to place themselves in an unfairly advantaged position.
Touting for criminal business was and is well recognised within the profession, and those in close contact with it.
The means to control such practices, given the implications of adverse publicity for a supposedly homogeneous profession, are, however, limited.
While the domination of the criminal market was well known within the profession nothing was done for two main reasons: first, solicitors were making a handsome living and were under no pressure to find or create alternative sources of income: and second, there appeared to be no way in which these cartels could be broken by ethical means:
During the mid-sixties the strongest pressures on the profession's practice were in the area of conveyancing.
This was, and is, a particularly sensitive area for the average solicitor for their monopoly could be recognised by any member of the public and was a highly visible cost to anyone buying or selling a house.
The  profession was well aware of its tenuous position and the Council of the Law Society was under pressure from members to defend their favoured status and the scale fee, a form of price fixing, for assessing the charge to clients.
The Council can only carry the profession with it so far.
Many solicitors deeply resent the treatment they feel they have received over their remuneration.
Despite continued inflation such small increases in remuneration have been conceded only after many years of negotiation.
Now it would seem that they are not only to be denied an increase, but also to be faced with a reduction.
No other section of the community has been treated in this way.
(Law Society 1972, pp.386–7)
Private practitioners recognised that there might come a time when alternative sources of income would be required to replace or supplement the high-return, conveyancing market.
‘If there is any sizeable reduction in conveyancing income, many practices could suffer to such an extent that they would be no longer finan-cially viable’(Hart Jackson 1972, p.12).
This awareness of im-pending disaster was exacerbated in the early seventies when a slump occurred in the property market.
Mortgages became difficult to obtain, house prices stopped rising, commercial properties remained vacant and the economic squeeze began to hurt the profession.
These factors, coupled with the abolition of scale charges for conveyancing, caused the lawyers to cast around for alternative sources of income.
‘If conveyancing is to decline something will be required to fill the void and this cannot develop overnight (Bolton Law Society 1974; Blatch 1966).
Further threats came from the withdrawal of legal aid for undefended divorces, with tacit official encouragement for do-it-yourself petitions, and the pressure for change to a no-fault system of personal injury compensation.
One of the areas to be examined was criminal work in magistrates’ courts.
Increased expenditure on criminal legal aid made advocacy economically attractive to those firms which had traditionally ignored this down-market branch of legal practice.
Criminal legal aid in the magistrates' courts cost £14 million in 1976, rising to £16¾ million the following year, an increase of 17 per cent.
The Legal Aid Annual Report for 1976–7 shows that between 1973 and 1976 the number of cases granted legal aid increased by 54 per cent.
Criminal legal aid has become big  business for lawyers.
Solicitors on the outside of the lucrative but tight criminal market wanted to get inside it.
Not surprisingly, those who were already established had little sympathy for this proposed redirec-tion of resources.
One feature which did unite the profession was the need to retain the market for private practitioners and not allow lawyers from  neighbourhood law centres to encroach:
I for one, think this is a worthwhile service that private practitioners can give to the community and unless one wishes to see neighbourhood law centres and the like (who I hasten to add do admirable work in particular spheres) take over this type of work and who knows, all criminal work and after that…
(Stevenson 1975) The position is that the members of this association view with deep dismay the continuing spread in area and operations relating to criminal litigation of all London neighbourhood law centres…
If this trend is allowed to continue unchecked it may lead to more solicitors finding criminal defences unprofitable and yet another field of work will be lost to the solicitors' branch of the profession generally.
(Lawrence 1975)
However, this was an insufficiently cohesive factor to allow an im-mediate and satisfactory settlement to emerge between the private practitioners.
The outsiders either would not or could not resort to those tactics which were thought to have assisted the establishment of the three large criminal practices characterised by an ‘outside’ solicitor as ‘The Barons’(Thomas and Mungham 1976; Smith and Thomas 1978).
Yet without positive discriminatory assistance the would-be criminal advocates were unable to break the cartel.
The answer which fell within an ethical framework was the duty solicitor scheme, as the Cardiff solicitors explained:
There is strong feeling against the three firms who do most of the criminal work in the city.
It is my view that the Duty Solicitor scheme was set up by certain parties to break this monopoly.
I joined the scheme because I wanted to extend the criminal scope of my practice and this was one way of getting more contact with the courts and with prospective clients.
The duty solicitor scheme gets our name known better: it is  valuable in that you get to know the clerks and some on the Bench.
The scheme certainly helped me right at the beginning when I was starting up as a criminal lawyer.
One wants to break the power of the ‘Barons’.
The scheme offered the opportunity of doing extra magistrates work.
I should like to say I joined the scheme out of humanitarian concerns but to be honest it was with a view to increasing business.
The scheme allowed the outsider, a solicitor with little or no criminal practice, to gain access to the criminal courts, receive a ready made clientele either through the cells or via the clerks and magistrates, represent these clients, get his face known, be talked about, be mentioned in the local newspaper and generally com-mence to build a reputation as a criminal lawyer.
It was seen both in Cardiff and elsewhere as, in the words of one stipendiary, a form of ‘legalised touting’(Morton 1977, p.293).
The dominance of economic terms of reference, to the possible detriment of clients, rather than matters of public service can also be seen over the issue of who was to be accepted as a member of the scheme.
Clearly, if it was to be successful in redistributing work, those who controlled the market should be excluded completely or relatively.
On the other hand the dominant firms, the ‘Barons’, were also those with the most experienced and often the most accomplished advocates, who could call upon a specialised back-up staff of articled and managing clerks.
Thus, the issue arose between redistributing work to the inexperienced solicitor or maintaining the experienced trial advocate, the ‘Baron’, who was already in the dominant role.
Eligibility for selection as a duty solicitor has gone through three distinct and separate phases.
Each one recognises sectional interests within the profession but has little or no regard to the public at large or the potential client.
The rulings were created and administered by the local law society which represents all interested professional parties.
The respective eligibility rulings are: common eligibility; maximum of two solicitors per firm; and, finally the present criterion, ‘substantial criminal experience’ with no maximum number per firm.
It became clear in the operation of the first category that, for example, strong social conscience or interest did not necessarily bring a concomitant skill in criminal advocacy.
It also meant that the larger firms, particularly those with large criminal practices, could flood the rota with partners and assistant solicitors.
Concern was expressed with the results of this free-for-all policy, both as far as the number of solicitors from large firms was concerned and in respect of the quality of advocacy:
A free for all is dangerous.
No disrespect to my conveyancing brethren but I wouldn't let them loose on a guilty plea of going the wrong way round a keep left sign.
A free for all was a scandal.
Too often their name was there but they either didn't appear, sending in someone else, or went only with someone else with them.
This kind of operation is only for the benefit of the firm.
Such a rule would do little to assist the redistribution of work.
The failure of the common eligibility ruling led to its replace-ment by a limit of two solicitors per firm.
This again failed to recognise that criminal advocacy is a particular skill and, on the economic level, militated against the large-practice firms which were able to field more criminally experienced lawyers than the maximum number:
I do not think it fair that only two, or any ad hoc number, should be allowed to participate.
For example, a firm with two partners would be getting 100 per cent attendance: a firm with eight only 20 per cent [sic].
I think the idea of having numbers from each firm is really a dog in the manger attitude.
The change occurred because of internal political reasons and for that reason alone and not out of the interests of clients.
I think that clients, as it happens, have benefited but for the wrong reasons as it were.
This time it was the turn of the large-practice firms and ‘Barons ‘to express successfully their concern.
Consensus was reached with the third and current criterion: that each solicitor must have ‘substantial criminal experience.’
The compromise between the professionally interested parties, the outsiders and the ‘Barons’, was arrived at by, on the one hand, removing the numerical ceiling which operated previously, to the detriment of the large firms, but also, by placing a limitation on these same firms, preventing them from flooding the rota with in  experienced staff.
Again, in theory, this principle protects large practice firms from the ‘inexperienced’ practitioner anxious to obtain a slice of the client market.
The reason for the accord rested in the way in which this eligibility test was administered.
Each aspir-ing duty solicitor is obliged through a process of self-assessment to decide whether the requirement of ‘substantial criminal experience’ has been satisfied.
Provided that all solicitors were competent and willing to make this judgement of themselves it would appear that the scheme had finally settled on a principle which would successfully serve the potential criminal client.
However, once again the results of its application as observed by practising solicitors raise grave doubts about its effectiveness for anybody other than the practitioners themselves (Thomas and Mungham 1977).
All lawyers, like doctors, have their first client.
Perhaps the secret is to keep that information from the client.
Is it possible that the importance of ‘substantial criminal experience’ is being exag-gerated?
The position is different in so far as it affects the duty solicitor scheme.
Most clients are first time offenders who are ignorant of their rights and the process through which they are being put (Thomas and Smith 1978).
The level of dependence on professional assistance is highest with this client.
It was stated frequently by solicitors that the effective choice of solicitor by the unrepresented defendant is either the duty solicitor or a named or identifiable solicitor.
Given that these defendants are unlikely to know the names of solicitors the responsibility for acting quickly settles on the duty solicitor.
There wasn't a single one (unrepresented defendant) who didn't say ‘Yes, I'll have you.’
They pounce on the man that appears whoever he is.
Under either of the first two criteria it was theoretically possible for a client to be represented by someone insufficiently experienced to handle the case.
Currently, by virtue of being on the rota of solicitors, the advocate has undergone self-evaluation whereby he indicates publicly that he is competent to deal with criminal matters.
Such a position, however, makes it more difficult thereafter for the solicitor to admit that the case presents too great a challenge and that it should be transferred to a solicitor with even more ‘substantial criminal experience’.
The duty solicitor has to  take what turns up on the day and often act immediately, particularly as one of the administrative attractions of the scheme is to help the court clear the daily list.
Although the client will usually be charged with a minor offence, cases can be complicated, whilst the out of town criminal may be involved in more serious crime.
Perhaps the most important difference between the ordinary and duty solicitor is illustrated by the following statement of a Cardiff solicitor who discussed the purpose of vocational training through articles and experience:
Solicitors are carefully nurtured taking the relatively simple cases and mitigation pleas.
The duty solicitor takes what is presented on the day.
Two murder cases have gone to the duty solicitor.
Fortunately both firms are competent to handle this.
Comments from several solicitors, from both large and small practice firms, suggest that there remain on the rota solicitors who have over-valued or mis-stated their criminal experience:
There are some people who really shouldn't be on the panel because they really don't know enough about the job.
I think people who take on the job should know the job.
Most do, lots don't…
Too many people taking it on who have hardly been in court before.
Those allowed on should be those with some experience of this sort of work.
In court once I noticed the duty solicitor going through a conveyancing abstract.
Not every person who presents himself as the duty solicitor is competent to handle criminal matters.
There are many people who appear in court who are basically conveyancers who are not competent to give other than initial advice.
Not only were disquieting statements made about certain rota solicitors but by rota members regarding themselves, which suggested that the present criterion for admission is a failure:
I am not a criminal lawyer myself.
I do conveyancing and probate.
I used to do criminal work when I was in general practice but I haven't done criminal work now for about four or five  years.
But I consider myself perfectly competent to be able to go to court, make applications for remand, make pleas of mitigation where there's a guilty plea and also conduct a case in such a way as to be able to pass it over to someone else in the practice.
I won't do defended cases because I can't spare the time, not because I don't feel competent.
I'm a divorce man.
When I get a case as the duty solicitor I pass it on to the criminal department.
Although the number of unrepresented defendants is reduced there is concern amongst practitioners that the quality of representation has suffered:
The quality has gone down.
I don't think they are doing a brilliant job as they don't have the experience.
I hear some people in court and I say to myself ‘I know why you are not here every day’.
The local law society holds out these solicitors to the general public as having substantial criminal experience but the rule seems to fulfil a symbolic role for the profession.
As one solicitor told us, ‘Substantial criminal experience?
It is a formula without a meaning.’
CONCLUSION
The collegiate nature of the solicitors' occupational group en-courages and maintains a feeling of identity, colleague loyalty and shared values.
The group projects a version of the formal om-nicompetence of all solicitors as a device for generating trust from the public which is used to making its own judgement of other occupations.
The homogeneity and close working relationship of the profession foster internal solidarity, understandings and deals (Baldwin and McConville 1977; Thomas 1978), whilst simultaneously informing the public of its protection via the code of ethics and the disciplinary powers of the collective organisation, the Law Society.
However, as we have explained elsewhere (Mungham and Thomas 1979 and 1981) there are significant internal tensions which exist within the profession.
At no time are these more apparent than when a possible downturn in the market  for legal services is perceived.
The scramble to redistribute existing resources and clients provides the conditions for the development of schemes such as the duty solicitor.
The need for compromise is illustrated by the way in which the present criterion for appointment to the duty solicitor rota is operated.
The Organising and Liaison Committees of the schemes are comprised of a small and identified number of solicitors.
Peer judgement by the group of colleagues concerning substantial criminal experience is difficult given that criminal advocacy is only one part of their daily practice.
The repercussions of alienating another solicitor in this matter might well be serious on other occasions in practice when a favour or understanding is required.
Thus, a vetting process intended to secure the best quality of advocacy for the client is at odds with the need to encourage harmonious working relationships within the profession.
The internal politics of the profession in a recession economy have not been resolved by this scheme (Smith and Thomas 1978) but it illustrates the irrecon-cilable tensions between individual economic advancement, collegiate unity and community/client interest, tensions which were recognised by our respondents.
But it's difficult, who should you look after — your solicitors who are trying to increase or break into criminal work or should you look after the client's interests by giving him only solicitors who are already tried and tested.
At least before the duty solicitor people were directed to lawyers who had qualifications in advocacy.
They devoted their lives to it.
It depends on whether the duty solicitor scheme was set up to help the unrepresented defendant or to diversify criminal work.
The origins and development of the duty solicitor scheme cannot, then, be explained solely in terms of an altruistic model.
While more people are represented and the court list is cleared faster, these are ancillary consequences of a scheme initially con-ceived to resolve economic struggles within the profession.
Although the success of the scheme in its attempt to relieve these internal tensions is questionable, its public image remains heavily altruistic.
The autonomy granted to the legal profession by the state and tolerated by the public is based upon its expertise and altruism.
It is the idea of service which legitimates the exercise of  professional discretion.
The logic of this argument creates an un-breakable circle.
The decisions of legal practice are made by solicitors because of their knowledge.
The power thus created will be used exclusively for the client's best interest.
The best interest will be judged by the professional.
Professionals, in contrast to members of other occupations, claim and are often accorded complete autonomy in their work.
Since they are presumed to be the only judges of how good their work is, no layman or other outsider can make any judgment of what they can do.
If their activities are unsuccessful, only another professional can say whether this was due to incompetence or to the inevitable workings of nature or society by which even the most competent practitioner would have been stymied.
This image of the professional justifies his demand for complete autonomy and his demand that the client give up his own judgment and responsibility, leaving everything in the hands of the professional.
(Becker 1970, pp.96–7)
The Law Society's presentation of the duty solicitor scheme and its public reception is important as an illustration of the way in which solicitors wish to be seen, in order to legitimate the way in which they operate.
This paper has provided an example of how the self-interest of solicitors is a more helpful way of viewing this group.