

Foundations of Power: Resources
The results of production should increase more quickly than expenditure upon it.
D. F. Ustinov, July 1984
The economy must become economic.
L. I. Brezhnev, March 1981
The Soviet Union will survive its economic difficulties, but it is unlikely to surmount them.
Twenty-five years ago, such a prognosis would have astounded many.
In the wake of Sputnik a large number of observers, sympathetic and hostile, were convinced that the USSR's technical and scientific prowess, and the planning system which underpinned it, posed a profound challenge to the West's values, institutions and international standing.
A fresh listening to the 1960 Kennedy-Nixon debates is enough to rekindle the exaggerated sense of urgency then felt that Communism represented the wave of the future, as its adherents had prophesied.
Today it is commonly held that the Soviet economy is an albatross — an albatross in the form of heavy military outlays, hard currency imports, and a lengthening backlog of consumer demands.
It is widely accepted that this system ‘has nothing to teach us’.
Indeed, the fashion in many quarters is to ponder whether the West possesses the discipline and finesse to ‘manage’ the USSR's decline—or perhaps accelerate it.
Several questions motivate this discussion.
Is Western conventional wisdom a better guide to reality today than it was twenty-five years ago?
What precisely is at fault with the Soviet economy, and to what extent is improvement possible?
What are the implications of economic strain for Soviet power, internally and externally?
Can outside pressure play a role in influencing the course of events?
The backdrop to any assessment is, inescapably, the formidable size and productive capacity of the Soviet economy (by CIA estimates 60 per cent larger in GNP than Japan's).
Over the fullness of time, in spite of revolution, civil war and world war, performance relative to competitors has not been lacklustre: compared with 1913, when per capita GNP stood at 24.6 per cent of the US level, the 1984 ratio was 46 per cent.
On the other hand, the mere fact that in that time she has overtaken it most one of some 20 countries that outranked her in per capita terms is enough to establish that her record is less than spectacular.
Whatever the verdict on her previous achievements, the decline in her performance over the past 15 years has been marked and far-reaching.
THE AGENDA OF DIFFICULTY
The well-known part of the story is the secular decline of growth rates from the heady levels of the 1950s (some 6 per cent per annum), as factor inputs (land, labour, raw materials) have levelled off.
Calls for innovation and for productivity related ‘intensive’ growth have been to little avail.
Production targets have been consistently underfulfilled from the Ninth Five-Year plan (1971–75) onwards.
Estimated GNP growth declined from 3.7 per cent Per annum in 1971–75 to 2.6 per cent in 1976–80, and again to 1.9 per cent in 1981 (although it must be said that 1982 and 1983 have shown some improvement—up to 2.6 per cent and 3.7 per cent respectively—the CIA's estimate for 1984 is a lacklustre 2.5 per cent).
Investment growth rates, whilst also declining, continue to exceed the rate of overall economic growth: whereas fixed investment amounted to 25 per cent of GNP in 1970, it absorbed 34 per cent of GNP in 1983.
The task of maintaining existing production levels has therefore come to consume a higher and higher share of national output.
Tradeoffs between different sectors of the economy have also become more expensive and more painful in their consequences.
For one thing, the shape of the economy is becoming more primitive.
Primary and extractive industries (now accounting for over 50 per cent of gross social product) are displacing manufacturing industries in relative importance, as investment is harnessed to the tasks of developing energy resources, ore and mineral deposits.
This trend is costly.
In the Soviet manufacturing sector it costs 0.7 million roubles in capital investment to increase production capacity by one million roubles, but it costs four million roubles to achieve the same result in the extractive sector.
One result of this diversion of investment is under-mechanisation and a shortage of labour: almost one half of workers in industry are consigned to unmechanised tasks.
A second result is an overburdened infrastructure: fewer resources available to expand electrical generating capacity or to repair and extend railway lines.
From the late 1970s, production of lifting equipment and railway rolling stock has actually dropped in absolute terms.
Whilst uncertainty about the volume and growth of defence spending is unlikely to be resolved unless the Soviet regime changes its character, few would dispute that the military's traditional claim on resources has been a major burden on the civilian economy.
Whether the share of GNP devoted to defence is 13–14 per cent or some other figure; whether growth was 4 per cent a year throughout the 1970s, or for only half that time, military expenditure has been a major contributor to the investment squeeze.
By the mid-1970s stipulated military needs could only be financed by cutting investment in the productive base as a whole.
A third contributor to the investment imbalance is agriculture, long the Achilles heel of the economy.
During the time of Stalin agriculture was impoverished by conscious decision, as the human and material resources of the countryside were squeezed to finance industrialisation.
Twenty-five years of exploitation have since been repaid by thirty years of largesse, but with dismal result: a situation which Professor Marshall Goldman of Harvard has likened to trying to cure a half-starved baby by overfeeding in old age.
At present, the agricultural sector accounts for 27 per cent of total investment; additionally, the burden of holding retail food prices at 1962 levels consumes a further $50 billion per annum in subsidies.
Each spurt in investment has for a time been halfway successful in boosting harvests and production, but policy to date has failed to grasp the nettles of productivity, variety, distribution and responsible land use.
The paucity of infrastructure (storage facilities, railways, roads), over-cultivation of land, underproduction of fertilisers and farm machinery both reflect and contribute to these difficulties.
In spite of massive investment and attention, in the 1980s 50 per cent of potatoes and 60 per cent of citrus fruits grown on state or collective farms spoil before reaching market; private plots, accounting for four per cent of arable land, supply 25 per cent of total output (30 per cent of meat and dairy products and 40 per cent of fruit); and the bill for overseas imports consumes as much as 45 per cent of hard currency earnings.
Demographic developments have become equally disconcerting and perhaps even less susceptible to remedy.
The four Union Republics which provide 80 per cent of the work force (RSFSR, Ukraine, Latvia and Estonia) face sharply declining birthrates relative to the less  advanced populations of the USSR.
Put more starkly, 88 per cent as many Russians will enter the labour force between 1986–90 as will retire from it; over the same period 300 per cent as many Turks, Uzbeks and Tadzhiks will enter the labour force as will retire from it.
What makes this an economic problem, and not simply a nationality problem, is the fact that the declining areas possess 85 per cent of the country's industry, 82 per cent of its electricity, and equivalent proportions of related infrastructure.
Whilst it may have become commonplace in Western Europe and the United States for Turks or Mexicans to move north in response to economic opportunity, the Turkic populations of the USSR show no such proclivity.
Were this not all, the new sources of energy lie in regions devoid of infrastructure and population.
Although the energy problem can be surmounted at a price, it seems certain that the imbalance between infrastructure and population will aggravate economic problems and in so doing worsen nationality problems as well.
As the workforce is shrinking, its stamina and morale may also be suffering.
In the 1950s standards of public health in the USSR, and of public health care, were flaunted to ‘non-believers’ as one of the system's prime attributes.
Within a swift span of years, however, life expectancy and infant mortality have assumed Third World proportions: inferior even to Albania's and roughly on a par with Malaysia's.
In the last quarter of the 20th century, the USSR may be just about the only country in the world where health standards are actually falling.
Alcoholism, pollution (through misuse of pesticides and careless dumping of waste); shortages of proteins and dairy products (diluted milk, denatured baby formula); the siphoning off of drugs and  anaesthetics into the illegal second economy all take their toll.
The level of safety in the workplace can be inferred from the fact that 20 per cent of the rise in death rates for men in their late thirties arise from ‘accident’.
(The USSR, with one-tenth as many motor vehicles as the United States, has just as many traffic fatalities).
In a country where anything so conspicuous as reducing food subsidies courts trouble, cut backs in the health sector may seem a safer bet (in 1977 7.7 per cent of GNP was devoted to health care, down from 9.5 per cent in 1955; in comparison, proportions in the United States over the same period rose from 8 per cent to 11 per cent).
A greater source of social frustration would appear to lie in the ossification of social mobility.
In Soviet conditions this fact is very significant.
The ethos of Soviet-style socialism has been opportunity.
From the onset of the first Five-Year Plan, if not before, social equality  has not only been sidetracked, but  forsworn as the object of policy.
To this day the USSR is without a progressive taxation system.
A ‘universal’ old age pension did not exist in principle until 1956, and not until 1965 was it extended to the peasantry and made universal in practice.
But even in times of privation, idealism could sustain itself thanks to the prospect that talent and motivation would be identified and promoted.
It is this era which is drawing to a close and, with it, the peculiar mixture of promise and peril which long characterised Soviet life.
Not only has the élite closed itself off to interlopers (some 70 per cent of officer cadets at the Odessa High Artillery Military School are sons of active duty officers); but, on the evidence, skilled workers have become downwardly mobile members of society.
In 1940 the salaries of engineering and technical personnel were over twice those of ordinary workers; by 1980 the differential had narrowed to 14 per cent.
Thanks to under-mechanisation, one-third of youths with specialised secondary school qualifications end up doing unskilled work.
Paradoxically, the relative unimportance of money in Soviet society compounds these difficulties.
Those things which confer privilege (quality shops, education, flats and health care) are acquired through privilege in the first place; they cannot be had for money.
To some extent the private ‘second economy’(accounting for as much as 25 per cent of GNP) circumvents the formal, official pecking order, but there as well, influence rather than money is what confers wealth.
The economic downturn has only intensified the self-rejuvenating qualities of élites and multiplied the ways in which others are shut out.
Under Socialism, the USSR has born out Marx's prophesy for capitalism: the proletarianising of an ever larger element of society.
It has also stood Marx on his head, by transforming itself from a classless society into a caste society (if at the same time gratifying Lenin's hope that the intermediate stage of class society might be bypassed).
The corruption, cynicism and disillusionment which now proliferate should not mystify us.
REAL EXISTING SOCIALISM
This tale of woe is, from one point of view, a catalogue of imbalances: between primary and advanced industry, between high-yield and low-yield investment, between increased demands and ageing infrastructure, between resources and population, between money  and the supply of goods.
It also has the appearance of a self-inflicted injury.
The commitment to maintain or increase expenditure on arms, agriculture and energy has drained investment from the manufacturing base on which all of these priorities depend.
Neglect of incentives and of light industry in preference to ‘priority’ investment is perhaps the major obstacle to securing a return on this investment.
Put in this way, management of the economy seems to have been grossly at fault.
But there may be powerful grounds for saying that the command economy, is the culprit, rather than the management of it.
If so, the problems we have surveyed must be seen as symptoms rather than causes ‘more’ and ‘better’are apt to be palliatives, not cures.
To many economists the cause of the difficulty lies in an institution, central planning, which cannot achieve balanced growth and innovation in a mature, sophisticated economy no matter how well it is managed.
Diversion of resources into light industry, for example, cannot solve the incentive problem as, without market pressures, there can be no guarantee that factories will produce what consumers wish to buy.
The basic and most idealistic justification of central planning is that the economy should be run for the benefit of society as a whole.
(As we have seen, the establishment of such a system in the USSR also fulfilled two more specific objectives: internally, securing a monopoly of power for the CPSU; internationally, ‘socialism in one country’: the creation of a state powerful enough to enable the revolution to survive in a world of states).
Whatever its ostensible purpose, the elimination of the market and the creation of a command economy has one clear consequence: the ‘who’, ‘what’ and ‘how’of economic relations is determined by planners, not by those who produce and consume.
It is the structure of the system which demands this, not the unimaginativeness or selfishness of those involved.
An enterprise director cannot do what he considers best for society since, without the market's signals, he cannot know what this is.
He may know the difference between a tractor which works and one which does not, but he cannot know how many tractors are required, what sort of tractors to build, and where they are most needed.
If the centre were omniscient, none of this would matter.
But in the Soviet Union, there are 12 000 000 products, 40 000 enterprises and a conceivable infinity of transactions.
Therefore, we should not expect the centre to be omniscient.
Soviet economists estimate that with state of the art computer technology, ten years of work would be required to produce each one-year plan.
Until this state of affairs comes about, plans will be the outcome of a long-term process, not easily altered after they are drafted; and planners will have no choice but to make rough approximations and search for performance indicators which are easy to monitor.
(Thus, the 12 000 000 products are ‘aggregated’ into 48 000 ‘positions’).
These tools of the trade may make planning possible, but they do not necessarily produce what is needed by Soviet society.
A GORDIAN KNOT?
As the quotations at the opening of this chapter suggest, the Soviet authorities are not unaware of the seriousness of their own problems.
Nor have reforms been meagre or lacking in ingenuity.
To minimise supply difficulties, increasing numbers of enterprises have been grouped into production associations.
To bypass ministerial demarcation lines, several territorial production complexes have been set up.
The July 1979 package of reforms cleared several obstacles to ‘direct relations’ amongst enterprises; it also gave teeth to a 1974 decree making delivery contracts binding.
The July, 1983 ‘Andropov’ experiment has built upon the more sensible of these measures, also reviving some of the decentralising features of the aborted 1965 reform: most interestingly, a wage norm based on ‘normative’rather than‘quantitative’(piece-work) indicators, thus,(it is hoped) promoting innovation and productivity.
The results of these measures will for some time be inconclusive, if only because parties to an experiment must still depend on the larger part of the economy which continues to operate according to traditional principles.
But it is clear that there are certain features of the economy which these reforms will not change.
‘Normative value added’, whilst preferable to quantitative value, still is not market value: salaries continue to reflect the (it is to be hoped better informed) judgement of planners, not real needs and opportunities.
By the same token, prices remain administered prices, also determined by planners rather than markets.
Administered prices may accomplish a variety of ends, but not the balancing of supply with demand (for social reasons, meat is cheap so there usually is no meat); nor will they reflect real alternatives and scarcities (hence the metal content of Soviet machinery is 25 per cent greater than in their American equivalents, and energy consumption per unit of GNP is almost twice that in Western Europe).
Enforcement of delivery contracts is vital  in principle, but in Soviet conditions difficult to achieve in practice.
If milk produced in a collective farm spoils in transit because the train transporting it lacks refrigerated rolling stock, who is at fault: the farm manager? the train supervisor? the repair shop? or the ministry which sets production quotas for refrigerated railway stock?
If the port of Murmansk is blocked up for weeks and mackerel arrives spoilt, is it wrong that the crew be given its bonus for so many fish caught, or that the dockers be paid for so many tons unloaded?
The obvious objective of the recent reforms—and the hardest nut to crack—is building quality and innovation into a performance indicator.
This will not be the first time it has been tried, and the observations of one former planning official are worth quoting at length:
When sales revenue is a chief success indicator affecting incentive funds, the enterprise can raise the indicator by buying more expensive inputs…
Similarly, if the enterprise switches from total sales revenue to net value of output as its performance indicator, it will select products with a high cost of processing, thus increasing net value added…
[In]instances when Soviet planners have stipulated a revised set of leading economic indicators, and tied incentive funds to them, other indicators have moved in undesirable directions…planners found that, once again, only direct regulation could bring an improvement for any individual economic indicator.
This sequence, rather than some wish by planners to turn the clock back…was, in my view the chief cause of the retreat from the 1965 reform.
These examples suggest that de-centralisation in itself will not substitute for the market's rewards and penalties, or for genuine consumer sovereignty.
Given this state of affairs, one would expect to see the country's leadership showing greater interest in markets and their expansion.
But the more ‘reformist’ amongst the élite have either stopped short of introducing real market conditions (Kosygin) or have been oblivious to the need for them.
Andropov's June 1983 speech, setting out his reformist agenda, criticised ‘irrational trial and error methods’ and spoke of restoring ‘economic order’on the basis of discipline, hard work and sanctions.
The now familiar formula — seeking ‘new forms and methods of management’ —a coded attack on Brezhnev's ‘stability of cadres’, means that the old are to a replaced by the young, the incompetent by the competent; it also signifies departures from outmoded routines and the unsettling of vested  interests.
But it does not amount to introducing market forces.
On evidence (to date limited), Gorbachev, like his patron, has shown a strong interest in the East German reforms, which strengthen the centre (the State planning Commission) and enterprises at the expense of intermediaries (ministries) —rather than the Hungarian reform, which strengthens markets.
He, too, has combined searing indictments of economic performance with calls for the rejuvenation of cadres and administrative housecleanings.
As Central Committee Secretary for Agriculture between 1978–85, Gorbachev was bound to have been largely responsible for the limited measures undertaken in support of private plots.
But equally, he has been associated with calls for ‘more and better’ party and State supervision (which, as Alec Nove points out, is at variance with more economic choice and responsibility).
We can only speculate as to why such ambivalence or hostility to markets persists.
In the first instance, there is nothing in the ideological and intellectual upbringing of the Soviet leaders which would make them partial to markets.
From the perspective of the Soviet élite, ‘Socialist construction’, centralisation and Five-Year plans have been responsible for raising a backward country to a world power.
As they would tell the story, the USSR would long ago have been crushed but for these measures.
To officials and apparatchiks obsessed with this legacy of backwardness, the West is advanced because it is the West, not because it is capitalist.
Inefficiency, sloth, poor productivity are the residues of Russia's past, not a result of Socialist methods.
Moreover, markets are anarchic, selfish, based on short-term gratifications (profit); ‘plan’ implies rationality, order, discipline.
Russian workers are lazy and must be directed; peasants are untrustworthy and must be supervised.
It would be excessive, even in today's permissive times, to return to Stalin's methods, but Lazar Kaganovich, Moscow party boss in the 1930s had the right idea: ‘when the manager walks into the enterprise, the ground should tremble!’
If these are the premises and prejudices of Soviet leaders, much as faults in the system will be criticised, the system itself will not be held at fault.
A second side to this issue is managerial culture.
Virtually extinct in the Soviet Union after over 60 years of Socialism is the linchpin of capitalism, the entrepreneur.
(To the extent he survives, he is apt to make the illegal ‘second economy’ his habitat.)
The Soviet manager is a bureaucrat and operator, not a venture capitalist or risk-taker.
He is expected to be resourceful, not to show initiative.
On balance, he will want uncomplicated planning targets, better communication, greater  predictability and greater dependability of supply.
Those who advance in this environment are men with an instinct for securing supplies, mobilising resources, finessing statistics, cultivating connections and ‘working the system’.
At the apex of the managerial hierarchy are men like the late Dmitriy Ustinov or Leonid Smirnov (head of the Military-Industrial Commission) with outstanding organisational competence, but with talents not necessarily suited to free market conditions.
In time a system with the market's penalties as well as freedoms might well breed a different managerial prototype.
But initiative will not be invoked by reform or fiat.
The Soviet Union is not an ‘initiative’ society.
No doubt, the most fundamental factor working in favour of the present system is the fact that the regime is politically hoisted to it.
There is an obvious side to this reality and a less obvious one.
Most would agree that the professed raison d'être of the CpSU is the creation of a society ‘of a new type’; the basis of its claim to infallibility is that it stands in the vanguard of this process.
Whilst it can plausibly introduce a hybrid reform with de-centralising features, it cannot dismantle the machine it has created without repudiating itself.
Whatever the economic benefit, the political repercussions of steps such as de-collectivisation would be far more unsettling than those brought about by the limited de-Stalinisation of the 1950s.
But such implications are only part of the problem.
Replacement of plan by market is in itself a surrender of power, since it means the elimination of planners.
At present, Soviet agriculture, and therefore the day-to-day lives of Soviet peasants, are regulated by hundreds of thousands of officials and 33 ministries.
If production and exchange were henceforth to be determined by those who produce and consume, what functions would their former controllers then perform?
What powers would the state still possess over those thus emancipated?
(In the Soviet state more, perhaps, than in the United Kingdom, but that is not the issue.)
In the United Kingdom, an employee can be dismissed from his job unceremoniously, but he cannot be prevented from working elsewhere, nor can his employer throw him out of his house.
But in the USSR the state which employs him is the sole employer and is the same state which determines whether he have a house or not.
It is not the KGB, ‘indomitable’ as it is, which makes the Soviet Union a totalitarian society, nor even the CPSU's monopoly of political power, but the fusion of political and economic power.
Monopoly of power—Stalin's first justification of the planning system—will probably be its last defence.
In political terms, the worry in carrying out free market reform may be less that the reform fails than that it might succeed.
For the present, the firmest barrier against change from below are controllers in their hundreds of thousands.
This is a large élite as élites go, conscious of its privileges and its place, and possessing real instruments of power over those who would challenge it.
The leadership may purge the apparatus, but it dare not eliminate it, and it is not about to take an axe to itself.
When all is said, this is why the alternative we think most rational for the USSR is the least rational and the least likely to emerge.
Is the inescapable conclusion, therefore, that the régime finds itself between the devil and the deep blue sea?
It would be a bold conclusion, considering that the USSR is a country with a large, trained industrial workforce, a vast scientific-technical establishment and infrastructure, and leaders who possess enviable prerogatives to chop, change, reform and direct.
It may smack of undue determinism to suggest that only this system's replacement will achieve anything and that its renovation will achieve nothing.
Given present realities (namely, a system which creates problems for itself), it stands to reason that there will still be wise as well as foolish investment decisions, good as well as bad planning techniques, clumsy as well as ingenious incentives.
The contrast between Poland and the GDR in these respects illustrates how telling such nuances can be.
In the Soviet Union as elsewhere, what matters is how well people manage their dilemmas and not just whether they solve them.
Like many issues which determine the course of history, the challenges of keeping pace in strategic competition, holding down grain imports, maintaining energy production and earning a hard currency income may be decided at the margin.
If Gorbachev expects to untie the Gordian knot, he has over-estimated his powers.
But it is an open question whether his policies will loosen it sufficiently to keep his country in the competition.
For political and strategic purposes, that is the question that matters.
TRADE, TECHNOLOGY, DEPENDENCY
Four sets of questions define the subject:
(1)
Does foreign technology play an important role in alleviating Soviet economic difficulties?
Does it perform sufficiently better  than Soviet equipment to warrant the hard currency expended upon it.
(2)
Is imported technology also effective by international standards?
Has it reduced gaps between the USSR and Western countries?
(3)
Is the technology which reaches the defence sector better utilised than in the civil economy?
Is it more successful in reducing lead times?(a question we take up in the following section)
(4)
Do we not, in supplying technology to the USSR, make it easier for her to free resources for military purposes?
Does ‘business as usual’ make the trade-off between guns and butter easier than it would be if embargoes were more comprehensive and controls more strict?
The Soviet Union has had its love affairs with Western know-how, but it has also mistrusted it and even, on occasion, taken the view that foreign technology, like foreign ways generally, had little to offer.
The First Five-Year Plan (1928–1932), the years 1941–47 (Lend-Lease and reparations) were both periods of considerable technology transfer from West to East.
The revival of interest in what can only be described as a strategy of import led growth began in the late 1950s as uneasiness over the optimistic, autarkic assumptions of the Khrushchev period increased.
Soviet interest in foreign technology therefore has not been a response to detente , but to perceptions of internal need, and increases in trade flows have not always coincided with greater political relaxation.
This is not to say that the USSR has not sought political dividends from economic ties.
In her relations with Western Europe today, she would appear to seek them and, indeed, to enjoy some.
However severe the gap between the Soviet Union and the West in technological know-how, this, one must reiterate, is secondary to the fact that the Soviet system makes poor use of the know-how at its own disposal.
Housing is inefficiently heated because volume of construction is a more important planning indicator than fuel efficiency, not because the Soviets cannot do better.
Soviet society is poorly computerised, not because the RADA computer is inadequate, but because user-producer cooperation is poor, and Soviet managers have an interest in concealing the data on which computers depend.
John Kiser relays the example of a West German order for advanced medical equipment, judged in its prototype form to be fully competitive with anything else available.
Once transferred to series production, so many defects emerged as to make the consignment  unusable.
(Indeed, some Soviet planners have speculated that it might be advantageous to license Western factories to produce Soviet equipment which would then be exported to the USSR.)
The question which therefore arises is whether the Soviet Union is better at diffusing the benefits of foreign technology than of its own.
To produce an impact on economic growth, the benefit would need to be considerable.
In common with most command economies, the USSR ‘under trades’.
As a share of GNP, Soviet foreign trade amounts to about five per cent.
(Trade with OECD countries amounts to only 1.6 per cent.)
Of this total, food and food related products account for 28 per cent.
When we look specifically at machinery imports from the West, we find that at their peak in the mid-1970s, they amounted to some 5–6 per cent of equipment investment.
As a technology importer, the USSR possesses certain intrinsic advantages.
Centralisation of foreign trade decisions (determined jointly by the State Planning Commission,Gosplan , and the Ministry of Foreign Trade) avoids duplication of purchases and enables strategic decisions to be taken concerning priorities in the economy as a whole.
As a monopoly, the Soviet Union often has considerable leverage over foreign sellers.
(Three separate negotiating teams were sent to each country tendering offers for the Urengoi gas pipeline, as a result of which the FRG, much to her surprise, found herself underbid at the end of the day.)
On balance, Soviet liabilities would seem to be a match for these assets.
One is the separation of the foreign trade organisation (the negotiator and purchaser) from the end user, and the resultant disjunction between a planner's priority and a shop floor requirement.
If as in pluralistic societies, individual enterprises were free to scan the market place themselves, they might duplicate purchases but, in the aggregate, would also spot more opportunities than would a relatively small number of foreign trade officials.
Secondly, the Soviets' penchant for canvassing exhaustively for the best and cheapest may succeed in these objectives, but at the cost of enormous delay between the time when applications are approved and machinery actually installed.
There is no small irony in this, as applications to purchase foreign technology in the first place will only be approved if the relevant Soviet machine building ministry cannot produce something of the appropriate standard and quantity in the time required.
Perhaps it is true that the foreign trade organisation's tortoise-like negotiations outpace the snail-like progress of Soviet machine building, but it cannot be a thrilling race.
Once installed, there tends to be an awkward fit between Western machinery and its Soviet factory environment.
If Soviet equipment is not always of an adequate standard, Western equipment is often over-sophisticated for Soviet purposes, demanding much by way of supporting technologies which in the USSR simply do not exist.
American studies suggest that US equipment in the Soviet Union operates on average at 60 per cent of its normal effectiveness.
The process of adaptation is not only difficult, it is also costly.
Far from freeing resources for other priorities, some have suggested that each rouble of imported equipment requires an average of five roubles in investment support.
In the view of at least one authority, these costs lead Soviet foreign trade organisations to prefer importing standard items over hi-tech equipment.
But, another response to this problem has been a shift to acquiring integrated, turnkey projects.
In spite of these obstacles, the evidence suggests that imported equipment yields high benefits.
Philip Hanson, perhaps the leading expert in this area, has assessed the impact in these terms:
The scale of these imports is small in relation to the Soviet investment programme.
Their impact, both direct and indirect, on the level and growth rate of Soviet production is significant, but appears to constitute only a modest source of Soviet economic growth.
There is evidence that the rates of return on hard-currency expenditure in this field are high.
These results may testify to the attributes of the equipment acquired and the proficiency of foreign trade organisations in tailoring purchases to real needs.
They would also confirm that the integration of this equipment into Soviet industry receives considerable attention:
Significantly, however, Hanson adds: ‘It does not necessarily follow that Soviet utilisation and diffusion of imported technology is highly effective by international standards’.
Once the standard of comparison shifts to international performance, then the system's obstacles are telling.
As we have seen, the Soviet approach to acquiring foreign technology is defensive: biased towards thoroughness, a careful weighing up of alternatives, and an avoidance of risk.
The result is often a hesitation in buying new technologies until they are proven, and a pace of negotiation which is both fatiguing and maddening to Westerners caught up in it.
If the Soviet Union were ‘catching up and overtaking’ a stationary object, Soviet practice would make sense, but the process itself is a continuous one, and the  competitor is a moving target.
Speed, not judiciousness, is therefore of the essence.
‘In general, it is hard to locate a major new technology developed in any country for which the USSR was among the earlier foreign purchasers of machinery or know-how.’
Relatively late Soviet purchasing of plastics, synthetic fibre and compound and concentrated fertiliser technology is implied in the belated chemicalisation drive…
The Soviet acquisition of computers has been relatively late…
Soviet commercial acquisition of other major technologies, such as numerically controlled machine tools and offshore oil drilling has been relatively late.
And so on.
By the time a new process or machine appears in the USSR, it is invariably on the point of obsolescence in the exporting country.
This pattern may be resistant to change.
The Soviet institutional structure produces decisiveness once decision is taken; it is not one which produces decision quickly.
The USSR is also bound to remain a society where penalties for error will outweigh the rewards for well judged gambles.
But our most serious uncertainties about Soviet abilities would seem to arise from the nature of diffusion itself.
Diffusing knowledge and acquiring it are as much an art as a science, processes influenced by variables which cannot be measured as much as by those which can.
Two variables which can at least be specified are the recipient's skill and his receptiveness.
In this respect, it does not bode well for the USSR that decisions pertaining to technology imports and decisions pertaining to economic reform have moved along independent tracks.
Acquisition of foreign technology has usually been an alternative to reform, not a complement to it.
The Soviets may rob themselves of their own best potential in this way.
Studies also bear out that people are the most effective disseminators of know-how, and that hardware just dropped on the doorstep is the least effective.
The barriers which the USSR erects in the name of Security to communication between Westerners with knowledge to disseminate and Russians who can benefit is perhaps the most blatant of its self-imposed handicaps.
Lead times, however, are only one economic factor relevant to East — West competition.
The potential of Western imports to free Soviet investment resources is not insignificant.
The six Urengoi pipelines, constructed to large extent with West European pipe and compressors, will increase natural gas production by seven to nine  per cent per annum, whilst the single export pipeline will add $8 billion per annum to hard currency earnings.
The project will alleviate the USSR's internal energy problem, ease the burden of supplying its CMEA clients and ensure continued funding for meat, feed grains and industrial equipment.
Without the pipeline, or with great delay in its completion, one could see that it would be difficult for the USSR to carry on with business as usual.
Precisely because the trade-offs are so clear, this particular project puts the right questions into focus.
For the sake of this exercise, it matters little that, as a Soviet planner, I fail to narrow the gap between my compressor technology and yours; nor does it concern me that one rouble of imported Western equipment requires five roubles in investment support: if the six roubles I invest produce fifty roubles of output, how have I injured myself?
Where trade-offs are at issue, rather than innovation, modernisation or know-how, the only question which matters is ‘opportunity cost’: resources which would otherwise be expended on equivalent Soviet equipment and, particularly, the question of investment versus overall return.
The question of trade-offs therefore promises to remain a live issue in East-West (and no doubt West-West) relations.
This stock taking leaves us positioned inconclusively between alarm on the one hand and complacency on the other.
Depending on circumstances, technology transfer can have dramatic or indifferent effect, but there is no clear-cut formula to hand.
The potential will depend on what is transferred (not just, how advanced? but also, how compatible?); and on how it is transferred (is the end user a resourceful user? is know-how to accompany hardware? is the information flow to be continuous? is the effort to be concentrated in a particular sector or dispersed in dribs and drabs across many?)
Finally, it will depend on the customer's purpose (a direct boost to production or indirect benefits?)
The Soviets, as shown by declining equipment orders since 1976, have themselves become more careful in weighing the balance, and have lost much of their earlier enthusiasm, as Brezhnev made clear to the Twenty-Sixth Party Congress of 1981:
We must go into the reasons why we sometimes lose our lead [in a technology]and spend large sums of money on purchasing abroad equipment or technology which we are fully able to make for ourselves, often indeed at a higher quality level.
The hyperbole in Brezhnev's statement is less significant than the disillusion it reveals: Brezhnev, after all, was the figure most closely  associated with the strategy of import led growth.
The Soviet Union is too dependent and too much part of the world economy to return to hibernation, but another period of infatuation may have come to an end.
For the future, technology transfer will remain a way of managing Soviet dilemmas, and perhaps ours, but it is not the key to our problems, nor the solution to theirs.
In sum and in conclusion, Western technology is not the good fairy of the Soviet economy.
Soviet leaders will continue to consider Western imports worth the price on balance — but there is a price to pay and a balance to be drawn.
To mix the metaphor, Western trade has been a sedative, not a tonic; it has acted as a brake on reform, not a stimulant.
But what of those areas—strategic and ascertainable — where the West's contribution is of timely and material benefit?
Can embargo be a useful instrument to protect lead times or influence Soviet policy?
In specific instances the answer to either question may well be yes, but as a general proposition, three considerations must dampen anyone's enthusiasm for economic brinkmanship with the Soviet Union:
(1)
When directed against industrial economies, sanctions invariably stimulate the creation of new capabilities.
In some instances, the long-term benefit to the victim may be worth the short-term price, but it is a question which must be faced.
‘Hurting’ the Soviet Union is not enough.
Will the consequences of hurting her be in her interest or in ours?
(2)
Sanctions and embargoes throw the Soviet regime back upon what it does best: enforcing a state of siege, imposing military discipline on production and mobilising society along wartime lines.
If there are to be sacrifices and belt-tightening, the Soviet leaders love nothing better than a backdrop of international threat to add pathos and realism to the drama.
(3)
In the battle of wills, as well as the battle of resources, the Soviet Union has cards to play.
Adversity is the regime's natural habitat, and in dealing with its own populace its one moral trump.
Within the Soviet Union embargo is apt to strengthen unity.
In the West, as we have seen, it is apt to promote disunity.
DEFENCE AND THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
The Soviet defence economy, it is often alleged, is a separate economy.
There are, indeed, impressive reasons for characterising it  as such, but only the most committed proponent of this view would wish to deny that the defence effort and the scientific-technological base on which it rests can be entirely insulated from the problems we have surveyed here.
An important question for assessing military effectiveness is, ‘if separate, how separate?’
But the prior question is how insulated the civil economy can be from defence considerations in the Soviet Union.
Oskar Lange once characterised the Soviet economy as ‘a sui generis war economy’.
The clear implication of this is that a fully autonomous civilian economy may not exist.
Without doubt, civilian production exists.
In a much quoted statement, Brezhnev once asserted that civilian production accounted for 42 per cent of the output of defence industry itself.
An obvious implication of the continuity between peace and war and between internal and foreign policy referred to in Chapter 1 is that there is less meaning to the civilian-military distinction in the USSR than elsewhere.
If the law of life is struggle, the ‘bottom line’ in economic activity as with any other, is the contribution it makes to that struggle, and no sector can simply opt out of it, even if it can be shown by some other criteria that doing so would improve matters.
More fish would be caught and fewer would rot if the Soviet fishing fleet, operating under ‘civilian’ ministries, did not circumnavigate to perform intelligence gathering for the Soviet Navy.
Yet, by Party-State criteria, this represents an intelligent use of scarce resources (as does use of the merchant, fishing and oceanographic fleets to furnish 70 per cent of the Navy's supplies at sea).
The inroads of the military into ‘civilian’ domains are a basic fact of Soviet life, regarded as entirely normal by the population.
From pre-, para- and reserve military training in schools and factories, to ‘voluntary’ contributions of food and material to the Armed Forces, to dual-purpose transport and the hardening of industrial plant, it is difficult to find an aspect of production in which military and security considerations do not in some way impinge.
The Merchant Fleet (Morflot ), for example, contains its own Military Sections charged with military training, and its vessels (equipped with gas masks and radiation detectors) are designed for prompt conversion to naval auxiliaries.
How many other countries have a Ministry of Civil Aviation headed by a Chief Marshal of Aviation and a state airline under control of military intelligence?
The Soviet military mind may admire US technology and regret that the Soviet GNP is only 50–60 per cent the size of its opponent's, but when surveying the way the US economy is organised, an officer of the 
Soviet General Staff must ask himself how much of that GNP has any practical use.
Consider the statistics in Table 1:
The ever-present reality in the West—industrial ‘restructuring’, the whittling away of heavy industry and the growth of ever more exotic services—is not a model that automatically commends itself to imitation.
In Chapter 4 we look at how Soviet society organises itself for war.
What is important to emphasise is that war is the ultimate purpose for which Soviet society is organised.
Butter, eggs, refrigerated goods trains are all desirable things to have, but they are not the test of an economy in Soviet eyes.
Leaders of the military establishment do not, any more than their civilian colleagues, define their economy by its defects.
This is not to say that they are not aware of them.
In Soviet eyes, ‘priority’ —the essence of the defence economy — is both a response to defect and a great source of strength.
Before considering precisely what ‘priority’ means, let us examine who determines it, who polices it and who benefits from it.
Standing behind the defence economy is a system of views entitled ‘Soviet Military Doctrine’.
Soviet Military Doctrine (which we discuss more fully in Chapters 4 and 5) would reject as a lunatic heresy the idea that there could be one set of assumptions governing defence production, a second governing the training and control of troops, a third for military strategy, and a fourth for the politico-military policy of the state.
War, like policy its master, is a purposeful act.
Defence budgeting and procurement do not move along different tracks from defence policy as a whole.
The inevitable complement to coherence, given the range of issues and concerns which must be addressed, is complexity.
Soviet decision-making in this sphere (as in many others) combines what to a Western  mind might seem incompatible: hierarchy and consultation, centralisation and a wealth of horizontal communication links, flexibility and ease of communication at the top, along with compartmentalisation and secrecy below.
A staple feature of Soviet bureaucracy is overlapping responsibility (particularly at intermediate levels): in part a natural consequence of size and complexity, in part a way of ensuring consultation and coordination; it is also the Party's tried and trusted technique of divide and rule.
The final and most important feature of the system is Party primacy.
Party involvement in a question does not create jurisdictional disputes, but resolves them.
Below is a ‘bare bones’ outline of the principal actors in defence policy and their principal economic responsibilities.
It should be noted that controversy surrounds the membership of some of these bodies and that there is no certainty about their precise relations to one another.
Finally, in Soviet bureaucracy as in any other, there are perils in drawing too firmly the lines between policy, advice and implementation, but I introduce these distinctions here in order to keep confusion within bounds.
Policy-Making Institutions
CPSU Politburo
Supreme policy-making body for all aspects of Soviet life.
Approves the military (along with economic) plan.
Considers budgets, aggregate resource levels, numbers of weapons.
Extreme centralism and  bureaucratic conservatism which characterise the USSR often plunge it into detailed consideration of procurement policy, but not on a continuous basis.
Defence Council of the USSR (Sovyet Oborony SSSR)
Brings together the top political leaders, the military and the military — industrial establishment.
Its re-emergence in the late 1960s reflected (1) need for more continuous and effective Party-military consultation,(2) demands of the Armed Forces on the civilian economy and the need for greater coordination,(3) need to ensure that strategy and, ultimately, policy governs the application of increasingly complex technology: improve the ‘fit’ between procurement, deployment, force structures and policy.
Approves doctrinal formulations, weapons programmes, and draws up overall plan for Politburo ratification.
Ministry of Defence and its Chief Military Council
If the Defence Council is charged with ‘leadership of the country's defence’, the Chief Military Council is charged with ‘leadership of the Armed Forces’.
Along with the relevant directorates of the MoD, it furnishes financial and other guidelines to the General Staff for its detailed planning.
General Staff
The ‘brain of the Army’, perhaps the central force in long term planning, procurement and the organisation of research and development.
Adjudicates resource disputes between individual services and acts as a clearing house for individual service proposals.
If not the sole, then the principal source of military advice to the Defence Council, whose Secretariat is believed to be headed by the CGS, Marshal S. F. Akhromeyev.
Supervisory Institutions
(1)
Central Committee Secretary for Defence Industry (G. F. Romanov until June 1985) * and CC Department for Defence Industry (I. F. Dmitriyev): Whereas the Defence Council is the chosen instrument for ensuring Party control over military policy, the Secretariat is the Party's vehicle for supervising defence industry.
(The Secretary himself may have broader responsibilities.)
The Department's 100 ‘responsible staff’ members have considerable powers over the ministries they oversee.
Works closely with:
(2)
Military-Industrial Commission (VPK )(head L. V. Smirnov): A working commission of the Council of Ministers, but in the first instance of the Defence Council.
Its chief may also be responsible to the CC Secretary for Defence Industry.
The VPK is thought to have broad inter-branch prerogatives for coordinating research and development, securing resources for defence production and enforcing the ‘military priority’ throughout the economy.
It is the VPK which draws up detailed contracts for production ministries, legally binding on all parties.
It also plays a key role in technical evaluations.
Advisory Institutions
(1)
Academy of Sciences: The leading force in basic research, and occasionally brought into mission-orientated research by the VPK  and production ministries.
Prominent individuals from the Academy act as consultants to the CC Secretariat, Politburo and Defence Council.
Its social science research institutes may on occasion provide alternative policy assessments.
(The Ministry of Higher and Secondary Education also contains research institutes which conduct defence work).
(2)
State Committee on Science and Technology: A science policy agency attached to the Council of Ministers.
Works closely with GRU to determine the requirement for promising foreign technologies.
Production Ministries
The Defence Industry Group is formed by at least nine ministries.
(There are at least an additional nine which are military-related.)
Each ministry controls a vast empire of research institutes, design bureaux and production enterprises.
In their tasks they are answerable to the VPK, the Central Committee and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers for Defence Production.
The nine ministries of the so-called Defence Industry Group are listed below.
Aviation industry (Aircraft and helicopters; airbreathing missiles)
Defence industry (Conventional weapons)
Electronics industry (Electronic components)
General machine building (Ballistic missiles, space equipment)
Machine building (Munitions)
Medium machine building (Nuclear weapons)
Means of communication (Telecommunications equipment)
Radio industry (Electronic components)
Shipbuilding industry (Ships and naval products)
What does ‘priority’ mean in the defence production sector?
The simple answer is more and better.
In concrete terms, priority refers to a variety of measures designed to insulate defence production from resource scarcities and the distortions of the planning process.
These include:
Personnel : Salary differentials 20–30 per cent over comparable civilian work tend to siphon off the better qualified.
As the most prestigious sector of the economy, the military sphere is also likely to attract the most ambitious and competent engineers, scientists and managers.
Nor surprisingly, a large proportion of the top leadership  have backgrounds in military industry.
The similar career patterns and long personal acquaintance of men like Brezhnev, Ustinov, Smirnov, Serbin (former head of the CC Department of Defence Industry) and Alekseyev (head of the MoD Armaments Directorate) maintain a consensus sympathetic to defence requirements.
Capacity : The celebrated 42 per cent allocated to civilian production attests to the extent of excess capacity enjoyed by the defence sector, compared with the straitened circumstances of other industries.
The other side of this coin is an impressive surge capability on hand when the need arises.
Similarly, manpower and budgets in weapons design bureaux do not vary with the production cycle.
This allows for a continuous stream of models and prototypes: the USSR does not face NATO's proverbial problem of holding together a design team in peacetime.
Autarky : Coordination between enterprises from different sectors and ministries is notoriously poor in the Soviet Union.
Hence, autarky in production is everyone's aspiration, but an unachievable (and unaffordable) one.
Defence ministries, however, come far closer to this ideal.
The Aviation Ministry…produces sheet aluminium, magnesium alloys, shaped metal products, plastics, and rubber products.
Commonly used components such as instruments, machine tools, rivets, nuts and bolts, instead of being produced efficiently by a single supplier are manufactured by all branches of defence industry; missile electronics, for example, are produced by the Ministry of General Machine Building.
Resources : The Ninth Five-Year Plan (1971–75) stipulated that light industry would grow more quickly than heavy industry; nonetheless, the opposite took place.
In Soviet conditions, this is not unusual.
‘Priority’ means that when the unscheduled but proverbial shortages arise, the Armed Forces receive the ration promised and others go without.
Whereas cost is a definite factor taken into account in plan formulation by the Defence Council and Politburo, it is not allowed to become a disrupter of plan fulfilment .
The arbiter over these matters would appear to be the VPK, which is empowered to commandeer resources where required, and whose work programmes carry the force of law.
Customer accountability : In defence, the customer is the Armed Service and the military representatives (voyenpredi ) of its  armaments directorate.
Seconded to each enterprise and design bureau, they are empowered to reject, at factory expense, production which is not up to standard.
Unlike the civilian quality control inspectors of the Department of Technical Control (OTK), whose salary arrangements link them effectively to their enterprises, the voyenpredi are in every sense the agents and servants of their respective services.
Their fortunes depend entirely on how effectively they wield the bludgeon at their disposal; in fact, a military representative may be gaoled for accepting shoddy goods.
A second customer prerogative is choice.
Weapons design bureaux, usually bearing the names of their founders (Tupolev, Korolyev), possess something akin to a corporate identity, as well as clear incentives for entrepreneurial behaviour.
The system is one which breeds product specialisation, whilst also ensuring overlap in broad areas of competence.
The result may be alternative proposals at the start (e.g., Mig-15, Yak-25) or reinsurance when things go awry in mid-course.
When the Nadiradize design bureau, specialising in solid fuel missiles, ran into trouble with its SS-13, the Chelomei bureau, despite its maritime orientation, was able to redirect the SS-11 programme to the anti-Minuteman counterforce role.
In their ensemble, these practices and privileges afford the defence sector a considerable degree of protection from the vagaries of the economic system.
They also draw upon the system's attributes: an ability to mobilise talent and resources, coherence of policy and direction; the ability of the centre to support and remove obstacles; and the possibility of combining strategy with flexibility.
In 1959, two years after the launching of the world's first ICBM, the civilian airport of Kiev, the USSR's third largest city, was without a paved runway.
This may say as much about priority in the USSR as anything else.
For all the truth of these points, and for all the striking contrasts, military production would appear to function more as a favoured section of the economy than as a separate one.
The weaknesses which strike the economy as a whole—scarcities, changeovers from design to mass production—are, even in the defence sector, the principal constraints on what can be produced and how.
Although the USSR supplies the US with 33 per cent of the latter's titanium, supply scarcities and limitations in manufacturing capability dictated producing the Mach 2.8 Mig-25 out of conventional steels (although a titanium version was successfully flown and tested).
Soviet design and procurement philosophy displays a prudence and  conservatism which reflects well known Soviet constraints, but also an ingenuity in the face of shortages and stringencies that characterises Soviet performance at its best.
Scarcities, pressures of time, and the often rudimentary skills of workers and equipment operators dictate a search for ‘minimal’ rather than exotic technology, and a penchant for working along proven lines.
Rather than strive to apply the most advanced technology available, the Soviet designer is conditioned to ask, ‘what is the simplest solution which will do the job’?
Simplicity need not always mean economy, but it has traditionally created a bias towards the single-purpose system, which allows concentration on point-design performance, as opposed to the multipurpose system common to Western inventories, which demands complicated and sophisticated design solutions.
It also implies an  abhorrence of ‘gold plating’, with its inevitable expense, reliance upon outsiders and hence, delay.
As Andrey Tupolev once put it, ‘the country needs aircraft like black bread.
You can offer pralines, cakes and so on, but there's no point—there aren't the ingredients to make them out of ’.
Soviet design philosophy also rises to the system's innate strengths: an economy which finds quantity as cheap as quality is expensive (hence long production lines and low unit costs) and a procurement system effective at bringing together operators, designers and technologists.
A Soviet tank may not be comfortable to ride in compared with a NATO tank, but it is reliable, easy to repair, and built quite deliberately for a particular kind of terrain, support system and warfare.
Soviet weapons reveal a greater degree of ‘design heredity’ than their Western counterparts, with each new generation incorporating many of the technologies of the preceding one.
(Indeed, old and new models may be in production simultaneously, as was briefly the case with the T-54, T-62 and T-72).
The risk of project failure may thus be minimised, but performance as well as know-how may suffer.
As one former tank designer put it, ‘in time, simplicity can become primitiveness’.
The incremental approach has also been known to produce an impressive degree of evolution within a given generation, with each system pushed over time to its workable limits.
Some 15 improved variants of Mig-21 emerged over a 25-year period, to impressive effect: the latest models possessing almost double the range and payload of the first.
The rigidities and continuities of the planning and design process may constrain ability to deal with the unanticipated and often press purpose built systems into unlikely roles.
Thus the Mig-25, designed originally as a high altitude  interceptor of the B-70, found itself adapted, upon the demise of the B-70 programme, for high speed reconnaissance and air defence.
This occurred despite the system being, from a Western perspective, singly ill-suited for its new air-defence role: inadequate in range, mobility, acceleration, and with engine components which were likely to melt when operated at full power.
Other examples of mid-course diversions (the SS-11) have been moderately successful, and some (the SS-20, which started out life unsuccessfully as the three stage SS-16 ICBM) have been conspicuously so.
Needs on occasion are identified which call for a sharp break with previous practice, or for a new genus of weapon altogether (such as the ICBM, Galosh ABM, particle beam weapons).
The appearance of such systems, often in advance of any Western equivalent, usually generates flurries of excitement, yet early versions tend to possess rudimentary capabilities, and effective variants may take considerable time to emerge as the component technologies are brought up to standard.
First in the world to deploy an ICBM, it took the Soviet Union ten years longer than the United States to develop a reliable guidance system; it has also taken 25 years to develop a quiet nuclear submarine, and having set the pace with anti-satellite weapons, the USSR may already have fallen behind the United States in this field.
Nevertheless, as Stansfield Turner, former CIA Director, once summarised it.
With brute force techniques…they do achieve about the same end result as we do with much more sophisticated techniques.
For example, they will put multiple computers in a system, each of much less sophistication than the one we put in ours.
Whilst it is no doubt true that the heaviness of early Soviet ICBMs and the ‘dirtiness’ of their warheads stemmed from crude propulsion and guidance systems, all that matters is that they accomplished what they were designed to.
Finally, how does the priority system, designed to deal with internal weaknesses, facilitate the absorption of foreign technology?
It would be prudent to assume that the GRU, in collaboration with its clients, is effective at identifying needs and diverting what it purloins to the right places.
We can also speculate that at least some ‘non-negotiable’ transfers are brought off more rapidly than those which go through the lugubrious procedures maintained by various State bodies and foreign trade organisations.
But it is questionable how much the priority system helps the USSR absorb foreign technologies rapidly.
To be sure, differences in scale and degree beyond a certain point can become differences in kind.
But there are two further factors which weigh against the optimal absorption of what is made available.
Secrecy and restrictions on communication between scientists and engineers are so stultifying that many reportedly are discouraged from undertaking defence work.
(Zhores Medvedev's attempts to spell out the injury thus caused to scientific-technical advance landed him in a mental hospital.)
The second is the complexity and sophistication of modern weapons systems themselves: each containing a sufficient number of different component technologies to ensure that progress, by and large, remains incremental rather than revolutionary.
As Thane Gustafson has summed it up, ‘the day when the simple invention of the stirrup changed the nature of warfare has vanished’.
Finally, as in civil production, the critical variables will be the what and the how.
Indeed, in this sphere, as in others, the simple transfer of equipment can be positively deleterious.
(In one case recorded by Medvedev, the process of ‘reverse engineering’ —that is, copying — became a 13 year ordeal.)
These considerations hold out some hope that, while the problem of maintaining lead times will remain serious, it will remain a manageable problem, much as it has in the past.
To reiterate, a Soviet economy restructured to make best use of its own human and material assets would be more of a threat to the West than one which became exceptionally adept at acquiring the West's secrets.
How then, on balance, is the Soviet effort to be assessed?
(1)
The Soviet ability to achieve breakthroughs is often overrated.
More impressive is the ability to make incremental improvements to existing capabilities and, over time, satisfy new requirements which are identified.
(2)
As in the civil sector, the gap in know-how may be less than the gap in the technological level of what is produced; often a conscious decision is made to forego the most advanced option.
The stringencies built into the economy are serious disadvantages and salutary disciplines: Soviet designers are the last to confuse the most advanced solution with the most effective one.
Where a need is identified, the USSR has repeatedly shown an ability to produce to the technical standard adequate .
(3)
We should not too complacently write off Soviet quantitative superiorities as the mere offset for technological backwardness.
There is an element of ‘mirror imaging’ in this perception.
The Soviet emphasis on mass armies is based on its history and geography, as well as considered judgements on the nature of future war in Europe.
Quantity, essentially, is not seen as a compensation for weakness in technology.
It has, in contrast, been Western orthodoxy to cling to technological superiority as a substitute for what is often taken to be an unbridgeable quantitative gap.
In the process the West may have sold itself a weapons portfolio which it lacks the means to produce in quantity.
Soviet orthodoxy has always considered technology as multiplier, not as substitute.
Given present quantitative disparities between East and West, incremental performance improvements do provide something to worry about.
Rather than ask whether a NATO tank remains superior to a Soviet tank, the relevant question is whether it remains superior to four Soviet tanks.
(4)
This may be the inescapable question for the foreseeable future so long as NATO procurement policy is predicated on highly trained work forces, scarce materials and sophisticated machine tools.
The Soviet emphasis on simple materials and technologies ensures in contrast long production lines, low unit costs, and an ability to turn spare capacity over to military production with a minimum of retraining and re-tooling.
The fact that the USSR produces two to three times as many machine tools as the United States is not without significance.
By way of postscript to these observations, some have discerned in the latest Soviet systems a greater introduction of new technology than is normally the pattern: a reflection, perhaps, of greater design confidence, but just as possibly the expression of worry about the pace of technological change in the present decade.
It is difficult to conceal the suspicion that in Soviet eyes a new technological era is dawning, with consequences for military science as far-reaching as the ballistic missile and nuclear weapon, and the ‘revolution in military affairs’ which they unleashed.
It is not so much the Western origin of new component technologies as their gestation in the West's civilian sectors which must pose the most vexing questions for Soviet policy makers and their orthodoxies.
The priority system which has raided and impoverished the civilian economy for military benefit may in  retrospect turn out to have been the scourge of military and civil progress alike.
There are radical implications in these challenges, and Marshal Ogarkov's departure in 1984, as well as his return to favour in 1985, may not be unrelated to his keen awareness of them.
A closer look at this challenge will be afforded in Chapter 5 but suffice it here to say that the military's vested interest in the established planning system, long a fixed point on the compass, may be changing.
CAN THE FUTURE BE MADE TO WORK?
It is clear that the Soviet economy is at an impasse, but we have tried to suggest that it is not at the abyss.
As one looks to the future, there would appear to be margins of manoeuvre and debate.
There would seem to be four types of players contesting the board and two axes on which the game pivots: conservative—transformist (a safer term than ‘radical’), and centraliser—de-centraliser (a safer term than ‘liberal’).
With Chernenko's departure from the scene, it may appear that the immobilistes have lost their final defence.
But if Gorbachev fails to meet the considerable expectations he has aroused, we may find there is plenty of rebound in the conservative cause.
What, then, are the likely options between now and the end of the century?
Muddling Through—the Coalition of Conservatives and Centralisers
Analogy: Brezhnev, 1968–1982
Problems to be tackled by additional restructuring and ‘administrative’ reforms (some on the East German or Czechoslovak pattern), greater levels of investment in yet more priority areas, exhortation and other ad hoc remedies; a blind eye to the ‘second economy’rather than a policy for it; consensual pattern of decision-making maintained and élite interests nurtured.
Consequence : The odd success as the more sensible reforms of the 1970s take root, but nothing sufficient to arrest the gradual listing of the economy; continued demoralisation of the workforce, but little threat to stability as élite maintains its cohesion against society; however, minority factions in élite becoming more forceful in demanding strategy versus drift.
Prospects : Possible as a short-term measure, but increasingly implausible for the longer term as the cracks become wider and resources for papering them over become more scarce.
Evolutionary Change—the Coalition of Conservatives and De-centralisers
Analogy: Kosygin-Brezhnev, 1964–68
Conscientious but ‘experimental’ introduction of Hungarian-style measures, with isolated centres of the economy turned into laboratories of reform; a limited legalisation of the ‘second economy’on the East European pattern, and greater support for the consumer and for private farmers.
Reluctance to displace planners, jurisdictional disputes ‘resolved’ by compromise; consensual decision-making and propitiation of the élite.
Consequence : Easing of supply problems in agriculture and boost to consumer satisfaction, but momentum lost as planners obstruct, managers become frustrated and disputes over prerogatives are fudged.
Prospects : A pattern which may evolve out of the failures above; its failure, however, could produce a turning of the tables and the triumph of:
Discipline and Reform: More Power to the Centre—the Coalition of Transformists and Centralisers
Analogy.
— Andropov, 1982–84, Stalin, Peter the Great, Gorbachev, 1985 —?
The ‘big boot’ approach to Russia's problems, with technocratic fine-tuning.
Large turnover of personnel at the centre, but its prerogatives strengthened: a search for ‘the best and the brightest’.
A streamlining of ‘transmission belts’ between the centre and direct producers, coupled with the more consistent application of the better 1970-style reforms.
Openness to experiment, debate, and admission of error, but ruthless enforcement of ‘democratic centralism’.
Administrative apparatus filleted to eliminate incompetence, lethargy and bottlenecks.
Greater reliance on police methods (to concentrate the mind), falling most heavily on workforce (alcoholism, absenteeism), but also on managers and provincial officials.
Consequence : Boost to production and idealism: idealism counterbalanced by fear and threatened by worsening privation as attacks on ‘corruption’ begin to bite; growth partially nullified by a worsening of distribution problems as the second economy is rolled back.
Eventual likelihood of a new equilibrium establishing itself as a new élite does and as police methods lose their novelty; in absence of  market-style reforms, balance of incentives apt to remain negative.
A mid-term solution, but not a long-term one.
Prospects : A strategy which will secure the backing of the younger, more creative and more frustrated members of (or aspirants to) the élite, as well as the Armed forces and KGB; a strategy with greatest prospects of survival over an extended period, although its potential will depend on how quickly the regime recognises the ‘second economy’ to be a ‘necessary’and ‘non-antagonistic’contradiction in a Socialist society.
Discipline and Reform: Survival of the Fittest—the Coalition of Transformists and De-centralisers
Analogy: None a yet
A more consistent, competent, ruthless and less ‘hare-brained’ Khrushchevism.
Hungarian-style reforms introduced, but comprehensively: markets function and managers make decisions unless planners say otherwise (at present few decisions can be taken unless planners authorise them).
Administrative axe falls most heavily on the centre as its size is pared down; economic axe falls most heavily on the less efficient, as unemployment and bankruptcies make their first appearance.
Consequences : In the short term, unsettling effects for state and society alike.
Survival into the mid-term depends on speed with which individuals can adapt to unfamiliar criteria and incentives.
Divided élite leading the assault upon itself may be in no position to withstand the pressures of a restless population.
This strategy may have the greatest potential for long-term success if the shoals can be navigated with success.
But if it fails it may take the system down with it.
Prospects : Unlikely, as its implications and perils understood; and, of the four strategies, it would demand the greatest unity at the top.
Foundations of Power: Empire
Whoever occupies a territory also imposes on it his own social system.
Everyone imposes his own system as far as his army can reach.
It cannot be otherwise.
Stalin to Milovan Djilas, 1945
Your country is in the region occupied by Soviet soldiers in the Second World War.
We paid for this with great sacrifices, and we will never leave.
Brezhnev to Dubček, 1968
The satirist, Saki, once observed that right and wrong, like the Russian Empire, had certain well-defined limits, albeit not always in the same place.
It seems only appropriate to begin this chapter by establishing the limits of the subject, because not everyone has been in agreement as to where influence ends and control begins.
By even the most stringent criterion, any definition of the Soviet Empire would have to encompass what Saki termed the Russian Empire: the fourteen non-Russian ‘Union Republics’ which join with the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic into an ‘integral, federal, multinational state’.
Constitutional provisions affirming each Union Republic to be a ‘sovereign Soviet socialist state’ with the rights to secede and to enter into foreign relations are honoured faintly in appearance, but by no means in substance.
Beyond Soviet borders, if we follow Moscow's own definitions, there are three circles of influence: at the outer rim, a variety of states enjoying relations of friendship or alliance with the USSR; then, a group of countries characterised by dependence and ‘solidarity’; and, finally, an inner circle characterised by subordination.
For our purposes, only the final group pass muster into the Soviet Empire, but the others are worth noting in passing.
The outermost ring, comprising ‘progressive’ but non-Leninist countries, is the most difficult to demarcate with precision.
Four of these politically dissimilar states (Finland, India, Iraq and Syria) are  party to treaties of ‘Friendship and Cooperation’ or ‘Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance’with the USSR; a fifth, Libya, has concluded similar agreements with Bulgaria, Romania and North Korea.
In addition to most of the preceding, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria, Uganda and Zambia have concluded military cooperation agreements with the USSR.
Several states maintain Soviet military advisers on their soil, in Syria's case a substantial number.
For the most part members of the Non-Aligned Movement, many of these states maintain good relations with countries hostile to the Soviet Union.
The history of Soviet relations with non-Leninist friends and clients has been marked by reversals and desertions (for instance, Indonesia in 1965, Egypt in 1972, Somalia in 1978), and when trouble looms, the USSR's ability to influence events may be found wanting.
More reliable by far are the eight states ruled by parties classified by the CPSU as ‘Vanguard Revolutionary Democratic’: Afghanistan, Angola, Benin, Congo, Ethiopia, Kampuchea, Mozambique and Yemen (Aden).
These parties are ideologically sound, all likely in Moscow's judgement to evolve into fully fledged Communist parties: no ideological hybrids here which owe more to Mussolini than to Lenin.
In contrast to the first group, relations are conducted at the Party to Party as well as State to State level.
In at least one case, Afghanistan, the regime could be said to be fully subordinate to Moscow.
These regimes, however, are recent creations, for the most part crudely and poorly grafted onto society; in some of these countries, the ‘permanence’ of their socialist transformations is questionable.
It is, therefore, only the 15 countries ruled by fully fledged Communist Parties which are deemed to comprise the ‘world system of socialism’.
Each of these countries are characterised by disciplined and politically mature Communist ruling élites with a formidable apparatus of coercion behind them.
However, some of the regimes (such as North Korea) are less subordinate to Moscow than countries in the preceding category; some are non-aligned (Yugoslavia), defiant (Albania) or in rivalry with the USSR (PRC).
Cuba and Vietnam, for their part, are bound firmly to the USSR by a mutuality of interest and outlook, but it is questionable, despite considerable dependency on the USSR, if they could be bound against their will.
Geographically, Vietnam and Cuba are remote from the Soviet Union, and their ruling élites are cohesive entities which have come to power through their own efforts.
Whilst it is possible that they will remain reliable instruments for a long time to come, it is in conditions like these that Titoism spawns and prospers.
The USSR herself appears to acknowledge that Cuba and Vietnam are not bound to her by Party discipline.
References to ‘fraternal solidarity’ abound, but one looks hard for references to ‘binding internationalist obligations’or the ‘permanent factors’in relations which force Warsaw Pact leaders to account to the Soviet Politburo.
It is hard to imagine the C.-in-C. of the Warsaw Pact addressing a Vietnamese colleague as Marshal Grechko once spoke to the Czech Defence Minister: ‘When I am thinking, you be quiet.’
These two states are more judiciously classed within the Soviet orbit than within her empire.
In the strictest sense then, the subject of this chapter are the six Warsaw Pact members of Eastern Europe which, along with Mongolia, could alone be said to be bound to the ‘socialist commonwealth’.
Leaving Mongolia aside, the leaders of each country are the linear descendants of ‘Muscovite’ Communists, sheltered in the USSR during the Second World War and brought to power in the van of the Red Army: in times of friction, it takes little to remind Eastern Europe's leaders not only how their bread is buttered, but how they got into the larder in the first place.
To add force to their indebtedness, each satellite finds itself enmeshed in a web of controls and relationships which institutionalise Soviet involvement in their internal affairs.
Far from being illicit and sub rosa , these practices and mechanisms are heralded as being essential to the ‘norms’ which make relations between socialist countries ‘organic’and ‘of a new type’.
Where even these devices prove insufficient to ensure subservience, there is ample reserve of armed force to do so, both within the satellites and in the USSR itself.
Whilst a number of considerations may limit the resort to force majeure , there is a sufficiency of means once the will to use them is present.
It is these states, bound to the Soviet Union by geography, dependency and military weakness which properly form the ‘Soviet Empire’, and whose contribution to Soviet power we shall now examine.
LIVING WITH STALIN'S LEGACY
For a variety of reasons Stalin rejected a ‘Finnish’ solution in Eastern Europe in preference to a security formula based on ideological conformity and the maintenance of control over these countries' internal as well as external policies.
His decision was a fateful one.
Although Stalin's insistence on absolute control may in the fullness of time have evolved into an emphasis on ensuring ultimate control, Soviet leaders in the 1980s still operate within the essential security framework which Stalin bequeathed to them.
Today, as in 1947, Soviet domination of Eastern Europe accomplishes five fundamental objectives:
(1)
It ensures geographical security, acts as a force multiplier, and brings Soviet power into the heart of Europe.
Gone are the days when a set of weak states acted as enticement to the invasion of European Russia by outside powers.
Whatever dread and resentment the Soviet regime inspires amongst its own population, that regime has solved the perennial problem of Russia's vulnerability, and is seen to have done so by the common people of the land.
This is a basic pillar of Communist legitimacy in the USSR, and in times of hardship may, perhaps, be the sole one.
(2)
It acts as a buttress to the ideological authority of Marxism-Leninism, internally and internationally, and sharply reduces the danger of contamination from without.
(3)
It furnishes the Soviet Union with an economic storehouse of skills and technology not always obtainable in the USSR or available elsewhere.
Despite worsening terms of trade in recent years.
We will suggest that these functions are still performed to an impressive and significant degree.
(4)
It provides a weighty diplomatic instrument in an overall European policy aimed at maximising influence over that part of Europe which the USSR does not control.
The USSR has shown skill in orchestrating the foreign policies of the CMEA states to capitalise on the sensitivities of individual Western European countries and drive wedges in NATO's diplomatic front.
In this enterprise the GDR has traditionally been cast as pawn (even bait) and Poland as stalking horse.
This diplomatic leverage, particularly over a divided Germany, ensures the USSR a powerful voice in NATO counsels even when Soviet military power is perceived to be in check.
(5)
Finally, dominion over Eastern Europe enthrones the USSR on the world stage as an equal of the United States: as a custodian not only of a set of national interests, but of a ‘world socialist system’ entitled to equal representation in world councils.
Eastern Europe's opening to the Third World (along with the influence of Cuba and Vietnam) add credence to the view that diplomatic  solutions to international difficulties can have no validity without taking into account the interests of the socialist camp.
Each of these assets has over the fullness of time authored its own particular problems and dilemmas.
(1)
The extension of the USSR's geographical writ, with the corollary that (Brezhnev expressed it), Eastern Europe's borders are ‘our borders’, turns the reliability of Eastern Europe's ruling élites and their armed forces into a matter of the utmost importance.
‘Security of the rear’ in peace and war now embraces, in addition to the Soviet Union, a number of states which, however limited in sovereignty, are manifestly foreign.
The result is a potentially unmanageable spread of vital interests in a country already lumbered with the burdens of being a multinational state.
(2)
By the same token, the ‘organic’ linkage between Eastern Europe and the USSR increases the likelihood that the problems of the Soviet Empire may become the undoing of the Russian Empire.
As one authority has concluded,
The Soviet Union fears the short, medium and long term consequences of bordering countries which are actually sovereign nation states—that is sovereign as conceived outside Soviet ideology.
As the RSFSR cannot be put at risk by being surrounded by non-obedient or independent and sovereign republics in Ukraine, Belorussia, Lithuania, Armenia, etc., so the security of the USSR as a national state cannot be put at risk by non-obedient and sovereign countries in east central Europe (and possibly elsewhere).
Soviet specialists themselves have referred to this connection in the following way:
Total Socialist integration is characterized by the increasing depth of interdependency.
Such interdependency demands certain limitations in national sovereignty.
In this process, the contents, forms and operations of national sovereignty should undergo necessary modifications.
Any departures from the norm in Eastern Europe may pose immediate problems for the USSR.
If it is in order for Dubček to grant federal autonomy to the Slovaks or Carpatho-Ukranians then what of the Soviet Ukraine?(the Politburo's worry in 1968); if genuine trades unions are to be countenanced in Poland, how can they be proscribed  in the Baltic republics and Belorussia?(the Politburo's worry in 1980).
The contagion which spreads from the enemy can be arrested because it is clearly subversive, but how is it treasonable to demand for one's fellow socialist citizens what is clearly permitted to others?
Ideologically, Soviet leaders may have discovered that they may be as much hostage to Eastern Europe's Communists as the latter are to Moscow.
This is the lesson of the Khrushchev years, and this lesson is simple: if the subservience of Eastern Europe's Communist rulers is ensured by their dependence on the Soviet Union, then the Soviet Union had best be dependable.
Moscow cannot repudiate the orthodoxies imposed upon its clients without repudiating its clients.
In the 1950s Khrushchev's attempt to do so by de-throning Stalin and mending fences with Tito torpedoed two client regimes, Bierut's in Poland and Rákosi's in Hungary, whose authority derived as much from venerating the first as from anathematising the second.is
Today's Communist ruling circles may no more believe in Party infallibility than latter day absolute monarchs believed in the divine right of kings.
The Holy Alliance which ties them to the USSR and to one another is the principle of Party infallibility, not the fact, and the certainty that the principle will be upheld—if necessary, by Soviet tanks.
Once this connection is broken, Eastern Europe's élites may make other arrangements (as did Hungary's Imre Nagy in 1956) on terms consistent with their own safety rather than Moscow's.
There is thus a contractual element in Moscow's authority—a state of affairs which gives Eastern Europe's conservatives a potential veto on reforms and experiments which the USSR might be tempted to support.
(3)
Although, as we shall argue, changing terms of trade are less adverse to the USSR than is supposed, the benefits which accrue through the structure of economic ties have over time become less economic and more political in substance.
More to the point, the use of Eastern Europe as a crutch for the Soviet economy's deficiencies has only reduced the ability of both to compete with the outside world.
(4)
Diplomatically, Soviet success at exploiting Europe's division to bring about changes in Western policy has, in turn, given Western Europe inroads into the USSR's own preserve.
The prerequisite to certain reductions of tensions in Europe has been de jure recognition by the Western powers of the territorial realities in the East.
Western Europe's hope and Moscow's fear is that the process also entitles the West to stipulate what ‘reduction of tensions’ comprises and how it is to be judged.
(Hence, the significance of the Helsinki Final Act.)
Whether the West's prerogatives are real, and whether or not they are exercised, the resolution of the territorial controversy has removed the one bone of contention which for a time made the Warsaw Pact a community of shared anxiety.
Since then, Soviet dominance has appeared that much more stark and anomalous to the peoples of Eastern Europe.
(5)
Finally, the status and prestige derived from empire threatens to raise the stakes in any imperial difficulty beyond what a rational reading of Soviet interests might otherwise dictate.
The maintenance of this imperium has become not only an essential pillar of the regime's internal legitimacy, but as essential a pillar of her external legitimacy as a Superpower.
It seems likely, therefore, that the USSR will cling to the view that empire is the foundation of her strength despite the problems this may bring upon her and others.
LIMITED SOVEREIGNTY: POLITICS
The basic limitation on the sovereignty of any Warsaw Pact country is, obviously, the imposition of a regime not of its own choosing.
In Soviet eyes, the continuing authenticity of such a regime is determined by a number of litmus tests, which ensure its conformity to Soviet practice.
The first is that it maintain a monopoly of economic power.
To a Marxist-Leninist, control of resources is power; the monopoly of political power follows from this rather than precedes it.
In practice, historical traditions, and a degree of Soviet respect for them, qualify this requirement in particular instances (like a large measure of private land ownership in Poland).
However, the sine qua non of any qualification to the rule is that there be no restoration of capitalism or capitalists: the state's economic power must be overwhelming compared with that of any  individual or any foreseeable combination of them.
Although the essential problem of power relations may thus be resolved, immense effort is still expended on maintaining the monopoly of political power.
It is not thought enough to ban unofficial political activity, institute press censorship and monopolise the means of communication, since at most these measures serve a negative purpose.
What is needed is a mechanism for ensuring that policy is carried out, rather than obstructed; and that those entrusted with promoting policy actively identify with it.
This is ensured, first, by ‘democratic centralism’: ‘the obligation of lower bodies to observe the  decisions of higher ones’; secondly, by Party oversight of all State bodies; and, finally, by the system of nomenklatura , which reserves important appointments to the Party apparatus.
In the NSWP countries, as in the USSR, control over appointment is a proven method of controlling policy.
These practices do not in themselves guarantee the irreversibility of Socialism.
It is hoped that they will keep the client in power, but today, as in Stalin's day, additional measures are thought necessary to guarantee that the client remains reliable himself.
A prime instrument of Stalin's domination, the ‘Embassy system’, installed Soviet ambassadors as viceroys over their dependencies, supported by legions of Soviet ‘advisers’.
In the post-Stalin years, the Soviet ambassador has remained a figure of enormous importance (hence the key roles assumed by Andropov in Hungary and Chervonenko in Prague in the respective crises of 1956 and 1968).
In contrast, very little business of substance is transacted through Moscow's resident NSWP ambassadors, whose postings are little more than sinecures.
A second instrument of control is the direct subordination to Moscow of the Armed forces and security services, making it possible to bypass the national leadership.
(Ladislav Bittman, a senior officer of Czech intelligence in the 1960s, has stated that day-to-day supervision by KGB liaison officers extended to departmental level).
Whilst some of the more conspicuous signs of domination have diminished over the years, a more indirect but equally pervasive web of relationships has grown up.
Very much at the centre of it is the CPSU CC's Department for Liaison with Communist and Workers' Parties of Socialist Countries, founded in 1957, and headed by Yuriy Andropov from that date until his appointment to head the KGB in 1967.
This department, an offspring of the old CC Foreign Affairs Department, maintains direct ties to Central Committee members of each neighbouring Socialist country.
(Indeed, the Soviet ambassador himself probably reports through these channels, rather than, or in addition to , the Ministry of foreign Affairs.)
It is understood that appointments to Central Committees and other key posts are to be confirmed with Moscow.
Dubček's failure to do this was presented by Brezhnev as a cardinal sin:
From the outset, I wanted to help you out against Novotný, and immediately in January I asked you: Are his people threatening you?
Do you want to replace them?
Do you want to replace the Minister of Interior?
And the Minister of National Defence?
And is  there anyone else you want to replace?
But you said no, they're good comrades.
And then suddenly I hear that you've replaced the Minister of Interior, of National Defence, and other ministers, and that you replaced secretaries of the Central Committee.
This amounts to nothing less than the extension of the nomenklatura system to intrabloc relations.
So long as other leaders do not follow Dubček's example, Moscow can be confident of dealing with known quantities in its client states and of possessing means to manipulate factional rivalries to its own advantage.
By the same token, national apparatchiki will understand that the support of Moscow will be the deciding factor in such rivalries.
Dubček's undoing was supposing that his personal stature allowed him to adopt a creative notion of his responsibilities and depart from the orthodox notion of these things.
He was a known quantity whose devotion to the Soviet Union was unquestioned; he would never countenance a multi-party system; he, unlike Nagy, had no intention of withdrawing from the WTO.
All of this was clear.
Dubček therefore calculated that it would be safe to whittle away the censorship of the media, break out of the nomenklatura network and transform the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia from a ‘democratic centralist’ into a democratic organisation.
Since the reformist animus came from within the Party and not from anti-Socialist elements outside it, he trusted that the Soviet leaders would grasp the artfulness and wisdom of his innovations.
But for the CPSU Politburo in 1968, these measures were a casus belli , and it is not unlikely that a future Politburo will take a similar view of such transgressions.
(Thus far, Hungary's cautious brand of reformism has managed to stop short of them.)
One analyst of these matters has noted that ‘Stalin had little reason to expect that control of Communist countries would differ markedly from control of Communist parties.’
Although post-Stalin leaders are more flexible about many things, that expectation survives in large measure and is to a fair degree born out by results.
Many Western commentators, by focusing on what is familiar to them, namely state-to-state relations, have tended to emphasise the importance of divergence and diversity with the WTO countries.
The distinguishing feature of the ‘Socialist camp’ is not just the obvious limitations imposed upon the state sovereignty of its members, but the centrality of relations between parties.
It is this party-to-party dimension of relations, and a particularly ‘centralist’ and ‘internationalist’notion of accountability, which keeps these diversities within limits and maintains élite  solidarity in fact as well as in name.
The predicament for Eastern Europe as well as the Soviet Union is that this intra-bloc cohesiveness tends to be purchased at the price of internal stability.
It is difficult to see how it could be otherwise given a political system dominated by appointment prerogatives and Moscow connections, rather than accountability to social forces with a direct stake in policy issues.
In Eastern Europe, as in the Soviet Union itself, issues and interests are sacrificed in the battle for faction and patronage.
Like the Vicar of Bray, political survivors in Eastern Europe know how to subordinate their policy interests to their own personal cause: venerable figures such as Novotný and Husák of Czechoslovakia, and Olszowski of Poland have migrated more than once between hardliners and soft.
It is not surprising that Dubček in his ascendancy gained the support of as many ‘Stalinists’ as backed the ‘conservative’, Novotný; nor that Novotný's record was subsequently depicted as more ‘Stalinist’than it was.
The politics of the élite therefore proceeds very much in a world of its own.
The very freedom from mass accountability which allows it to do so also makes it difficult for leaders to know what society is thinking: without mechanisms for making needs known and understood, Polish and Soviet leaders simply cannot know what the consequences of a rise in food prices or of other policy shifts will be.
The noteworthy point about explosions against the system in the GDR (1953), Hungary (1956) and Poland (1956, 1970, 1976 and 1980) is not their ferocity, but their apparent suddenness.
From a detached perspective, it might therefore seem that the political viability of the USSR's East European clients depends not only on greater economic and administrative competence on their part, but the opening up of communication channels between élite and mass and a narrowing of the gulf between state and society.
But those who composed the Brezhnev doctrine have not been taken in by this line of thinking, at least not to date.
It is this declaration which symbolises the primacy of cohesiveness over stability, and it arose, one must recall, not in response to the avowed enemies of Socialism, but to a loyal leadership which demonstrated the will and ability to deal with society on society's terms.
If a loyal client has no objective need of its Soviet protectors, then how long will it remain loyal in fact or in spirit?
Not surprisingly, Soviet assessments of the more recent Polish crisis are out of tune with the lessons which have generally been drawn in the West.
Konstantin Rusakov, present CC Secretary for intra-bloc relations, does indeed fault the Gierek leadership for ‘big mistakes and miscalculations…in economic and social policy’, but goes on as well to indict it for ‘flagrant departures from the integral regularities and principles of building socialism’.
Amongst the latter, he and other figures include:
(1)
‘the violation of the universal laws governing the building of socialism [which]led to incomplete socialist changes and even to retention of some elements of the transitional period’— namely, failure to fully collectivize Poland and reign-in the Church;
(2)
allowing KOR, ‘an avowedly counterrevolutionary grouping…to operate in the country essentially legally’;
(3)
‘anti-socialist elements…increasingly breaking into the mass media’;
(4)
an unacceptable degree of contact with the West.
‘Since World War II in Poland there have been about 15 000 translations of publications by Western authors…about 16 000 Western-produced movies have been shown and over 3 300 productions of plays by Western authors have been staged’.
At least outwardly then, Soviet authorities insist on a linkage between Socialism and stability, and deny any tension between them.
But Western observers may have grounds for scepticism.
It was not, as the Russians say, ‘for the sake of their blue eyes’ that Poland's leaders granted such concessions to their subjects.
Nevertheless, there is a clear—and perhaps valid—message behind these Soviet critiques: a safer bet maintaining order through Leninist norms than putting brakes on reform once the ball is rolling.
Whatever the truth of the matter, the one certainty for the future is that economic pressures will put everyone—reformers and conservatives—to the test.
LIMITED SOVEREIGNTY: ECONOMICS
As we approach the last third of the 1980s, it is an open question whether the tribulations of the CMEA economies will weaken or strengthen Soviet influence in her Empire, or for that matter erode or reinforce Europe's division.
The Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, comprising the USSR, Poland, the GDR, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Bulgaria, was founded in 1949 as a diplomatic counterweight to the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation (OEEC) and as a multilateral forum for containing the effects of Titoism.
Beyond this, it  had little economic importance and did not function as a multilateral institution in any proper sense of the term.
Each East European Communist Party pursued at Soviet behest an autarkic model of economic development in faithful imitation of Stalinist practice.
Cooperation and coordination between the different East European economies was discouraged, whereas relations with the USSR were regulated through joint stock companies under effective Soviet control, along with bilateral treaties which imposed steep delivery requirements and unfavourable terms of trade upon Soviet clients.
Stalin's frank priority was the post-war reconstruction of the USSR, not the winning over of Eastern Europe to the Soviet cause.
It is estimated that the value of resources transferred by the Soviet Union out of Eastern Europe between 1945–1956 approximated the value of Marshall Plan aid transferred by the United States into Western Europe during the same period.
In spite of the social dislocation and consumer privations that Stalinism wrought, it must be said that the ruthless and heavy-handed mobilisation of human and economic resources did succeed in achieving impressive growth rates and in building up a solid industrial infrastructure in what, with the exceptions of Germany and Czechoslovakia, had been largely agrarian countries.
But even before the uprisings of 1956, Nikita Khrushchev had come to the conclusion that such overt exploitation could no longer be justified in the interests of the USSR or the development of the region as a whole.
As he put it to the 1955 Congress of the Czechoslovakian Communist Party, ‘socialist ideas can only triumph when the peoples of Eastern Europe eat like the delegates at this Congress’.
From the mid-1950s, much of the Stalinist edifice was dismantled: in 1954 the joint stock companies were abolished; in 1958 pricing mechanisms were recast to East European advantage.
The Khrushchev years also marked the beginning of a process dear to the hearts of Soviet clients: participation in the making of CMEA policy.
On the other hand, these clients managed to resist a process equally dear to the hearts of Khrushchev and his successors: integration.
Despite the conclusion of a Comprehensive Programme of Integration in 1971, progress on this front has been pitiful in many respects compared with that achieved within the EEC.
Why this socialist commonwealth should be less integrated economically than a Europe of free capitalist states is worth pondering.
As with many other puzzles, the caprices of politics have reinforced the legacy of history.
The jealousies and animosities which  characterised the countries of Eastern Europe before the Second World War never developed into a coherent aspiration towards supranationalism on the West European pattern.
Instead, the fragmentation of the region was cleverly seized upon by Stalin, who pursued a policy of divide and rule even after the hostile nation states of Eastern Europe were transformed into People's Democracies of his own making.
To this day, the sinews of this commonwealth are the transmission belts between Moscow and individual East European capitals, not multilateral institutions.
Much as Moscow may, on grounds of economic sense, welcome a more integrated economic policy, she would not wish to see institutional machinery set up which compromised these discrete, private channels of manipulation and control.
Much as the regimes of Eastern Europe might welcome the support of their neighbours against Moscow—and hence a strengthening of such multilateral forums—they also view their neighbours as rival claimants to Moscow's favour and are wary of giving them a greater voice in their own affairs.
Each vassal is the captive of its own ambivalence: wishing to be less subordinate but also more favoured.
Thus, neither Moscow nor its charges has a clear interest in multilateral institutions which truly flourish.
The real essence of integration, however, is not multilateralism, but the creation of a supranational economy.
Ironically, the autarkic model foisted by Stalin on his charges in the 1940s to maintain their isolation from one another and their dependency upon him had, by the 1960s, become something of a rallying point for regimes who in no other sphere enjoyed any tangible measure of independence.
In overall terms, there would be impressive savings (particularly in energy costs) if each produced only what each produced best.
But in particular terms (and in terms of‘kto-kogo ’), economic rationality means that Romania must exchange its hard-earned capacity to manufacture steel or munitions for a dependence on the GDR, Czechoslovakia and the USSR which costs more in freedom and leverage than it saves in economic resources.
Moreover, for a regime like Ceausescu's, economic nationalism (and the corollary of anti-minority policies at home) may constitute the only real bond between state and society.
To return to our comparison with the EEC, economic integration in the western half of Europe is seen as the first tentative step to a political union which many pay lip service to and few take seriously.
In Eastern Europe, economic integration is the last step in a process of political extinction which all take seriously and which most dread.
By the time of Nikita Khrushchev's fall, at any event, the regimes of Eastern Europe had managed to alter the terms of trade within CMEA to their benefit.
Plentiful raw materials and assured markets had improved living standards along with popular forbearance.
These very palliatives, however, had also removed the stimulants to technical progress.
Moreover, by the mid-1960s, many economists had identified central planning—the engine of economic construction in the 1950s—as the culprit which stood in the way of modernisation and efficiency in production.
Inflexibilities in resource allocation, quality deficiencies, waste, gaps and imbalances in production were becoming both more widespread and more critical as economies diversified and grew more complex.
It was the identification of these problems by Czechoslovak economists as early as 1962 which launched the country onto its reformist course years before Alexander Dubček appeared on the scene.
In the context of these difficulties, the onset of East-West détente from 1969–70 and the provision of Western technology and credits looked like deliverance itself.
For many CMEA countries, but particularly for Gierek's Poland, Western largesse became the linchpin of a strategy to refurbish the economy and reorientate production towards competitive industries capable of holding their own in world markets.
By the decade's end, such expectations were exposed as pipedreams, and the strategies behind them had collapsed in ruins.
The reversal of fortunes can be attributed to two factors.
The more obvious of the two was the four-fold increase in the world market price of crude oil in 1974–75 and the additional three-fold increase between 1979–1981.
When added to the tapering off of Soviet oil production, the ‘opportunity cost’ to the USSR of energy exports to CMEA as opposed to the West has altered appreciably—all the more so once these exports became vital for financing her own grain and equipment imports from the West.
In response, the USSR negotiated a new price formula for its exports to CMEA countries and imposed ceilings on deliveries.
Where prices were once held constant for five year periods, from 1976 onwards they have been revised annually on the basis of a five-year moving average of world market prices.
In that year the price paid by CMEA countries per tonne of Soviet oil doubled, and the price has risen substantially since.
Whilst the USSR has been less successful than she had hoped in restricting export volume, CMEA countries nonetheless find themselves obliged to purchase ever larger volumes of fuel from non-CMEA countries at market clearing prices.
Secondly, the dividends realised from Western equipment imports have been disappointing.
The reasons for disappointment in Eastern Europe differ little from those encountered in the Soviet Union.
But the consequences have been different, because East European expectations have been higher than Soviet ones.
The USSR sought growth and productivity improvements from her Western equipment programme; her East European partners have, in addition, looked to Western acquisitions to boost their own competitiveness in Western markets.
For them this has been a matter of necessity.
Whilst the resource-rich USSR could finance equipment imports through raw material exports, resource-poor Eastern Europe has been forced to finance her imports through Western loans, which can only be repaid out of future export performance.
Even had the post-1974 recession not dampened OECD demand for CMEA products, this would have been an unusually risky strategy.
Western technology has been made to assume a burden which it cannot fairly be expected to carry.
It is striking under these circumstances that no CMEA government used Western technology as a spearhead for economic reform.
Rather than grasp the potential of combining the two, CMEA governments acted on the assumption that the simple purchase of advanced technologies would in itself enable them to compete with advanced economies.
(The folly of the supposition is shown by the fact that, by 1980 the machinery which Poland had acquired in 1970 had become obsolete.)
Hungary is less the exception to this rule than is often made out.
The ‘New Economic Mechanism’, instituted in 1968 before the great sea change in East-West relations, was in fact frustrated by conservative rear-guard actions between 1972–78, the years of greatest Western largesse.
By comparison, the GDR would seem to be the example which proves the rule: in 1972, her efficient semi-private enterprises, accounting for 12 per cent of net material product (and much of her economic vitality), were socialised.
Poland, whose capital equipment programme was the most ambitious in the Bloc, instituted a re-centralising reform in 1975.
Whilst all have suffered, the variations from country to country are not insignificant.
On balance, the GDR, Hungary and Bulgaria have shown themselves able to absorb Western technology and put it to effective use; but Romania and, more conspicuously, Poland, have combined high levels of dependency with ill-conceived investment decisions and the worst adaptation problems of the kind discussed in Chapter 2.
Czechoslovakia—for many years the most reformist of the CMEA countries—was treated as a pariah by Western governments  after the collapse of the Prague Spring and, under the watchful ‘normalisation’ of Gustav Husak's leadership, has preferred economic stagnation to the sort of risks and reforms which could start Western trade flowing again.
By her insulation, Czechoslovakia has bought herself a safe and steady misery and avoided the worst buffetings of the decade: only 27.3 per cent of the country's trade was conducted outside the Bloc in 1978, compared with over 50 per cent in the case of Poland and Romania.
The exponential growth in CMEA debt (from $6 billion in 1970 to $58.3 billion in 1981) has come as a shock to borrower and lender alike.
The reality we are left with today is that:
Eastern Europe must try to maintain satisfactory levels of exports to the West in order to service its debt obligations there and satisfy domestic needs at a time when it is being pressed to greatly increase exports of manufactures to the Soviet Union to pay for increasingly costly imports.
This would appear to be a herculean task for the relatively efficient and an impossible one for everyone else.
If the GDR, with a 1982 debt service ratio of 63 per cent faces an uphill struggle, Poland, with a debt service ratio of 191 per cent has put herself beyond the point of return as an OECD trading partner for at least a decade.
The obstacles in the path of de-centralising reforms will be as difficult to negotiate in Eastern Europe as in the USSR, and in present conditions it is possible that the patient would not survive the cure.
The present squeeze on resources of all kinds in CMEA economies has made them so taut that the short-term consequences of market-orientated measures (inflation, unemployment) are bound to be sharp and widespread.
Only Hungary—a superbly well managed economy by CMEA standards—has taken the plunge and restored direction to its flagging reform efforts (a direct consequence of which has been a 79 per cent increase in the consumer price index between 1979–1983).
Elsewhere, the burden of proof will be on reformists to show that their policies offer the best chance of avoiding internal instability.
For much of the Bloc, then, the solution may be to opt for the devil they know.
For the time being, most have done so.
Increased reliance on Moscow may now hold out much prospect of improvement in growth, productivity or living standards, but intra-bloc trade at least offers assured markets, predictable performance benchmarks, and the  kind of long-term trading agreements which are the staple of central planning and of central planners.
Thus far, austerity measures implemented within CMEA have produced a modicum of economic restructuring away from Western-orientated production, along with fuel conservation and an improvement in economic growth (from 1.7 per cent in 1981 to 3.8 per cent in 1983).
The burden of debt has also declined slightly from its peak 1981 levels, but as a result of curtailed imports rather than increased hard currency earnings.
It would be difficult to say at this juncture whether this upturn, achieved at considerable social cost, can be sustained.
If it cannot, there may be political as well as economic implications to reckon with.
Low growth rates pose particular dangers for centrally planned economies.
Given the generic distortions of output and distribution in such systems, high rates of growth are required to keep the overall machinery lubricated and in motion.
(Growth rates of two per cent per annum, as experienced by Poland after 1978, do not produce EEC-style sluggishness, but breakdowns in deliveries and services and factories unable to function for want of necessary parts.)
Secondly, growth in centrally planned economies has been the fruit of high levels of investment (30 per cent in some cases), which would be politically unacceptable in most liberal democracies because of effects on consumption.
Communist regimes, by pointing at high growth rates, could once justify this squeeze on the consumer as an investment for the future, but with low rates of growth it becomes obvious to a work force that gratification is being denied rather than simply deferred.
For the moment, the answer to the question posed at the start of this section is that economic detente between East and West has underscored the distinctiveness of the Eastern Bloc and, on balance, reinforced its cohesiveness.
There does remain a balance to be struck.
Politically orthodox Bulgaria may have more or an interest in good trading relations with the West than was once the case; but would she alter anything by way of political character, or even policy, to this end?
Far more striking in the changed atmosphere of the 1950s is the case of Romania.
The first country to chart an independent course in the economic sphere (and the only one to make an issue of doing so) startled all and sundry in May 1980 with calls for more effective joint planning within CMEA.
Needless to say, all CMEA countries have now emerged as enthusiasts for greater integration in the realm of energy production and distribution: In sum, the results of this decade of lost hopes have been:
(1)
Increased leverage for the USSR.
(2)
The failure of politically motivated Western trade policies to produce their intended results.
Those countries most disposed to economic cooperation with the West are those which have found trade most beneficial (Hungary, Bulgaria), not those which have been treated most generously (Romania), let alone those who have become most trade dependent (Poland).
Where trade has proved damaging for whatever reason, the result has been estrangement.
By the same token, politically motivated trade denials (Czechoslovakia 1968, Poland post-1981) have only provided incentives to remain in the fold.
In Eastern Europe, policy has driven trade relations; trade has not been an end in itself.
Moreover, the political interests of Eastern Europe's regimes have taken precedence over the economic interests of society.
(3)
None of this is to assert that trade cannot produce political benefit, or that policies cannot be fashioned to this end.
What can be asserted is that the benefits are too marginal to warrant the attention the subject has aroused—and the undertaking too complex to be able to withstand the political controversy surrounding it in the West.
HAS EASTERN EUROPE BECOME AN ECONOMIC LIABILITY TO THE USSR?
So much for Eastern Europe's interests, but what of Soviet interests?
Oil shocks, resource scarcities and the provision of raw material subsidies to CMEA countries are bound to prompt this question.
Many today consider the CMEA to be a drain on the Soviet economy: to the tune of $80 billion between 1971–80 if the calculations of one recent study are to be accepted.
Considering that the Soviet economy is not in the pink of health in its own right, it only makes sense to ask whether the burden will remain affordable—and, indeed, whether hard economic facts will not drive the USSR to reassess the wisdom of maintaining anything so extravagant as a Socialist Commonwealth in her present circumstances.
Clear as it is that the terms of intra-bloc trade deteriorated from the USSR's point of view in the 1970s, the issue deserves to be treated with a degree of wariness.
Whilst some now characterise the relationship as grossly unfavourable, others draw the line at calling it less favourable.
For at least three reasons, the controversy is unlikely to be resolved to everyone's satisfaction.
(1)
Comparing socialist caviar with capitalist champagne:Much of the argument turns on one's pricing assumptions.
Goods imported by the USSR within CMEA are priced in soft (unconvertible) currencies, purchased through barter arrangements on negotiated terms which may be inconsistent from planning period to planning period and from one supplier to the next.
Goods imported from OECD countries have an international market value; when barter arrangements are not an option, they must be purchased out of scarce hard currency earnings.
In short, there is both an absence of meaningful prices within CMEA and of equivalent pricing mechanisms between one trading bloc and another.
The  difficulties of comparing OECD and CMEA products multiplies these confusions.
For all this, primary products exported outside the Bloc have (at least since 1974) been worth more in dollar terms than they have within it; but given the way goods are priced within it, this may mean less than meets the eye.
In dollar terms Soviet oil may purchase 25 per cent more in West Germany than in Czechoslovakia, but this does not necessarily mean that it will purchase 25 per cent more railway switching gear or pipelaying equipment.
Even if, as one study asserts, the USSR pays 50 per cent more for CMEA products than these products command in world markets, the question which matters to the Soviet Union is what she would have to pay for equivalent Western equipment (and how she would pay for it).
By making some plausible alterations to pricing comparisons, one analyst, Paul Marer, found that the $80 billion in implicit subsidy contracted to a $14 billion subsidy.
(2)
Intangible economic benefits:A large proportion of CMEA imports may have no suitable or readily equivalent Western substitute: the CMEA product mix is geared to the requirements of Soviet industry which, as we have noted in Chapter 2, may differ from those in the West; and Western equipment may require complementary products or particular production methods which can be introduced into the Soviet environment only at some effort and expense.
A second intangible benefit of trade with CMEA is the  compatibility of planning and procedures: long-term trading deals and a constant product mix.
(3)
Political benefits:CMEA affords yet another institution for strengthening the Soviet voice in the internal policy deliberations of East Europe states.
In addition to according the USSR a forceful say in the economic priorities of its trading partners, there is evidence that Soviet leverage over terms of trade has produced specific concessions in the foreign policy arena (such as material and diplomatic support for Soviet policy in South Yemen and Angola; offset costs for Soviet forces deployed in the Warsaw Pact).
These, to be sure, are mainly political benefits, but they accrue to the USSR by virtue of her economic relations.
If Soviet economic relations with her East European clients have become a ‘net liability’ to the USSR in any meaningful sense, this must mean that, on balance the USSR would be better off without them and not simply that they involve a net expenditure.
(A car represents a net expenditure, but the life it allows one to lead would be more expensive, perhaps impossible, if one did not have it.)
Far from encouraging a re-examination of Soviet stakes in the area, a full rendering of costs (and, most important, alternatives) is likely to confirm them: if, as one expert has calculated, the ‘cost of the Soviet Empire’ amounts to some 14 per cent of Soviet defence expenditure, it could be the most cost effective component of the Soviet defence effort.
The most that can be said with confidence is that the relationship is a liability for the population of Eastern Europe.
LIMITED SOVEREIGNTY: DEFENCE
Of all the ways in which Eastern Europe contributes to Soviet power, its military contribution as a buffer and forward base for military deployment and intelligence gathering may be the most important to her.
The Warsaw Treaty Organisation is arguably the least important.
The USSR's essential military needs are met by a network of bilateral treaties entered into years before the founding of the WTO: treaties which have been supplemented by similar agreements between the individual East European countries and renewed at periodic intervals over the years.
At the time of Stalin's death, some two years before the signing of the Treaty, the USSR's European clients maintained at Soviet behest over 1.5 million men under arms (half again as many as today), supervised by thousands of Soviet ‘advisers’ posted down to  regimental level and, particularly in Hungary and Poland, by Soviet Commanders in East European uniform.
Like the CMEA, the WTO was established more in furtherance of political objectives than in its self-declared ones.
Much as the CMEA emerged as a diplomatic counterweight to the Marshal Plan and OEEC, the Warsaw Pact arose principally in response to the entry of the Federal Republic of Germany into NATO.
There were additional factors.
Stalin's death and the first limited signs of de/tente and disengagement in Europe (notably the Austrian State Treaty of 1955) heightened the importance of national sensibilities in Eastern Europe and made it advantageous to erect a multilateral fig leaf of collective security over the USSR's continued domination of her neighbours.
By 1955 it could also be seen that Stalin's direction of East Europe military policy was not only onerous, but wasteful.
The increasing impact of nuclear weapons upon military planning and the perceived importance of maintaining the integrity of a future theatre of operations made it necessary to standardise doctrine and training and, hence, provide a more integrated forum for addressing joint military requirements.
Out of all these considerations a Pact of Mutual Assistance and Unified Command was concluded in Warsaw on 14 May 1955.
From the start, therefore, the Pact did fulfil a limited military purpose.
Nonetheless, in its original form, the Pact's principal political organ, the Political Consultative Committee (PKK) and its principal military organ, the Joint High Command (OK OVS) functioned as ‘dignified’ rather than‘efficient’institutions.
(The Joint High Command, in fact, was located in the headquarters of the Soviet General Staff, its effective operational master.)
Despite a few institutional innovations in 1961 and a number of others in 1969, the WTO remains an administrative, training and (only since 1969) a consultative organisation.
The Pact's supreme political organ, the PKK, although required to meet twice yearly, did not meet once during the Bloc's most crisis prone periods: 1956–58, nor between March 1968 and March 1969.
The Combined Staff (OVS) of the Joint High Command, the supreme military organ, to this day appears to be without rear services (logistics) directorates, an operations department and a transport department.
In peacetime, Warsaw Pact forces are responsible either to their national commanders or, in particular cases (such as Air Defence Troops) are commanded by direct command-and-control link to Moscow, by-passing national military staffs and Warsaw Pact HQ.
In wartime, according to Marshal Sokolovskiy:
Operational units, including armed forces of different socialist countries, can be created to conduct joint operations in military theatres.
The command of these units can be assigned to the Supreme High Command of the Soviet Armed Forces, with representation of the Supreme High Commands of the allied countries.
True to this description, the Joint High Command played no part in the Hungarian intervention of 1956, commanded by Army General P. I. Batov of the Soviet Ground Forces; nor in the invasion of  Czechoslovakia in 1968, which was carried out with the participation of other Pact forces.
These were duly assembled, exercised and put in readiness by the Commander-in-Chief of the Combined Armed Forces, Marshal I. I. Yakubovskiy, but at the decisive moment transferred to a forward command post of the Soviet High Command in Legnica, Poland, under the C.-in-C. of the Soviet Ground Forces, Army General I. G. Pavlovskiy.
Reliability and Subordination
Of 87 divisions deployed in peacetime on the territories of WTO states, only 31 are in the order of battle of the Soviet Armed Forces.
Given the increased emphasis in Soviet military planning upon unreinforced attack by forward deployed units, the quality and reliability of the non-Soviet military establishments is clearly of some significance.
Of particular importance amongst the six non-Soviet WTO members are the three ‘Northern Tier’ states of the GDR, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Not only are they the most significant in terms of population, industrial capacity and military capability; it is on the reliability of these countries in war that Soviet access to NATO's vital Central Region depends.
On the face of it, the greatest guarantor of the reliability of the WTO armed forces might appear to be the 550 000–600 000 Soviet forces stationed on their national territories, the overwhelming majority of which (20 divisions) are deployed in the GDR (Group Soviet Forces Germany, HQ Zossen-Wunsdorf).
Additionally, two divisions are deployed in Poland (Northern Group of Forces, HQ Legnice), five in Czechoslovakia (Central Group of Forces, HQ Milovice) and four in Hungary (Southern Group of Forces, HQ Budapest).
Two divisions stationed in Romania were withdrawn in 1958; no forces are stationed in Bulgaria.
Forces from these garrisons have been used on several occasions against  recalcitrant East European governments, though with the one exception of the limited uprising in the GDR in 1953, they have always been extensively reinforced from the Western Military Districts of the USSR.
(In 1956, Batov's invasion force consisted of 120 000 troops drawn from the Ukraine, as well as Romania and Hungary itself; Soviet divisions along with one Polish, one East German, one Hungarian division and one Bulgarian brigade—over 400 000 men — were funnelled into Czechoslovakia on the night of 20–21 August 1968).
In each case, the ‘temporary’ augmentation of the Soviet garrison became a permanent feature of the new status quo: after 1956 the Soviet Union doubled the strength of its Hungarian garrison from two divisions to four; the Central Group of Forces owes its entire existence to the events of the Prague Spring.
These examples no doubt demonstrate the ability of Soviet forces to act as the ultima ratio of Socialist order in Eastern Europe; their presence, however, does not guarantee that the armed forces of Eastern Europe will perform reliably or effectively.
To these ends, other means have been developed over the years, most assiduously in the three Northern Tier states.
They are summarised below:
(1)
Command and Advisory organs of the Warsaw Treaty Organisation:these bodies, six in number, with joint Soviet-East European representation, provide a continual reading of the pulse and a barometer of trouble and difficulty.
(2)
The Soviet ‘Military Representative’ and Military Mission housed each capital:in peacetime the Military Representative is a significant participant in the making of national defence policy.
In time of war, it is possible that he would become the ‘representative’ of Stavka (the Supreme High Command) and transmit orders directly from Moscow.
(3)
Vetting of senior commanders : the appointments of Defence Minister, CGS, and Head of the Chief Political Directorate are at least confirmed and may be initiated by Moscow.
It is likely that some form of vetting extends to divisional (one-star) level
(4)
KGB operatives in Eastern Europe : believed not only to monitor, but direct, the activities of East European counter-intelligence and security personnel operating within the WTO armed forces.
(5)
Informal command ties : higher military education, specialised training, exchanges and visits.
A two-year course in a Soviet General Staff academy appears to be mandatory for those taking up senior appointment.
Although training in the USSR is no  guarantee of greater affinity, the scope of professional ties between Soviet officers and their opposite numbers is considerable.
The Soviet High Command thus possesses considerable knowledge of local conditions and personnel, as well as a further channel of influence by-passing the national command structure.
It is reported that Polish commanders have lobbied directly with Moscow for higher defence spending in Poland.
(6)
Operational controls : over communications and command and control centres (an ingredient of success in Poland in 1980–81); over fuel and munitions stocks (run down before the invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia).
In non-Soviet ground forces the largest formation is the division (13 000 men).
Each in wartime would be slotted alongside Soviet divisions into Army and Frontal commands.
This in itself makes independent operations most unlikely.
Of equal importance are controls exercised by national Party leaderships and their respective security organs:
(1)
Politically reliable officers:97 per cent of whom are Party members in the GDR, 85 per cent in Poland.
As their relationship to the USSR is well known, the armed forces tend to attract the more pro-Soviet elements of the population.
Privileges as well as the habits of professionalism maintain distance between the officer and society.
(2)
Chief Political Directorate:functioning like its Soviet counterpart with the status of a Central Committee Department as well as a division of the Ministry of Defence, this organisation is responsible for the political reliability of the armed forces, political education, and censorship of military publications.
Its head, a Deputy Defence Minister, is directly responsible to the Politburo.
Its officers, ‘political deputies’, posted down to battalion or company level, constitute a separate chain of command, supplying personnel evaluations on a confidential basis to their political superiors.
(3)
The unit Party organisation:responsible for convening regular meetings of Party members and conducting ‘criticism and self-criticism’ of officers irrespective of military rank.
(4)
The ‘security channel ’ a third chain of command.
In the GDR, officers of ‘Administration 2000’ of the State Security Service (SSD) function as an arm of the Ministry of State Security (MfS) in the armed forces.
Its officers, often unknown to military commanders, wear the uniform of the service to which they are assigned.
In Poland, the security channel functions as a distinct division within the Ministry of National Defence.
It would be a bold person who claimed that these channels and mechanisms, comprehensive as they are, provide a guarantee of reliability in all contingencies.
Controls are a sign of wariness, not confidence.
Before concluding this discussion, it would be instructive to explore the performance of the Polish People's Army in what can only be considered a most exceptional contingency.
Poland's Army and Poland's Crisis
The move of the Polish People's Army (LWP) onto the political stage in 1951 is by Communist norms unorthodox, but by Polish norms explicable.
The LWP has been the most political of the East European Warsaw Pact armies, because it is in Poland that the political authorities have been weakest.
It must also be said of Poland that its society has been most resistant to Communist influence and, that of all East European countries, the gap between the state and its society has been greatest The LWP has not gone out of its way to act as the arbiter of events; rather, it has had this role thrust upon it by Party factionalism and weakness.
Throughout the post-1956 period, this most political of armies in this least reliable of countries has evolved into the greatest repository of Soviet trust.
Poland has always been the first non-Soviet WTO state to receive front line equipment from the USSR.
By comparison with the high levels of contacts prevailing generally between Warsaw Pact military élites, the closeness of ties between the LWP and the Soviet Armed Forces has been impressive.
Finally, the Polish General Staff has not only seen itself as an avid ‘consumer’ of Soviet military doctrine, but a contributor as well, which has authored its own innovations with Soviet endorsement.
This paradoxical state of affairs is the result of three factors: due, first, to the large number of commanders who, like Wojciech Jaruzelski, trace their formative upbringing to the USSR and the Soviet organised First and Second Polish Armies of the Second World War; secondly, to the social ostracism suffered by officers belonging to an army which prides itself on being the guardian of Communist as well as national values.
Young, professional graduates of higher educational establishments, they command high status in the state and  low status in society.
(A 1958 survey of secondary school leavers ranked the occupation of Army officer as 21st in desirability—behind office worker.)
Finally, Poland's geographical position binds her military professionals to the USSR by a common perception of threat.
As a country astride the USSR's main artery of communications, Poland risks becoming the target of nuclear attack in any conflict, and resistance to Soviet forces would turn the country into a battleground.
Polish officers, therefore, have felt an instinctive affinity for Warsaw Pact ‘coalition warfare’ doctrine, with its emphasis on pre-emption, surprise and defeating the enemy on his own territory in the shortest possible time.
The interest of some countries, notably Romania, in a doctrine of ‘national defence’ has not impressed Poland's military commanders any more than it has their Soviet patrons.
For all the enigmas in his career, Wojciech Jaruzelski seems himself to be the prototype of what the USSR has come to trust most in the Polish military outlook.
Trained in Ryazan during the wartime years, he returned to Poland to rise to divisional command (Major-General) at the age of 33.
Although a regular officer, he was appointed in 1960 to head the Chief Political Directorate, a sensitive time to be moved into so critical a position.
Over the next 13 years the Polish People's Army was buffeted by instability in the Party, internal divisions amongst its own commanders and unrest in society at large.
Jaruzelski's rise to power seemed quite unaffected by the ebbs and flows of factional politics:
1960: Appointed Head of the Chief Political Directorate
1964: Elected to the Central Committee of the PZPR
1965: Appointed Chief of the General Staff
1968: Appointed Minister of National Defence
1970: Elected a candidate member of PZPR Politburo
1971: Elected a full member of the Politburo
From the time that General Marian Spychalski was replaced as Minister of National Defence in 1968, the Army steadily lost its appeal as a vehicle for intrigue.
By 1973 Jaruzelski's men, all with similar career profiles to his own, were in place.
Jaruzelski's career suggests that a strong Party background is not always the surest path of Soviet favour (witness Gomulka).
Trust is conferred upon known quantities with a record of loyalty to Soviet interests.
In highly politicised systems, it is often the non-political professional who is the man to watch (witness Albert Speer).
By several accounts, Jaruzelski and the officer corps as a whole resented the fact that the LWP was called upon to assist the militia (police) in quelling the shipyard riots in 1970.
To this day, we do not know why élite internal security units of the KBW were not used for this purpose, as they were in 1956.
It is even possible that the attempt to use the LWP for internal repression played a part in Gomulka's downfall.
The restrictions governing such use which were shortly to be articulated by Gierek, Gomulka's successor, provide the charter and justification for the military's conduct in 1981:
The Party will always remember that [deployment of the PPA in civil unrest]can only result from an extraordinary situation, jeopardizing…the foundations of the socialist system, a situation where all the paths of political action have been exhausted, where an obvious enemy has raised his hand against the achievements of the working people.
On the evidence, military intervention was perceived as a serious contingency in early 1981.
The following months were characterised by intensive joint consultations, preparation and, true to Soviet traditions, an orchestrated strategy of deception and concealment.
In early 1981 under the cloak of exercises, Polish military units in strategic locations were redeployed and their barracks occupied by internal security troops.
In separate exercises, Polish and Soviet Signals Troops established a comprehensive communications net separate from existing military and civilian channels.
Throughout these first months it appears that Jaruzelski supported First Secretary Kania's efforts to achieve a political solution.
In Leninist terms, however, a political solution does not imply a compromise solution; in Kania's own words, its object was to ‘kill counterrevolution in the egg’.
With the unsatisfactory outcome of the July Congress of the Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR) this hope was dashed.
It was probably then that a military solution was firmly decided upon and additional measures taken.
Whether or not, as some allege, food supplies were deliberately run down by the authorities, by autumn there was plausible reason enough to deploy troops to urban and rural areas to assist in food distribution and ‘relieve bottlenecks’.
In October, conscripts about to be released had their tours of duty extended: a step which, overnight, increased the size of the armed forces by 25 per cent.
In the midst of these activities, Jaruzelski continued to conduct his negotiations with the  representative of society, but now as part of an exercise in maskirovka rather than persuasion.
The first hours of Martial Law themselves demonstrated that the regime had learnt the lessons of the 1970s.
Whilst control over the country was  transferred to the armed forces, the task of directly confronting recalcitrant elements a the population was largely entrusted to the ZOMO (motorised militia) ORMO (militia reserve) and élite security units.
The dramatic and yet equivocal significance of Martial Law — restoring Socialist order whilst forestalling Soviet invasion—has allowed Jaruzelski to remain faithful, at least in appearance, to the ideal of the LWP as guardian of both national and Communist values.
Throughout his career, he has been an enigma rather than a player.
A Soviet product rather than Soviet puppet, it would most likely require a Soviet invasion to establish conclusively whether his loyalty to the USSR is his overriding one.
For the moment, there is little reason to doubt that he regards ‘internationalism’ as the highest form of patriotism.
WOULD THEY FIGHT?
The armed forces of the non-Soviet Warsaw Pact countries have become professional military establishments, trained and equipped to high standards, and commanded by dedicated and reliable officers.
Whilst the evident unpopularity of Soviet domination in Eastern Europe may be thought to make such forces reliable in wartime for garrison and rear duties only, fact is that these military forces are trained and equipped for a war with NATO, according to an offensive doctrine of ‘coalition warfare’, designed to place them from the start of hostilities onto an ‘external front’.
Any appraisal of the performance of these forces in war must be hedged by uncertainty.
The proliferation of controls, for example, is bound to add to the problems of command, control and communication in wartime (as on a small scale it did in Czechoslovakia in 1968), but how much so it would be hard to say.
Moreover, from the Soviet point of view, there are known deficiencies and dangers.
Romania's ‘military deviation’ and her emphatic rejection of coalition warfare in preference to a doctrine of ‘national defence’puts her reliability very much in doubt.
The continued consequences of the Prague spring and its depletions of the Czech officer corps, if no threat to the reliability of the Czechoslovakian People's Army, are bound to  have implications for its effectiveness.
The long-term effects of martial law on the morale of the Polish People's Army remain to be seen, but the demoralisation which we now know to have followed in the wake of the 1970 disorders are an inauspicious clue to the LWP's health today.
Whatever the LWP's future reliability, the weight of its contribution is bound to suffer if ‘emergency’ becomes a permanent state of affairs in the country.
Already it is possible that the GDR's National People's Army (NVA) has displaced the LWP as the chief recipient of Soviet favour (and of advanced front-line equipment).
Against these factors, one must recall that in the Northern Tier countries (Poland, GDR, Czechoslovakia), the earmarking of the national armed forces for participation in the cutting edge of offensive war against NATO has rarely provoked dissent from their commanders.
The esprit de corps of these forces has increased in proportion to their professionalism and the degree to which this professionalism is recognised by their Soviet patrons.
Frustration where it does exist (for example, in the LWP) arises where such recognition and trust are withheld: in the fact that equipment, whilst advanced, is not of the very latest, in continued Soviet resistance to independent national frontal commands, and so on .
Eastern Europe's Warsaw Pact commanders and their subordinates employ their initiative to press for more challenging roles, not less.
Professional and motivated as officers and commanders of the national armed forces might be, what of conscripts?
In wartime, pitted against an enemy in front and otherwise surrounded by Soviet divisions, it is difficult to see how conscripts would have any choice other than to fight as people do when their lives are at stake.
The realities of modern war do not brook much choice in the matter.
Individual desertions are bound to take place, and perhaps in considerable numbers, on the rare occasion where the opportunity presents itself.
But the high-tech (not to speak of nuclear) battlefield is unlikely to present this opportunity often; and it is difficult to envisage the ‘opting out’ of any sizeable formations in light of the integrated command structure and dependency upon Soviet communications nets.
As one former NVA officer put it, ‘in terms of the purely military situation, when the commander stands behind me, I have to shoot.
In terms of the psychological aspect of it, the soldier on the other side is a soldier of the Bundeswehr.
That is of no interest to me at all’.
It must also be understood that the national armed forces have not been designed with civil unrest in mind, and that their employment in civil disturbance has been exceptional.
In the GDR, the  Wachsregimente of the Ministry of State Security (MfS) and the Bereitschaftspolizei of the Ministry of the Interior have more than sufficed for this purpose, enabling the NVA to keep its hands clean and its morale high.
In Czechoslovakia, the People's Militia perform a similar role.
In the NSWP countries as a whole, there are over 150 000 border troops and other specialist units under Ministry of Interior or Ministry of Security control, not to speak of designated Soviet formations, which can be expected to provide security of the rear areas if war breaks out.
On reflection, it would seem that garrison and police duties amongst the civil population would be the worst role possible for NSWP armies in time of war.
Not only would such tasks be unsuited to their skills, but any involvement in public order functions under wartime conditions would be most likely to magnify whatever conflicts of loyalty exist and bring out discontent.
The Soviets are unlikely to depend upon NSWP formations to ensure the safety of their own rear and lines of communications.
These realities, pressures and residual doubts probably add rather than detract from Soviet incentives to favour a pre-emptive, lightning offensive, carried out with a minimum of warning and consultation.
Given the horrific effects which are bound to be visited upon the countries of Eastern Europe in the event of a prolonged conflict, the Warsaw Pact's non-Soviet members may be disinclined to resist he logic of Soviet strategy.
Army and Party, War and Politics
Russian monarchs traditionally considered the military, that is, the army, the closest to their heart among all branches of the administration.
It is precisely there that they considered themselves the most competent and consequently interfered in all spheres of its life.
P. A. Zayonchkovskiy
Socialism is against violence being used on nations.
That is indisputable.
But socialism is in general against violence being used on people.
However, no one except a Christian anarchist or a Tolstoyan has ever deduced from this that socialism is against revolutionary violence.
V. I. Lenin
When Sir Winston Churchill characterised the Soviet Union as ‘a mystery wrapped inside a riddle inside an enigma’, he might have added, ‘and so she would wish to appear’.
No past rival of Western democracies, not even Hitler's Germany, has presented to the outside world a more opaque image of policy-making than has the USSR, and in no sphere does this arouse greater confusion and concern than defence policy.
Soviet success in turning secrecy into a prime purpose of government is likely for the foreseeable future to deprive the West of any definitive understanding of these matters, and leave even knowledgeable émigrés in dispute about them.
Western students divide roughly into those who find continuing enlightenment in the concept of ‘totalitarianism’ and an increasing number for whom the ‘ideological and organisational unity’and ‘monolithic cohesion’of the CPSU rule book is, if not Potemkin facade, of declining utility to the real stuff of policy-making.
The substance of much present-day Western analysis consists of frictions between contending interests and élites, accommodations, bargains and rear guard actions: a political set-up in which the Armed Forces  General Staff, with its prestige and professional competence, is seen to have acquired a firm foothold.
Many Western scholars have thus been prepared to speculate that the military programmes of the 1970s represented Brezhnev's way of ‘buying off’ the Armed Forces establishment for supporting East — West detente.
On the morrow of Marshal Ogarkov's removal as Chief of the General Staff, Western press comment included speculation that his policy stance had come to obstruct the reassessment of arms control and East-West policy sought by the leadership; according to one respected newspaper, senior Western military attachés in Moscow were tipped by Soviet army officers that the Kremlin blamed Ogarkov for the disasters of the SS-20 deployment and the shooting down of the Korean airliner off Sakhalin Island.
One former American Secretary of State has gone so far as to characterise the Armed Forces as an institution ‘operating entirely outside Party control’.
If, as one émigré scholar has put it, it is ‘inexcusable’ to think in this wag—to suppose that in the USSR the General Staff has autonomy over major weapons programmes, generals have ‘policies’or obstruct them, and that the Armed Forces must be ‘bought off’by Parties leaders—then, the ‘inexcusable’has become commonplace.
Formally, there is little ambiguity about the mechanism of policy and the place of the Armed Forces in it.
The Party leads; it is not led.
Like full-time Party officials, military officers with Party membership are bound by the norms of ‘democratic centralism’: freedom of discussion until decision is taken, accountability of lower organs to higher, ‘strict Party discipline and subordination of the minority to the majority’.
Moreover, ‘[all]manifestations of factionalism and group activity are incompatible with Marxist-Leninist Party principles, and with Party membership.
These norms are rendered specific to the military sphere.
As stated in the Soviet Officers Handbook, ‘present-day military doctrine is the political policy of the Party and Soviet government in the military field’.
The General Staff is, in the words of one expert, ‘a highly centralised and powerful organisation with immense prestige’; but it is not a law unto itself.
This understanding of Party-military relations is stated in all authoritative military publications, such as the Soviet Military Encyclopedia,and reiterated in every military establishment in the USSR.
Thus at least it is written.
Nevertheless, many wonder whether any administratively sophisticated society can be run on this basis.
Two criticisms of this orthodoxy have emerged.
One spotlights the increasing scope and sophistication of the General Staff and its  proliferation of Directorates beyond the strict confines of military-technical policy.
Now 14 in number, these include External Relations, Main Foreign Military Assistance, International Negotiations, and Main Directorate for Warsaw Pact Affairs.
The Party, whilst retaining its formal prerogatives in the military-security field is in fact alleged to be increasingly hostage to the technical competence of what Frunze once called the ‘brain of the Army’: an organisation with the expertise as well as the staff support to determine the framework within which issues are discussed and decisions taken.
The second critique is more authentically pluralistic.
Even the General Staff is but one actor in an increasingly complex policy process.
The formulation of defence policy cannot be divorced from economic and foreign policy issues of concern to a wide assortment of bureaucratic interests: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, KGB, Council of Ministers—not to speak of a variety of State Committees, Institutes of the Academy of Sciences,Gosplan and the Military-Industrial Commission.
In this reading of things, each bureaucracy has become adept at marking out turf and advancing its own interests, whilst the Party-State leadership finds itself in the position of ‘broker’ between contending interests and ‘constituencies’.
There is, perhaps, useful corrective in this perspective to the polemical overkill which characterises the ‘totalitarian’ school at its most unyielding.
Yet there is a distinctly Western flavour to many of these arguments, along with their implication that de-centralised decision-making on the Western (or at least American) pattern corresponds with the requirements of modern society.
Perhaps we had best ask ourselves why our political institutions function as they do.
Is it because of‘administrative rationality’ or for more noble and more cynical reasons?
The noble reason is that ‘the defence of democracy is democracy’, not efficiency or competence.
We adhere to our procedures to ensure liberty and representation: if these procedures produce good policy as well, that is a bonus.
The cynical reason is self-interest.
Given the constitutional separation of powers in the American system, for example, ‘adversary politics’ is a matter of survival for politicians.
It is ‘rational’ because of the incentives and penalties of a particular system of government.
But it has been deleterious to good decision-making on more than one occasion.
It is not insignificant that private economic institutions rarely take Western political institutions as their model for decision-making.
The ethos which has shaped the Soviet system, and the self-interest which sustains it, could not be more different.
It is a system with sights  set on a preordained ‘historical’ task, to be realised by ‘scientific’means.
In T. H. Rigby's distinction, government in the USSR is a ‘task achieving’ organisation, not a ‘rule enforcing’organisation.
As in any military enterprise, the goal is ‘victory’, to be pursued through proven and tested principles.
The task of leaders is not representation, but command; their requirements are coordination, discipline and action on the basis of timely and accurate advice.
Society, as Frunze put it, is to be ‘militarised’, as is the vocabulary of life.
The defence of any practice is its ability to promote the end; all means are instrumental.
Criticism and discussion must, therefore, be solicited and encouraged, but never for its own sake, and only up to the point that decision is taken.
Discussion, too, must be organised, not spontaneous.
These are not empty words and phrases, but principles given powerful institutional sanction.
Accountability of lower organs to higher is enforced by appointment and disciplinary prerogatives vested in higher Party organs (the system of nomenklatura),with power of reprimand and removal.
The Secretariat of the Central Committee is given the teeth to do what it is meant to do: appoint, control access to decision-makers and supervise the policy which the Politburo formulates.
This state of affairs neither eliminates bureaucratic in-fighting nor does it rid the system of mid-ranking officials attached to interests and issues and skilled at maintaining their prerogatives.
But the ethos of the system and the reality of democratic centralism lend to its political machinations a different flavour and bias from that found in any system plausibly termed pluralistic.
In any system, ‘constituencies’ are those one speaks for and accounts to.
In the USSR accountability flows upwards, not to bureaucratic colleagues, let alone to those below.
Khrushchev in removing Marshal Zhukov did not have to confront ‘the military interest’: by manipulating Zhukov's own subordinates, Marshals Malinovskiy and Golikov, into position, he was able to turn Zhukov's bureaucratic confrères into his own allies.
Power to appoint is power to divide and rule.
Those who fight rear guard actions in the USSR do so in the calculation and gamble that they are useful enough to higher-ups to be screened and protected.
But the USSR is without outside élites and pressure groups, let alone an electorate, to rescue the careers of those who push their luck too far.
It is a society with few sanctuaries when protectors turn upon you.
THE ARMY AND THE PARTY
The paradox at the heart of Party-military relations is that the Soviet Armed Forces are simultaneously the most privileged organisation in society and the most assiduously controlled.
‘Probably no other organisation in the Soviet Union is as watched and courted by the Party leadership as the Soviet Armed Forces’.
The Party has gone out of its way to foster the image of the Armed Forces as guardian of the motherland, school of patriotism and the expression of those qualities that the Party seeks to promote in homo Sovieticus.
As the demographic balance shifts against the Russian population, the Armed Forces have also become a critical instrument of what Westerners often term ‘national integration’, but what the Soviet authorities, with their characteristic mixture of Socialist and Great Russian chauvinism, prefer to term ‘the elimination of national conceit’.
Much of this is part and parcel of the regime's religion of struggle.
It is also the complement to the extraordinary cult of the Great Patriotic War, whose presence in Soviet society it is impossible to escape: in the Ural Military District, where no German soldier set foot, there are 675 monuments to war dead.
The militarisation of the Soviet economy, baffling to an outsider, is complemented by a militarisation in the sphere of education.
The 1967 law of military service, which reduced the term of conscription from three years to two (and from four years to three in the Navy and Air Forces) at the same time set in motion the expansion of an already considerable effort at pre-conscription and para-military training: between 1967–1972 the budget of the para-military training organisation, DOSAAF (Voluntary Society for Assistance to the Army, Air Force and Navy) underwent a threefold increase.
Officer education itself is presently carried on by about 140 officer commissioning middle and higher military schools, offering four to five year courses and conferring higher education degrees: fully 13 per cent of all higher education in the USSR is now carried out in the military sector.
In addition, 23 military academies and institutes offering three-year courses at staff college level and above, are entitled to confer the highest academic degrees in the USSR.
Migration of Generals and Admirals in and out of the civilian sector (such as defence industry, universities and institutes of the Academy of Sciences) is a routine practice.
Thus, it is not a question either of military concerns or of civilian  control.
The military priority makes itself felt throughout society, but ‘military goals and values are important because of the values of civilians’.
The inordinately elaborate system of controls visited upon the Armed Forces is designed to produce a fusion of military professionalism and Party mindedness.
Nevertheless, these controls also betray a mistrust of the military's potential.
Paradoxically, the help rendered to the Party by the Armed Forces during political crises has reminded the party of this potential and invariably produced a redoubled effort to ensure military dependence upon Party and State.
Following Stalin's death in 1953, a divided Party leadership had reason to feel apprehensive as well as grateful for military support in the struggle against Beria and the MVD-MGB apparatus.
By Khrushchev's own account, Beria was arrested on the instruction of the Politburo by Marshal Zhukov and Colonel-General Moskalenko, Commander of the Moscow Air Defence District.
Marshal Konev is believed to have presided at his trial.
Shortly thereafter, the Party took the unusual step of assembling the Armed Forces heads and demanding their collective endorsement of Beria's arrest—a step which might not have been judged necessary by a leadership firmly in the saddle and truly confident of its prerogatives.
Four years later, Khrushchev again enlisted the support of Marshal Zhukov (now Defence Minister) in his struggle against the Stalinist rear guard (the so-called ‘anti-Party group’), which had produced a Politburo majority in favour of his resignation.
Thanks to Zhukov, critical Khrushchev supporters were brought to Moscow in time for the Central Committee meeting which then overturned the Politburo's verdict.
Thus, whilst in 1953 Armed Forces support was invoked by the Party, in 1957 it might be said that it had been enlisted by a faction, albeit the First Secretary's own.
Nevertheless, Zhukov's intervention had been solicited by the highest authority; by Party norms no impropriety had been committed (as would have been so had Khrushchev's colleagues been acting in accordance with Central Committee sentiment).
And yet for a moment Zhukov was thrust into the position of kingmaker.
The precedent was not a comfortable one, not even for Khrushchev himself, and three months later, Zhukov was dismissed by the man he had saved.
There was doubtless a second reason for his dismissal.
As Minister of Defence between 1955 and 1957, Zhukov had vigorously pressed for a less onerous regime of Party supervision and for greater General Staff autonomy in military — technical matters.
Then as now, such aspirations were unacceptable to the Party leadership.
Zhukov's  display of loyalty did not soften Party thinking on the subject, and the Chief Political Directorate (the political arm of the Armed Forces) stood its ground with greater determination after Zhukov's intervention than it had before.
Finally, we turn to the hostility of the Armed Forces to Khrushchev in his final years, and the question of his downfall in October 1964.
Khrushchev's remodelling of the Armed Forces—his restructuring of individual services, reductions in the size of the Ground Forces, and the enforced retirement of field grade officers—provoked controversy throughout the services and a considerable degree of resentment The more significant fact, however, is the Khrushchev's Politburo colleagues took issue with the ham-fisted and idiosyncratic character of these measures—and, in addition, faulted Khrushchev for similar methods in agriculture and in the restructuring of the Party — State bureaucracies.
It is these colleagues who deposed Khrushchev, not the Armed Forces.
Had they stood behind him, the General Staff would have suppressed the dissension within its own ranks.
In view of the consternation which Khrushchev's policies aroused in the Party itself, his eventual deposition is less striking than the degree to which he succeeded in imposing his will on a reluctant leadership.
Finally, it is worth recalling that the remodelling of the Armed Forces continued after Khrushchev's demise (though on a less frenzied and ‘hare-brained’ basis).
What is one to make of Party-military relations in this period, and what do they imply for the present?
In the very special circumstances of the 1950s and early 1960s, with leadership in transition, de-Stalinisation in motion, and the ‘Revolution in Military Affairs’ under way, it was only natural that Army-Party relations showed signs of buffeting and stress.
To be sure, similar fault lines were present between the Party and State bureaucracies and at the top of the Party pyramid itself.
But at no point in these years did the Armed Forces take the initiative in resolving political disputes and at no stage was it brought into intrigue by discontented Party factions (exempting, of course, the First Secretary himself).
Whilst line officers pressed for greater autonomy on their own operational turf, these years actually witnessed a strengthening of the prerogatives of political officers, not their diminution.
Party etiquette, then as now, excludes the Armed Forces from the Party's internal squabbles.
Prudence,amour propre and ‘reason of state’ give the Party an interest in maintaining its pre-eminence in both the military-technical and military-political realms.
Even—perhaps especially—in times of intra-Party strife, attempts by the General Staff to widen its prerogatives produce a closing of Party ranks.
The will to enforce its diktat is present.
Four mechanisms of control—little changed in their essentials since the founding of the Red Army—provide the means.
These mechanisms comprise:
(1)
The Communist Party organisations at unit and subunit level, and their standing committees and bureaux.
Through regular meetings, they institute the practice of ‘criticism and self-criticism’ and enforce Party discipline, irrespective of military rank.
(2)
The system of Military Councils, extending from the Chief Military Council of the Ministry of Defence to the Military Councils at Military District level and below.
Composed of military commanders, political officers and Party officials, their concerns range over the entire panoply of administrative and disciplinary functions, as well as troop control and civil-military relations in the USSR's 16 Military Districts.
Through these bodies, regional and local Party Secretaries are afforded direct input into military policy and confront military commanders as equals.
(3)
The Third Chief Directorate of the Committee for State Security (KGB).
These officers, who wear the uniform of the service to which they are assigned and are not accountable to the Ministry of Defence, are often unknown to their nominal military superiors.
Responsible for security functions in the Armed Forces, they provide an independent check on the loyalty of officers and, like their parent organisation, act as ‘eyes of the Party’.
(They are not to be confused with the GRU, whose function is military intelligence.)
(4)
Most important is GlavPU, the Chief Political Directorate of the Soviet Army and Navy, at one and the same time an organ of the Ministry of Defence and of the Central Committee, where it has departmental status.
Its head since 1962, Army General A. A. Yepishev*, a former KGB officer, has direct access to the General Secretary of the CPSU and probably works closely with Central Committee Secretaries responsible for ideology and cadres.
The ‘political officer’(zampolit),posted down to company level, is the linchpin of political control, charged with overseeing military-political training and the enforcement of Party policy.
Despite the principle of ‘unity of command’, the recommendations submitted by the political officer on fitness and promotion through the  Directorate's confidential channels provide him with real prerogatives over the ‘real’ officers who surround him.
The military-technical qualifications of GlavPU officers has vastly improved since the 1950s.
The Chief Political Directorate also possesses its own military academy (the Lenin Military-Political Academy) and journal (Communist of the Armed Forces).
According to John Dziak, a specialist in the US Department of Defense,
An examination of the general tone of [military-political publications]reveals that these political officers are among the most vocal proponents of the so-called hawkish positions that mistakenly are attributed to professional line officers by many Western observers.
Such interpretations tend to infer that the military are pushing assertive and dangerous arms policies on a somewhat hesitant Party leadership.
Yet…such concepts as ‘quantitative and qualitative superiority’, ‘nuclear war as a continuation of politics’ and ‘victory in a nuclear war’are as much a feature, if not more so, of the political-military literature of the [Chief Political Directorate]as they are of the journals and books which are more clearly military.
In fact, it is difficult simply to categorize works as either ‘political’ or ‘military’since they are frequently authored by ‘collectives’of writers from both sides of the house.
One of the most crucial prerogatives of the Directorate is the control of all military publications and the articles which appear in them.
On some testimony, drafts must also be submitted to the KGB and the Central Committee's Propaganda Department as well.
INSTITUTIONS AND POLICY-MAKING
A more structured, rationalised and institutional approach to policy making has become the hallmark of the Soviet political system since Khrushchev's enforced retirement.
This institutional development has strengthened those features of the system which foster a community of political-military interest at policy-making levels.
Over the years, the expansion in the size and competence of the Party's control apparatus has more than kept pace with the growth of the General Staff, and the proliferation of in-house staff supporting Politburo and Secretariat members has been a noteworthy aspect of the process.
In the military sphere, the most impressive innovation has been the Council of  Defence (Sovyet Oborony),the supreme policy-making organ in security policy, but for the Politburo itself.
The linear descendant of the wartime State Defence Committee (GKO) —and, indeed, of Lenin's Council of Workers and Peasants' Defence—it seems to be a much revamped and strengthened version of its immediate predecessor of the Khrushchev years, the Supreme Military Council (not to be confused with the Chief Military Council of the MoD, whose task is the narrower one of leadership of the Armed Forces.
In wartime it would become the Stavka,HQ of the Supreme High Command, whereas the Defence Council would be transformed into the GKO).
Writing as late as 1971, John Erickson could still pinpoint a widespread frustration with the absence of a clear C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces and with military policy imposed by ad hoc command changes rather than clear and systematic institutional mechanisms and procedures.
These have now been put in place, whilst in July 1976 Brezhnev was publicly identified as Chairman of this body as well as C.-in-C.
The Defence Council is therefore the body which joins together the top political and military leadership.
Its existence is one factor obviating Party-military showdowns of the kind which characterised the Khrushchev era, and the formulation and supervision of security policy is therefore placed on a more structured and continuous basis.
The main task of the Defence Council is to formulate an annual, as well as a five-year, ‘plan of military construction’klan voennogo stroitel'stva ) in accordance with the Party's reading of political and strategic interests.
Because Soviet military doctrine regards strategy, deployments, force structures and defence Production as integrated and interdependent activities, the Defence Council is concerned not only with a finite number of economic tasks, but with the scrutiny and elaboration of all aspects of defence policy.
Formulation of the plan seems to be the result of a complex but highly structured process of consultations and meetings carried out over a six month period, and culminating in the ratification of the plan by the full Politburo.
Drafting of the plan begins long before the completion of the stipulated planning period and is brought into balance with the socio-economic plan for the country as a whole.
The point of the exercise is to ensure:(1) that all actors properly concerned with defence participate in the process, and that views and considerations bearing upon defence are ventilated; and (2) that a unified, coherent plan emerges on the basis of Soviet military doctrine.
But for confirming the General Secretary's position as Chairman, the full membership of the Defence Council has never been identified in open Soviet sources.
Not surprisingly, Western sources are far from unanimous about its composition, its staffing arrangements and its procedures.
By all accounts, the Defence Council is dominated by civilians.
Apart from the General Secretary, all authorities known to the author count amongst its permanent members the Minister of Defence (Marshal Sergey Sokolov) and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Nikolay Ryzhkov).
The CGS (Marshal S. F. Akhromeyev) is thought to head the Council's Secretariat (and by most, but not all accounts, has the status of a permanent member).
Whether or not the Chairman of the KGB (Victor Chebrikov), the Minister of Foreign Affairs (Eduard Shevardnadze) and the senior Party Secretary for defence production (until July 1985 Grigori Romanov), have the formal status of permanent members, it is clear that they are in regular attendance, as very likely are the Chairman of the MVD (Vitaliy Fedorchuk) and the Chairman of the Military-Industrial Commission (Leonid Smirnov).
Others from the Party and ministerial apparatus are brought in as needed.
Opinion divides further over staffing arrangements: in the opinion of most authorities a function performed almost exclusively by the General Staff.
However, Sergei Freidzon, a former Soviet planner, identifies two additional standing bodies: an Institution of Permanent Advisers (19 civilians, as well as the CGS and two First Deputy Defence Ministers) and a larger Institution of Permanent Consultants (50 per cent military, 50 per cent civilian), both of which are in harness to the Council for much of the year.
Freidzon also attributes impressive functions of analysis and arbitration to the personal chancellories of Politburo members, which are thought to comprise individuals who are highly expert in their particular fields.
(By way of contrast, the Social Science institutes of the USSR Academy of Sciences, such as IMEMO and Arbatov's Institute of the USA and Canada, are thought to have a minor input into the policy-making process).
If for all this, the General Staff still performs the lion's share of staff work, this is hardly evidence that the military lead the Party by the nose in defence matters, either over details or essentials.
If the Politburo were unhappy with these arrangements, it would change them.
In sum, there are seven conclusions to be drawn from this survey:
(1)
The Party is arbiter, not broker.
Differing tendencies are brought within the Party fold and taken up by the leadership; otherwise, they perish.
(2)
Democratic centralism concentrates power in a few hands and at the end of the day produces decision rather than fudging.
Defence policy is policy,not what participants in pluralist systems term ‘policy outcome’(a compromise between different policies).
The ‘scientific’ ethos of the Party and the ‘unity, integrity and coordination’of military doctrine reinforce this imperative.
Military build-up must therefore be understood as a component of the policy of East-West détente,not a concession to those who opposed it.
(3)
The USSR is not so monolithic as to be devoid of élite politics.
Differing views have an opportunity to arise and make themselves felt—but there the similarity with Western politics end.
Party discipline has bite.
In the struggle to advance, outmanoeuvre rivals and be heard by superiors, factional loyalty (loyalty to one's patron) may take precedence over policy interest.
There are many exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions usually apply to those who fail and the rule to those who succeed.
(4)
If Ogarkov's demotion in September 1984 revealed anything beyond a straight-forward preference to utilise his skills more effectively, then punishment came not for losing an argument, but for breaking the rules—for carrying on arguments after being overruled and pressing for prerogatives in the military-technical and military-political areas which were not rightfully his.
(5)
Policy in the USSR is not lightly changed by the top, not because of powerful ‘interests’ below, but because the scope of issues absorbed and integrated into defence planning and the exhaustiveness of the process militate against doing so.
The strong silence which greeted Cyrus Vance on presenting Carter's arms proposals to the Politburo in 1977 reflected not only their radical nature, but their unfavourable content.
If Vance had been able to convince 17 Politburo members that a far-reaching restructuring of strategic forces was in the Soviet interest, this would have become Soviet policy.
(6)
In fact, and not just to all appearance, the Politburo was embarrassed by the KAL affair.
There is no reason to suppose it or even the General Staff authorized the downing of flight 007: in all likelihood a routine decision of regional Air Defence command charged with prompt action in defence of Soviet frontiers.
But there is no basis for deducing a calculated attempt to embarrass the leadership.
Party controls would make this almost inconceivable in theory and extremely foolhardy in practice—with  certain disgrace, imprisonment, or even execution, of those officers involved.
Punishment, by several indications swift and far-reaching, has been meted out for incompetence, not insubordination.
(7)
For all the travails of the Soviet economic system, the policy-making structure is not in crisis.
Democratic centralism is alive and well.
As a principle aiming to combine hierarchy with participation, it may be cumbersome, but it is neither unworkable nor irrational.
Whereas Americans have grown accustomed to participation at the cost of policy coherence, and Europeans to a more professional and collegial structure which risks shackling politicians to the imperatives of officials, the Soviet system at its best avoids both of these pitfalls.
Typically it hinders ‘real’ participation: opinion, even where solicited, invariably has ‘career implications’.
In this process, ‘society’ seems neither to be represented nor consulted; in the military sphere, as in most others, the élite consults itself.
WAR: THE WHYS AND THE WHEREFORES
Any honest attempt to unfathom the Soviet view of war runs into a set of paradoxes.
The USSR's commitment to Communism's expansion and triumph seems to co-exist with a psychology of threat and a view of herself as victim.
The USSR's legacy of vulnerability has left an indelible mark; even in the new found era of military boldness and ‘operational confidence’, adversaries are always on the verge of undoing previous gains, military planners face ‘harrowing choices and uncertainties’.
Security means defence against all comers and contingencies; as such, it can only materialise when the world is purged of uncertainty.
It is never achieved; it is never enough: military power is to be developed not just for security of the homeland, but for restraining Imperialism throughout the world.
This too is security.
Soviet military power is a vital factor in the ‘world correlation of forces’: as the Soviet Union grows stronger, progressive mankind benefits; as ‘progress’ advances, the Soviet Union becomes safer.
This dualism, neither ‘mere rhetoric’ nor ‘disinformation’is real enough and, as we have seen, the product of a coherent but dialectical system of thought.
Amongst other things, it provides surprisingly clear answers to the questions: ‘What role is war to play in policy?
What is to  be the peacetime function of the Soviet Armed Forces?
How are the Armed Forces to perform their purpose in war?’
In one sense, war is alien to Marxist-Leninist thinking.
War is the product of capitalism, its exploitive nature, its rivalries and its economic contradictions.
Socialism, on the other hand, is not born out of armed conquest and aggrandisement, but economic development and the class consciousness it creates.
Once this process is firmly under way, war becomes the Imperialist's way, and eventually their only way, of frustrating it.
Blinkered and self-serving as this picture may appear (it entirely ignores the gains which the USSR has achieved through war), it will be clear on reflection that what is meant by ‘peace’ is conflict without war: or, to invert these terms, ‘a form of warfare which permits the settlement of unavoidable clashes between Socialism and Capitalism without having recourse to general armed conflict ,(author's italics).
In Pravda's words, ‘the Marxist-Leninist concept of peaceful coexistence does in no way contain the pacifist-like promotion of peace’.
In the nuclear age the maintenance of this threshold between conflict and war is a basic objective of Soviet policy.
In the Third World in particular, but also in Europe, enormous attention is devoted to the socio-economic ‘substructure’ of society, and relations are cultivated with political actors across the whole  spectrum of discontent.
Even as the ‘external functions’ of the Soviet Armed Forces acquire real importance, the principal means upon which the USSR relies to influence change are what Westerners are accustomed to call ‘other means’: moral, political and material support furnished below the legal threshold of intervention, designed to encourage and revolutionise or at least influence and infiltrate.
This contrasts with the tendency of the United States to pin its hopes on one faction, invariably the one in power, and put faith in military and economic aid to maintain stability.
In time of crisis, the United States has more than once confronted the ‘all or nothing’ choice of military intervention or abandoning its client.
The Soviet Union also considers the might of her Armed Forces (and in particular her nuclear arsenal) instrumental in this endeavour to make the world safe for ideological struggle.
To both Western and Soviet thinkers, the advent of nuclear weapons represented a profound secular development in international relations and military science.
To Leninists, however, it has been a development with profoundly asymmetrical effects.
Far from foreshadowing greater moderation and comity in international relations, the ‘revolution in  military affairs’ has had revolutionary implications in politics, because without war, imperialism cannot defend itself from history.
As Khrushchev expressed it, ‘We consider, proceeding from a Marxist-Leninist analysis of the present situation, that war is not inevitable today.
And not because the imperialists have become wiser and kinder, but because they have become weaker, because the camp of peace is now strong as never before.’
With the creation of a formidable nuclear force, the Soviet homeland can no longer be held to ransom against Socialism's expansion; as the West's capacity for direct intervention is blunted by ‘the growing might of the Socialist camp’, the ideological struggle is not only safer, but free to intensify.
As the Director of the CC International Department, Boris Ponomarev, has stated.
‘The policy of peaceful coexistence…does not only hold back the revolutionary struggle, but promotes its upsurge…the might of the Soviet Union serves as a decisive obstacle in the way of imperialist plans for unleashing a new world war.’
In short, as nuclear capabilities have developed and conventional forces become more global in their reach, it becomes possible to extend the canopy protecting the forces of progress from the United States and others who would arrest natural and necessary changes.
The outposts of Imperialism in the Third World are to be denied the support of Imperialist powers.
This is what Dr Trofimenko calls ‘the wider social logic of détente’.
In 1974 Marshal A. A. Grechko, member of the Politburo and Minister of Defence, identified several ‘external functions’ for the Soviet Armed Forces in an important revision of Soviet military doctrine:
At the present state the historic function of the Soviet Armed Forces is not restricted to their function in defending our Motherland and the other socialist countries.
In its foreign policy activity the Soviet state purposefully opposes the export of counter-revolution and the policy of oppression, supports the national liberation struggle, and resolutely resists imperialists' aggression in whatever distant region of our planet it may appear.
This statement is a tribute not simply to new power projection capabilities, but to the nuclear build-up which preceded their appearance.
The clear inference is that the nuclear threshold is becoming robust enough to withstand even fairly overt military challenges.
‘At the present stage’, even the projection of conventional military power ‘in distant regions’ may fall below the threshold of war.
The direct intervention of Soviet and allied forces, as in Angola (within  a year of Grechko's pronouncement) and, subsequently, in Ethiopia and Afghanistan, are not departures from the norms of peaceful coexistence.
They are now considered to lie within them.
A third mechanism for maintaining the threshold between conflict and war is what is generally termed ‘presence’.
‘War’, as Clausewitz said and as Lenin restated, ‘is a tool of policy’.
If diplomacy is to function in war, then the Armed Forces must also serve as a tool of policy in time and peace.
A prime purpose of the Soviet Armed Forces is to move Soviet diplomacy along: to act as its complement or counterpoint, to intimidate, encourage and impress.
In an exhaustive study the Brookings Institution identified 190 incidents between 1944 and 1979 where the armed forces of the USSR have been used as a political instrument in peacetime.
Plentiful and noteworthy examples can be found in Europe itself, despite the absence of armed hostilities between East and West.
Mobilisations, deployments and manoeuvres have been carried out over the years to discourage resistance to Communist takeover (Czechoslovakia 1948), to block undesired contacts with West Berlin (19 separate occasions, including two seizures of West Berlin territory), to apply pressure in negotiations (Norway and the Barents Sea), and to mask intentions in crisis (Czechoslovakia 1968 and Poland 1981).
In all, 91 examples of this sort can be cited.
Not insignificant in this respect has been the upsurge of Soviet submarine activity in Swedish and Norwegian waters from the time a Whisky class submarine ran aground in October 1981; in August 1984, these incursions were given a new twist by a Sukhoi fighter bomber's six minute escort of a Swedish airliner into Swedish airspace.
There is no self-evident motivation for these intrusions, but three hypotheses present themselves:
(1)
they reflect the growing military importance of the Nordic area to the Soviet Northern and Baltic fleets, just as the Northern Flank has attracted more attention in NATO defence planning;
(2)
that, with inverted logic and subtlety, they are meant to reinforce the Soviet peace offensive in Europe by underscoring the controversial character of NATO modernisation programmes;
(3)
that they are meant to demonstrate a new correlation of forces in the Nordic region, the obsolescence of traditional policies and the dangers to the Nordic states of clinging to them: in short, to distance Norway from her NATO allies and produce a pattern of Swedish alignment more attuned to Soviet requirements.
All three factors may be at work.
Curiously, the Sukhoi intruded over an area of Swedish airspace recently stripped of its air defence cover, owing to defence cutbacks.
What better way of showing that in today's climes Sweden can no longer look after herself?
Whatever the explanation, episodes of this nature make it plain that in peacetime the purpose of Soviet forces is not just to ‘be there’ but to be used.
In sum, the ‘peaceful’ purpose of the Soviet Armed Forces, as of Soviet policy, is to move history along in that part of the world where Socialism has not yet triumphed—by casting a shadow and making its presence felt, by posing as an ‘obstacle’against Imperialism's interference with the ‘revolutionary struggle’; by erecting a protecting canopy over change.
One might be forgiven for saying that the purpose of all this power, conventional and nuclear, is deterrence: Soviet might is not to be used to strike the enemy but hold him back.
But a curious deterrence this, which aims to restrain states only to unleash peoples, to intensify rather than mitigate conflict and make the world safe for revolution rather than order.
The Soviet formulation is more exact: ‘the active defence of peace’, by which we can infer ‘victory without war’.
On the other hand the USSR has been steeped in war, and so is Marxist-Leninist ideology.
Engels may well rank as the nineteenth century's most significant military thinker after Clausewitz.
By comparison with the intellectual patriarchs of Anglo-Saxon democracy, it is astounding to what degree the patron saints of Soviet Communism, Marx and Engels, made war—interstate and civil—an object of study and the raw materials for their theories and insights.
This only stands to reason.
Socio-economic conditions may focus the mind, mobilise the troops and prime the mechanism of revolution, but revolution itself is an act of violence.
As it is necessary for a Marxist to make a science of society, so too must he make a science of violence.
‘Great questions in the life of a people’, said Lenin, ‘are decided only by force.’
The Great Patriotic War is testimony enough to this, but the Soviet regime was conceived in war: an interstate war turned by pressure of events and conscious strategy into civil war.
In three years the newly formed Red Army not only managed to defeat three White armies and detachments of their foreign allies, but helped to impose Soviet control over the Muslim and Far Eastern borderlands, and Soviet dependencies in Tannu-Tuva, Outer Mongolia and Northern Iran.
In 1920 it routed a Polish army to the suburbs of Warsaw and at the end of the following year launched an invasion of the Menshevik Republic of Georgia after its government had quelled  an internal Bolshevik uprising.
Soviet arms were despatched to Communists in Finland, Bavaria, Berlin and northern Germany, and only a White offensive in 1919 prevented the despatch of troops to assist the fledgling Bolshevik regime of Béla Kun in Hungary.
With the conclusion of the Russian civil war, as prospects of revolution faded in Europe, Soviet arms were enlisted to deepen Imperialism's crisis on its own flanks.
Material sufficient for three divisions was despatched to the nationalist regime of Mustafa Kemal Pasha in aid of his war against Greece, and the honeymoon period with Sun Yat-Sen and Chiang Kai-Shek (1922–27) saw the granting of more than $2 million in military aid to the Kuomintang: whilst Soviet advisers set up the Whampoa military academy and trained soldiers of the National Revolutionary Army in the field, Soviet troops performed limited combat missions, including aerial bombardment and reconnaissance.
In the autumn of 1929 the USSR became the first state to break the illusions created by the Kellogg-Briand pact by unleashing its Special Far Eastern Army upon the Manchurian nationalists, who rashly thought they could put an end to Soviet control of the Chinese Eastern Railway.
By any reckoning, this represents an impressive decade of military adventure and achievement for a country recovering from war and famine and for a government which ‘needed peace’.
Today's Soviet leaders are the products of a long-standing tradition of thinking about war and the use of force.
For over two decades, the distinctiveness and integrity of this tradition have been obscured by the West's superior military power.
But as nuclear parity becomes the first order of the day and conventional power projection capabilities expand, Soviet departures from Western attitudes in the realm of war become more visible and telling.
To the Soviet mind, the ‘bourgeois’ view of war as a breakdown of normality, and peace as a time of cooperation and goodwill, is quixotic.
War may not be an overall preference (Lenin was particularly fond of Clausewitz's remark that the aggressor would prefer to walk in and occupy a foreign territory peacefully rather than fight for it); but if it is the most effective way of achieving an aim, it is necessary to pursue it.
Lenin tirelessly reiterated Clausewitz's dictum, ‘war is a tool of policy’, not only to establish the subordination of generals to politicians, but to legitimise war and divest it of taboos.
Even in the nuclear age, war must be approached as a purposeful political act.
Today, Soviet strategists think not only about how to deter war, but about how war might occur: how to prepare, how to prevail, how to survive.
The corollary to this perception of war is a distinctive attitude  toward peace.
When Clausewitz described war as ‘the continuation of policy by other means’, Lenin also understood this to mean that peace was the continuation of war by other means.
Negotiation is a form of struggle.
As Lenin expressed it, ‘concessions are a continuation of the war, but in a different sphere’.
War is also understood to be a product of class society and of class antagonisms.
In specific terms, we can take this to mean: that war remains a political act; that war must also be understood to be a revolutionising act; and, finally, that it thereby acquires the potential to become ‘absolute war’ —whose corollary is total victory and absolute peace.
Let us take each of these points in turn.
In the first instance, Soviet military thinkers are not so ready as their modern Western counterparts to adopt the view that military imbalance is the primary cause of war.
Nor are they convinced that ‘equilibrium’ or ‘strategic stability’is a guarantee of peace.
All things being equal, a favourable balance makes war less likely, but other things are not always equal, and they may be hard to ignore.
War is the product of real antagonisms and a calculus of political opportunities and threats, not (to use John Erickson's term)‘military metaphysics’.
It is for this reason that Khrushchev's Cuba missile gamble was so outrageous.
To be sure, Khrushchev committed the obvious folly of challenging his rival from a position of weakness; but the greater folly consisted of challenging the rival's vital interests from weakness.
For the USSR in October 1962, retreat meant loss of face, for the United States, loss of primacy.
It is obvious how this affair had to end: the political logic of the contest would have made the gamble ‘adventurist’ even if the military logic had not.
Gambles of any kind are ‘adventurist’ to the Kremlin's way of thinking, and the episode only goes to show what a maverick figure Khrushchev was.
The Brezhnev leadership, like Stalin's, showed a proper regard for the political stakes in interstate rivalry.
It grasped—as one hopes its successors have—that the pressure to bring military potential to bear may be more important than military potential itself.
From this standpoint, Soviet intervention in Angola (1975–76) and the Horn of Africa (1978) was not ‘adventurist’: the United States was under strong political pressure not to bring its military potential to bear.
Had it been otherwise, the USSR would not have acted.
But this political calculus will not always be a moderating influence.
To be sure, the USSR will not initiate a war it knows it will lose, but as the political stakes mount, so will the risks she is prepared to take.
One may dismiss too lightly Brezhnev's insistence to Dubček that he would have invaded  Czechoslovakia even at the cost of World War III.
War is a flesh and blood thing; even in Europe ‘the military balance’ does not purge it of its political character.
Even when not launched for a revolutionary purpose, war according to Marx has a revolutionary effect.
‘War puts nations to the test; and just as Egyptian mummies crumbled into dust when exposed to the shock of air, war spells the sentence of death upon any social institution which has become calcified’.
This effect is doubtless less for victor than for vanquished, but the victor will not be spared it.
In spite of victory, Britain's participation in two world wars accelerated social changes, altering both social attitudes and power relations.
By ‘militarising’ their society in peacetime, the Soviet authorities aim to spare their society similar effects, ensure that the nation stands the test and that the Party will not be pronounced ‘calcified’at the moment of truth.
But, as a multinational state with restless minorities and a multinational empire with resentful subjects, the CPSU has reason to confront the prospect of major war with apprehension and a long war with dread.
But if war should occur, it will be war not only between states but between exploiter and exploited; there is thus real potential for war to turn into what Clausewitz called ‘war of hatred’.
It is noteworthy that Lenin—perhaps a more serious student of Clausewitz than any political leader produced by the West—chose to emphasise that aspect of his teaching which his ‘bourgeois’ disciples often ignore:absolute war and the tendency of violence to progress to extremes.
‘We must hate — hatred is the basis of Communism’ wrote Lenin in his pamphlet, ‘Defeat of One's Own Government in Imperialist War’.
Today's Chief Political Directorate stresses in interstate war the need to ‘strengthen the indoctrination of Soviet soldiers in a spirit of high vigilance and class hate for the Imperialist aggressors’.
In Sokolovskiy's seminal treaties,Military Strategy,a Third World War is classified as a ‘revolutionary war’ in which opposing classes as well as opposing states risk annihilation.
If war is to be understood in these terms, any victory worthy of the name must produce the defeat of the opposing class as well as its state.
Lenin was very conscious of Marx's warning that each war contains within it the seeds of a fresh war, an observation amply born out by the conflicts between France and Prussia-Germany in Marx's lifetime and in Lenin's time by the First World War.
Victory, therefore, solves nothing unless it eliminates the source of the antagonism which produced war in the first place.
Measured against this standard, the  punitive sanctions imposed in 1919 by the Allied Powers against Imperial Germany, considered draconian by liberal opinion at the time, were superficial and lenient.
Neither the exactions of the Versailles Treaty nor the creation of a republican form of government rooted out the nationalist old guard or revolutionised the German social structure; within 15 years, Germany was set on a course of revanche .
These ‘shackles of Versailles’ are notably in contrast with the treatment meted out by the USSR to Poland and the three Baltic republics in 1939–40.
According to Order No. 0054 of the Sovietised Lithuanian Ministry of the Interior, 14 categories of citizens were earmarked for ‘elimination’.
These included members of non-Communist political parties and students belonging to non-Communist student organisations; Mensheviks, Trotskyists and persons ‘removed from the Communist Party’; military judges, state police,gendarmerie and prison staff; aristocrats, bankers, merchants, industrialists, hotel and restaurant proprietors; clergymen and persons active in parishes; persons who had travelled abroad; even Esperantists and philatelists.
In all, some 700 000 out of a population of three million were thus eliminated.
In Soviet eyes, these  Leninist-Clausewitzian  precepts have been born out by experience.
In a very rich catalogue of experience, the Great Patriotic War may be worth the balance of the collection.
From its outset, Operation Barbarossa assumed a class character, and it quickly escalated into a ‘war of hatred’.
The initial débâcle was as much a comment on the inability of society—as of the Red Army—to withstand the blow directed against it.
Any explanation of what occurred in the war's opening stages is incomplete unless it includes the traumas of collectivisation, the purges, the antagonism of the peasantry and the strength of national sentiment in recently annexed regions—and any accounting for Vlasov's ‘Russian Liberation Army’ is impossible.
The residues of this débâcle survive today in the regime's mistrust of its people, its dread of weakness, and its determination that an alternative ideology be given no chance to emerge in the country.
But recovery also brought its lessons, and these have not been lost on posterity either.
In the broadest sense, the Soviet triumph was a confirmation of the strength of Socialist society: a triumph which would have proved impossible but for mass mobilisation, centralised control and the military-industrial recovery which they produced; but this triumph also required a regime capable of decisive action against its internal opponents.
Western scholars may never discover how many Soviet citizens perished at the hands of Beria's NKVD troops (or  Abakhumov's SMERSH, operating in the enemy rear), but the scale and significance of their operations is well understood by those who command today's KGB Border Guards and MVD Internal Troops, along with the ‘special detachments’ of the KGB and Armed Forces.
Secondly, the fruits of this victory testify to war's revolutionising effects and its profound social repercussions.
The establishment of the ‘People's Democracies’ not only changed the social map of Europe but promoted Socialism's prospects elsewhere.
Victory advanced history, not just the security of the state.
Thirdly in the eyes of the regime, victory demonstrates the superiority of Marxist ethics over the bourgeois variety.
Measures and sacrifices which the bourgeois-liberal mind contemplates with horror are vindicated by the country's transformed position in the world and the protection afforded future generations against similar tragedies: in the scheme of history, timely, resolute action has been the greatest kindness.
There are also three lessons of particular import for the West.
Thanks to the war, the USSR maintains an abiding respect for the traditional instruments of military power.
Whether this perspective represents wisdom or only a curious anachronism today, it commands the scrutiny of a post-war generation in the West brought up to respect the limits of military power more than its utility.
The messianic streak in the Communist and Great Russian makeup has also been reinforced by the USSR's ordeal and its triumph.
Perhaps no society which had surmounted such a trial could consider itself as simply one power amongst many.
The war confirmed the country's uniqueness: the USSR does not intend to be, in Trotsky's phrase, ‘a country like any other’; nor, perhaps, could she be.
Finally, the war accounts for the strategic orientation which we discuss in the following chapter.
Not only does the USSR understand the reality of modern war; she has been given—perhaps uniquely—a glimpse into war as it might occur in future.
Robert McNamara's measure for ‘assured destruction’ –20 to 33 per cent loss of population, 50 to 70 per cent loss of industry—stand in some contrast to the USSR's wartime losses—12 to 15 per cent loss of population and 50 per cent loss of production—particularly when we consider the time over which these losses took place.
But the difference is not stark enough to warrant definitive assertions that there would be ‘no winners’ in a nuclear war.
If there is a standard of comparison for the USSR's wartime losses, it lies in McNamara's statistics, rather than in our experience of the Second World War.
Perhaps most significantly of all, the Great Patriotic War demonstrates that society can endure the unspeakable and recover.
The USSR need  not, in that cavalier phrase, believe she could ‘fight and win’ a nuclear war to retain the orientation she has acquired: nuclear war is ‘thinkable’; it is, in principle, survivable; and it must be conducted as war —which is to say, as a continuation of policy.
To conclude, how warlike is the USSR today?
To some appearances, unusually so.
The USSR is by most standards a highly militarised society; in common with militarist movements of previous eras, the CPSU considers war to be the ultimate test for society and regards peace as a pre-war period.
Thanks to the Clausewitzian unity of war and peace, a warlike spirit is infused into the most ‘peace-loving’ enterprises.
No taboo or sentiment is allowed to enter into the question, ‘when to choose peace, when to choose war?’
For a state which defines ‘security’ as favourable movement in the ‘world correlation of forces’, peace is no more than war by other (conventional, non-violent) means.
But in another sense, the USSR is profoundly anti-militarist in character.
War is to be respected, not romanticised.
It is subordinate to policy, as generals are subordinate to those who make it.
The Armed Forces have immense prestige, but no mystique; generals are masters of a trade, the Party has a monopoly on insight.
In all of its dealings, the USSR adopts a strictly utilitarian approach: which tool of policy will be the most effective?
Which will achieve the aim at the least risk and cost?
Very often, war is a distinctly inappropriate tool for changing the correlation of forces.
As Engels said, ‘the victorious proletariat cannot impose its blessings upon a subject population by bayonets’.
This admonition dampened Soviet enthusiasm for invading Poland in 1980–81 and inspired the search for other means.
(But if the other means failed, then the military blow would have needed to be that much more massive).
‘Everything’, as Stalin said, ‘should be determined by the correlation of forces’.
This dictum should inspire comfort in the West.
Even when the military balance is in her favour, the Soviet Union will maintain a healthy regard for the political stakes in East-West rivalry, as well as its social undercurrents; she will be aware that the ability to act effectively depends not only upon military trumps, but the psychological and moral intangibles of world politics.
The long, drawn out battle between capitalism and Socialism is in the short and medium term a battle for influence and opinion.
The USSR will not lightly seize a military opportunity that discredits her overall strategy.
As events in Angola, Ethiopia and Grenada show, she will contrive, and indeed she will always prefer, to remain inside the conventions of international  law and put the onus on others for transgressing them.
The invasion of Afghanistan may be less an exception to this rule than many think.
Given the triumph of fundamentalist Islam in Iran and the strength of similar forces in Afghanistan, many who saw no justification for Soviet intervention in law in 1979 could see one on grounds of ‘national security’: much as such justifications were offered for the flagrantly illegal annexations of western Poland, the Baltic republics, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina and parts of Finnish territory in 1939–40.
Under different, ‘unthreatening’ conditions, these actions would have sounded the alarm, and only the most incurable apologists would have apologised for them.
The perceptions of outsiders therefore matter to the USSR.
One should not expect her to resort to military force ‘whenever she can get away with it’: if nothing else, she needs to keep the world's ‘useful idiots’ in business.
But must we go so far as to say that the USSR will not resort to force unless she is certain to get away with it?
Much will depend on whether she seeks to snatch a prize or forestall a threat.
If the former, she would wish to be very certain of the value of the prize and fully confident that war will secure it.
The revolutionising effects of war have been very pronounced in Russian history; the USSR will not lightly embark on war, because she knows that a setback to the state could present a peril to the regime.
However, states are often under pressure to act because they fear history will turn against them if they do not.
This was the case with Imperial Germany in 1914.
In the USSR's case, this pressure would be especially great, as the regime's legitimacy demands that history move in its favour.
In conditions of threat, the question is not, ‘are we certain to win?’ but, ‘which poses the greater risk, war or peace’?
It is not inconceivable that the USSR would exchange the known perils of peace for the uncertainties of war if the perils of peace were serious enough.
This should worry the West.
Military attack to rescue political defeat is, by the Leninist calculus of reasoning, eminently justifiable.
Moreover, if the tables are to be turned, the USSR will do so at a time of her choosing, rather than wait for the hour of maximum danger to herself.
To date, the USSR has never attacked a stronger opponent, but it is not out of character for her to steal a march on her equals when their guard is down.
Curiously, like Imperial Germany, the USSR confronts adversaries on two fronts; like Germany's ally, Austria-Hungary, she possesses a multi-national empire, sullen and subdued for the moment, but periodically explosive.
Empire may strengthen the hand of prudence, because international humiliations tempt subjects to believe that their  Emperor has no clothes.
Perhaps, then, adventure is best avoided.
On the other hand, there is attraction for the USSR in removing problems at their source.
The greatest stimulant to ‘false hopes’ in the Warsaw Pact countries is not NATO's hostility, but its existence; the permanence of Socialism in Eastern Europe may never be assured whilst the pre-eminence of the Soviet Union in all of Europe is in dispute.
A fuite en avant might be tempting if it became feasible.
On her other flank, would the USSR ever say of China what Germany once said of Russia: today I can afford to go to war, tomorrow I may not have that luxury?
It may well be that she considers China to be as much of a long-term complication for the West as for herself: too capricious to make a dependable ally for NATO, too ambitious to fit into America's design for the Pacific, too shrewd to challenge vital Soviet interests.
But if she faced a China intractably hostile, staunchly pro-American and modernising with a vengeance, would the USSR become more amenable or would she look for a means of escape?
I do not pretend to answer the question by having posed it.
There is nonetheless in this mixture of internal and external anxieties something which may bode trouble.
The historian, Geoffrey Hudson, once wrote that ‘no factor leads to war more ineluctably than the steady decline of relative power’.
This may be especially true where the ‘absurdity’ of distinguishing foreign from internal policy is well understood, and where the movement of history is assigned such importance.
The greatest danger to the West may be a USSR militarily strong and politically on the defensive: ‘politics’, as Lenin said, ‘is the reason, war only the tool’.
In time of crisis, the West will have reason to be grateful for its defences.
But crisis—particularly one which puts the USSR's world position at risk—is something that the West should wish to avoid in the first place.
Finally, should war in fact come, there should be no illusion as to what sort of enemy one would face.
War between East and West would not only be a contest between states and power blocs, but ways of life (‘classes’): more likely to be ‘a struggle for the very existence of the two opposing world-wide systems’ than a limited engagement.
Confronting equal or superior power, the USSR may be cautious, moderate, even conciliatory.
But unchecked, she seeks total victory and final solutions.
Magnanimity is not in the Leninist vocabulary.
The Changing Scope of Military Strategy
World war has ceased to be an inevitability.
But this does not mean that nuclear war has ceased to be an instrument of politics, as is claimed by the overwhelming majority of representatives of pacifist, anti-war movements in the bourgeois world.
This is a subjective judgement…
It…gives rise to illusions about the ‘automatic destruction’, the ‘self-negation’ of nuclear war, and dulls the vigilance of peoples.
Major General A. S. Milovidov, Colonel V. G. Kozlov, ed.
The Philosophical Heritage of V. I. Lenin and Problems of Contemporary War (1972)
When it comes to confronting the Soviet military challenge, strategic provincialism and its companion, strategic introversion, may prove more damaging to the West than Soviet power itself.
‘The threat’ has become, in Soviet parlance, ‘well known’, and well stereotyped: on their side, an economy locked into a scale and a tempo of war production which we may lack the will or wherewithal to match; on our side, a technological edge eroding under pressure of rising capital costs and determined Soviet effort; and finally, the forfeiture of strategic and nuclear superiorities which historically have served as NATO's trumps against traditional Soviet strengths.
Without doubt, the latter development represents a secular change in the strategic environment of profound importance.
It would be both remarkable and alarming if that change alone did not bring greater scrutiny to bear on the perennial dilemmas of NATO strategy and of roles and responsibilities in the Alliance.
Deterrence, being a political as well as a military