

Special educational needs: policy into practice
Ronald Davie
The title I have given to my paper echoes the extended title of the conference.
This general theme is perhaps even more relevant now to the field of special educational needs than it was two or three years ago when the initial decision about the conference topic was made.
Certainly, we have seen over the last seven years in Britain new educational legislation of a kind which is having a profound influence upon practice in education departments and schools — for better or for worse.
Furthermore, the impact of the 1981 Education Act has meant that the field of special educational needs has been more affected than mainstream practice by these new policies.
The 1988 Education Reform Act will, however, have widespread implications for all concerned with education.
There is no time in one relatively short paper to undertake any comprehensive review of the 1981, 1986 and 1988 Acts and their potential and actual effects on practice in the area of special needs.
In any event, as I have indicated, some of this ground will be covered by others.
I intend therefore to pursue three main strands.
First, I shall look at the philosophy underlying the 1981 Act and examine the evidence as to how well it is working in practice.
Second, and more briefly, I shall ask some questions about the relevance of the 1988 Act to the particular needs of pupils in our schools who have significant difficulties with learning, or whose behaviour or adjustment gives cause for concern.
Finally, I shall, largely by reference to these two Acts, share with you some thoughts about the problems of successfully translating policies into practice.
The 1981 Act in its basic conception found — and finds — favour, I believe, with the overwhelming majority of those in the field, and with almost all others, too.
Of course, it inherited the credibility and goodwill of its precursor, the Warnock Report (DES 1978).
The three cornerstones of this legislation were: the attempt to break away from the categorisation of children, allied to the concept of a continuum of need; the importance attached to successful integration; and the belief that a partnership with parents was vital.
These cornerstones remain as firm in principle now as when they were laid down in 1981, or when the blueprint was drawn in 1978.
The edifice built upon those stones — the implementation of the Act — leaves much to be desired, however, as the research of Goacher et al (1988) makes clear.
I draw upon these research findings here mostly, of course, because of their direct relevance to our theme.
In addition, I have as a consultant — and on behalf of the National Children's Bureau — been working with a team from the University of London Institute of Education over the past two years or so, to distil the lessons from this research for local and health authorities.
This collaborative development project, involving most of the original researchers, has been producing training and other materials, trying them out in a few selected authorities, and also extending its dissemination networks in anticipation of the finished products.
Before picking out a few of the research findings, which highlight short-comings, I should say that there was a great deal to commend and admire about the response to the Act from individual schools and authorities in very difficult circumstances, not the least of which was the failure of central government to provide any additional resources.
The yardsticks of progress are not easy to quantify, but over 70 per cent of LEAs reported a proportionate increase in expenditure from 1983 to 1986 on special educational needs; and over three-quarters of LEAs have increased their use of mainstream placements for children with special needs, both in the primary and secondary sectors.
Many other changes were reported.
Yet, only a minority (40 per cent) of LEAs had substantially increased the number of their administrative staff working in this area.
Despite the crudity of these yardsticks, it is clear that most authorities have been, and are making considerable efforts to give effect to the 1981 Act.
Nevertheless, it is necessary to introduce some significant qualifying remarks about the current direction of policies and procedures in many authorities.
The new definition of special educational needs
The new definition of special educational needs centres on whether or not a child has ‘a learning difficulty which calls for special educational provision to be made’.
This learning difficulty has to be ‘significantly greater…than for the majority of children of his age’; or, he has to have a ‘disability which either prevents or hinders him from making use of educational facilities of a kind generally provided in schools maintained by the local education authority concerned…’.
This definition breaks away from the previous categorisations of handicap and attempts to introduce a subtler and a more relative concept.
Predictably, perhaps, this has resulted in different interpretations.
Thus, if we restrict our attention for  the moment to pupils for whom a statement is made, the proportion ranges across LEAs from less than 1 per cent of the school population to nearly 3 per cent.
Furthermore, in their returns to the research team, administrators in some LEAs spoke of 5 per cent as their target population for statements, while elsewhere it was considered that as many as 18 per cent could require a statement.
Notwith-standing the relativity of the concept, this situation surely indicates a lack of clarity or mutual agreement about the nature of special educational needs, which cannot be allowed to continue.
Since statements are seen in part as a form of protection for the child, we must seek to ensure that all who need this protection have it.
As was clear in the original Warnock Report (DES 1978), however, the proportion of children who fall within the general definition of special educational needs is around 20 per cent.
It is not at all clear what extra resources and provision are currently being planned or provided for this larger group, nor whether the size of that group is broadly agreed, nor whether local authorities and schools are identifying in any way the children involved.
Finally, it should be noted that the process of categorisation is still with us, although the names have changed: former ESN pupils now have severe or moderate learning difficulties, maladjusted pupils have emotional or behavioural difficulties and so on.
Initials have crept back, too,—‘SLD’, ‘MLD’, ‘EBD’.
Integration
The second topic to be considered in this first section is integration.
We do not need here to rehearse the contentious issues which surround integration, but it is sometimes aimed that the placement of a child in a mainstream school constitutes integration, or, in any event, that we all understand the same meaning of this term.
Both assumptions are false.
To quote briefly from the Warnock Report:
…it was apparent that professionals and administrators in education, health and social services held a wide range of views concerning what constitutes ‘integration’.
It also became clear that diametrically opposed opinions of and attitudes towards integration could quite easily be found within a local authority.
In four out of the five authorities studied in depth by the research team, ‘the provision of a statement appeared in the majority of cases to coincide with a decision to transfer a child to a special school’.
Furthermore, ‘responses to the questionnaire indicated that this pattern is reflected nationally’.
This situation bears an uncomfortably close resemblance to the picture which obtained before the 1981 Act when children were assessed under the old SE  procedures as in need of special educational provision.
It does not appear to sit easily with an Act which requires local authorities to educate children with special educational needs in ordinary schools, provided that this is in the interests of the child, that it does not adversely affect the education of the other children and is compatible with the efficient use of resources.
Thus, as it seems to me, the burden of proof under the 1981 Act has shifted to demonstrating why a child with special educational needs should not be educated in an ordinary school with the necessary extra provision.
If I am correct — and the statement is also seen in some measure as a form of protection of the parents' and child's rights in this matter — it is surely anomalous that this statement appears largely to have become a passport to special schooling.
Inter-agency collaboration
The next theme I would like to share with you is a very familiar one at the National Children's Bureau, namely, the difficulty of achieving effective co-operation and collaboration between education, health and social services.
It is not appropriate here to analyse, nor even to state, the many reasons for this difficulty, but after scrutinising the research findings I have to say that LEAs have on the whole not seen the implications of the 1981 Act for social services departments or district health authorities.
Here is the research team's summary of its findings from the detailed study of five education authorities:
With one notable exception, a factor common to all these very different approaches to policy formulation was the negligible role allowed to health and social services personnel.
The joint DES/DHSS nature of the Circular, the necessary involvement of health and social services professionals in the multi-professional assessment, and their part in providing for those with special educational needs, were apparently not seen as sufficient reason for including them in discussions.
This picture in the five authorities studied in depth was mirrored in the country as a whole.
It was reflected predictably in the relatively low priority now given by social services to special educational needs.
Although they receive notification from education of the intention to assess a child, they are uncertain of their role, and so, with other pressing priorities, they tend not to give it high priority.
Only a third of LEAs had arranged any training for social services departments about the purpose and procedures of the 1981 Act, and only a few more (38 per cent) had arranged training for health authorities.
Even more culpably, not all LEAs, it seems, informed social services or health authorities of the outcome of their procedures for statements.
As I have indicated above, the reasons for poor collaboration between services  are complex and many-sided.
The time has surely come for local authorities, at least, to develop and implement ‘whole authority’ policies and procedures on a range of topics, which would certainly include children with special needs and also child abuse.
Parents as partners
My last theme deriving from the research findings relates to the involvement of parents, which was envisaged as a central feature of the Act.
Circular 1/83 was clear on this point:
In looking at the child as a whole person, the involvement of the child's parents is essential.
Assessment should be seen as a partnership between teachers, other professionals and parents in a joint endeavour to discover the nature of the difficulties and needs of individual children.
The research findings indicate that many authorities have a long way to go before their procedures come close to what one might reasonably describe as a partnership with parents.
On the one hand, it seemed clear from the studies in five authorities that the Act's emphasis on partnership was recognised and in general accepted.
On the other hand,
changed practice had yet to begin in many areas of the LEA procedures.
Previous patterns of working, sets of beliefs about parents and their willingness and capacity to play a larger part in decisions about their children with special educational needs, professional uncertainty and paternalism all had a part to play in the process.
(Goacher et al )
For example, the information booklets prepared for parents had obviously been written with care and many of the right sentiments were expressed.
A certain formality of tone and style often intruded, however, and in one case there was no indication that the LEA viewed parental contributions as valuable or desirable.
Overall, the research team concluded that only in one of the five authorities was the information provided really accessible to parents.
This authority also often gave details absent from others' booklets.
For example, the social services department was included among those to be contacted during a statutory assessment, together with the reassurance:
If a social worker is already helping your family, there is nothing to worry about; your social worker will discuss the assessment with you, and will not give any information without your permission.
The needs of ethnic minorities
In none of these five detailed study authorities were versions available in any language other than English, despite the fact that in one of them, 17 per cent of the population were from ethnic minority groups.
The authorities responding to the national survey questionnaire all said that they would offer the services of an interpreter, if this appeared to be necessary.
Only six stated that they would offer a translation of the documents.
The position in the borough with 17 per cent from ethnic minority groups is especially revealing in this context.
The statementing officer had reported that no one had thus far requested the use of an interpreter.
Yet, another research team in the same borough at the same time, carrying out a survey of parental responses to statements, had to rely heavily on interpreters for interviews with the parents.
Clearly, the fact that ethnic minority parents do not request help cannot be taken to mean that they fully understand the information they receive.
Parents' views of assessments
Parents in , it seems, are not yet happy about the way assessments are handled, to judge by interviews with a sample of 44 parents in the five authorities studied.For some of these parents, who had established a long-standing and good relationship with a teacher or psychologist, the assessment procedures were seen as positive, informative and helpful.
But the majority were either dissatisfied or upset about a number of aspects of the way they had been treated during the assessment process.
What particularly upset them, in some cases, was the negative tone, as they saw it, of assessments.
Some did not like to face a battery of professionals.
Resentment was always present when parents felt either that there was a lack of openness or frankness on the part of the professionals or administrators, or that they were being coerced, or that their concern for and about their child was being called into question.
Two short quotations illustrate the negative and the positive.
One disgruntled mother said:
They tell you nothing, give you the idea that there are no alternatives…they don't like to admit that they can't cater for every child's needs…they don't give anything freely…not even information.
In contrast, the father of a three-year-old rubella-damaged deaf girl had received a great deal of help from the LEA, the hospital consultant, and from social services and voluntary organisations.
He commented:
Everyone was very helpful.
It has been very good all the way.
We wouldn't have known where to start really.
Perhaps ‘end of term’ reports on individual authorities and schools after their first two and a half years or so of implementing the 1981 Act (when the research data were finally gathered) would range from commenting, ‘Encouraging progress has been made’, through the ubiquitous ‘Could do better’to ‘Disappointing work.
A somewhat slack attitude!’
I move now to the second strand of my paper: a consideration of the 1988 Act.
Since others will be dealing with this in some detail, I will restrict myself to brief comments on some of the major areas of concern in respect of special educational needs.
First, however, I have to declare myself in favour of the general principle of a national curriculum, which has been described by Kenneth Baker as the central feature of the new Act.
As far as children with special educational needs are concerned, there are for me two main worries.
I want to see a curricular framework which is flexible enough to permit sensible modifications and, where necessary, exemptions to be made in the interests of individual children with special needs.
On the other hand, flexibility can operate to the disadvantage of these pupils if inappropriate compassion on the part of teachers leads to a lowering of expectations, and consequently of standards, for the individual child.
Whether this fine balance of flexibility and rigour can be achieved in the context of the national curriculum, I do not know.
But it is one of several such equations in the Education Reform Act.
With the possible exception of grant-maintained status, for which I personally find it very difficult to see any merit or justification, the other provisions with potential threat for children with special needs (open enrolment and local financial management) are for me rather like the curate's egg.
Everything, then, will depend upon the guidance and circulars produced by the Department of Education and Science, i.e. upon the way in which the Act is interpreted by the department and implemented at local level.
The future, therefore, is in the balance.
When I look at these various provisions taken together, I see the possibility of benefits deriving for children from increased accountability in education and from a more consistent national curricular framework.
A fresh wind of educational change can so easily become a chill wind, however, and, if it does, the most vulnerable of our children will suffer.
To use another metaphor, if the world of education becomes a jungle of market forces, I fear for the survival of children with special needs.
As I have indicated, I believe the future educational scene is critically poised in several important areas for children with special needs.
I therefore would strongly urge NARE — and preferably in concert with others — to monitor events very closely over the next few years.
The government has shown some willingness in parliamentary debates on the Bill to accept the need to safeguard the position of special needs pupils.
This occasionally resulted in amendments — more often it took the form of assurances from ministers about future intentions.
Those words need now to be scrutinised closely as future events unfold and as the ‘small print’ of implementation is  written.
NARE, and other like bodies, must be watchful and quick to respond not only in their explicit task of safeguarding the interests of their members but also in their implicit duty of safeguarding the interests of the children with special needs whom their members are privileged to serve.
The final part of my paper concerns the difficulties of successfully translating policies into practice.
My earlier comments drawing on research findings exemplified well the reality of gaps between intended policy and actual practice.
The issues here are not just related to policies, however, nor to new legislation.
The difficulties of translating any kind of new knowledge into practice are formidable and complex.
The processes involved are common to a wide range of information — from research findings to new professional or practical developments, from innovative ideas or policies to parliamentary legislation.
The common factors include the problems of good communication and dissemination; the perceived ‘ownership’ of the innovation by those whose practice is most affected; the firm and explicit adoption of the innovation; the experience of initial implementation; the other pressures bearing upon the organisation or individuals who are being asked to change; the resource implications; and the extent to which the innovation becomes firmly embedded into the structure of the organisation or the practice of the individual.
These, then, are the kinds of factors to be borne in mind when any new knowledge or innovation is intended to affect practice.
The complexity of the processes involved are often underestimated by researchers, administrators and by politicians.
The implications of this for those three groups are that careful consideration needs to be given, for example, to the overall time scale envisaged, to the consultation process, to the effectiveness of the dissemination and to the resource implications.
In the context of the particular brief I have set for myself, I would like, in concluding, to return to the government's legislative programme and some of the lessons to be learnt from the experience of recent years in translating policy into practice.
The first thing which strikes one is the speed with which bodies are expected to respond or to change.
One knows that governments have other considerations to bear in mind, including the legislative process itself.
Nevertheless, there are dangers that too much haste puts at risk that necessary bond of mutual trust and co-operation between the policymaker and those who are called upon to implement policy.
This government — any government — would do well to heed those dangers.
The second aspect which can be noted is the reluctance of government sometimes to appreciate or accept possible resource implications.
Again, this debate goes beyond the educational field.
I am not one who believes that extra resources necessarily solve problems or necessarily smooth the way to their solution.
Nevertheless, the notion that every new advance or development in  education can be made by utilising existing resources more effectively is simplistic and does not bear close scrutiny.
One sometimes hears it said that this or that innovation is not a matter of extra resources but of new attitudes or different ways of working.
This ignores the reality that attitudinal change, changes in working practices or skills and institutional change at the very least need careful and often time-consuming planning and preparation if they are to be successfully achieved.
And time is money.
My final plea is that those who create new policies take seriously and consider fully the perspectives and situations of the practitioner.
In the field of special educational needs, perhaps more than in any other area of education, there is a skilled and committed body of practitioners who are no strangers to innovation.
If they are properly consulted, resourced and involved in the process of change, those skills and that commitment can be harnessed to great effect in serving the interests of those children and services on whom their professional careers are focused.
If they are not involved, resourced and committed to the change, the reality of practice at the grass roots is likely to be a pale shadow of what might have been.
Whose Act is it anyway?
Philip Robinson
The Education Reform Act was given the Royal Assent on the 29 July 1988.
The Great Education Reform Bill that had been presented to the House of Commons seven months earlier with the soubriquet of ‘GERBIL’ had, like gerbils, grown.
The original 147 clauses were expanded and added to, becoming the 238 of the legislation.
The Act marks the most significant shift in direction of the education service since that of 1944.
Its passage through the House considerably enhanced the reputation of the Secretary of State as a skilled parliamentarian and strategist as the November proposals emerged almost intact the following summer.
The Secretary of State is clearly a beneficiary of the legislation; the powers bestowed on that office have grown considerably.
School governors have increased powers and responsibilities and it is alleged parents will also benefit from the greater choices available and the clearer accountability of the system.
Local education authorities have less autonomy and become more the administrative arm of the Department of Education and Science, delivering a system of education within the well defined orbit of circulars and orders in council.
Teachers are not free to define the curriculum but this may be more a loss of face than substance.
Teachers have always been constrained by the demands of examinations and the expectations of parents.
There is not a school in the land that doesn't teach mathematics and English.
The criticisms made by the informed opinion of Her Majesty's Inspectors have been that too often the curriculum is narrow and pedestrian rather than promoting the full development of individuals.
In his discussion on social justice the American philosopher John Rawls wrote:
All social primary goods — liberty and opportunity, income and wealth, and the basis of self respect — are to be distributed equally unless an unequal distribution of any or all of these goods is to the advantage of the least favoured.
(1972, p 303)
To what extent does the Education Reform Act promote the advantage of the least favoured?
What are the benefits for the poor, the homeless, the disadvantaged in the education world heralded by the new legislation?
Any special educational provision for a child provided with a statement under the 1981 Education Act may exclude or modify the national curriculum.
On the basis of the present issue of statements this would mean that about two per cent of the child population are judged as likely to fall outside the provision of the 1988 Act.
For the rest, excepting those who attend independent schools, the Act may be judged on the extent to which it promotes the interests of all children.
An aim of educational policy in this and many other countries has been that of enhancing equality of opportunity.
Embedded within discussions of human rights is the intention that we should not so organise our social institutions that they promote some people and inhibit others.
The realisation of this aim has remained elusive; in all societies the children of the powerful do better than those of the powerless.
If power is represented as being ‘middle class’, or a member of the ‘party apparatchik’, the consequence is the same, the distribution of educational opportunities is progressively in its favour, with more of its children attending secondary education and even more attending tertiary or higher education.
Is the 1988 Act likely to promote or impede the achievement of equality of opportunity?
I fear the latter, but first a little more on the term itself.
I still find it helpful to return to a point made by Tony Crosland in 1962.
He argued that ‘equality of opportunity’ has a weak and a strong sense.
In its weak version the phrase means equality of access.
In this usage we have achieved the goal of equality the moment there is a school in reach of every child.
No one is denied books, materials or teachers, so all have the same opportunities to use them as they might.
Such a view ignores the tremendous structural inequalities within society; it assumes that ethnicity, gender and class do not influence educational achievements and that all schools are of the same character.
Children are not, however, independent of the nexus of expectations, attitudes and values that surround them.
In recognising this, Crosland introduced what he called ‘a strong definition of equality of opportunity — equality of outcomes.
The concept of equality of outcomes does not mean that each person obtains the same number of marks in the same number of examinations, but that a representative individual of any group has the same probability of success as a representative individual of any other group.
The probability of someone with blue eyes gaining five or more passes at GCSE is, I imagine, the same as that of someone with brown eyes.
As has been often demonstrated, however, this is not the case if we take the representative individual from a group divided on the basis of skin colour, parental occupation, gender or, in England, whether he or she lives in the north or south of the country.
For each of these divisions we would find inequalities of outcome and it is in this sense that one can assert that we have failed to achieve equality of opportunity in England.
The girl who is black and the daughter of working class parents faces at least a triple disadvantage compared with a white middle-class boy.
The cause of  her disadvantage rests in the social arrangements we make, yet there is a tradition of social analysis which attempts to blame the girl for her failure, as if it were simply her responsibility to overcome the conditions of class, race and gender to which she is subject.
This is not to deny personal responsibility, but to recognise that in all social organisations individual responsibility is constrained by the social arrangements which obtain.
The political realisation of Crosland's view of equality was the publication in july 1965 of DES Circular 10/65 outlining the government's intention of ending selection at 11 plus and eliminating separatism in secondary education.
The circular gave an expression to a motion passed in the House of Commons in January of that year when the House, ‘conscious of the need to raise educational standards at all levels’, regretted the separation of children into different types of secondary schools.
For the next decade or so most local authorities stumbled, enthused, muddled and reorganised their secondary schools into a comprehensive form.
Some resisted outright and a few, Kingston upon Thames for example, remained in their pre-1965 form more than 20 years after the Crosland circular.
The focus of change was organisational arrangements, in the sanguine belief that if the framework of the school was altered then the processes of education which it enshrined would also alter to support a strong definition of equality of opportunity.
The evidence to date on the relative success of this organisational change in many schools in England and Wales is ambiguous.
Maughan and Rutter (1987) report on an extension of Fifteen Thousand Hours where the opportunity was taken of the existence of the original 1970 data set to follow the progress of some of the pupils throughout their secondary education in either comprehensive or grammar schools.
They have the examination results of these pupils at 16 and are able ‘to compare the progress of pupils of similar ability and background in the two school sectors’(1987, p 56).
Although the pupils chosen, 79 from the grammar schools and 81 from the non-selective, had broadly similar attainments when they were aged ten, those who went to the grammar schools scored slightly higher than those who went to comprehensives.
The grammar school pupils had a mean reading score of 11.2 when they were aged ten and the comprehensive pupils 10.7.
The mean non-verbal IQ scores were 107.1 and 104.6 respectively.
The outcomes, for example the number gaining five or more ‘O’ level equivalent passes, were much in favour of those attending grammar school, with 48.7 per cent gaining five plus ‘O’level equivalents as against 14.7 per cent in the non-selective schools.
One is not comparing like with like, however, and the grammar schools had a slightly more advantaged intake, less ambiguity as to the goals of the school and had not suffered the upset of reorganisation.
Other comparisons of the two systems, by Reynolds and Sullivan (1987), Sutherland and Gallagher (1987), and by Steedman (1983), are inconclusive on the grounds that they are not comparing like with like but the outcomes of a well  established and resourced system with one still grappling with its identity and purpose.
An important series of research projects that does allow some judgment to be made between selective and non-selective schools in the comprehensive system has been undertaken at the Centre for Educational Sociology at Edinburgh University.
The results give some support to the advocates of comprehensive secondary schooling that the system will reduce class inequalities and lead to an improvement in overall educational achievement.
This research (McPherson and Willms, 1988), draws upon surveys of Scottish school leavers.
On three occasions, 1976, 1980 and 1984, data were gathered from a random sample of young people who left school in those years.
The first cohort experienced the formation of comprehensive schools in Scotland, the second their early development and the third had, by and large, attended schools in a settled comprehensive system.
McPherson and Willms conclude: ‘Since the mid-1970s, the reorganisation that was initiated in 1965 has contributed to a rise in examination attainment and to a fall in the effect on attainment of social class’.
Over the eight years of the project the reduction in inequality between different socio.economic groups was consequent upon an improvement in scores attained at the bottom end of the distribution and not the levelling down of those at the top.
McPherson and Willms assert that ‘comprehensive reorganisation was a precon-dition to the translation into educational gains of the potential for educational improvement of other changes, economic, social and educational, that have occurred since the mid 1960s’.
The contribution of the comprehensive system to the improvement in attainment measured in terms of performance in the examinations for the Scottish Certificate of Education (SCE) at 16, 17 and 18, comes as a result of several factors.
These include the abolition of selection at 12 years (the age of transfer from primary to secondary in Scotland) which gave all pupils formal access to certificate courses, and the raising of the school leaving age to 16, which prevented pupils leaving school before the stage of first public examinations.
The research evidence also suggests that the pupil of average socio-economic status tends to higher achievement in ‘uncreamed schools’, that is schools where high ability pupils are not sent to selective schools, and where the school has had the opportunity to establish itself.
This latter finding is in accord with the view that within school factors — that mélange of characteristics embedded with concepts like ‘school ethos’ and ‘climate’— are important in contributing to outcomes.
It is of interest to note that even Maughan and Rutter report one non-selective school with a low ability intake whose pupils' achievement is broadly comparable with the grammar school averages.
They continue:
This school was the one with the most positive process score in our earlier study: it achieved good results for all its pupils despite a relatively poor  balance in its intakes, and this seemed to reflect a very positive and cohesive ethos, supportive of academic attainment for all children, combined with a clear concern for their other needs.
(1987, p 64–5)
The move towards a comprehensive system was one in which it was hoped artificial organisational barriers to the development of all pupils would be removed.
The poor would at least have a common school with the advantaged in society, enjoy a common programme and though this in itself did not mark equality of outcomes it did secure equality of access.
As the reorganised schools began to settle and establish themselves it began to become apparent that the curriculum, the vehicle for educational progress, needed to be reorganised also.
Too often the curriculum of the comprehensive school was that of the grammar, high status academic subjects were on offer to the academically able child and the rest suffered a watered down version of ‘studies’: European for those judged not capable of sustaining a foreign language, classical for those not taking Latin and Greek, social for the non-geographers and historians, and rural for those not taking ‘proper’ science.
The curriculum in secondary schools also began to take a predictable shape, mathematics, English, RE and PE for all plus a ‘choice’ from six option columns.
As Cicourel and Kitsuse demonstrated many years ago (1963), the choice was in fact more illusory than real.
In their study at Lakeshore High School in the USA they showed that the actual performance of students was interpreted by the school staff in terms of the expectations held for a particular student.
Thus two students could attain the same marks, but the way in which the marks were interpreted depended on the perception held for each student.
Those perceived to be ‘university material’ were directed to high status choices, academic subjects, and those not seen as having the potential for higher education, despite having the same raw marks, were encouraged to opt for a more ‘realistic’course.
One of the ways in which schools reorganised as comprehensive began to change the curriculum so that it would promote the struggle for equality of outcomes is the development of modular patterns (Moon, 1988, Warwick, 1987).
These take the curriculum and re-present it in ‘bite-sized pieces’, usually in courses of between 20 and 30 hours, which may be put together for an award like GCSE or which can be taken as free-standing units.
As Moon points out, one of the major advantages of organising the curriculum in a modular framework is that it can avoid stereotyping.
Each module has a set of learning outcomes and encompasses a span of time that is meaningful to a 13 to 14 year old.
Girls can be encouraged to take modules in technology without feeling they are committing themselves to two years' or more work; low achieving pupils can take a range of modules without suffering the indignity of following a programme that marks them out as ‘different’.
Greater coherence can be effected in the curriculum through a clear understanding of what is intended and how students may demonstrate what they know, understand and can do.
This is not the  place to discuss in full the nature of the modular approaches nor to detail the achievements of those schools in the forefront of this curriculum initiative.
Will the success that has been developed in these areas be supported or impeded by the 1988 Education Reform Act?
The Act represents a particular view both of the nature of learning and schools as organisations.
Learning is seen primarily as the acquisition of knowledge rather than the development of understanding.
Consequently the curriculum is divided into ‘base’, ‘core’ and ‘foundation’units of RE, mathematics, English and science, together with history, geography, technology, music, art and physical education and, for secondary aged pupils, a modern foreign language ‘specified in an order of the Secretary of State’(clause 3).
The list is that proposed by Robert Morant for the Board of Education in 1904, save that‘drawing’ is now art, ‘singing’now labelled music and what was ‘manual instruction’(for boys) and ‘domestic subjects’(for girls) now appears as technology.
This content has to be packaged to identify the ‘knowledge, skills and understanding which pupils of different abilities and maturities’ are to attain at ages seven, 11, 14 and 16; that is the objectives, means and evaluation of each.
The working group on mathematics deliberated whether there was a risk that the existence of national targets would inhibit the development of the low achieving child.
The conclusion reached was ‘probably not’ and, having affirmed a principle that ‘as far as possible children should remain within the mainstream framework of attainment targets and programmes of study’(1988, para 10.31), acknowledges that much will rest with the teacher's skill in developing appropriate pedagogical styles and, as ever, that more research is needed.
The Mathematics Working Group has proposed 15 broad attainment targets in mathematics and the science group 22 for secondary pupils and 17 for primary with a further four for primary technology.
When the full set of proposals is available there could be a total of 150/200 attainment targets with the authority of law behind them.
The danger, as ever, is that of trivialisation of the curriculum as received by pupils.
In the anxiety to ensure that a legally enforceable ‘balanced and broadly based curriculum’ is delivered at the level of specificity indicated in the reports of the early working parties lies the danger that the mere acquisition of facts will prevent the growth of understanding.
In the urge to achieve coverage those who find little comfort in academic work may be given an arid diet of superficiality which neither ‘promotes’ their ‘spiritual, moral, cultural development’nor ‘prepares’them for the opportunities, responsibilities and experiences of adult life.
It may have been preferable to issue the national curriculum documents as guidelines, templates of good practice against which schools could evaluate their extant curriculum rather than requirements that have to be met.
It is essential, as HMI argued in 1983, ‘that all pupils should be guaranteed a curriculum of distinctive breadth and depth to which they should be entitled irrespective of the type of school they attended or their level of ability’.
In the headlong rush to articulate what an ‘entitlement curriculum’ ought to be we could destroy the  essential quality of all curricula, the engagement in a dialogue by teacher and learner, a dialogue whose ends are diverse, whose pathways various but whose aim is constant — the enhancement of the quality of understanding.
The curriculum that is enshrined within the Education Act seems more to serve the interests of the Department of Education and Science to effect greater control and accountability within the system than to promote the concerns of the disadvantaged and dispossessed.
A more serious criticism is that the Act undermines the organisational framework within which the comprehensive secondary system was set.
Section 52 allows for the creation of grant-maintained schools and Section 105 for the creation of city technology colleges (CTCs); the ending of planned admission limits and the devolution of financial management onto secondary and larger primary schools increases organisational diversity.
The question can be fairly put as to who benefits from this diversity.
It is the intention of the Secretary of State that a school that opts out of local authority control will not be allowed to change its character, similarly, a CTC must provide education for pupils of different abilities drawn mainly from the area in which the school is situated (clause 105 subsection 2).
This promotion of diversity, defence of the consumer, assumes a perfect bureaucratic world where individuals act rationally, where supply meets demand and where the equilibrium of the market is attained.
In reality, the increased diversity of schools will exacerbate the differences between them, creating a pool of ‘residual schools’ unpopular with ambitious parents and the refuge of those too preoccupied with their own difficulties to ponder much over the quality of education provided for their children.
A system that forces some into the worst schools is hardly one that meets the canons of social justice with which we began this article.
It is naive to assume that the existence of city technology colleges or grant maintained schools will act as a stimulus to the rest.
As schools increase in their heterogeneity, those that serve areas where there is a concentration of disadvantage will watch helpless as the more motivated, more able, more ambitious children move to the favoured schools, leaving them to cope with the rest, and worse, suffer the ignominy of having their results on national tests published, protected only by a general statement from the local authority, indicating ‘the nature of socio-economic and other influences which are known to affect schools’(Task Group on Assessment and Testing, para 134).
The sadness of what is in effect the breakup of the comprehensive system is that it occurs at the point when the system was reaching a confidence and maturity which demonstrated that it could meet the demands of the late twentieth century.
In 1965 members of parliament regretted that the separation of children into different types of secondary schools impeded the raising of standards.
The Education Reform Act of 1988 in promoting that separation will undoubtedly contribute to the raising of educational standards for some.
As ever these will be the children from advantaged homes, middle class and what was once patronis-ingly known as ‘the respectable working classes’.
The children of the poor, from  ethnic minority groups, one parent families and those bearing the costs of industrial decline and renewal have little to gain from this legislation.
The sadness is the greater as the Act comes at a time when the accumulated wisdom from attempts to improve schools was establishing a consensus on how schools might more effectively meet the needs of all pupils.
The creation of an effective school depends not on the application of some well-honed formulae nor on the opportunities provided by legislation.
Both formulae and legislation may influence the conditions within which members of the professional community seek to enhance the effectiveness of their schools.
In the end what is important is the quality of the teaching profession: schools depend on the commitment of individual teachers often working alone and without the possibility of close supervision.
This has been recognised in the rhetoric of government:
The full force of teachers' professionalism will need to be put behind the national curriculum and assessment if both are to be beneficial to pupil and other ‘customers’ of the education service.
(The National Curriculum: A Consultation Document , para 67)
A profession of high morale and self confidence that has earned the esteem of those its serves, primarily parents and their children, will create schools that are effective.
The task is on-going; just as education ought not to have an end, in the sense that an individual could claim to be ‘fully educated’, so schools are in the process of becoming effective.
Signposts are available, what is now needed are the stories of those who follow their direction, and accounts of their perception of the terrain covered and problems encountered.
The journey is of utmost importance as it is about the enhancement of excellence in what we provide for our children.
In serving the interest of some rather than all, the 1988 Education Reform Act may come to be judged as an impediment to the creation of that equality of outcomes so long seen as an essential right of all citizens.
Pre-school age children with special educational needs
Sheila Wolfendale
Introduction
For this chapter the author has drawn on some of the substance contained in a paper published in Children and Society (Wolfendale 1987).
The particular relevance of that paper is that it provides a multi-disciplinary perspective on special needs and the under-fives, and a major theme pervading the NARE conference talk was the need to evolve policies of collective responsibility in the development of services to meet special needs of children under five, given the context that pre-school education is not statutory.
Educationists working with under-fives and in nursery settings find themselves regularly in contact with other professionals from health, social services, voluntary agencies.
This chapter aims to reflect the reality of interdisciplinary contacts while maintaining that the pivot for the development of early learning opportunities for all children is educational and that, therefore, the ‘lead department’ in local authorities as far as under-fives (including of course special needs) is, or ought legitimately to be, education.
The chapter concludes by considering the implications of the Education Reform Act for under-fives and special educational needs.
The Continuing Debate
All under-fives workers are well acquainted with the debates and controversies surrounding pre-school provision in the UK.
These, unresolved, provided a backdrop to the themes of the talk.
We are familiar with these continuing major issues:
the relative contribution of home as a determinant of learning as against nursery (Tizard and Hughes 1984, Davie et al 1984)
the necessity for and quality of child minding (Moss 1987)
lack of unified services and the consequent need for service co-ordination (Bradley 1982)
what are ‘best buys’ in and effects of pre-school provision (Osborn and Milbank 1987, Jowett and Sylva 1986)
effects of day care (Calder in New and David 1985, Tizard 1986)
consequences of pre-school intervention (Woodhead 1985)
continuity between pre-school and school (Cleave and Jowett 1982)
the unevenness and disparity of provision (Gilkes 1987)
incompatibility between and confusion of aims and criteria for pre-school experience between establishments funded by different agencies
underfunding for pre-school, nationally and locally.
Irrespective of differing views and attitudes towards any one or more of these issues, we would nevertheless acknowledge a number of overriding principles that are rooted within a humanitarian philosophy which concerns protection of children's rights; granting of equal opportunities; and acknowledging the univer-sality of children's needs in relation to the individuality of their needs.
Professionals engaged in pre-school and early childhood education are likely to come from separate traditions and may have different perceptions as well as common goals.
Some will have come through mainstream nursery experience with its honourable history of innovation; others by way of special/remedial education routes.
How these experiences can be reconciled in order to provide equality of opportunity to all under-fives is a fundamental theme which is reflected in this article.
Reconciling traditions
Consideration of the growth of provision, in historical terms, reveals some commonality of principle, an inter-connectedness which will be exemplified here.
The point is that this kind of overview is rarely possible by busy practitioners on the ground, working in parallel grooves but seldom in tandem, in social services, education, voluntary nurseries, playgroups, special needs assessment centres, units, nurseries.
Thus a nursery nurse will confess to being ignorant and fearful of a certain handicap while demonstrating competence and confidence in dealing with a child who has tantrums or is language-delayed.
Similarly, teachers who have specialised in the education of children with disabilities can feel daunted at the prospect of handling and coping with young children.
By tracing these separately evolving traditions chronologically we can discern their major messages.
Early childhood education
The pioneers of early education, while differing from each other in methods and materials, essentially look what has come to be known as a ‘child-centred’ approach, wherein it was paramount to base education on a child's ‘nature and needs’rather than on some preconceived theory.
In their writing, Froebel, Pestalozzi, Edgeworth, the Macmillans and Susan Isaacs reiterate basic principles for effective learning, all of which involve the child as an active learner not just as a passive receptacle (Curtis 1986, Ch. 2).
Landmarks in the development of special education in Britain
The past two centuries have seen the gradual evolution of separate educational establishments catering from their time of inception for identifiable disabilities and categories of handicap (Warnock Report 1978).
The original justification for separate education, while untenable, even anachronistic nowadays, provided for the education and protection of countless specially vulnerable children, and gave many teachers opportunities to develop understanding and expertise in an area of handicap and special educational provision.
We are therefore the inheritors of this tradition whereby expertise, being concentrated, has accrued to the point now where technology allied with pedagogy can provide quite powerfully for children in need, in whatever their setting.
Compensatory education for ‘disadvantaged’ children
This ‘tradition’ is much more recent, yet the ideas have been pervasive: that organised, structured opportunities for ‘disadvantaged’children in their early years can combat or offset the allegedly depriving effects of a poor (and therefore, by definition, unstimulating!) home.
There are whole bibliographies on the American experience of Head Start, Follow-through, and the British initiatives of the EPA.
These initiatives have been characterised by curriculum innovation, home-school links, parents as educators, and although results are equivocal (inter-pretation depends upon criteria, on assessment and evaluation measures, etc), much has been learnt about curriculum design and evaluation.
A number of powerful techniques were tried out, such as behavioural approaches to learning and other coherent learning programmes.
Their legacy is apparent today, such as the application of High/Scope in the UK (VOLCUF/High Scope).
Common to each tradition is the principle of meeting children's learning and other needs, even though differing emphases are evident.
A final example of this inter-linking of ideology is the work of Maria Montessori.
She began working with ‘handicapped’ children and concluded that the methods which she had found most successful in dealing with feeble-minded children would be quite applicable to those who were normal and that ordinary schools needed the sort of transforma-tion she had accomplished at her own ‘special’school.
Her approach, in common with other innovators, was to get the very best from each and every child, using methods she had devised to achieve this goal.
The bedrock aspirations these educators have had in common, as far as early childhood educational opportunities are concerned, are expressed in a recently  published book which is based on contemporary research and which shows the continuing aspiration for a comprehensive preschool service:
…our assertion is that adequate preschool provision can improve the quality of life of young children and their families; this conviction is given further support by the evidence we have presented in this book that pre-school education will in most circumstances aid the child's development, increase his educational potential and in the long run his overall performance.
Thus investment in preschool provision and the improved quality of life it bestows may pay good dividends in the shape of calculable beneficial effects on the child's educational attainments five years hence and perhaps into the longer future.
(Osborn and Milbank 1987, p 242)
Bringing special needs into pre-school services and developing pre-school services to meet special needs
The effects of reports and legislation
The Warnock Report (1978) put under-fives high on the educational agenda and set out a blueprint for assessment of needs; notification by one statutory service to others (in particular an obligation on DHAs to notify to LEAs, cf 1981 Education Act, Section 10); liaison between services and with parents; key personnel (e.g. its recommendations for ‘named person’).
Initiatives in under-fives and special needs in recent years have stemmed in part from these recommendations, some of which, of course, formed the basis of the 1981 Education Act.
Circular 1/83 accompanying the Act devotes a section to under-fives and reiterates a commitment to integrating children with ‘significant learning difficulties’ or disabilities into mainstream pre-school provision (p 13).
This presupposes co-operation between services (p 15), yet workers in all but a handful of local authorities could attest to resources and personnel not being made available to effect the good working links advocated in official reports.
Despite restrictions of finance and lack of initial endorsement often from higher echelons of management, the amount of innovative work in under-fives and special needs areas has been significant.
Some of it has been established ‘good practice’ for several years, such as Portage, singled out for mention in the Warnock Report.
Other work is still recent enough to warrant being described at present as ‘emerging good practice.
‘Bringing the best together’— a summary of some of the initiatives
A number of developments are singled out for brief reference.
For knowledgeable readers this part can serve as a reminder; for those who wish to read further key references are given.
Parental and family involvement
Developments of the last few years within mainstream nursery settings as well as within ‘special needs’ contexts demonstrate a commitment to dealing with the whole child, taking into account major influences on his/her life and progress.
A key tenet is that of ‘parents as educators’(Topping 1986) within broader ecological perspectives (Apter 1982, Wolfendale 1987a).
A whole range of initiatives in pre-school settings has been described (Smith 1981, Tizard et al 1981, Raven 1980, Wolfendale 1983) with attempts made by these writers and others to put observed practice into theoretical and conceptual frameworks.
In a DHSS-funded, National Children's Bureau-based study, Gillian Pugh and Erica De'Ath surveyed pre-school schemes and centres in which parental/family participation was an integral feature.
Materials have been developed from this study and two books describe 12 pre-school schemes and centres which are attempting to develop relationships between parents and workers (Pugh et al 1987).
One of the most advanced initiatives in the area of pre-school and special needs is Portage which has spread dramatically throughout the UK in the past 12 years.
Portage as a comprehensive teaching/learning programme involves ‘parents as partners’ and is therefore a prime example of ‘equivalent expertise’(Wolfendale 1983) wherein professionals and parents work together, sharing and pooling their experience and skills on behalf of the child.
The classic Portage model extends to the organisation and management of the programme at all levels and stages of operation.
It provides a convincing demonstration of inter- and multi-disciplinary co-operation as well as effective parental involvement, thus giving evidence that, given a number of identifiable requisites, personnel from different disciplines can work together productively.
There are now a number of books and articles on Portage — the National Foundation for Educational Research (NFER) publishes Portage books and materials.
The area of involving parents in assessment of the development and progress of their young children is a growing one.
A number of instruments have been developed (Wolfendale 1988) including All About Me , a parent-completed pre-school schedule (Wolfendale 1987b).
Working for parents
This section describes the growth of self-help parents' groups and services for parents developed by several voluntary associations.
The 1981 Education Act (implemented I April 1983) has provided a powerful spur to the formation of such groups and services.
While the Act reiterates a commitment to parental involvement (Sandow, Stafford and Stafford 1987) nevertheless many parents have felt excluded from decision-making processes and have formed alliances to challenge local authorities and to press for change.
Examples include the Parents' Campaign for Integrated Education in London; the Campaign for Choice in Special Education, also based in the Inner London  Education Authority; LINC in Rugby.
In some of these, initial confrontation is now leading to constructive dialogue with local authority officials.
The national umbrella organisation for these local and regional groups is 81 ACTION which was formed during 1986, has an agreed set of aims and publishes a newsletter.
The groups exist for the whole age range, from pre-school upwards.
A number of voluntary associations have become committed to the idea of ‘empowering’ parents to speak for and represent themselves, and see their role as providing training, support and an expert voice as and when required.
Curriculum innovation
The question of the appropriateness of nursery curricula in particular and other pre-school opportunities in general has been a matter for debate for a number of years (Tizard 1974).
Descriptive studies of pre-school education (Parry and Archer 1974, Gilkes 1987) have illuminated the debate to some extent and aims and objectives approaches to curriculum design can serve as pragmatic guidelines in the absence of a consensus about short and longer term criteria for early childhood education.
Research and development into compensatory educational programmes, referred to earlier, have focused much attention on the issues without necessarily resolving them.
A major stumbling-block to consensus is the fact that ‘curriculum’ is an educational term, deployed by educationists.
But there are anomalies within education, too.
In 61 education nurseries catering for children with special needs surveyed by the Department of Education and Science (1983) less than one-third were working to a statement of intent about the curriculum.
Growth in provision for pre-school children with special needs
A number of significant developments were anticipated and advocated in two books published before the implementation of the 1981 Education Act.
Chazan et al (1980) and Chazan and Laing (1982) herald growth in ‘special’ provision, increased parental involvement, the need for team work, planned intervention programmes, the advent of specialist support staff.
That these developments have implications for initial and  inservice training of staff is addressed by Chazan et al .
The Warnock Report has remained influential in staking out certain philosophi-cal ground rules, to which an increasing number of people are drawn, namely, integration.
Although few local authorities have written special needs policies and written commitment to integration, nevertheless ‘on the ground’ practitioners test out its viability by placing pre-schoolers with assessed special needs in education and social service nurseries, and in playgroups.
The obligation upon LEAs to meet a child's special educational needs as set out in his/her statement of needs has led to an increase in specialist staff, visiting, or based in these centres and working with and supporting regular staff.
Some teachers have a liaison brief that brings them into contact with other services and parents.
Despite these encouraging developments (see Potts 1987 for a brief overview) most of the aspirations of the Warnock committee in recommending the under-fives as a priority area remain unfulfilled, and there is a dearth of data on the effectiveness of integrating children with special educational needs in the pre-school years (McGlynn and Phillips 1987).
The Select Committee (1987) examin-ing the working of the 1981 Education Act has this to say about the under-fives and special educational needs:
…the Act has facilitated progress and there has been some encouragement of home teaching programmes through educational support grants.
However, the Department (of Education and Science) had little information about the working of the Act in this phase of education and offered no information about the numbers of children who may be receiving special education under the age of five nor of the number of children who might be the subject of statements below school age.
In view of the evidence of the importance of early identification and intervention the Committee believes that a study by the Department in collaboration with LEAs and the DHSS of the Act's procedures in the preschool period is now necessary.
(p xvi, para 40)
Implications of emerging practice for collective responsibility
There is evidence that policy for children with special educational needs under five varies between and among statutory services and local authorities.
In the few examples of written policies on special needs and/or integration, the under-fives may be tacked on, or tagged alongside a general commitment to all children with special needs.
Less tenable even than that situation are those in which no policy exists and well-intentioned initiatives such as those described above or smoothly functioning inter-disciplinary networks succeed because of personnel rather than the execution of a statement of intent.
It may be apposite to consider that a corporate stand on under-fives and special needs is now a moral imperative and that we should take seriously the clarion calls of Warnock and the Select Committee, not only because we owe it to children and their families, but also because
good practice must not go to waste without the proper commitment and backing
there is a danger of poorly utilising available resources due to lack of forward planning and co-ordination between services.
A small clutch of local authorities have evolved coherent and articulated policies for under-fives that automatically include special needs, as an integral part of a shared philosophy.
For example, the written policy of one large northern  metropolitan area stated ‘It is important to protect children's rights’.
The following is an extract from a shire county area development plan:
Ideally there would be no institutional separation of children and families with special needs.
Universal services would be available with a level of resourcing that would permit them to give appropriate support to individuals within a common overall structure.
Specialist treatment bases might continue to exist where intensive work could be done on particular problems, but their aim would be to ensure that children could take advantage of mainstream services.
Collective responsibility; sharing responsibility; and accountability
A warning note is sounded in the Fish Report (on special education in the Inner London Education Authority 1985) for local authorities, voluntary associations and parents' groups to move towards stated, written policies on an integrated nursery and pre-school service:
We found that the large range of professionals involved in provision and services for young children with special educational needs were often con-fused about how such needs could be predicted and what assessment procedures should be used.
(p 46)
Collective responsibility operating within broader social and political contexts
Equal opportunities and children's rights are the bedrock principles of unified pre-school services.
Special needs, disability and handicap are perceived to be part of a list of rights for so-called minority groups.
Yet the under-fives area has tended to be somewhat ignored when anti-racist, anti.sexist policies are developed.
The Swann Report (1985, p 393) devotes half a page (out of 800 pages) to this age group and recommends extension of nursery facilities for ethnic minority children and greater numbers of staff from the ethnic minorities.
Nothing is said to make it clear that ‘education for all’ extends to under-fives.
It does, and Nicole Celestin's booklet (1986) shows how it can and should be applicable.
The political ramifications of resourcing and decision-making likewise cannot be ignored.
Under-fives workers cannot afford to be concerned solely with so-called ‘professional’ issues.
They need to stay vigilant against: erosion of pre-school provision; the disadvantaging (removal of rights) of women who are mothers; lack of funding of pre-school and special needs services; continued fragmentation of services.
Fighting against threats to young children's rights to early childhood opportunities could be seen as an expression of legitimate collective responsibility.
Prospects for special educational needs in the early years
Thus far, the chapter has aimed to provide a review of developments, to identify emerging as well as established practice, and to demonstrate inter-connectedness of service provision.
A number of principles, notably that of collective responsibility, have been set out as signposts for the continuing evaluation of services for the under-fives.
But what of immediate realities and possible action for the present back in the workplace?
There are a number of issues that already have and will continue to have direct bearing on day to day practice of which the major one will be the reverberating effects upon pre-school education of the Education Reform Act 1988.
The closing part of this chapter will raise a number of these issues with a view to alerting us all to the realities against which aspirations have to be aligned, if not reconciled.
Issues of daily practice: the educational perspective
While the government of the day is committed in principle and in law to extension of rights and access to education and other services for under-fives with special needs, the provision lags behind.
In lieu of an overarching policy of universal nursery education, within which special needs would have an acknowledged place, we have the hotchpotch of provision with which practitioners are only too familiar, and which mostly reflects local and regional idiosyncrasies rather than a planned and coherent structure based on policy.
Translation of policy into practice would mean acting upon specifics, such as the recommendations made in the recently-issued NUT Guidelines on Negotiating for Special Needs (1988):
The early assessment of under-fives, home visiting, Portage schemes and nursery provision should be a priority time for the assessment process and additional support for the care of very young children with special needs attending nursery classes.
(p 7)
Perhaps we can discern positive moves in respect of the government's intentions towards under-fives generally by some developments during 1988, as follows.
The setting up of the Select Committee to look at the whole under-fives area
A great deal of evidence has been given by all the associations concerned, and the Select Committee report was published in January 1989.
There was speculation about how seriously the committee would heed and take account of the overwhelming consensus that the early years are the seedcorn of the future, and that, commensurately, investment of the proper magnitude would have to be made to reflect that, and, also, to bring the UK in line with a number of other European countries, as far as provision is concerned (Moss 1988).
One way  of providing an integrated service, and one which is advocated by the National Association of Inspectors and Advisers (expressed in the NAIEA evidence to the Select Committee) is to develop combined centres, which offer education and day care.
HMI sees mileage in this model, too (DES 1988).
Representation on special needs was also made to the Select Committee, by teachers' associations and others, making the point that early identification of delay difficulties is facilitated when the provisions and structures are in place.
It is to be hoped that the evidence provided by Margaret Clark (1988) will be seen to be a vital concomitant to the evidence considered by the Select Committee.
Inclusion of pre-school in the grant-related in-service training programme (GRIST) for 1988–89
For the first time, monies are earmarked for training in the teaching of four-year-old children in primary classes, the specific purpose being to update and improve the knowledge and understanding of teachers and non-specialist advisers with responsibility for young children.
One of the liveliest issues of contemporary education is that of four year olds in school.
Concern was expressed to the Under Fives Select Committee from all quarters about the inappropriateness of curricula and care for young children who are in effect ‘pre-school’ but not, in the main, receiving appropriate pre-school learning experiences, and who sometimes are in classes with children up to seven years of age.
There is evidence of sensitivity to the issues at local planning level and empirical evidence as to the differential needs of four year olds in primary schools (NFER/SCDC 1987), so the government is in no doubt about the seriousness of a situation which will be aggravated by the advent of the Education Reform Act.
The GRIST funding represents a timely response to addressing these issues, although a cautionary note has to be sounded — if the curriculum is not considered satisfactory for four years olds in general, what of its relevance for four year olds with special needs?
Some may already be placed, with a statement of needs which ‘protects’ via the additional provision of a special programme, extra specialist teaching and/or welfare assistance.
There will be other four year olds, however, whose needs will go undetected or unmet by virtue of numbers, inadequate teacher recognition, and a myriad of other ‘pre-referral’ features of learning difficulty which accrue over time, even in infant school (Wolfendale and Bryans 1980).
This is a critical problem for teachers, advisory teachers, advisers and educational psychologists to resolve.
Education Reform Act 1988 (ERA)
The ERA became law on 29 July 1988, though each of its many provisions will come into force at different times over the next few years.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to grapple with the full implications of the whole ERA for pre-school  education, particularly with regard to‘opting out’, financial delegation, especially as, at the time of writing, vesting days for each of these major elements have yet to be announced, and discussion would be speculative.
In the shorter term, it is possible to raise several issues that are of concern to those working with pre-school and special needs.
1
Parents and professionals will welcome the amendment to the 1981 Education Act which comes into force at once, to the effect that parents have the right of appeal where statements have been rewritten for any reason and must be informed in writing of this right.
2
LEAs will have the right (though not the duty) to employ such ‘outside’ specialists as speech therapists.
This will be an important and helpful clarification of what has recently been a vexed issue, and will undoubtedly have a bearing on pre-school provision.
3
The national curriculum: There are two relevant aspects to consider.
a
For children in primary and secondary schools, the issue has been how to make the national curriculum sufficiently flexible to accommodate children with special educational needs, while safeguarding their rights not to be excluded from mainstream education.
The legislation now allows for the temporary or permanent modification of statements (and in the case of non-statemented special needs pupils, to make temporary exceptions).
Thus a pupil may be exempted from the national curriculum in the short or longer term; what exactly he or she will then ‘receive’(i.e. the relationship of an individualised curriculum to the national curriculum) is of course a crucial issue.
b
Implications of the national curriculum ‘downwards’ to four year olds in primary schools (see ‘Issues of daily practice’above) as well as a possible consequential ‘knock-on’effect on the education of three to five year olds in nursery schools and classes.
There is a legitimate fear of ‘straitjacket-ing’ the nursery/early years curriculum to fit what some see as the constraints of a national curriculum and the requirements of the testing programme.
4
The testing arrangements: The national curriculum will be intimately connected to the assessment and testing schedule at years seven, 11, 14 and 16 and the same concerns expressed in 3 a and b apply.
The programmes of study will apply from five years of age, likewise the attainment targets, although not in operation formally until the age of seven years, will of course be drawn from the study programmes in the first two years of statutory schooling.
The concept of ‘teaching by objectives’, and regular progress monitoring, can be regarded as offering a system whereby no child slips through the net.
But the concern, in respect of the early years, is that we have never achieved consensus over what an appropriate early years curriculum should be; besides which, provision is so varied nationally that some children are evidently disadvantaged from an early age.
In his evidence to the Select Committee on Under-Fives, the Secretary of State for Education, Kenneth Baker, said he appreciated the different starting points (into education) and said that schools could publish in their results a clear indication of the starting age of children in order to indicate those who are disadvantaged (unpublished evidence).
This suggestion begs many issues.
Are these various ‘reality indices’ positive and constructive in sum for pre-school children with special educational needs?
If we go only by the legislation and other portents, then the outlook is overcast at present and we are not sure how it will clear; if commitment and current initiatives are anything to go by, then the prospects are brighter.
Support for special needs in the primary school
Peter Smith
I will attempt to address this theme in the context of the current situation and to make suggestions about the future of support for special needs in the primary school based on experience of good practice in the past and present.
It is not surprising that many professionals involved in education are rather dispirited and disillusioned at this time.
The rate of change and the lack of sincere consultation have led to an air of defeatism and concern which is frequently summed up in the analogy that they (the government) keep moving the goalposts.
Although there has been a recent escalation in the introduction of legislation we are all aware that the educational climate has gradually changed ever since former Prime Minister Jim Callaghan's historic speech at Ruskin College in 1976 when he instituted the Great Debate.
Readers of this paper will need no reminding of the way in which the important recommendations of the Warnock committee were encapsulated in the 1981 Act but accompanied by a clear negative statement: ‘There will be no additional funds’.
Frankly, I find ii amazing that so much progress has already been made in support of special needs and integration into normal schools without resources from central government.
Following realistic appraisal of the current situation and the provisions of the GERBIL, I am convinced that we must respond to the government legislation.
Of course we must, but at the same time we must endeavour to retain the practices and methods we know are right for our children.
Do we need to be reminded of the current legislation?
Probably not, but I will make brief reference to what I sometimes think of as ‘The Odds’.
There are two items already with us that are symptomatic of the reduced trust and respect in which some ministers hold teachers.
These are the pay and conditions which were imposed following the long spell of industrial action.
As well as removing the salary negotiating machinery, they introduced the concept of GRIST days and the 1265 hours.
As we all know, the 1265 hours represent a reduction of hours worked by most teachers.
I think we must recognise that the five GRIST days have proved to be very useful and much appreciated by all.
Those responsible must ensure, however, that the quality of programmes on those days remains high or dis-illusionment will come when the novelty goes.
The other new GERBIL clauses concern the national curriculum, age-related tests, local financial management, opting out, city technical colleges, open enrolment and open records.
Some of these are very political and outside my brief, but there are those on which I want to comment.
The national curriculum will clarify the entitlement of every pupil and will therefore be helpful for those with concern for children with special needs.
Although there is in effect already a common basic curriculum in our primary schools it will help to have an agreed statement.
Personally, I am much encouraged that in response to pressure the Bill was amended to make it flexible enough to accommodate pupils' special educational needs.
The government also accepted a Lords' amendment specifying special needs as a factor that may bc taken into account in the resource allocation formula.
Open records should lead to better record keeping in the primary sector and will give further support to the general practice of consulting parents early about learning or behavioural problems.
The third provision I want to discuss is that of age-related testing.
I was heartened to note that a new clause was inserted during the Bill's progress through Parliament, stipulating that the results of a pupil's assessment should be made available only to the pupil's parents, the governors or the LEA.
This is better news, but I suggest that the utmost vigilance will still be needed by teachers and associations such as NARE and UKRA to ensure that assessment and testing are not allowed to exercise a deleterious effect on schools.
Few teachers will disagree with the need for diagnostic testing of individuals or even with sensible assessment for monitoring of standards.
Dangers exist, however, that tests could both dominate and limit the curriculum as well as reinforcing a sense of failure for children with special needs.
A recent pronouncement by a former Education Minister serves to remind us of the kind of thinking we must guard against.
The ex-minister proposed that action should be taken against parents of disruptive five year olds who are unable to pass a test of 20 items.
The test items range from the ability to dress themselves, to the ability to count from one to five and to recognise their own names in print.
If this attitude is allowed to prevail there will be no room for different rates of development in our children.
We now know too much about child development to allow this kind of testing to be inflicted on our schools, so we must co-operate in developing and using appropriate tests while, at the same time, resisting inappropriate proposals.
Having established my personal feelings about the current political situation and the changes resulting from the GERBIL, it is now necessary to pay attention to present practice with regard to special needs in the primary school.
Perhaps the starting point for this discussion should be a historical one.
When I started teaching a junior class in 1947 in a London County Council  school there was no provision at all.
The school was a JMI school with over 400 pupils in ten classes, ten teachers plus a head teacher, a part-time secretary and a milk lady who came into school for one and a half hours a day to distribute milk.
With over 40 in each class and no  supernumerary staff, the children with special learning needs were thought of as being dull and backward.
They were offered the same curriculum as the rest of the unstreamed class, i.e. they were on course to fail the 11 plus.
Any extra help they received was through the dedication of any class teacher who had enough energy left over from dealing with the demands of the class as a whole.
They were also subjected to the same monthly attainment tests through which the headmaster monitored the effectiveness of his teachers.
I remember a lad named Alfie who was in the junior school for three years.
The monthly tests were designed with the demands of the scholarship exam in mind but Alfie, with his severe special needs, did not achieve a single mark in any test during the three years.
The only expertise available in connection with special needs in the 1940s resided in the divisional educational psychologist and, as there were over 80 schools in division one of the LCC, we neither expected nor received much help from that source.
During the 1960s, class numbers dropped sharply and concern for children with learning difficulties began to increase.
This was the era of opportunity classes.
Children with considerable learning problems were removed from mainstream classes for a few months and taught by a specially appointed additional teacher.
The opportunity class teachers I knew either had some extra training and/or some special quality or flair.
Unfortunately, neither their teacher colleagues nor the parents understood the teaching techniques utilised.
They assumed that pupils, mostly boys, of course, who were failing on the school reading scheme simply needed more and more opportunity to slog away at the phonics and sight vocabulary while under tight supervision.
They failed to realise that the excursions, the painting, the model making and the drama were all necessary to generate interest and to build relationships and confidence.
This was an approach to literacy learning that is now recognised and valued as the language experience approach.
Still, most of us were glad to be relieved of responsibility for our failing learners for a few months.
Alongside the occasional opportunity classes in the 1960s came a little finding for extra staff.
Part-time teachers could be found working in odd corners with small groups of children needing extra help.
These teachers, usually female, were recruited in response to advertisements that usually stipulated needlework plus some remedial reading.
The 1970s saw the beginning of serious attempts to develop remedial services in local authorities.
People were appointed to co-ordinate the work of remedial teachers in schools.
In-service courses proliferated, resource centres were established, publishers began to produce materials and a whole range of diagnostic tests was made available.
The word dyslexia became a familiar label even though it did not in itself provide miraculous remedies for learning difficulties.
Many advisory teachers and others who at present hold leadership posts in special education  needs support services were seconded during the 1970s and 1980s to take one-year full-time diploma courses at institutes of higher education.
During the 1980s we have witnessed further development of provision in special needs.
The Warnock Report and the 1981 Act which followed have drawn attention to the special needs of 20 per cent of the population.
Steady progress has been made in many authorities in integrating some of the statemented children (the two per cent) into mainstream primary schools.
I am sure this is a trend we all applaud providing the necessary staffing and facilities are made available.
The benefit to the children with special needs and also to the mainstream pupils is plain for all to see.
It would appear, however, that the needs of some statemented children are such that they continue to require special provision in special schools.
There have been several imaginative schemes where special schools or units have been placed alongside mainstream schools.
This allows for special needs children to continue to receive specialist medical and/or educational help while also enabling them to integrate with mainstream children at an appropriate level.
I have made this broad but brief review of the development of provision for special needs partly to remind us of how much improvement has been achieved and also as a background to the rest of the paper.
I intend to concentrate on provision for the 18 per cent unstatemented pupils who remain in mainstream schools but who, as Warnock reminded us, have special needs.
I want to pay particular attention to present practice and to what may perhaps happen in the years ahead.
While I was preparing this paper the Times Educational Supplement of 5 August 1988 published a comment on the HMI report on secondary education.
In the section on special needs the report notes that in 45 per cent of schools pupils are withdrawn for group lessons concentrating on basic language and numeracy, while in the other 55 per cent of schools special needs teachers work alongside the subject teachers in the normal classroom setting.
HMI also commented that in general‘too little attention is given to the diagnosis of need before attempting to meet it’.
I quote from this report on secondary education because I find the debate about whether or not to withdraw pupils with special needs is one which occupies the minds of primary teachers as well.
The debate is an example of unnecessary polarisation.
I do not believe that it has to be a question of either/or.
Both strategies have their place and it should be for teachers to determine the balance appropriate to their situation and the needs of their pupils.
Later in this paper I intend to outline the curriculum and teaching strategies I hope will be retained within the national curriculum.
As it is vital that all children have access to the rich curriculum and to the kind of experiences that involve pupils with purpose it must be desirable that, at times, the special needs teachers work alongside mainstream class teachers.
At such times the special needs teacher will be mediating the tasks, helping the pupils to benefit from the experience and at the same time observing their performance.
At other times it may be beneficial to withdraw children with special needs  individually or in groups for concentrated attention on an aspect of learning which has been diagnosed as necessary.
The role of special educational needs support teachers has become more complex and clearly defined in recent years.
The special educational needs support service (SENSS) that I know well now has a structured hierarchy to ensure that available staffing resources are distributed through the borough according to needs.
They also provide advice and inservice training for the SENSS team and for mainstream teachers.
Thus the role of SENSS teachers is increasingly an advisory one.
In addition to working directly with pupils with special needs they advise mainstream teachers about programmes of work and they carry out detailed diagnostic assessment as necessary.
The interaction between SENSS teachers and class teachers as they work together with the class and as they exchange information is a great improvement on the situation which pertained in the days when remedial groups were withdrawn and then returned to class with a total absence or communication.
Although I have stressed the importance of all children having access to the full primary curriculum, it must be recognised that some children do need special provision, more time, and/or extra help if they are to profit from the opportunity.
The importance of incremental learning in some aspects of the curriculum is now widely accepted.
It is now recognised that the tasks and skills to be learned by children with severe learning difficulties have to be analysed precisely and that the setting of small, clearly defined incremental objectives for individual pupils is a necessary part of programme planning.
(Warnock, para 11.57)
Or as Ainscow and Tweddle emphasise in their important book,Preventing Classroom Failure :
An objective based approach to teaching children with severe learning difficulties is needed.
First ascertain what the learner already knows and teach from that point.
The tenets expressed in these two quotations have greatly influenced attitudes and the context of in-service courses, giving rise to such approaches as the special needs action programme.
Both the above quotations refer to severe learning difficulties but of course severe is a term open to varying interpretations.
The incremental approach is often appropriate for any child with considerable learning difficulties.
Ii is perhaps fair to say that experience of the kind of thinking involved also results in more perceptive provision for those children whose learning difficulties are less pronounced.
At this point there is need for me to give some detail about the shape and nature of the primary curriculum to which all children should have access.
I am convinced that current practice in the best of our primary schools is second to none and I know this view is also held by educators in other parts of the world.
This is not to suggest that our primary schools are perfect; perfection in something as complex and variable as education would be very hard to achieve.
My belief is that our good practice has evolved over a period of more than 50 years and that it has developed in classrooms through the dedicated expertise of British teachers enjoying the relative freedom traditionally allowed within our education system.
My concern is that increased external influence with accompanying loss of autonomy could lead to the demise of all that has been gained.
I repeat, however, my conviction that primary teachers can adapt to the new legislation without abandoning the good practice which they know is right for children.
The remainder of this paper will be devoted to a description of that good practice.
A discussion of primary practice should, perhaps, begin with a definition of aims.
Volumes have been written on this subject but I will offer a succinct aim that sums up, for me, the essence of good practice:
To provide experiences and activities through which all children may learn to:
observe reflectively
think effectively
discuss confidently
study efficiently
respond creatively
concentrate and persevere
work harmoniously in groups
read and comprehend independently
express themselves in speech and writing.
The emphasis on language development in this succinct aim is obvious but so, I hope, is the emphasis on learning through activity and with a sense of purpose.
Equally important is the teacher's interventionist role in creating the learning environment, initiating the experiences and providing skills teaching as appropriate in accordance with the stage of development of the individual.
The organisation of a classroom to bring about the acquisition of concepts and the learning of skills requires considerable thought.
The classroom environment needs to be a stimulating workshop yet requires provision of opportunities for listening carefully, paying attention and sustaining concentration.
In presenting learning tasks and information to pupils a flexible organisation is required and children need training to be as independent as possible when working without direct supervision.
Figure 4.
I provides a framework within which a teacher might plan.
The ILEA Report on Junior Schools 1985 listed factors contributing to ‘good’ schools.
High on the list were:
1
Involvement of the teachers: In successful schools, the teachers were involved in curriculum planning and played a major role in developing their own curriculum guidelines.
2
Consistency among teachers: Pupils performed better when the approach to teaching was consistent.
For example, in schools where all the teachers followed guidelines in the same way, the impact was positive.
My experience of successful schools certainly supports these two recommendations and I would suggest there are clear implications for SENSS Teachers and advisory teachers to be involved in school policy making to ensure that all children have access to the full curriculum.
There is a need to influence thinking in staff rooms towards a balanced but flexible approach which avoids unnecessary polarisation.
Space allows me to discuss only a few aspects of the curriculum in any detail.
Literacy and numeracy remain priorities for all children in the primary school.
I will also devote some time to topic work because of the importance I attach to integrated approaches to learning.
Literacy remains the number one curriculum priority.
It can be confidently stated that every experience and activity in the primary school uses language but also serves to develop it.
Reading has historically been viewed as being synonymous with the term  remedial and still today it is a priority for attention by members of SENSS teams.
As a past president of the United Kingdom Reading Association I wish to establish that while my association is concerned with reading it is also concerned with the full range of language arts and skills.
Figure 4.2 summarises the nature of our concern and the way in which we view the interrelation of the four modes of language.
 It is now customary to consider reading in this context.
For a long time reading has been subject to a variety of fads and fashions.
The current debate centres on whether children should learn to read through reading schemes or through ‘real’ books only.
The trend to polarise in reading theory and practice is both unnecessary and unfortunate.
The important thing is that children learn to read with confidence, understanding and pleasure.
To ensure that this happens teachers need the resources to motivate and interest children and to structure the development of their ability to read for meaning independently.
Bearing in mind the different learning styles of children, all schools surely need a range of the best of reading schemes together with a multitude of real books.
It is for the teachers, drawing on their professional knowledge and expertise, to use the  materials appropriate for their pupils.
The energy currently expended on this pointless debate would be better directed towards a concerted effort to persuade the government and local education authorities to fund a better teacher-pupil ratio in the early years.
More opportunities for individual and small group Work in the infant schools would make it more likely that children will achieve fluency in reading early enough to prevent the rejection of learning which so often accompa-nies failure as children move on into the older primary classes.
An important aspect of reading which must  receive attention is the relationship between sound and symbol.
Most teachers encourage children to make use of a range of clues including picture clues, contextual clues and syntactical clues but there are also occasions when phonic skills are needed.
This is also true in connection with spelling, and so phonic knowledge remains an essential element in the language learning programme.
I was pleased to note in the conference programme that Lyn Wendon is conducting a workshop, ‘Talking about Language’.
Lyn Wendon has devised a Pictogram system which she calls Letterland.
Through the Letterland characters children come to understand about sound/symbol relationships in a way which interests and excites them.
As children with special educational needs grow in reading competence, increasing demands are made on their skills because they are expected to learn through reading.
Unless we continue to support these children in the upper primary and lower secondary classes their confidence can be undermined and the frustration/failure cycle re-established.
Research has shown that many text books written in the subject areas for 11- and 12-year-old pupils have readability ages of 14.
Such sentences as ‘Climatic conditions deteriorate rapidly with increasing elevation’ are not difficult because of the concepts embodied but because of the vocabulary used and the way the sentence is structured.
A special needs support teacher working alongside a mainstream teacher is able to mediate such printed statements to pupils with special needs.
Sensitive intervention of this kind is greatly facilitated in classrooms where group discussion approaches are used.
The Schools Council project, ‘The Effective Use of Reading’, recommends several strategies that involve group interaction as children work together to reach decisions or conclusions about information presented in written prose.
SENSS teachers who are involved in school policy discussions should seek opportunities to influence teaching approaches in this direction.
The other side of the literacy coin — writing — is increasingly coming into focus.
The schools curriculum development council's project ‘About Writing’ is foster-ing interest through working groups around the country.
The growing trend to adopt the Graves approach, as explained in his book Writing: Teachers and Children at Work (Heinemann 1983) is particularly helpful for those children who find writing difficult.
Graves divides the writing process into stages and, through the encouragement of conferencing, facilitates intervention without loss of face for the pupil.
Acceptance of the separate stages of rehearsal, drafting, revision, editing and publishing as normal practice for writers encourages children with  special needs to express their ideas in writing more confidently than was possible when children were expected to get everything right at the first attempt.
Related ideas like shared writing, dictated writing and invented spelling together with the introduction of new technology including the word processor should all contribute to an easing of the tension associated with traditional attitudes to spelling and handwriting.
It must be remembered, however, that for all children the ultimate aim is still maximum competence in the conventional skills involved in writing.
It follows, therefore, that alongside the encouraging innovations briefly mentioned, there must be school policies for achieving satisfactory standards of handwriting, spelling, grammar and punctuation, etc.
During the last few years an increasing number of schools have adopted agreed policies for handwriting.
This is a welcome development since children need the support of consistent teaching and sensible attitudes if they are to acquire the fluent and legible hand they need for communication.
My views on this subject are fully documented in Developing Handwriting (Macmillan 1977);The Teacher's Manual for New Nelson Handwriting (Nelson 1984; revised 1989) and Holmes McDougall Handwriting (Holmes McDougall 1988).
SENSS teachers are all too well aware of the difficulty of remedying handwriting problems once they have become deep-rooted.
It behoves these teachers, in their advisory roles, to try to influence school policies and to encourage some form of monitoring accompanied by the diagnosis of significant faults.
Numeracy is the other major curriculum concern of SENSS teachers although, all too often, only a very small percentage of available resources is devoted to this subject.
All children need a degree of competence in mathematics and some facility with numbers is essential for successful living in present day society.
The media and the community in general focus concern on number bonds and tables.
There is no doubt that quick recall of number facts is still an advantage even in the era of calculators and computers.
It is equally important, however, that children understand mathematical concepts and processes and that they see some purpose in learning the subject.
The Cockroft Report (1984) gave a most encouraging survey of good practice and advocated an approach which can be summed up through the mnemonic SPIDER:.
S olving problems
P ractical work
I nvestigation
D iscussion
E xposition
R outine skills.
This approach is a balanced one, the teacher's role in promoting active searching  for pattern and purpose being nicely balanced by the more conventional role of presenting information and setting tasks that practise algorithms and basic facts.
The inclusion of discussion is also interesting and contrasts with traditional approaches which demanded silence in arithmetic lessons.
I refer back to my earlier remarks about classroom organisation.
In a class which is accustomed to working in groups it is possible for a SENSS teacher to work alongside a group of children which includes one or more pupils with special needs.
In that situation a child with learning difficulties has access to the full curriculum with his peers but also has the benefit of the SENSS teacher sensi-tively supporting and encouraging.
I conclude this paper with a brief statement about thematic work.
Although topic work is sometimes justifiably criticised for being shallow and unstructured, I believe it to be one of the most valuable aspects of the primary school curriculum.
During the last ten years there has been considerable progress towards ensuring that thematic work is incremental, that undue repetition is avoided and that the skills, attitudes, concepts and knowledge of the integrated subjects are taught sequentially.
Good practice in topic work is complex and there is not space to describe it in detail here.
A detailed account is to be found in Chapter 7, ‘Reading Development Through Topic Work in the Middle Years’, in Teaching Reading: The key Issues (Heinemann 1982).
George Brown in Human Teaching for Human Learning describes a project based on what he calls Confluent Education.
Figure 4.3 sets out a range of terms to show the relationship between the cognitive and affective aspects of learning.
The labels employed all apply to well structured integrated thematic work and, I think, fully support my plea for its retention.
In conclusion I would suggest that the thrust of this paper can be summarised as follows:
Steady progress over the last four decades has brought us to a point where much of what happens in primary education is a source of pride.
There has also been a steady growth in the number and quality of teachers engaged in special educational needs support.
Our knowledge about how children acquire literacy and numeracy is now considerable.
Our understanding of the ways in which children learn confirms the appropriateness of group work and of integrated studies which involve pupils with a sense of purpose.
All of this suggests that, in responding to the new legislation and in adapting to meet its demands, we must not lose what has been so painstakingly developed.
Above all, there must be extreme vigilance to ensure that testing is not allowed to become a retrogressive influence.
A policy for integration using supportive education
Phil Bell
Introduction
The aim of this paper is to consider a strategy which schools could adopt to help introduce a policy for integration.
The paper draws on a model which, while not held up as the definitive approach, could nevertheless serve as a working document for schools wrestling with the realities of moving towards an integrated structure.
NARE's silver jubilee conference provided a platform not only to reflect on past achievements but, perhaps more importantly, to set new goals for future developments.
It is time to review the wider concept of needs and consider their implications in the wake of the Education Reform Act.
The 1988 Act offers an entitlement curriculum for all children encompassing nine areas of learning and experience — surely a step in the right direction.
Built into the fabric of this entitlement is the requirement that it should embrace five curriculum characteristics, the first three being that it must be broad, balanced and relevant.
On the surface this structure would seem to have much to commend it, guaran-teeing, as it does, every child a right to an educational curriculum of distinctive breadth and depth irrespective of the type of school he or she attends and irrespective of the talents the child possesses.
However, as usual there is a sting in the tail and in this case it is the fourth characteristic, that of differentiation, which gives cause for concern.
There are many ways of building differentiation into the curriculum and the Act is not prescriptive of any particular approach, but as Lady Warnock (1988) pointed out:
the philosophy and objectives of the 1981 Education Act, which went some way to implementing the Warnock recommendations, are not much in evidence in the latest legislation.
In fact, they are conspicuous by their absence.
The most far-reaching omission was the lack of any firm commitment to a policy for integration.
While no one would deny the requirement for progression and continuity, the fifth characteristics of Baker's curriculum package, I would argue that one essential characteristic has been omitted.
This sixth characteristic is that of accessi-bility, for it is around this concept that the nature and fairness of differentiation could be decided.
Implicit in some definitions for differentiated learning is the assumption that it is the child who has the ‘problem’ when there is a breakdown in learning.
If we accept, however, that as teachers it is our professional duty to bring about learning, then we are beholden to examine our methods regularly and to consider what constitutes effective teaching and learning styles.
The need for this regular review is pin-pointed in the Fish Report (1984) which states that ‘the relative nature of the majority of special educational needs means that schools determine the extent and nature of the needs which arise’.
In secondary schools, in particular, this statement should be aired frequently to focus attention on the processes and practices adopted in the name of education.
If the stepping stones laid down by previous legislation and publications are to be extended, it is important to review initiatives which are attempting to implement a policy for integration.
Integration is still very much in its infancy and working examples of its practice need to be documented, not only for the school's own evaluation purposes, but also to provide discussion documents to encourage other schools to take a careful and considered look at their own provision.
In helping schools to take a more considered look at their own structures the framework outlined in figure 5.
I may prove useful.
This framework identifies five elements for consideration when reviewing a whole-school response to meeting children's needs, and will be used in this paper to raise key issues.
The framework can offer the opportunity, not only to raise the staff's awareness of the issues which surround the concept of meeting needs, but hopefully to challenge some of the traditional dogmas which beset it.
For schools looking to develop a whole-school approach this diagram can provide a starting point for each department to articulate its position and, from these deliberations, find and build common bridges across subject departments to meet individual needs.
A primary goal in establishing some common ground must be to agree each teacher's role and responsibility for meeting children's needs.
This will be achieved only if all staff contribute to the formulation of the whole-school policy.
The reward for encouraging all members of staff to be active participants in the decision-making process, so helping them to develop an ownership of the final policy, is that it gives the policy a greater chance of being fully implemented across the curriculum.
The framework in figure 5.
I does have limitations, particularly when attempting to treat each element in isolation.
In any discussion it will soon become apparent that there is a considerable degree of overlap and intercorrellation which can not and should not be avoided.
The fact that none of the elements are mutually exclusive can also be viewed as a strength, for this reinforces the important point that ideals, as well as children, do not fit neatly into narrowly defined and constructed categories.
Attitudes
A pivotal point for determining the effectiveness of a whole-school approach for meeting children's needs will be the extent to which the staff's awareness of their own prejudices, bias and misunderstandings is challenged.
It is easy to see how these misconceptions have been formed, since the majority of teachers were educated and steeped in a system that perpetuated the concept of ‘the remedial child’, and was buttressed by policies and practices which continually reinforced the idea of a different child aligned with the need for segregation.
It is vital, therefore, to recognise the difficulty many staff experience when faced with an alternative view which may contradict and threaten the very philosophy around which their thoughts and teaching style has developed.
It is of paramount importance to break this chain of thought dictated by concepts of ‘ability’ and ‘segregation’and in its place to introduce a concept of individual needs and a policy for integration.
This alternative model moves away from the conventional idea of a child with learning difficulties to one which recognises and builds on the child's learning achievements.
Like everyone else, teachers may be unaware of the prejudiced views they hold and admitting their prejudice can be a very painful process.
The responsibility for challenging the conventional wisdom which surrounds the concept of needs rests heavily on the shoulders of those teachers aware of the injustice in the present system.
Introducing change, however, calls for patience, sensitivity and consideration for others who may not have had the opportunity to move on in their thinking.
The process of encouraging staff collectively to analyse and share their own concepts of ‘remedial’ and ‘need’can bring to the surface the anomalies, inconsistencies and injustice which at present cloud the vision of some teachers.
Skills
In the enthusiasm to challenge the injustice in the system it is important not to  overlook the needs of the teachers.
Consequently, to prepare for integration, the existing structure may need a thorough overhaul achieved by a comprehensive programme of planned staff and curriculum development.
The myth that certain teachers have ‘special’ or extraordinary ‘expertise’needs to be dispelled and replaced with the realisation that the skills needed to meet individual needs are those associated with effective techniques for teaching and learning.
Courses, including GRIST, have traditionally tended to bring together individual teachers from different schools to consider current educational issues.
For the member of staff concerned, the course may be most enlightening and motivating, but back in the reality of school this enthusiasm may be negated by a less than receptive staff.
The introduction of the cascade model, in which the member of staff reports back to colleagues, has been introduced to alleviate this reaction, but this too has met with three fairly substantial problems: first, the idea of cascading presumes that the teachers will return from the course keen and willing to share their experience; second, that the teachers will have the expertise to allow them to cascade the experience effectively; and third, that group dynamics between course members in which security, confidence and understanding can develop from the shared experience is frequently dissipated when the groups disperse.
While GRIST courses can help to raise awareness of particular issues, the benefits of providing a programme of in-house courses addressed to a particular school's needs may have much more relevance for the staff.
If a school can tailor its in-house courses and make them relevant to the needs of the whole school staff, then the dynamics of that collective and shared experience may provide greater rewards.
School led (be it school based or off-site) INSET has much to commend it and would appear to be a very productive and effective means of meeting the development needs of both the school and the staff.
The impact of such an approach was emphasised recently in a mainstream secondary school wishing to introduce a child from a special school who suffered from cerebral palsy.
To begin the integration process a video showing the child's classroom behaviour was produced.
With the child's consent the video was shown to the secondary school's staff to raise awareness of the child's needs and at the same time to identify the staff's anxieties and areas for future staff development.
The video provided a realistic and immediate means of conveying the child's needs to a teaching staff who had little previous knowledge of this condition, apart from sub-conscious ‘prejudice’.
The response from the staff was overwhelming.
The video showed everyday situations which the staff could relate to, and enabled them to make very constructive comments.
A similar video was made showing the physical environment of the mainstream school and the tutor group of which the child would become a member if she came to the school.
This second video was shown and discussed with the staff and child at the special school.
This reciprocal arrangement allowed the secondary school to benefit from the professional advice of the staff at the special school and to respond to any concerns or reservations raised by the child.
Having gained the support of the staff, attention then focused on the children.
A planned tutorial programme was prepared by the senior mistress, head of house and the child's tutor to raise the awareness of the children in the tutor group.
As with the staff, the children were shown the video and their comments and concerns were counselled.
It was found that although a four-week tutorial programme had been prepared, the children in the mainstream school were far more receptive and accepting of the situation and could not see any reason for delaying the child's integration.
In response to the children's far more advanced views on integration the tutorial programme was revised and within two weeks the child was a member of the mainstream school.
This preparation eased the way for further integration of physically handicapped children into the mixed ability secondary school.
The integration of children with physical handicaps into secondary schools may not be new, but the issue being considered here is the process of whole school staff development.
Resources
Resources can essentially be divided into two components: primary and secondary.
The primary resource, the most precious and valuable of all, is, of course, the teacher.
The excitement, entitlement and enabling aspects of the curriculum lie solely in this professional's hands.
It is the teacher's management of the learning environment that will determine effective learning for all, a point brought out by Ainscow and Tweddle (1988).
Without the vision, understanding and enthusiasm of this professional even the very best of secondary resources will fall far short of their educational potential.
The secondary resources are the tools the teacher brings to the learning environment in terms of equipment, ideas and materials.
These tools should enable all children, not only to gain access to the curriculum but also to allow and encourage them to respond to it in a way which clearly expresses their understanding.
The demand for these tools was recently illustrated in Ann FitzGerald's article (TES 1988) where she records Betsy Langford's poignant words:
…children are used to feeling dissatisfied with their work, to expect chiding from the teacher and often mockery from their friends and to find that even when they've tried their hardest, the results don't reflect the amount of effort expended.
The secondary resource should provide a means or a vehicle for driving through this pain barrier experienced by many children, but apparently not recognised by many teachers.
The skilled teacher who welcomes and values the child's contribution can do much to enhance the learning environment.
If this enhancement is  then linked with a resource which acts as a facilitator and so allows the child to record his or her thoughts in a form which reflects the hard work, the child's self-image, self-esteem and self-confidence can be further enhanced.
Inevitably, as time goes by, the necessity to record one's ideas and thoughts in a more concrete form tends to increase, so creating greater demands for productive skills.
These skills have the effect of laying children open to closer inspection and increase their vulnerability through peer appraisal and criticism.
The effect of peer recognition should never be underestimated, and as teachers we should find ways for all children to be able to enjoy the rewards of their endeavours.
Teachers must value the child's contribution and through anticipation of his or her needs provide the necessary tools for the child to exhibit the work in the best possible light.
To this end, it is important to build up an impressive arsenal of resources to meet individual needs.
These resources should be open ended and act as a facilitator to support the child's efforts, similar to those described by Bell and Best (1986), which are content free and can be applied in many contexts.
It is often quite surprising to discover just how aware children are of their own needs and how they can frequently articulate the type of resource they need.
Taking account of the way in which these needs are perceived, both from the teacher's standpoint and the child's, can be an illuminating experience.
In discussions with the child it is often possible to plan a course of work to meet the individual's needs so that the learning process is negotiated rather than dictated.
If carefully planned, resources can help turn the curriculum into an integrative force rather than a competitive one.
In such an environment the curriculum would welcome, celebrate and build on all the talents children bring to the lessons.
By matching resources to the child's needs they become self evaluating, since, if they do meet the child's needs, they will enable the child to become an independent learner and not teacher dependent.
Organisation
A powerful factor which influences the effectiveness of learning is the structural organisation of the school.
The school's structure can operate systems which either enhance or restrict the child's education.
There is often a fatalistic predict-ability about a child's future achievements in certain structures which, while helping some, can unwittingly limit the progress of others.
In these organisations there is a high risk that the self-fulfilling prophecy and expectation syndrome will dominate both the teacher's and the child's view.
In very simplistic terms the organisational structure would seem to dictate four views:
1
The school's view of the child, in which concepts such as sociological views (EPA areas), psychological views (schools for maladjusted), intellectual  views (grammar schools) and finally the new hybrid, the technological (CTCs), may affect the education a child receives.
2
The staff's view of the child.
In certain organisational grouping there is the increased risk of self-fulfilling prophecies and expectation syndrome.
Where the school legitimates the claim of ability groups by streaming, setting or banding, it can blinker the staff's view.
Equally, the pupil's value to the organisation can also be implied in this hidden way and either overtly or covertly alter the teachers' actions.
Unfortunately, it is rare for either the staff or the child to question the validity or wisdom of these structures.
3
The way in which the pupils view their peers has powerful overtones.
In certain structures a child can be labelled by his peers and the labels are endorsed by the organisational structure.
Pupil/peer recognition can hit at the very heart of the learning system and either inhibit or encourage progress.
4
The way in which the child views himself can also affect the learning environment by establishing different sub-cultures or affecting self-image, self-confidence and self-esteem.
These thumb-nail sketches show four components which contribute to the child's ‘success’ in the educational system.
When seeking ways to integrate children certain prerequisites are necessary which will affect the school's organisational structure.
One such requirement is the need for a mixed ability philosophy which actively encourages integration in all its forms.
The adoption of a mixed ability philosophy does not, however, of itself necessarily guarantee that the individual's needs will be met.
Dessent (1987) argues that the differentiated curriculum within a school will always be limited if it does not recognise, reward and value diversity among pupils.
Furthermore, simply valuing the pupils equally is not enough.
There has to be the desire to produce a curriculum which is responsive to individual needs.
If the structure pays greater attention to what the children achieve, rather than values them for what they are, its philosophy will be seriously flawed.
It is no accident that this paper has in its title ‘supportive education’ and not ‘the supportive education department’.
The difference is central to the case being presented.
Schools which create a department or give teachers specific responsibilities for meeting individual needs can, inadvertently, reduce the responsibility of all teachers.
We have only to look back to the debates about language across the curriculum to remember the puerile arguments over whose responsibility it was to teach language skills.
The consternation this single idea provoked will be nothing compared with the new breed of whole-school responsibilities which are now beginning to emerge: technology across the curriculum, IT across the curriculum, and economic awareness for all being just the start.
For too long secondary schools have found it organisationally convenient to compartmentalise subjects.
These functionally convenient but  artificial demarcation lines have made the timetable easier to handle and have provided security for  teachers who knew that for a single or double period their task was to concentrate on a specific subject.
One problem which this structure often creates, however, is that the skills gained in one curriculum area are rarely applied in another context.
There seems little transference of application from one subject to another.
This problem is even more pronounced when labels are applied to children or staff, particularly in relation to perceived needs.
To nominate a teacher ‘head of special needs’ can confine the responsibility for meeting children's needs to a mere handful of staff.
Even the innocent term ‘support teacher’ has the potential to lead into the same trap.
This leaves secondary schools with the question of what options are left open.
Could one answer be to call all teachers support teachers or is this too simplistic a response?
Primary schools seem to manage with the term ‘classroom teacher’ and their cross-curricular approach may have much to offer the secondary curriculum.
At present, however, such a concept is probably beyond the reach of all secondary schools.
Perhaps an interim step would be to develop the concept of co-operative or team teaching with the class teacher and support teacher working as a team, each sharing the responsibility for the education of all children, similar to the model described by Bell and Best (1986).
In this model individual teachers were given labels like ‘support teacher’, but their role was seen as an advisory or service position.
The support teacher was there to support
1
The child
2
The teacher
3
The curriculum
This label was further obscured by the fact that the person so designated was a support teacher for one year group and was then timetabled as a subject teacher for another year group.
Curriculum
Just as it is counter-productive to separate education into individual subject areas, so too is the act of considering in isolation the four areas discussed.
Each is interactive, being an integral part of the others, and together they complement and extend the contribution to meeting the needs of all children.
The interaction of the elements in figure 5.1 will determine the outcomes of both the stated and the hidden curriculum.
The curriculum guide-lines outlined in the 1988 Act offer an entitlement for all children, but the quality of these experiences will be subject to the way schools interpret and act on these four important elements.
If education is to be responsive and supportive to all children's needs then schools must provide two things:
1
A quality of education for ALL
2
An equality of educational opportunity for ALL children
The equality that is claimed is one of rights and they can be summarised as:
the right to be educated with one's peers
the right of education to adjust to meet individual needs
the right to have one's contribution regarded on an equal basis with others'.
There is little point in making light of the enormity of the task ahead, but this should not discourage those teachers with the vision and determination to continue the fight for a structure that encourages integration.
Young people with special needs in the further education context
Richard Stowell
Students with special educational needs are to be found at every level of post-school education and training — in further education colleges, universities and polytechnics, and in adult education institutes and training schemes.
Their numbers in further and higher education colleges in the UK alone were estimated in 1985 to be more than 55,000, representing remarkable progress even by comparison with the situation 15 years earlier when none but a few pioneering colleges made any special effort to accommodate students with disabilities or learning difficulties.
The special school sector was built up over a century or more.
The first school for the blind was established in 1791 and there were a dozen or more such institutions by 1870.
The 1850s also saw the establishment of schools for the physically handicapped and the ‘mentally defective’.
The picture was completed only in 1971 when children with severe learning difficulties, hitherto provided for by the health authorities, were brought into the education service.
By contrast, and despite there being a duty on local education authorities since 1944 to provide for all up to the age of 19, significant numbers of young people with special educational needs began to enter colleges only in the mid-to-late 1970s.
Yet by 1985 more than two-thirds of further education colleges, for example, ran special courses for such students.
It is not possible to talk of a ‘further education special needs sector’ as it is of a ‘special school sector’.
One reason for this may be that post-school provision is still very much in its infancy.
Almost certainly more important are the forces that moulded provision and continue to give impetus to further development.
Provision for students with special needs can be viewed as  analogous to a small ship on the ocean waves.
Even to the extent that they represent a homogeneous group, people with disabilities and learning difficulties represent less than 0.5 per cent of all those enrolled in colleges of further and higher education.
The ‘ship’ is therefore dwarfed by the size of the ocean which is post-school education and training; moreover it is an ocean which over the last ten or so years has been in unprecedented turmoil culminating in the hurricane represented by the 1988 Education Reform Act.
Not all the winds of the last decade have, by any means, been unfavourable, nor has the ship been entirely rudderless and without power.
Direction was first given to the work by the publication in 1978 of the Warnock Report, the results of a committee of inquiry into the education of handicapped children and young people.
Two surveys conducted for the committee were of particular relevance to post-school provision: one, of young people, carried out by the National Children's Bureau (of which more later) and a survey by Her Majesty's Inspectorate.
Although never published, the HMI survey is thought to have shown only isolated examples of special consideration afforded students with special educational needs.
The Warnock Report, by its detailed recommendations, and not least by nominating it as one of its three ‘areas of first priority’, put post-school provision on the agenda, even if the subsequent legislation to implement the Report (the 1981 Education Act), ignored post-school education and training.
Since Warnock, some sense of national direction has been given by the work of a number of agencies, not least Her Majesty's Inspectorate, which has played a very important role, instilling confidence in college staff and promoting good quality provision.
The Department of Education and Science in England has funded staff training materials, published recommendations for staff training (a ‘special’ professionalism), and administered an educational support grant to provide micro-computing equipment for students with physical disabilities and in-service training grant schemes which have promoted staff development for college staff.
In Scotland, the Scottish Education Department has given similar encouragement, notably in its recognition of special educational needs considerations in the ‘Scottish action plan’ which has transformed Scottish further education.
The Further Education Unit, a curriculum review and development unit established in 1977 to make possible a more co-ordinated and cohesive approach to curriculum development in further education, has given a commendable priority to special educational needs.
A series of ‘mapping exercises’ have reviewed the current state of provision, before the development of a number of curriculum frameworks.
The first of these was ‘From Coping to Confidence’, published in 1985 and intended as guidance for staff working with students who have moderate learning difficulties.
It was followed in 1987, by ‘New Directions’ and ‘A Transition to Adulthood’, in recognition of the increasing number of students with severe learning difficulties in the former case, and of students with considerable physical disabilities in the latter.
The National Bureau for Handicapped Students (NBHS) was formed in 1984 principally among college staff who themselves had disabilities.
It has provided an advice service to staff and students, conducted research and published information, but perhaps most of all has provided through its regional and local groups, and national conferences, an opportunity for teaching staff and others to meet together on a regular basis to share ideas and experience.
It too has published a number of staff training packages.
A feature of recent years has been the degree to which the differing agencies — HMI, the DES, Further Education Unit, and NBHS (now renamed Skill: National Bureau for Students with Disabilities) have worked together.
More recently the Manpower Services Commission has strengthened links, as recognition grows that the division between ‘education’ and ‘training’makes little sense in terms of meeting the needs of 16 to 19 year olds with disabilities and learning difficulties.
Current collaboration in the development of staff training materials may augur well for further co-operation and joint training opportunities.
Each in turn has been influenced by involvement in the major OECD/CERI ‘Transition to Adulthood’ project, although to date the UK contribution to the project has been very limited.
This could be an indication of a continuing unwillingness to recognise how much further advanced are many EEC and OECD centres in their education and training provision for people with disabilities.
Of all the agencies, only the Manpower Services Commission has had the control of the purse strings that allows positive steering; with the exception of educational support and in-service training grants administered by the DES, the other agencies' role has been confined to offering advice and expertise.
Further education is a service delivered at local level by education authorities and colleges, who have often had room for independent action but little commitment to a coherent policy.
The area of special needs in further education/training has had to contend with the fact that it is but a very small part of a very much larger whole, and that the FE college and the training schemes are subject to the vagaries and constraints of the external environment.
The ‘ship’ sails on a very large ocean.
Steering without an effective rudder would have been difficult even with calm waters; in the last decade the waters have been anything but calm.
The most important contextual change has been in the labour market.
The survey undertaken by the National Children's Bureau, when the Warnock committee was deliberating, showed that some 27 per cent of 18 year olds considered handicapped were currently unemployed, with 19 per cent seeking work.
Although this is almost five times the proportion of non-handicapped who were unemployed, the figures also show that almost half of ‘handicapped’ 18 year olds were in employment, even if most of the jobs were repetitive, unrewarding and insecure.
In the mid-1970s this picture was about to change, as economic crisis produced widespread unemployment, and particularly high youth unemployment.
The large-scale youth unemployment coincided with a collapse in apprenticeship schemes as industry, in recession, withdrew its support for the part-time vocational courses that were the stock-in-trade of the further education colleges, many of whom had evolved from the old mechanics institutes.
Faced with the demise of their traditional courses, and with a government anxious both to increase the skills of the new unemployed young, and to be seen as doing  something for the unemployed, colleges responded by mounting a programme of full-time non-vocational, or pre-vocational, courses.
The new client group included many disadvantaged young people whose needs, it soon became apparent, were very little different from those traditionally thought of as having learning difficulties or behaviour problems.
It was then but a short — though for many an agonising — step to provide special courses for those coming out of special schools and the remedial classes of comprehensives.
Thus it was that youth unemployment brought about, or at the very least greatly hastened, ‘the new FE’, and with it the spread of courses for students with moderate learning difficulties.
Alongside college provision, training schemes under the youth opportunities programmes, particularly those run by the Elfrida Rathbone Society, catered for greater and greater numbers of 16 and 17 year olds with learning difficulties.
Progress in further education has been rapid, to the extent that a 1985 national survey undertaken by the National Bureau for Handicapped Students for the DES, and published as Catching Up ?, showed that more than half the colleges in England ran special courses for 16 to 19 year olds with moderate learning difficulties.
The survey also showed that 69 colleges provided full-time courses for students with severe learning difficulties, when barely a handful had done so five years before.
Almost half the colleges made at least some form of provision for a group of young people who up until 1971 had been considered ‘ineducable’.
The next decade will see a somewhat different trend emerging as demographic changes result in the number of school leavers declining by more than one-third.
Young people will be at a premium, wanted by colleges and employers alike, and for this reason, young people with disabilities may find more doors opening to them.
On the other hand the tide of youth unemployment that brought people with special needs into college along with pre-vocational education, YTS etc, will recede.
It remains to be seen whether the special provision built up over the last decade will survive what may be the collapse of pre-vocational college-based education.
The second major contextual change has been shifts in government policy, operating in the context of large scale youth unemployment.
The last ten years have seen reforms in the education system greater than probably ever before, culminating in the Education Reform Act 1988.
Pre-dating the Act, and in some respects in contradiction to the aims of the national curriculum that forms the core of the legislation, were the government's attempts to improve the structure and quality of vocational and technological education.
The belief that many ‘non-academic’ 14 to 16 year olds were ‘turned off’school because of the lack of relevance to the world of work, coupled with a desire to raise vocational standards, was given by government as reasons for the introduction of new pre-vocational courses in schools and colleges.
Others have expressed the changes in terms of the need to produce a more compliant and disciplined youth work force.
Whatever the reasons, new courses were established, prime examples being the certificate of pre-vocational education (CPVE) and the technical and vocational initiatives (TVEI).
Outside school, the youth training scheme (YTS) replaced a largely discredited youth opportunities programme (YOPS).
From the point of view of young people with special needs, many of the new courses have the virtue of being flexible, student-centred, and of incorporating a good deal of individual programming.
YTS has been a major provider of new opportunities and through its funding mechanism, its special assessment and age exclusions, and its provision of special equipment and services, it has shown itself to be responsive to the needs of very many young people with disabilities and learning difficulties.
TVEI schemes were slow at incorporating special schools but their numbers are increasing, with the active encouragement of the training agency which, with Skill, has produced a number of information and training packages.
Similarly, CPVE is proving to be a useful vehicle for delivering the mainstream curriculum to students with special needs.
The next decade presents many challenges.
Building in opportunities for student progression is one of these, so that special courses, very necessarily built up over the last 15 years, do not become an end in themselves but rather a means towards mainstream education and training.
Pre-vocational education initiatives are beginning to provide one progression route, but may not survive the rapid reduction in the number of school leavers.
The absence of a coherent national policy on the post-school education and training of people with disabilities continues to inhibit its development.
This is particularly so in relation to the complex levels of benefits, grants and training allowances which distort people's choice of course and too often act as a disincentive to any form of education or training.
The absence of an ‘aids to study’ scheme, whereby students might acquire essential communication and study aids, is also an important inhibiting factor.
Information technology is playing, and will increasingly continue to play, a major role in opening up the curriculum to people with disabilities.
Above all, the challenge of the next decade is to improve the quality of post-school provision.
Catching Up ? showed there to be some 43,500 students with disabilities in public sector further and higher education in England.
There is widespread geographical variation — provision is much stronger in the North-West and the East Midlands for example, compared with the South and South-East — and the number in higher education has not expanded to nearly the same extent.
People with disabilities are still heavily under-represented in further education, and training and imaginative efforts are required to correct this.
The question of quality now needs to be addressed.
Are we content with the quality of college provision, which in some instances has appeared to be close to a ‘care and containment’ policy, or are we going to ensure that students with disabilities receive the maximum opportunity to realise their potential?
Special educational needs: an adult education response
Sue Abell
Introduction
Educational resources in Britain are very much concentrated in the statutory sectors and many schools and colleges have made fine provision for those with special educational needs.
But they tend to offer full-time courses aimed at students under 19 and many adults continue to have special educational needs long after they leave full-time education.
Indeed, with the rapidity of change in modern Britain, the need for continuing educational opportunities is on the increase for all adults.
During the 1970s it became clear that adult education was mainly serving the needs of well educated and socially advantaged members of our society.
The Russell Report,Adult Education — A Plan for Development (1973), suggested that a comprehensive adult education service should be ‘readily accessible to all who need it’.
The Report pointed out that disadvantaged groups were grossly under-represented in adult education and suggested steps that might be taken to remedy that situation.
Vigorous efforts were made to tip the balance more in favour of those with greater needs.
These moves have had some success and adult education is probably now more open, more flexible and more responsive to the needs of the whole community than it was then.
Essex has an equal opportunities policy which should mean that adults with special educational needs are well represented among its students and this is, indeed, the case.
In fact, out of a total of more than 60,000 students enrolled for adult education in 1988 probably 3,000 have special educational needs.
‘Probably’, because they are not categorised that way and may simply enrol for classes along with other students.
A limited number attend clubs (such as Gateway, sports, orchestra, for the dead but the majority attend classes, about 50 per cent of them within the adult basic education framework.
Community education organises two large camps each year for special needs students in addition to class provision which it arranges for a number of specific groups of adults:
with moderate and severe learning difficulties
recovering from mental illness
with an inherited or acquired hearing impairment
with visual impairment
who are asthmatic
who are cerebrally palsied
recovering from strokes or head injuries
with a combination of the above disabilities or impairments.
Some swimming, movement and sports groups cater for a wide range of disabilities including impaired limbs, spina bifida, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, cystic fibrosis, Down's syndrome, myelomeningocele, arthritis and accident injuries.
Subjects offered
Within adult education there are three main groups of students:
those within the basic adult education framework who usually study literacy, numeracy, coping/life/social/home skills, communication, sign language, lip-reading, Braille, typing those who are part of the general arts programme and who learn handicrafts, music and movement, dance, drama, orchestral playing, cookery, photography
those who are involved in developing physical skills such as swimming, movement, yoga, body-awareness.
But the group most demanding of provision is that of adults with severe learning difficulties who are newly resident in the community.
They have usually taken part in a preparatory programme through social services or the health authority, but once out of institutional care, the fragile skills, sometimes learnt over a painfully slow time, can be lost through lack of use.
These members of our society have difficulty with basic communication skills often because of the sheltered nature of their life and background.
The programme that is devised for them will usually be geared largely towards communication skills and will probably include craft, drama, and life skills which thus serve a dual function.
It is not always clear how far it is possible or desirable to integrate such students into the regular adult programme.
Providing the classes at adult centres is a positive move towards integration, but the teaching required in the classroom is specialised and is generally done in separate classes.
Type of class
Provision available through community education includes classes, workshops, long courses, drop-in centres and residential summer schools, some of the latter specifically for students with severe learning difficulties.
The need for these was identified when the regular programme of summer schools for ABE students began to attract students with severe learning difficulties who could not cope with the curriculum offered but seemed to gain great benefit from the opportunity for residential education.
Location
Activities take place in adult education centres, school-based centres, swimming pools (including some at special schools), hostels and homes.
In a few instances, community education buildings have been adapted with deaf-loops, ramps, toilets, and stair lifts.
Special transport arrangements are often necessary.
In addition to the specific programmes offered, adults with special needs are encouraged to join classes in any of the other subject areas offered by adult education and the community education service is able to offer support for such students through volunteers who are specially recruited, trained, and supported.
Befriending schemes have been established so that, where it is desirable, students with special educational needs can be accompanied by a volunteer helper who will interpret or explain and assist as necessary.
Training of tutors
Tutors teaching specific classes or incorporating special needs students in their regular classes require good support, and regular training is offered to them.
The county offers certificates in the teaching and learning of adult basic education and a particular option is available for tutors working with students with severe learning difficulties.
Adult education is part of the further education service and some adult education tutors take advantage of courses offered, such as City and Guilds 731.
Co-operation and partnership
Collaborative links have been set up with colleges, social services, the health authority and a wide range of voluntary organisations.
The programme offered by adult education for dysphasic adults illustrates this co.operation.
Referrals come from the health authority whose speech therapists  undertake assessments of students and often team-teach with adult education tutors.
The regular training programme is jointly planned by adult education advisory tutors and senior speech therapists.
The course team includes members from both disciplines.
All agree that this has enormous advantages as they learn a great deal from one another and are better able to serve the needs of the group in other contexts as well as that of joint provision.
Individual help
Adult education in Essex thoroughly embraces the use of volunteers in its service.
They are recruited regularly, trained and deployed.
Their expenses’ are paid and they make a magnificent contribution to the service, enabling group tutors to increase the flexibility of their classes and ensuring individual help whenever it is needed.
Referrals
Offering the right kind of help where it is needed requires a comprehensive assessment scheme.
Luckily, Essex has eight full-time advisory tutors for ABE and all have had training and considerable experience in assessing special educational needs.
This means that wherever they live in the county, adults with special educational needs can ask for individual assessment, counselling and programme planning.
Advantages of adult education for students with special educational needs
With its comparatively meagre resources, adult education might be seen as being at a disadvantage when catering for adults with special educational needs but, in reality, it has some features which enhance its capacity to respond.
Ironically, its part-time nature gives it its greatest flexibility.
Tutors are appointed as and when required and this makes it possible to set up new classes without too much preamble.
Provision for head injured adults is an example.
The health authority has been advocating adult education classes for discharged head injured patients, and community education appointed an experienced tutor to pilot a course.
Her report resulted in
the recruitment of volunteers
the design of a training course
identification of resources
a plan for increased provision.
The lessons learnt will be disseminated through the county training programme and may well result in the establishment of provision in other parts of the area.
The use of volunteers constitutes another advantage for adult education.
Volunteers bring skills that complement those of the tutor, lead to a better student/tutor ratio, and facilitate the teaching of individuals with idiosyncratic needs.
Perhaps the most potent advantage for adult education is that it sees itself catering for developing learning needs over the whole adult age range.
It can make provision to dovetail with schools or colleges for 16 to 19 year olds, but it also offers opportunities for students with special educational needs to continue their education when most schools and colleges no longer have courses for them.
It offers continuing education not only in the continuous sense, but also continually, in response to changing needs that might emerge with a different life-style, increasing age or acquired disabilities.
The curriculum
Adult education provides a mixture of special classes and integrated provision.
But the full integration of special needs students has a long way to go, and requires much more commitment to the adaptation and modification of plans and a further shift of resources to those whose need is greatest.
The future of special education needs for adult education
An awareness of the responsibility to respond to special educational needs permeates the whole of adult education, often starting on a small scale through the initiative of dedicated individuals.
But success breeds replication and good examples of provision soon spread to other centres.
There are 40 adult education centres in Essex and each is responsive to the special educational needs of adults.
But there are also major gaps.
Building up relationships with other agencies is time consuming and not always productive, so the links tend to be forged one by one by the few full-time staff available for this important aspect of developing special needs work.
Our adult education service does not have staff who are wholly responsible for special needs and is dependent upon generic full-timers and a few specialist part-timers.
Although this leads to productive links with other agencies and services, it cannot be in the best interests of the students.
A truly responsive adult education service can only exist when specialist staff are appointed or designated to take responsibility for this important area of work.
Sharing expertise: developing the consultative role
Gerda Hanko
Introduction: acting on recognition of the interactive nature of emotional, behavioural and learning difficulties
That schools differ widely in outlook, expertise and resources, and that such differences help to influence the degree to which individual pupils may find it difficult to progress has been one of seminal emphases of the Warnock Report (DES 1978).
Recognition of the interactive nature of children's learning needs has spread since then, with the implications for mainstream schools
that children with special needs have to be seen as being the responsibility of the school as a whole
that this requires whole-school approaches to meeting them
and that the learning situation itself needs to be examined for its possible contribution to children's learning difficulties, instead of merely looking in the child for causes.
Publications now abound which aim to develop ‘ways of supporting the kind of school that’, with Hegarty (1987), ‘provides for each according to need as part of its normal provision, perceives special provision as an integral part of the whole’, and aims to prevent learning difficulties (Booth et al 1987) instead of just reacting to them.
Incredibly, these developments appear to receive no recognition in the 1988 Education Reform Act, and could well be halted for want of explicit official support.
I want to suggest that joint problem-solving consultancy approaches — developed to maximise existing expertise — can and need to be geared to prevent this from happening, and to consolidate and further such developments in aid of meeting the special educational needs of all children.
Although a number of surveys have shown that practice has been slow to change, the ground has at least been prepared for change.
Fewer teachers have difficulties in responding to reminders that children share substantial common  ground regardless of whatever special attention they may need at any one time.
This has helped teachers to realise that what they offer specially to their neediest children may be of relevance to others.
Schools seem less reluctant to accept that the difficulties some children experience may well point to a more general problem in school or classroom interaction; and teachers who have been helped to respond more appropriately to those pupils whom they had found most difficult to teach, have found that in the process they were becoming better teachers to their other pupils as well, with their job satisfaction rising accordingly.
All teachers need now to be given this experience, and all those in a position to provide it — because of their own good experience and expertise in meeting children's special needs — have themselves to be enabled to share it effectively with fellow professionals.
Enabling all teachers to provide for each according to need: skill enhancement within a problem-solving framework — the shift in role for the specialist supporter
For teachers to meet the range of special needs of all their children is clearly a formidable task, and without effective support of all teachers many children's needs will remain unmet.
In the face of even further diversion of financial resources for training away from special needs, can we build on what expertise we have to find economic and yet effective ways to overcome the present difficulties, to deepen all teachers' understanding of learning and behaviour problems and of the way in which they might be resolved within the learning situation of the classroom ?
As my title suggests, one way forward can be seen to lie in developing the consultancy role of those in a position to help teachers meet their pupils' special needs.
I want to focus here on an ‘affordable’ way of reaching a maximum number of teachers with this aim, i.e. the group consultative training approach.
While most of what follows with regard to consultation skills will also be relevant for working with individual teachers, the focus will be on group consultation; not merely, however, as a numerically economic approach, but as one that can show how personal resources can be maximised through working in groups with colleagues, using skills which are also relevant to the group members as teachers.
Current support is insufficient both in quantity and quality.
Support staff, numerically increased in some areas, but threatened with further reductions in others, are able to reach only a minority of the estimated number of children in need of special attention.
They will continue to do so, whatever their number, while the problem is seen as mainly one of numbers, of needing more specialist staff to work individually with specific children, away from the learning situation where the difficulty occurs.
More people are now aware of the built-in hazards that go with attempting to deal with a difficulty away from the context in which it arises, of the illogicality of  such endeavour, and the wastefulness of selective provision that fails to maximise the school's and school services' existing resources.
Current provision has been criticised for:
relying on support staff as sole experts, bearers of remedies and answers (thereby implying that these are beyond classroom teachers' competence, ‘deskilling’ them by encouraging abdication of responsibility)
ignoring the difficulties of following the advice of others from outside one's own work setting, especially if it seems to suggest that one's own expertise is to be supplanted by it
the reinforcement of arbitrary distinctions
a
between pupils (those with and without ‘special needs’; those with special ‘educational’ needs and those with behavioural and emotional ones) and
b.
between support staff (such as expecting SEN staff to focus on methods of achieving ‘educational results’ without also attending to the interactional emotional and behavioural context of learning failure, seen as the remit of pastoral care, counselling and the psychological services)
and for altogether offering an unco-ordinated and overlapping, segregated and selective, conflicting and even rivalrous service.
Demands to redress such insufficiencies have led to calls for school-based staff development schemes for all serving teachers as an integral part of a special needs related properly co-ordinated unified in-service structure (cf Hegarty 1987, Sayer 1987, Wolfendale 1987); and for staffs within and across schools and the school services to meet and pool their expertise, share and deepen their understanding systematically in school-based discussion and workshops.
Furthermore, such a structure should also cater for the need for ongoing support of special needs post-holders, to deepen their awareness of existing expectations and evolving needs of the fellow professionals with whom they are working — expectations and anxieties both voiced and unvoiced (cf Laslett and Smith 1984).
They also require continuing support in those inter-professional consultation skills which can preserve them from being left ‘stranded, resented and counter-productively (deemed to be) bearers of answers to problems which the rest of the staff could be helped to resolve for themselves’(Sayer 1987).
All this implies, as has been pointed out in the collected evidence presented to the 1987 Select Committee inquiry into the implementation of the 1981 Education Act (cf vol 2 of the evidence), and to many others since then involved in attempts at educational reform:
a shift in the role of former ‘remedial’ teachers, of pastoral care and special needs post-holders, and of school-attached educational psychologists; and
an extension of their remit to ‘initiate and facilitate staff development programmes’(NARE 1985); i.e. of crossing boundaries into other colleagues' territory.
Both should receive official sanction and both require in-service training opportunities to acquire the necessary skills.
In the absence of official sanction, however, the ground already covered in the development of school-based consultative in-service programmes may itself offer the wanted training opportunities for special needs post-holders and those who could give them support in their turn.
The training needs of special needs support staff as ‘initiators and facilitators of staff development programmes’ have been shown (cf Lloyd-Smith and Taylor 1988; Sayer 1987.;
Hanko 1985, 1986, 1987) to centre on the development of interprofessional skills of
understanding the professional needs of the classroom teachers with whom they are to work
learning ways of pooling expertise rather than one-sidedly attempting to impart it
redeploying some of their skills — over and above applying them in work with failing, disheartened or work-refusing children — for working with fellow professionals whose expectations may likewise be in conflict with those of the would-be supporter, just as those of work-refusing children tend to be in conflict with those of their teachers.
The magnitude of the special needs post-holder's task becomes clear if one considers that these skills are to be geared to assisting classroom teachers of varying lengths of career experience (often considerably longer than that of the ‘qualified’ supporter) and range of subject specialities (beyond the supporter's expertise)— teachers already under pressure from many directions and with ambivalent feelings about ‘hawing problems’and ‘being seen as in need of help’; and if one considers that the supporter's extended task is to deepen these colleagues' understanding of ‘special’learning needs, to enhance their skills, discover and develop their strengths and the confidence that the professional know.how they possess can be summoned for responding more appropriately to most of the behavioural, emotional and learning difficulties they encounter.
Ambivalent feelings, mixtures of resentment, disbelief, hope, disappointment with remedies that ‘didn't work’, and demands for answers counter-productive to the task at hand have to be understood and dealt with constructively, and reasons for them appreciated.
On the one hand, the supporters need to learn how not to collude with any counterproductive dynamics of the institution they are trying to serve (such as the expectation of direct advice, collusion with which would further heighten the expert image of the ‘deskilling’ specialist come to deliver solutions); on the other hand, since their primary task is augmenting the teachers' own skills, they must be able to cope with attributed evasion of responsibility, with not knowing their job, with letting people down.
One teacher's despair may tempt them to fall into the ‘rescuer’ role; other teachers may strike them as ineffective so that the supporters become judgmentally prescriptive with those ‘why don't you …’bits of advice that can make things worse by letting the teacher feel how others can handle them better.
Let us now look at the primary task of enhancing classroom teachers' understanding and skills through a joint problem-solving approach; then study an example of group consultation in practice; and finally consider the utilisation of sessions for basic training in consultation skills for designated specialists.
Consultative case discussion as a school-based joint problem-solving staff development approach
A growing number of staffs within and across schools and the specialist services are now engaged in developing such joint approaches, meeting as teams in school-based discussions and workshops, with the explicit aims of pooling their expertise, sharing and increasing their understanding of the factors that may lead or contribute to children's learning difficulties, and finding their own most appropriate solutions to them.
One such approach in particular, the case discussion model (cf Daines 1981, Hanko 1985/7), has met with considerable interest, and continues to be found helpful by primary and secondary teachers of all lengths of career experience as they work with their consultant supporters in clearly defined ways.
A support and training technique has been developed, based on the Caplan model of inter-professional process consultation (Caplan 1970), a technique of regular group sessions where consultant and colleagues pool their equal but differing expertise in a process of joint exploration of a difficulty experienced in a group member's work setting, such as, for instance , the context of a pupil's learning difficulty.
In the process of exploration the consultees' expertise is supplemented by one another 's and the consultant's, and in this way professional understanding and skills are extended.
It is the consultant's task to assist the exploration and the finding of alternative workable solutions to the problem,within a problem-solving framework .
He or she attempts this by
asking answerable insight-generating questions and promoting this skill in the group
supplementing the teacher's expertise with that of others
and generating information that can help to highlight the issues underlying the problem that is being explored, so that new solutions are found.
The problem-solving framework distinguishes the case discussion model from ad hoc case conferences, lunch-time ‘surgeries’ run by educational psychologists where teachers can discuss the difficulties they experience with specific pupils, or meetings arranged to deal with crisis situations.
In all these the discussion remains specific to the difficulty that brought it about.
The problem.solving framework, in contrast, ensures that the information that  emerges regarding a specific pupil's difficulty in its context is generated in such a way that it also helps teachers in general— whether or not they know the pupil under discussion — to learn to ask themselves the kinds of questions that are helpful whenever problems arise in any pupil's learning situation.
As a staff development activity it is designed to be of both immediate and long-term use in the classroom and school setting, and thus meets an important stipulation for effective in-service work.
Group consultation in practice
The aims of the consultative exploration are thus:
to deepen teachers' understanding of individual needs
to become aware of obstacles to the learning task
to develop their abilities to meet these needs by adaptations within the context in which they occur,
within the remit of an ordinary teaching day: that is to say, through
the day-to-day learning programme (analysing it to discover its remedial/ therapeutic potential)
therapeutic-educative relationship experiences between teacher, pupil and other classmates (activating the educational potential inherent in daily classroom interactions)
developing teachers' skills in consultation and negotiation, on behalf of the pupil, with colleagues across departmental and managerial boundaries; with parents as partners in their children's learning; and, where indicated, with members of other professions across institutional and professional boundaries (cf DHSS guidelines 1988, which, ironically, suggest more awareness of what may be achieved through the personal and social education aspects of the school curriculum than their DES counterparts with regard to the forthcoming national curriculum).
The following example of a joint problem-solving session, discussed in greater detail elsewhere in a different context (Hanko 1985/7), illustrates both the range of issues that can arise for exploration, and the processes which can be activated in group consultation to contribute to insight and solution.
In particular, it demonstrates the constant simultaneous focus on the twin concerns of the approach, the special needs of children as learners, and the professional needs of teachers in relation to them.
Attention is paid to the negative effects which some children have on teachers when, for various reasons, they seem to be ‘unteachable’ and to reject what their teachers are trying to offer.
One of these effects can be what Britton (1981) refers  to as the phenomenon of re-enactment as an unwitting professional response to the dynamics of a child's situation, the difficulty that exists for professionals not to re-enact — and thereby aggravate — what the child already experiences, and the ease with which they may collude with his sense of hopelessness and negative feelings.
The case shows how failure to resist such re-enactment increases the teacher's difficulty, as it is detrimental to the help he might otherwise have been able to offer.
The question was whether supporting the teacher on this basis might lead to the required change in his attitude, help him to see the situation in a new light, and thus affect his perception of the problem.
The presentation of Dave's case has been chosen to highlight the core consultation skills it called into action.
The staff group concerned (composed of teachers from a middle and a first school sharing a site) had met weekly for a number of times, when one of them, Mr E, presented eight-year-old Dave, ‘an infuriating boy, who never listens and who can't even copy from the board; there is nothing one can do with him’.
In previous sessions, Mr E had already shown himself, through his constant ‘yes, but…’ interjections, as the group's resident ‘butter-in’, breezily polite but seemingly unable to accept that anything that was being suggested would work.
With remarks like ‘Ah well, that never did me any harm; I have gone through worse’, he would brush aside his colleagues' explorations as irrelevant, yet hint at having himself suffered as a child.
Such personal comments can however not be taken up in a professional staff support group, being outside its brief and scope which differ from those of a personal therapy group.
Far from disregarding them, however, such comments need to be ‘heard’, since our personal experiences can affect our reactions to others in general and teachers' reactions to pupils and the demands they make on them.
Mr E described Dave, now in his second term at this school, as exasperatingly ‘lazy’, always talking to others, the only one in the class who will make a mess of things, who cannot even copy from the board, but who can sometimes surprise by good work.
He never listens, just switches off, does the opposite of what he is told and underachieves in everything.
Mr E finds it hard to understand, if he compares Dave with his ‘hard-working, extremely bright sister’, one year older, also at this school, how there can be two such different children in one family.
He quotes the mother as confirming that Dave is an infuriating boy, and quite different from his clever and hard-working sister.
At this point, the group, already developing the skill of asking ‘answerable questions’ from a position of expertise to be shared, ask for further information on the basis of what Mr E had told them: ‘You mentioned how he can surprise you by occasional good work.
What was that about?
In which way was it good?’
But Mr E could at that moment not remember, and this lapse of memory made him rather thoughtful.
The group then recalled their own experiences with children who refused to work and how often there seemed to be another child in the family who ‘cannot do anything wrong’.
They gave examples of how some of their attempts at building up self-esteem seemed to have worked.
Mr E, however, countered each example with either ‘it won't work with Dave’ or ‘I've tried all this’, and switched off at any good idea offered, unable to listen, making himself, like Dave, the only one in the group so different and obstructive.
He gradually induced in the group a feeling of hopelessness, which must have resembled what both Mr E and Dave were feeling in the classroom.
It seemed not to be a good idea, at this stage of the group's life, to comment on these similarities, which might have made Mr E even more conspicuously different from his colleagues, especially since, as well as asking insight-generating questions, they had told him how they had handled things better, which had moved Mr E to reject their suggestions as unworkable with somebody like Dave.
Could one instead help the group to become more supportive towards him?
Could one, for instance, strengthen Mr E's own support potential by stressing the way he noted Dave's good work?
Could one promote his buried awareness into a skill of giving matter-of-fact recognition to a child's potential, of giving a child hope about himself, instead of confirming his negative stance by showing surprise at occasional good work or using it to prove that Dave ‘could do better if he tried’(as we so easily exhort when we are exasperated, and as the group seemed to be doing with Mr E)?
Questions like these in the consultant's mind led to fanning a small positive spark in seemingly totally negative behaviour, and this made a difference to Mr E both in relation to his colleagues in the group, and as Dave's teacher to whom a way out of a vicious circle of perpetual defeat could in this way be illustrated, again without explicitly referring to the analogy of the situation.
This led the group to recall, towards the end of the meeting, how they, too, had got nowhere with work-refusing children while they constantly demanded better work from them (thus identifying with Mr E as having known failure instead of contrasting their own better results with his, as they had done earlier) but how they had been able to help them when they had worked on the relationship.
At the next meeting, Mr E almost casually mentioned that he had been trying out one or two of last week's ideas and that Dave seemed quite responsive to him this week.
He was now showing his own responsiveness to Dave and Dave's response in return, which made Mr E more hopeful about him.
A few weeks later, he also reported with some amusement how he had involved a colleague (not a member of the group) in discussion about another pupil when he had caught both himself and his colleague ‘fixing’ the child inadvertently in his bad behaviour.
Equally interestingly, Mr E felt he was managing to convey something of his greater hopefulness to Dave's mother, using insight-promoting questions when she kept praising her daughter and complaining about Dave, and asking, for instance: ‘What are the things you can be nice to him about at home?
Could we work together on these?’
Dave's mother in turn seemed to be becoming more accepting.
While Dave was still a problem, it now seemed to Mr E remediable.
It no longer aroused feelings of exasperation, as it had done when he failed to link what had  amounted to a form of work paralysis with the hopelessness which Dave must have felt about himself both at home and at school.
This example of one case discussion, lifted out of a sequence of weekly meetings, may appear a laborious way of achieving small gains, consuming time which teachers, pressed as they are, can little afford.
The cumulative effect, however, of attending to such questions consistently over a period of time is considerable and, as teachers agree, eventually time-saving.
There is, after all, nothing more time-consuming than having to teach children whose needs one does not understand.
In addition, however, sessions like this, or sequences of them, can be used as a consultancy training ground by inviting from any of the school services those with specialist qualifications and good experience in meeting children's special needs, to attend such meetings as participant observers acting as co-consultants.
Special needs post-holders have in this way been able to develop their consultation skills with teachers, while educational psychologists who have begun to extend their remit in this way have found this to be a realistic way of meeting the supporters' own need for ongoing support.
Training opportunities for developing the consultative role
The above description of a session as an example of consultative joint problem-solving will have shown how it differs from other forms of support such as counselling, giving advice, or supervision.
To achieve the twofold aims of consultation — deepening teachers' understanding of any pupil's special needs, and enhancing their ability to meet them — the consultative role has been geared as outlined to:
supplementing the teacher's expertise with that of the group (instead of the group and consultant trying to supplant it by showing they can handle things better)
generating information and experience that can highlight the problem and ‘reframe’ it by changing perceptions; and doing so by promoting the skill of asking answerable awareness-promoting questions.
The consultation skills employed in this session had been:
the listening skill of noting — behind the teacher's breezy rejection of anything that looked to him like advice — his own sense of failure with a failing pupil; i.e. understanding how one difficult situation (failure for the pupil) may be ‘mirrored’ in another (failure for the teacher), with consequent reinforcement of the difficulty through re-enactment of the symptoms by the teacher 
the skill of communicating at different levels without necessarily articulat-ing them.
The consultative task was to keep the focus of discussion on the pupil, but simultaneously to deal with the teacher's perception of the problem (the reinforcing effect it was having on both pupil and teacher) by giving him through group support the kind of liberating learning experience which he could transfer into the teaching context with Dave
diverting attention from his hopelessness, while helping the group to support him vis-a-vis the child to be helped — not by recounting their own success stories but by recognising what support potential he might already have, buried as it was but ready to be drawn out by support from others.
This was geared to helping him to behave likewise with a failing pupil, so that both he and the child had less need to make others feel useless.
By understanding something of his own behaviour as self-defeating (an understanding that was achieved without loss of face since explicit comments were avoided), and respecting the feelings behind the pupil's refusal to work, the teacher could stop  re-enacting and reinforcing the pupil's refusal to work, the could relax his pressure and abandon his preconceived ideas about Dave.
His spontaneous reports in later sessions suggested that he had made a beginning in that direction, and had even begun to apply, with colleagues outside the group and with the boy's mother, the skills used in the group.
There had thus been a level of skill enhancement for work in the classroom, and of skills training and transfer to working with colleagues within the group and others on the staff, and for achieving a mutually educative partnership between teacher and parent.
What is being looked at in all case discussions is a sequence of focal points of which trainee consultants need to be made aware, to be able to highlight the interactional context of the difficulty.
The starting point must be the teacher's current perception of the problem if there is to be a widening of awareness and reframing of it as the exploration proceeds.
The teacher's perception is likely to be affected by his feelings about the pupil, dented self-confidence through not being able to be a ‘good enough’ teacher to him, which a more objective analysis may help to restore.
Dated, or even outdated knowledge about children and learning processes may need to be supplemented; and the teacher's own untapped resources may be tapped for effective use in promoting the pupil's progress.
As has been shown in detail elsewhere (Hanko 1986, 1987, 1989), knowledge that can highlight the underlying issues has to be supplemented, and skills have to be developed in the group, which the designated supporter will have been applying in his work with children, but now has to redeploy for work with fellow professionals.
These are used to focus their awareness on the learner, the learning task, and the learning environment, on the interactive nature of learning difficulties and their behavioural and emotional concomitants.
The knowledge supplemented and shared in the exploration will concern:
1
The pupil (how such emotional, behavioural and learning difficulties as are being discussed, may develop; how disturbance-producing experiences can affect behaviour and learning)
2
The pupil's classroom and working groups (how an individual's behaviour may have a function for the whole group who may then try and prevent him from changing it; how groups may be handled so as not to ‘need’ one child's particular behaviour and instead support his progress)
3
Teacher and pupil in interaction (awareness of different professionals' reactions to particular difficulties and behaviour patterns; their potential effect on pupils)
4
The learning programme and learning tasks (possibilities of adapting these to the needs gauged, so that learning can take place and the therapeutic potential of the curriculum be utilised (no matter how nationally prescribed).
The skills to be furthered in the exploration deal with:
gauging needs underlying the overt behaviour
making special bridging efforts to reach the child's ‘teachable self
designing new learning experiences to meet the needs gauged (relating to 2, 3, 4 above)
enlisting effectively, in support of the child's learning, his parents and others in the family, colleagues within and across feeder schools, and, where indicated, specialists from other services (development of negotiating skills across professional boundaries).
In short, teachers are helped to offer all children, as Quinton put it when reporting his and Rutter's findings (1988) on the healing effects of teachers on children in even severe adversity, ‘good school experiences, such as some form of success, accomplishment, sense of self-esteem or just pleasure in school activities’, with consequent better adjustment in adult life — even if they did not always seem to have an immediate effect (!).
Knowledge of findings like these are an example of the kind of insight-promoting information which often helps to give teachers new heart to proceed in spite of seemingly overwhelming obstacles.
Over and above the skills required to develop effective joint problem-solving groups, however, trainee consultants also need to become aware of what is involved in setting them up.
Setting up and developing joint problem-solving groups — experiential training of co-consultants
Mr E's group had been a two-term group of middle and first school teachers sharing a site, all members attending the weekly sessions for the two terms, with  myself as a temporarily school-attached consultant.
There are, however, no set rules for the composition of such staff groups within and across schools and school services, variations to the theme being as numerous as the institutions they are to serve.
Staff groups may be short-term or long-term, or a mixture of both, with a core of long-term members working with short-term participants who join for an agreed number of sessions in turn — this particular structure affords a good opportunity for a school to build up a core of its own consultant teachers.
Staff groups may be for one school only, or, as in the example above, meet across feeder schools (whose staffs may otherwise still work in splendid isolation from each other) to great mutual benefit.
Any such group may be working with one consultant only.
The consultant may, on the other hand, be able to suggest to the head teacher that an invitation be extended to other support staff with such specialist qualifications, from within the school or the school services, to act as co-consultants, with a view to developing their own consultative skills.
A co-consultant already in touch with the school as part of his traditional remit may in this way be able to extend it through remaining in regular group consultative contact long after the initiating consultant's commitment has ended — and may of course himself become an initiating consultant with his other schools.
Schools have welcomed such arrangements with open arms.
Thus, where a group is to be set up, the range of different structural possibilities needs to be outlined so that the school can decide on the structure that may best meet its needs.
Preparing the ground for setting up a group: a consultative training exercise in its own right
Much will depend on how the possibility of starting a staff development group is first raised.
A group may be requested by the school itself — a more frequent occurrence now under the new GRIST and ‘Baker day’ arrangements — especially if the head, a persuasive special needs post-holder, pastoral care tutor, or other members of staff have heard of such groups working well elsewhere.
Or the initiator may be a tutor from an in-service teacher training department, a member of a child guidance unit or related school services involved in consultancy training, the school's educational psychologist with good experience of working with teachers, interested staff from the local special needs or teachers centre, special schools or units or the LEA advisory team.
Whoever the initiator, he or she needs to know how to help create the conditions favourable to a good working group.
Trainee consultants need to appreciate that the procedure of informing an interested school of the different structures that have been found to work well in different settings, and of inviting the school to decide which they might wish to develop in the first instance, is in itself an important part of preparing a  supportive climate.
This will be needed — but should not be expected to exist from the outset — if the group is to become an effective working group.
Much of the success of a joint problem-solving consultation group will depend on the way in which it is set up, and this is a consultative exercise on its own.
Space does not permit more than a summary of the aspects the would-be consultant needs to consider jointly to ensure both a good beginning and optimum development for such a group, and readers are therefore referred to the guidelines offered in detail elsewhere (cf Hanko 1985/7).
These include such essentials as a preliminary sounding meeting with the head and whoever else is part of the school's senior management (i.e. anyone in a position to further the aims of the group) to secure their sanction and support; and an introductory meeting with as many of the staff as possible and manageable, for instance over a working lunch, regardless of who will eventually join the group, so that everybody knows what it will be about and interest is generated even in those who may not wish to join it.
Issues that need to be raised, and ground rules to be agreed, will concern such matters as:
confidentiality and functions of membership
frequency of meetings, timing and venue (staff need to be safeguarded from competing commitments)
length of course size and composition of the group.
Probable misconceptions about a consultant supporter's role have to be handled, credibility and relevance of one's own experience need to be established in a non-assertive but authoritative way; appreciation of the teachers' professional expertise needs to be conveyed, together with an awareness of the difficulties that can prevent them from exercising it to its fullest extent; and it needs to be spelt out clearly what such a group would be able to offer and what, together, one may reasonably hope to achieve — one must not raise hopes of cures for all ills.
The emphasis is on staff development, not on deficits that need changing.
Conclusion
In conclusion, joint problem-solving and the consultative sharing of expertise can maximise scarce existing resources and increase the capacity of teachers to meet the individual needs of all children; stimulate teachers' personal judgment and initiative as to the best educational ‘therapies’ open to them, raise their sights as to how to help all children, whatever their difficulties, to learn and to cope, how to offer them those ‘good school experiences such as some form of success, accomplishment, sense of self-esteem or just pleasure in school activities’found to be so valuable even in later life (cf Quinton and Rutter 1988).
It is now more important than ever, in an economic climate as unfavourable to education as the present, with attempts at major educational reconstruction in which the special needs of children may well be lost sight of, that developing the consultative role and process are seen as an important way forward.
Developing a whole-school approach to disruptive pupils
John Atkinson
Before attempting to set out an approach to disruptive pupils, I believe it is important to preface the debate with a general comment on education — first, because the nature of the topic can generate emotions that lead to a distortion of the author's overall perspective, and second, while I am critical of many educational responses to disruptive pupils I do not wish to add to teachers' feelings of being under siege.
It is my belief that teachers are doing remarkably well in an era of prolonged attack upon state education that has led many consumers to come to believe that schools and teachers have somehow failed, by producing children ill equipped for their roles in society.
I would contend that the scapegoating of the education system, in general, and of certain local authorities, in particular , has acted as a diversionary tactic for the inadequacies of central government responses to the funding of the state education system, their failure to stem the spiralling decline in teachers' morale and the pitiful attempt to provide real job opportunities for school leavers.
The scale of the difficulties facing our schools goes unrecognised by too many in our society.
The scale can be illustrated by the fact that 30 years ago our young people were maturing at a later stage than now, but in many cases were leaving school at an earlier age and taking up employment — the gap between adolescence and employment was perhaps only 12 months.
Today many boys and girls at school are more confident, articulate, mature and consequently, in some cases, more threatening, yet the time lapse between adolescence and employment could be three to four years.
It is the schools, and their teachers, who have had to shoulder this burden, increasingly so in a climate where opportunities are diminished and our pupils rightly feel let down, frustrated and alienated from a society that appears insensitive to their plight.
The vast majority of teachers recognise that the carrot and stick argument of ‘work hard and you'll get a good job’ is ridiculed by many youngsters, at an earlier and earlier age.
Equally they recognise that their pupils are exposed to  sophisticated and easily accessible media which graphically, and at times gratu-itously, portray the violence and disharmony that exists in society.
It is a fact that since 1976, when Jim Callaghan made his celebrated speech at Ruskin, the education system has been subjected to an unprecedented flow of Education Acts (1980, 1981, 1986, 1988), committees of inquiry (Warnock, Taylor, Elton) and curriculum documents from HMI, DES, ‘think tanks’ and academics.
Schools have battled valiantly, however, to come to terms with the new demands of curriculum and examination reform in a climate of industrial unrest and limited resources.
Moreover it seems ironic that while the Secretary of State for Education attacks, and rightly attacks, the appalling attendance rates at certain schools, and apportions blame for this situation by claiming that children are bored, he offers a solution, in the form of the national curriculum, of a diet of mathematics, English, science, history, geography, a foreign language — all hamstrung with a pedestrian approach to evaluation in the form of bench-marks.
As Ted Wragg says: ‘this list of subjects I did when I was at school in the 1950s.
It is as if curriculum development in the past 30 years had never existed’(Times Educational Supplement ).
Such an approach ignores the magnificent efforts of many of our schools to create a vibrant learning environment encapsulating the need for technological sophistication and real understanding as opposed to mere accumulation of facts unrelated to their present and future worlds.
It is to be hoped that teachers respond to the positive utterances of David Hargreaves and Keith Evans (director of education for Clwyd) and continue curriculum innovations within the confines of the national curriculum.
The importance of disruptive behaviour and its impact upon society, in general, and schools, in particular , is highlighted by the current committee of inquiry into school discipline chaired by Lord Elton.
At this juncture I wish to make five statements pertinent to the issue and then advance a framework of how schools can respond positively to deal effectively with disruptive pupils.
1
It seems indisputable that there are a tiny minority of pupils whose behaviour is so disturbing that mainstream schools are unable to cope, in the present circumstances, with the manifestations of this behaviour.
2
It seems indisputable that in a minority of cases, the causes of the disturbing behaviour are located wholly outside the responsibilities of the school and that the school is impotent in what it can offer.
3
There is a much larger number of pupils who exhibit disruptive behaviour which can, should and must be dealt with by an effective school response.
4
The segregated forms of provision that exist to deal with disruptive pupils reflect a bias in terms of race, class and gender that is too conspicuous to go unchallenged (Coard 1971, Tomlinson 1981, Eggleston 1986).
5
Just as schools have been accused of creating pupils with learning difficulties, it is possible to argue that schools create disruptive pupils.
Whenever I ask teachers and trainee teachers to respond to two questions about disruptive behaviour:
What did you feel?
What did you want to do to the child?
I invariably receive responses such as‘anger’, ‘fear’, ‘frustration’, ‘inadequacy’, ‘failure’, ‘my ideals went out of the window’, ‘I wanted to throttle him/her’.
While I accept that these may be legitimate responses to difficult circumstances, I also reflect that these responses are from mature, talented and committed teachers.
The fact that disruptive behaviour often leads to considerable stress, anxiety and absenteeism suggests that it is all the more important that schools tackle the issue with more clarity and imagination.
On the grounds of efficiency, alone, it is important that mature, talented and committed teachers are not demoralised by disruptive behaviour, and lost to the teaching profession.
Disruptive behaviour has a direct and, at times, devastating impact upon teachers, but it is important to establish that it is not a recent phenomenon.
Galloway (1982) and Furlong (1985) present a body of evidence that disruptive behaviour has always existed among boys and girls, in state and public schools, across the age range but more prominently in the lower ability range.
As Furlong (1985) says:
…a golden age of pupil behaviour when children attended with regularity and did their teachers' bidding without question…may have existed.
What is clear is that this golden age did not exist in the mid 1950s, in the first part of this century nor in the first half of the last century.
(p 25)
Despite this reassuring message from history that disruptive behaviour is not an event peculiar to contemporary education and recent evidence that there has been no dramatic increase in such behaviour, it has to be acknowledged that anxiety about disruptive behaviour has increased.
Galloway (1982) identifies three reasons put forward for this increase.
First, it is the manifestation of the violent society in which pupils live.
Second, teacher unions and associations have highlighted the problem to inform and attract sympathy from the public.
Third, the range of existing services seems unable to cope with the demand.
This anxiety could be further compounded by the 1988 Education Act as competitiveness and accountability feature more prominently in the daily life of teachers.
Finally, the media portrayal of political and educational events has presented an unsavoury image.
From the William Tyndale affair, the Brent affair and Burnage affair interspersed with riots at Handsworth, Toxteth and at football matches, it is the levels of indiscipline in school that are featured prominently as the primary cause.
Naturally, the causes of disruptive behaviour are frequently debated but unfortunately sloganised.
Reasons such as‘over-indulgence in the early years’(NAS 1974) and the perennial ‘parental attitudes’(PAT 1976) are typical examples.
It is my contention that the response to causes of disruptive behaviour has focused too much on within-child factors.
As Galloway (1982) states:
Responses to disruptive behaviour must not only recognise the importance of factors in the pupil and his background, but also the relevance of factors in the school itself.
I believe that too many school responses to disruptive behaviour are negative.
Frequently the strategies adopted are either to suspend or reject the disruptive pupil and, in certain cases, ignore the fact that disruptive behaviour has occurred.
As Bird (1984) has pointed out, these schools perceived disruptiveness as arising from either the irrational behaviour of pupils or the limited educational expectations of working class pupils or the pupils' personal problems of adjustment to the school.
Such explanations fail to acknowledge the possibility that schools may a responsible for creating and sustaining disruptiveness.
I am arguing that schools must respond more positively; as Hargreaves (1984) states:
The theme of our remarks on the severely disaffected and disruptive is this: First, seek to integrate and, when that fails, find a positive alternative.
When Reid (1986) identified seven causes of disruptive behaviour (underachievement, the family, links between school and parents, peer group relationships, the gulf between the general public and teachers, schooling per se and teachers), I believe that he highlighted the very issues schools need to turn their attention to and over which they might have significant influence.
Furthermore, the six categories identified by the Pack Committee (1977):
1
Pupil and authority
2
Pupil and work
3
Pupil and teacher
4
Pupil and pupil
5
Pupil and property
6
Pupil and public
indicate the possible interactions involved in disruptive behaviour and provide a framework in which schools can begin to formulate policies to resolve the problem.
To devise policies that directly lead to more positive and imaginative approaches, I am proposing that schools need to focus on two particular strands of educational research: first, the research that has been developed in relation to‘effective schools’, and second, the principles that underpin ‘The Whole-School Approach to Special Educational Needs’.
In the 1960s and 1970s a substantial body of evidence emerged which claimed  that schools made little or no difference to pupils' outcomes.
The Coleman Report (1966) and the Jencks Report (1972) from America accompanied British evidence, in the form of the Plowden Report and Bernstein (1970), to portray a pessimistic view of the influence of schools upon pupils.
As Reynolds and Sullivan (1981) state, the evidence suggests
that what a child takes from his or her school depends very little upon the quality of the school experience itself but very greatly on the nature of the pupil's intelligence and family and community background.
Such evidence encouraged and sustained the focus on within-child characteristics, illustrated by theories of cultural deprivation and linguistic deprivation.
A number of strong individual, but unrelated challenges were advanced.
Counter arguments were put forward that schools and LEAs could influence attendance, intake ability, streaming, teaching styles, levels of classroom management and involvement of parents, all of which directly and indirectly influenced pupils' behaviour.
I believe, however, that over the past 20 years an important body of evidence has emerged which strongly suggests that schools do make a significant difference both to pupil attainment and pupil behaviour.
Power (1967), in his research into 20 schools in Tower Hamlets, identified a variance in delinquency rate of 0.9 per cent in one school and, at the other extreme, 19 per cent.
As both schools had a similar catchment area, he postulated that it was the schools themselves that made the difference between their pupils' behaviour.
Reynolds (1976), in his study of nine schools in South Wales, identified considerable variance in measures of attendance, academic achievement and delinquency.
Two types of school, ‘incorporative’ and ‘coercive’, were identified according to the way in which they tried to involve pupils in achieving their goals.
It is possible to identify the characteristics of each school.
Coercive schools
No attempt to involve pupils in school life
No attempt to enlist support of parents
High level of institutional control
High rates of physical punishment
Low tolerance of acting out
Incorporative schools
Allow pupils to take part in lessons
Allow and encourage work in groups
Involve pupils in extra-curricular activities
Pupils, across the range, act as perfects 
Good relationships between teachers and pupils
Minimal institutional control
No use of physical punishment
Close relationship with parents
It is abundantly clear from Reynolds's findings that schools can adopt certain strategies that will have a positive influence on pupil behaviour.
Hargreaves (1975) points out that Jordan (1974) has identified two types of teacher, which might well complement Reynolds's two types of school.
By identifying the characteristics of each type, interesting information emerges about the ways in which different teachers can elicit different types of behaviour from similar pupils.
Deviance — provocative teachers
Assumed children did not want to work
Thought it unreasonable to provide alternative strategies
Saw discipline as a contest teachers had to win
Were unable to defuse tense situations
Frequently issued ultimatums
Believed in value of confrontations
Considered pupils as anti-authority
Punished inconsistently
Neglected deviant children in interactions
Made many negative evaluations
Used sarcasm
Believed children, generally, were not to be trusted
Avoided informal contacts outside the classroom
Deviance — insulative teachers
Assumed children want to work
Had clear rules and made them explicit
Were firm
Did not have favourites
Avoided confrontations
Allowed opportunities to save face when they punished children
Did not publicly denigrate children
Were optimistic about children
Perceived all children as contributors
Liked and respected children
Were good humoured and trusting
Enjoyed meeting children outside the classroom
In 1977 HMI published a report Ten Good Schools which was followed by  Rutter et al 's (1979) celebrated work Fifteen Thousand Hours .
Rutter et al , in a detailed analysis of 12 schools in an inner London borough, make bold statements about the influence that schools have upon pupil attainment and behaviour.
Schools can do much to foster good behaviour and attainments and…even in a disadvantaged area schools can be a force for good.
(Rutter et al 1979)
This predominantly optimistic view is further enhanced by Rutter et al who were prepared to identify five key areas which were associated with good schools and suggest.ways in which each area can be developed to promote positive behaviour and improved attainment levels.
The five areas are: schools as organisations, group management, the establishment of school values and norms, consistency, and pupils' acceptance of norms.
Despite criticism of these research findings, I remain convinced that they offer a framework for schools to investigate themselves as organisations and for teachers to analyse themselves as individuals when meeting disruptive behaviour.
Furthermore, three other significant reports (Hargreaves 1984, Thomas 1985 and Mortimore 1988) continue to present evidence that schools have a significant influence on pupil behaviour.
As Reid et al (1988) state:
Thus, the correlation between disaffection and bad schooling should never be treated lightly as the long term consequences in society could be devastating.
By paying attention to specific recommendations of Hargreaves (1984), Thomas (1985) and Mortimore (1988), schools and teachers can come to realise that the reduction of disruptive behaviour is likely to be achieved, not by behaviour modification techniques, punitive sanctions or by delving into alleged within-child factors, but by modifying those school structures, and their interaction with pupils, that have such a significant influence on pupil attainment and behaviour.
In this way they will be able to meet the needs of individual pupils in a more effective manner.
In short, I am stating unequivocally that effective schools exist.
The factors that contribute to effective schools are well documented.
Disruptive behaviour can be reduced dramatically by schools concentrating on those factors over which they have direct control.
It is now firmly established that effective provision for children with special educational needs is achieved by paying attention to the curricular, pastoral and self-enhancing aspects of the school.
If teachers are to tackle their school's problems realistically, they will need more and better courses on such issues as pastoral care; effective classroom and school management; coping with and overcoming disaffected and disruptive pupils through appropriate teaching and curriculum strategies, as well as finding ways of undertaking constructive school and self-evaluation programmes…
(Reid 1988)
and
when normal individuals show an inability to learn in school, yet are perfectly capable of learning in other situations, one should be driven to consider what aspects of the society are creating negative attitudes to schools and whether changes are necessary in the schools themselves.
(Widlake 1984)
In Improving Primary Schools (Thomas Report 1985), there is a detailed analysis of the performance and experience of working class primary aged schoolchildren.
In the report there is a wealth of clearly documented evidence highlighting the best practice in ILEA primary schools and providing evidence of contributory factors toward the creation of an effective primary school.
In its concluding section, it pays particular attention to the very issues raised by Reid above and offers advice on the way forward.
It makes specific points under the section on schools:
It is, in our view, more important to forge a whole school policy than to take on new practices piecemeal.
(Thomas 1985)
The report continues by making reference to the factors that might be instrumental in contributing to the development of a whole school policy: curriculum-general, language, mathematics, expressive subjects and physical education, science, social education; schemes of work, children's progress and school organisation.
The examination of a school's curriculum should take account of what children do and also of what they learn from what they do.
Children should be happy at school and acquire positive attitudes to learning, developing new interests as well as pursuing old interests.
Learning to read, write and do mathematics have high priority, and children should learn to apply these skills in a variety of ways.
(Thomas 1985)
In Improving Secondary Schools (Hargreaves Report ILEA 1984), specific recommendations, aimed at all involved in the delivery of the education service, are highlighted to reduce levels of underachievement and disaffection.
The report makes recommendations on four areas which can only enhance the ability of  schools and teachers to meet the needs of disruptive pupils.
First, attendance, which can be a prime factor in disruptiveness, is highlighted, and practices which will ensure each school has an effective policy are outlined:
A senior teacher being charged with specific responsibility for pupil attendance
A list of absentees being produced quickly, ideally by morning break, for use by appropriate teaching and office staff (see Reid, 1982d)
Devising a sensitive scheme for the immediate follow-up of absentees, either, for example, by telephoning home or by sending out letters to parents/guardians
Form tutors ensuring that records of attendance are as accurate as possible and explanations for absence produced when pupils return to school
Heads of year/house monitoring the work of form tutors
Heads of year/house and teachers with responsibility for pupil attendance having regular meetings with education welfare officers, perhaps once a month
Regular spot checks for specific-lesson truancy and for pupils leaving school before the end of the school day
Rewards in the form of praise or prizes for individual pupils or classes with an excellent attendance record
Penalties for pupils who are persistently late
Absentees and truants welcomed quietly back to school and efforts made to re-integrate them socially and academically.
Second, the report highlights the inadequacy of the curriculum in the fourth and fifth years and as Galloway (1982) discovered this was the age at which suspension rates accelerated.
The source of much disruptiveness in many secondary schools is the boredom, frustration and sense of futility many pupils feel in relation to the curriculum.
To counter this Hargreaves suggests that heads of departments should guarantee that
Pupils exercise all communication skills — talking, listening, reading and writing — in equal amounts, with the same value ascribed to each
Topics and relevant issues are raised in classes which stimulate pupils to express opinions, argue, explain and negotiate for a consensus
The assessment of oral skills is considered as important as the assessment of other skills
Teachers will ensure there is an oral component in any assessment procedure they devise, and will pressure external examination bodies to do the same.
Third, the report makes recommendations to deal with the concerns of study skills, homework and underachievement.
If the issue of disruptiveness is to be  met, then underachievement is a key issue and providing pupils with the opportunity to learn how to learn (study skills) and follow the routines of other pupils (homework) will be ways of reducing underachievement.
The report recommends that
Head teachers, in consultation with the whole teaching staff, instigate a clear homework policy and introduce measures by which its implementation is regularly monitored
District inspectors/advisers provide headteachers with support and advice on the matter of homework policy and practice
Head teachers ensure that the school informs parents filly about the homework policy and takes measures to enlist their support
Head teachers seek to provide opportunities for pupils to complete their homework on the school premises
The Authority, in the longer term, should investigate the extent to which additional resources are needed for supervised ‘extended study’ by pupils and meet these vital needs
Head teachers and teachers ensure the school has a study skills policy and helps pupils both to acquire independent learning skills and to pass examinations.
In this latter context, schools and districts within local authorities can make a major contribution by:
a
devising INSET programmes with the aim of creating a body of expertise within each subject area of the curriculum
b
preparing study skills booklets for pupils
c
introducing a teachers' guide which provides ideas and examples of good practice within schools
d
devising a booklet for teachers comprising supplementary papers on specific topics such as the ILEA (1983) package on ‘Effective Learning Skills’.
Fourth, Hargreaves recommends that there are general school policies which can effectively improve performance.
The policies require the support of the local authority and proper resourcing but they provide an ideal framework for schools seeking to become more responsive to their pupils and the Communities they serve.
The report recommends that:
the authority should advise governors to take account of appropriate experience when considering staff for promotion
induction and probationary year schemes be improved
head teachers ensure that all heads of department have clear job specifications
inspectors, when their help is sought by head teachers, give high priority to improving the effectiveness of heads of department 
the authority provide courses on basic classroom management and in dealing with disruptive pupils, especially for teachers in professional difficulties
heads of department ensure that members of their subject teams participate in meaningful self-evaluation exercises
heads of department adopt policies of using classroom observation and co-teaching methods to ensure and/or raise the quality of teaching as appropriate
schools pioneer self-evaluation, quinquennial reviews and staff appraisal and course monitoring schemes (see ILEA, 1977; 1982)
head teachers designate a deputy as staff tutor with overall responsibilities for staff development within the school
head teachers establish a representative staff development committee to advise them and the staff tutor on the school's INSET programme
the inspectorate include a component on staff development and INSET in all management courses for head teachers and senior staff
the authority give greater priority to school-focused INSET to meet increasing demand
the authority give higher priority and better financial allocation to the in-service education of teachers (INSET) which extends opportunities for teachers to observe and learn from the work of colleagues in other schools
the authority make financial provision to enable teachers to visit schools outside the ILEA (perhaps along the lines of the West Glamorgan Teacher Fellowship Scheme — see Reid, 1985b)
the inspector for pastoral care work co-ordinate with a committee the promotion and development of the pastoral curriculum through INSET
the authority make provision for more local and central courses on the pastoral curriculum and make PSE a high INSET priority
head teachers ensure all information about the school's INSET programme is on the innovation exchange information sheets
divisional educational officers enable schools to replace satisfactorily teachers away on INSET courses
the authority provide schools with substantially increased administrative assistance
the authority grant head teachers a half-term sabbatical leave every five years.
Mortimore (1988) continues this approach of identifying factors that contribute to school effectiveness.
Bayliss (1986) summarises the interim report of 1986 and outlines 12 ‘rungs’ on the ladder of success.
I am totally convinced that the solution to the search for ways to handle disruptive pupils lies in this impressive body of evidence and recommendations.
In turning to my second strand of educational research I am encouraged by Reid, Hopkins and Holly (1988):
One eventual measure of the success of the post-Warnock 1981 Education Act will be the extent to which schools are able to combat their non-attendance, disruptive and disadvantaged pupil problems through their special needs programmes.
Indeed I believe that the effective delivery of such special needs programmes is very much dependent on the organisational structures and educational philosophy that underpins the approach to special educational needs in any school.
Traditionally children with special educational needs have been seen in terms of a deficit model — just as disruptive children have.
All too often they have been segregated from their peers to form ‘remedial’ classes — just as disruptive children have.
In these withdrawal classes they have frequently been offered an inappropriate, low-level curricular experience accompanied by low teacher expectation — just as many disruptive children have.
Invariably children in such groups have demonstrated the cumulative effect of such approaches through poor levels of achievement, low self-esteem and deteriorating standards of educational attainment and behaviour — just as disruptive children have.
This deficit model which has so patently missed the needs of children with special educational needs is being supplanted, at an increasing pace, through a whole-school approach.
By paying attention to this approach, I believe its central tenets can be adopted to provide a way forward for a more effective response to disruptive pupils.
I wish to tackle three major issues which have influenced this changing philosophy and relate it directly to disruptive pupils.
First, a key factor in the move towards a whole-school approach is the evidence which highlights the necessity for the child with special educational needs to be provided with access to a broader curriculum (Warnock 1978, Widlake 1984, HMI 1984).
It seems appropriate therefore that disruptive pupils have full access to the curriculum which requires that schools acknowledge this in their planning.
The second factor is the evidence which suggests that knowledge and skills acquired in the withdrawal approach do not necessarily transfer, and curriculum content is often divorced from the ordinary curriculum.
(Gipps, Goldstein, Gross 1987).
The move towards in-class support is equally valid for disruptive pupils.
Indeed the evidence (Wilson 1980, Evans 1981) suggests that disruptive pupils are exposed to an inferior curriculum which may only add to their difficulties.
The third factor supporting the whole-school approach is the benefits of wider experiences and peer interactions derived from the involvement in the curriculum which are essential for the full development of the ‘whole child’.
It seems patently clear that disruptive pupils need more, not less, interaction with their peers and more, not less, involvement in the whole life of the school.
The isolation or bunching together of such pupils only provides them with poor role models and intensive interaction with other disturbed children.
The whole-school approach means that every effort is made to ‘normalise, pupils with special needs.
Pupils are included in school plays and productions, included in school teams and have their work displayed upon walls and in school magazines as often as other pupils.
(N Butt 1986)
It is for schools to embrace the same approach for disruptive pupils.
The whole-school approach implies that ALL staff will ensure that all pupils with special needs are identified and provided for.
Hence, I am arguing that ALL staff accept similar responsibility for disruptive pupils.
The curriculum considerations of the whole-school approach imply that pupils will be in the mainstream classes and the responsibility of the class teacher.
Support teaching will take place instead of withdrawal.
Hence, subject and support teachers will need to develop expertise in modifying curriculum materials and managing behaviour problems.
In conclusion, I am advocating that, as the whole-school approach grows in popularity as a positive response to children with special educational needs, it is important that schools, as organisations, and teachers, as individuals, reject the segregationist policy towards disruptive pupils which might appeal to some teachers and government policy makers.
By embracing the evidence from the ‘effectiveness of schools’ research and adopting a whole-school approach to special educational needs, we can create a truly comprehensive service of education in which it is accepted that ALL teachers have responsibility to meet the needs of ALL children.
This will require a creative response to the curriculum, the pastoral service and the management structure.
It is important that the category of children with moderate learning difficulties, which has escalated to frightening proportions, is not replaced with a new category of disruptive pupils.
Both categories are dangerous because of the subjective and inadequate forms of assessment which are used and the social, educational and economic effects on those labelled.
We need to offer disruptive children an education that does not limit them in a straitjacket designed to serve the political and economic needs of a society characterised by a culture of individualism.
We need to provide an educational service that does not promote disruptive pupils nor reject disruptive pupils.
We must not disable or marginalise them in a society that increasingly seems interested only in the successful.
We need to offer an education that enables them to play a positive role in society by giving them the opportunity to use their talents.
It is my firm view that the education service has a moral responsibility to address the issue of disruptive behaviour before a so-called solution is imposed on it.
The role of school governors in meeting special educational needs
John Harrington
The 1981 Education Act is still in force.
It has not been repealed or superseded by more recent legislation.
This point was emphasised by Professor Klaus Wedell in the keynote lecture of the conference.
It is important to bear this in mind in any study of the role of school governors in meeting special educational needs.
However dramatically their powers and responsibilities may have been extended by the 1986 and 1988 Acts, their legal duties in this matter remain exactly as stated in section 2(5) of the 1981 Act.
(5) It shall be the duty of the governors, in the case of a county or voluntary school, and of the local education authority by whom the school is maintained, in the case of a maintained nursery school (a) to use their best endeavours, in exercising their functions in relation to the school, to secure that if any registered pupil has special education needs the special educational provision that is required for him is made (b) to secure that, where the responsible person has been informed by the local education authority that a registered pupil has special needs these are made known to all who are likely to teach him; and (c) to secure that the teachers in the school are aware of the importance of identifying, and providing for, those registered pupils who have special educational needs.
The Act goes on to define ‘the responsible person’ as the head teacher or designated governor.
In practice delegation to the head teacher is usually seen as the most reasonable and educationally sound arrangement.
The legal process is similar to those by which head teachers exercise responsibility for health and safety and the prevention of nuisance or disturbance on school premises!
Nursery schools are mentioned separately because education acts do not automatically apply to them.
They are, therefore, not required by law to have governing bodies although some LEAs, including Berkshire, established such  bodies some years ago and have subsequently applied most of the requirements of legislation to the ways in which they conduct their affairs.
In areas with long nursery waiting lists it has been usual for governors to establish admission panels drawn from their own members.
These panels meet termly with head teachers to decide whether priority should be given to the admission of certain individual pupils because of particular educational or social need.
Consideration would be given to factors such as social deprivation, stresses in the family, difficulties with language or learning and substantiated medical problems.
In this way the governors of nursery schools and primary schools with nursery units have been actively involved in decisions about special educational needs.
They have valuable experience which could usefully be shared with governors of other types of school who are facing a similar challenge.
As a legal precedent section 2(5) of the 1981 Education Act was significant because it was addressed directly to governing bodies and assigned a primary role to them rather than the local authorities.
This approach continued to gain impetus in subsequent consultation processes and legislation which emerged.
Through all this process, and partly because of the pressures created by it, the central role of governors has received little public attention.
Few books dealing with education for special needs have referred to governors.
In the case of one otherwise excellent book governors looking for reference to their own role in the index would have found nothing listed between ‘Failure’ and ‘Handicap’!
One of the exceptions was ‘Management and the Special School ’ edited by Tony Bowers which devoted 17 pages to the governor's function.
The book predates the 1986 Act and concentrates explicitly on management issues but it still contains much useful and relevant advice.
Local authorities responded to the Act by concentrating more on special needs in their governor training programmes but produced relatively little written information for general distribution.
This was understandable.
Priority had to be given to the statutory duties of constructing and publishing procedures for the assessment of pupils with special needs and the monitoring of their progress.
Now that the legal framework for the rest of the century appears to have been set attention can be given to the task of interpreting it for governors.
In Berkshire a working group of advisers and head teachers has produced a draft document summarising the duties imposed by the 1981 Education Act, the help and resources available to enable governors to carry them out, and specimens of statutory returns.
If governors are to be helped to perform their duties under the 1981 Act effectively, these duties must be set into the context of the responsibilities imposed by the 1986 and 1988 Acts.
The first real impact of the 1986 Act came to governors with the requirements to produce a formal report to parents and hold an annual parents' meeting.
Presenting a report before an audience in this way and making themselves vulnerable to questions and criticisms were new experiences which many governors continue to find unsettling.
It was not easy to find a way of presenting  prosaic information in a way which would attract parents.
Some schools serving a clientele with reading difficulties selected a distinctly tabloid format.
‘Did you know?
Governors tell all!’ was the headline chosen by Kennel Lane Special School in Bracknell.
Some of the school's achievements were then listed followed by the invitation ‘Want to know more?…then come along to our Annual Meeting for Parents on Tuesday 5 July.’
In all schools the governors' obligation to report on the discharge of their functions obviously includes their response to special educational needs, and in special schools is synonymous with it.
The question which immediately arises is: ‘how do we report on a function which is entirely concerned with the wellbeing of individual pupils without breaking confidence?’.
There is no simple answer but it is generally advisable to describe the disappointments in broad terms as they affect the whole school (‘the LEA has been unable to grant our request for extra welfare assistance’) and present the successes individually but anonymously (‘through the efforts of the governors a reading aid has been provided for a partially sighted pupil’).
It would certainly be improper for the governors to go into the medical or educational case history on which the call for provision had been based.
Their chairman would have the support of both the Secretary of State and the LEA in discouraging, and ultimately forbidding, discussion of the performance of an individual pupil or teacher at an annual parents' meeting.
The usual advice would be to suggest a private meeting between the chairman, the head teacher and the parent who raised the issue.
In cases of noteworthy personal achievement such as the award of a swimming trophy to a disabled pupil the governors may consider it entirely fitting to mention the name, but care must be taken not to introduce an undesirable element of competition or rivalry.
This danger exists also in secondary schools where the governors' report must include information in a prescribed form in relation to public examinations — in effect, a publication of results.
It will be important for governors to present their reports in such a way as to ensure that the quality of their schools is not judged solely by academic results but by success in meeting the educational needs of all pupils, including those whose progress can never be measured on an examination scale.
They can only achieve this through a systematic analysis of their responsibilities towards the curriculum as a whole.
It always has been desirable for governors in special schools to have some knowledge of the curriculum in mainstream schools and for this awareness to be reciprocated.
In the future this will be essential as the system moves towards an integrated structure.
The government has reaffirmed its commitment to the principle of integration envisaged in the 1981 Education Act.
Articles of government made under the 1986 Act gave control of the secular curriculum to governors of aided schools and required the governing bodies of other maintained schools to study the LEA curriculum statement and consider how it might be modified to meet the needs of their schools.
Within such a framework the duties imposed by the 1981 Act could be accommodated fairly easily, but another challenge was immediately presented by the introduction of the national curriculum with its mandatory package of core and foundation subjects.
Although some adjustment would have to be made to new criteria for apportioning teaching time, these subjects were not new.
Adapted in various ways, they formed part of the teaching programme for mainstream and special pupils for many years.
A more worrying element was the requirement to assess the progress of each pupil formally at the ages 7, 11, 14 and 16.
The advocates of education for special needs were not reassured by the terms of reference of the task group established by the Secretary of State.
This group was asked to advise on what forms of assessment, including testing, would be most appropriate at each age.
Would this mean that children with special educational needs, whose chronological age had little relevance to their scholastic progress, would be publicly judged against certain criteria applied nationally to the whole ability range?
What would be the position of children for whom the LEA had issued a statutory statement of special need?
The Secretary of State replied that the national curriculum would apply to statemented children but the statement might set out any changes to meet need.
Changes would also be permitted in attainment targets, programmes of study and assessment arrangements.
The parliamentary Select Committee on Education saw a need for clarification and a more analytical approach, but the call for a national advisory body was rejected by the government.
Senior members of Her Majesty's Inspectorate who expressed similar anxieties have initiated an internal review of statutory procedures by DES officials.
Governors will await with interest the outcome of this review and of the Secretary of State's consideration of the issue of new or revised circulars.
In the meantime they have the immediate task of responding to special educational needs on the basis of the information which is available to date.
The national curriculum guidance which has been issued at the time of writing on the two core subjects of mathematics and science shows a welcome emphasis on statements of attainment rather than testing.
Taking science as an example, the programme is divided into areas of study, one of which is ‘The Variety of Life’.
The first attainment target is that ‘Pupils should develop their knowledge and understanding of the diversity and classification of living things and of the relationships, energy flow, cycles of matter and human influences within equal systems.’
Brief summaries are then given of the relevant programme of study to be followed by pupils in the age groups 5 to 7, 7 to 11, 11 to 14 and 14 to 16.
When pupils reach the upper limit of each age group their attainment would be measured by teachers against a series of nationally prescribed criteria.
These range from level one, requiring a knowledge about the wide variety of living things, to level ten, which requires an understanding of cycling of the major elements and the role of microbes and other organisms in maintaining the cycles.
Thus an able 11-year-old pupil might attain level 7 in a particular subject while a  pupil of the same age in the same school who has learning difficulties might reach level 3.
This information will be given only to the parents of the individual child.
Governors who are attuned to education for special needs will be aware that ‘Low’ attainment level may represent greater progress and achievement on the part of pupil and teacher than a ‘High’attainment level.
It is an important part of their role to promote equal esteem in the community for every aspect of the work and activity carried out in the school.
Sensitivity to the feelings and perception of parents, individually and collectively, is an essential quality for all school governors.
They will be asked to exercise it particularly where there is special need and in the other delicate area of sex education.
Governors must decide whether this subject is to form part of the curriculum for their school.
If it is included, they must also decide on how it is to be taught.
The government's circular (8/87) which lays down the guidelines to be observed stresses the importance of a spirit of confidence between parents, governors and teachers in the approach to this question.
It should be remembered that parents do not have a statutory right to withdraw their children but governors have a duty to make a decision on any application for withdrawal which is made to them.
In the case of religious education the right of withdrawal is statutory and governors are recommended to make themselves familiar with the special status which is accorded to this subject in the national curriculum.
The emphasis which has been placed so far on the curriculum is intentional.
Unless governors are thoroughly familiar with the task the community has entrusted to the school they will not be able to make informed decisions about the staff, educational resources, premises and money which are necessary to accom-plish it.
The Articles of Government made under the 1986 Act gave to the governors of county and controlled schools the duty of devising arrangements for the appointment of staff, excluding head teachers and, in some authorities, deputy head teachers.
Governors of aided schools, as the legal employers of the staff of their schools, have always had the right to make their own staffing arrangements subject to the establishment laid down by the authority.
Although they were legally autonomous they usually followed guidelines issued by the LEA and, in the case of denominational schools, diocesan authorities.
If governors of any maintained school wished to take formal action on the basis of a teacher's level of competence or suitability for continued employment at their school they would have to comply with LEA policies on redeployment and support for teachers experiencing professional difficulties.
They would also have to observe the requirements of national employment legislation and this would always be the case whatever developments may occur on the education side.
The 1988 Education Reform Act extends this power to the point where governors can require the LEA to give notice to a teacher if this is their decision after passing through all due legal processes.
The cost of this extended power is that governors will be liable to defend their decision before an industrial tribunal.
These processes have been described because they provide an active  demonstration of the recent change in the balance of power between governors and local authorities.
It is hoped that most governors would spend the whole of their service without having to face such an unwelcome decision as the dismissal of a member of staff and would be able to concentrate their efforts on engaging and supporting the best people to carry out the educational tasks for which they were responsible.
In the context of special need this means selecting competent, adaptable and understanding staff who are sensitive to the needs which present themselves in the school and who are prepared to undertake the study and training required to keep pace with developments.
This extends to the appointment of ancillary and technical staff, who would be expected to have the same sympathetic qualities, and to making a case for help from the authority's teaching and support services or for a welfare assistant to help with an individual pupil.
The governors' responsibility for school premises likewise has implications for their special needs role.
If the school has on its site a special unit for pupils presenting particular medical, social or educational need, the governors should certainly be totally familiar with its purpose, sympathetic towards its aims and actively concerned with its work.
If they are not, they should question their suitability to serve as governors of that school.
The suitability of the premises, the need for improved access or relocation of equipment and the provision of items such as ramps, carpeting or acoustic tiles where appropriate are all matters which should concern governors if they are to ‘use their best endeavours’ to ensure that special needs are met — the duty which is binding on the governors of every school.
The evaluation of physical resources extends to items which are more obviously learning tools such as hearing or reading aids and books, audiovisual materials and project packs.
For all these tasks governors will need the help of specialist staff such as advisers, advisory teachers, doctors, nurses, therapists, psychologists and, most importantly, classroom teachers.
It will be impossible for all members of a governing body to absorb all that needs to be known about the vast subject of special needs and to be adequately informed at the same time about all the other endeavours which they have to promote.
Delegation will be essential, either to an individual governor, as recommended in the Warnock Report, or to a sub-committee on duties relating to special needs.
The sub-committee pattern has several advantages.
It divides the task into more manageable proportions, it increases the number of people available to visit the school during teaching hours (preferably to become actively involved in the work) and it gives an opportunity for shared membership with other sub-committees dealing with the curriculum, staffing and finance.
The devolution of financial management is one of the most important developments in recent legislation.
By 1992 all secondary schools and primary schools with more than 200 pupils will have responsibility for their own budgets.
The pattern of financial management for smaller primary schools and for special schools will be determined by the LEA after consultation with governors.
By economic necessity this pattern will have to be accommodated within a structure  which is attuned to decentralisation so there will inevitably be more delegation even to the governors of the smaller schools.
It will undoubtedly be an advantage to governing bodies to have more control over the resources of their schools and greater flexibility in the deployment and use of staff, premises and materials.
This will include the power to reduce expenditure in any one of these areas in order to devote more funds to another, for example, by choosing to spend money released by a staff vacancy on educational equipment rather than on recruiting a replacement.
This power brings with it the responsibility to ensure that decisions are made and priorities are set upon the basis of the best educational advice available.
Governors who are committed to the cause of special education will have to bid for a share of resources in competition with the advocates of other areas of the curriculum who will be pressing their case with equal vigour.
This competitive element will be sharpened by the policy of open enrolment, introduced by the Education Reform Act, which gives parents the right to have their child admitted to any school which has a place.
The parental vote will be even more powerful if it is proposed that a school should opt out of local authority control and transfer to grant maintained status.
This is presented in legislation as an opportunity for parents and the local community to run their own schools with funding direct from central government.
Such a decision, taken through the prescribed secret ballot procedures, could ultimately be imposed by parents on a governing body.
In discussing proposals with parents and the LEA the governors would need to be fully aware of the possible educational and financial consequences including the terms on which support services for special needs would still be available, and at what cost, from the LEA or elsewhere.
It would not be lawful for a grant maintained school to reject children with special needs who were otherwise eligible for admission but it is impossible to legislate against the temptation to work towards greater academic activity or to concentrate on subjects which are regarded as prestigious by the potential client group.
In spite of all this complexity the focus of the governor's moral and legal duty remains the individual pupil.
This is reflected in Articles of Government made under the 1986 Act in the procedures laid down for dealing with the exclusion of pupils from school and with the appeals which might arise from exclusion.
The central feature is a case conference which brings together parents, governors, teachers and other professionals in a joint effort to resolve the problem presented by the case.
This procedure is by no means limited to exclusion.
Head teachers frequently convene case conferences at an early stage in an effort to meet a pupil's needs before this crisis point is reached.
Many governors are likely to preside over a case conference at some time during their term of office and for chairmen, particularly those serving large schools, it may become a regular and frequent experience.
All the pupils concerned will have special needs in the sense that there is some defect in their response to the educational programme being offered by their present  school.
With advice from the head teacher and the LEA representative, when present, the governors presiding over a case conference will have to be able to evaluate the options put forward, including alternative education outside the mainstream school system, and make a recommendation.
Faced with a pressing requirement to absorb a great amount of educational, legal and procedural information, governors have an obvious and urgent need for training.
This point is being stressed by many organisations representing the interests of people with physical, mental or educational disabilities.
Because of the scale of the need, the limitations of staff and resources and the pressure of other work it is unrealistic to expect that local authorities could provide a comprehensive training programme immediately.
Governors will, therefore, depend heavily upon the guidance and information which can be provided for them within the school.
As in the past, the information for guidance will be conveyed mainly by the head teacher's report, which governors would come to regard rightly as a source of sound professional advice, subjects for discussion and a welcome touch of humour (‘Mr C scored three goals for the staff against the pupils and also acted as referee’).
As current legislation takes effect these will continue to be important elements but the style of presentation of the report can be expected to change as the governors receive greater control over school based resources and the power to make more executive decisions.
Head teachers may find it helpful to consider the format now being commended by some local authorities to the officers responsible for the preparation of the committee reports.
This format comprises the following sequence of headings: purpose of report, decision requested, summary of supporting arguments, financial implications, comments of other professional officers and supporting documents.
In the context of a head's report dealing with special needs the decision required could relate to anything from the building of a new unit to the provision of additional welfare or teaching assistance for an individual pupil.
In all cases, after stating the purpose of the report, the head teacher needs to set out clearly the decision he or she would advise the governors to take.
It is not a case of imposing a decision but of ensuring, through the presentation of supporting arguments, that the governors are aware of which of the options stated is the most educationally sound.
If they take any other course of action they must be prepared to defend it.
The case for setting out financial implications is obvious in a situation in which the school budget is controlled by the governors.
The ‘other professional officers’ whose comments might be incorporated if appropriate would include not only the officers and advisers of the authority and centrally employed caring and counselling staff but also teaching and ancillary colleagues within the school.
Discussion in the staff meeting should have taken place before any proposal affecting school policy is presented to the governors and a class teacher should certainly have been involved in any submission about an individual pupil.
Any reports produced by these professional colleagues should  take their place, with any relevant papers produced by the authority, as ‘supporting documents’.
If governors are to make good decisions on meeting special needs their approach must be equally systematic.
The following advice could serve as a framework.
First look at the membership of the governing body to discover what relevant expertise is available or might be made available by co-option.
The myth that governors are all ‘uninformed lay people’ should be dispelled at an early stage.
Decide whether a governor or group of governors forming a sub-committee should be appointed to assist the chairman in dealing with urgent pupil matters and to assume responsibility in special needs.
If a sub-committee is appointed, consider the advantages of some common membership with any other groups appointed to deal with staffing and resources, including finance.
The sub-committee might then find it is helpful to note any immediately available information about good practice elsewhere and consider the questions which they propose to ask during their first consultation with the head teacher.
If pursued effectively, this consultation could lead to a planned programme of visits to classrooms or units and periodic reports of governors' meetings by the sub-committee, the headteacher or teachers dealing with special needs in their daily work.
Concurrently with this programme the governors should be making themselves familiar with the roles of centrally based staff who could help them, such as special needs advisers, psychologists and support teachers, and seeking their help in interpreting the authority's statements on policy and procedures.
They should also press for the training necessary to enable them to carry out their duties of securing provision for individual pupils and working to ensure that special education is esteemed as highly as any other form of education within a system in which schools will have greater control over resources and the setting of priorities for their use.
The role of welfare assistants in supporting children with special educational needs in ordinary primary schools
Terence Clayton
Introduction
The use of welfare assistants, non-teaching assistants, teachers' aides, auxiliary helpers and ancillary staff, which those who assist teachers with their non-professional duties are variously called, is not a recent innovation in either special or ordinary education.
More than 20 years ago, the Plowden Report (1967) drew attention to such staff and made recommendations regarding their recruitment and career structure, numbers, role, and training requirements, emphasising, in particular, that, ‘ancillary help should be used not simply to maintain, but to raise educational standards’.
Later, the Warnock Report (1978), in focusing attention on the integration of children with special educational needs, cited the committee's awareness of the important contribution made by non-teaching aides, as they were described.
The report noted that they not only provided care for children but enabled teachers to attend to others and also that the aides themselves carried out important educational work under the teacher's direction.
Teachers themselves, despite some reservations, have also welcomed such assistance (NUT Report 1962, Clunies-Ross 1984) and certainly since the implementation of the Education Act 1981, numbers have increased considerably.
In their recent survey, Goacher et al (1988) showed that 76 per cent of LEAs recorded a ‘substantial increase’ in the number of welfare assistants/non-teaching auxiliaries and 65 per cent indicated that this was an area attracting priority finding.
Welfare assistants and education
Given this welcomed increase, how can welfare assistance be best employed?
Duthie (1970), in studying the teacher's day, estimated that about one-third of a teacher's time was taken up with duties of a non-professional nature which ‘auxiliaries’ could undertake.
Duthie included ‘housekeeping’ activities, preparation of materials and supervision as legitimate duties.
Duthie, and later Kennedy & Duthie (1975), were concerned with general rather than special education and authors who have focused on special needs have suggested a wider brief.
Hegarty et al (1981), for instance, identified four main roles which they described as care, educational, para-professional and general.
Care, which was mainly to do with children's physical well-being, typically included help with dressing, toileting, feeding and mobility.
The educational role usually amounted to freeing the teacher from mundane classroom activities or carrying out instruction under the teacher's guidance, whereas the para-professional role involved helping with physiotherapy and speech therapy exercises.
The general role was a mix of less tangible duties including acting as a mother figure, friend or confidante.
A similar analysis was put forward by Hodgson et al (1984).
Specialist roles have also been experimented with, for instance, by Kolvin et al (1981) who trained and used aides to provide nurturing treatment to pupils with emotional and behaviour difficulties.
Assistants and the curriculum
Brennan (1985) felt that classroom assistants as a resource were relatively little exploited in curriculum terms with most assistants in special education acting as facilitators by helping children with disabilities to do what other children can do for themselves, or relieving the teacher of classroom chores.
Brennan felt that they could be used to enable teachers to individualise and extend the curriculum and suggested the following activities:
Supervision of ongoing work to free teachers for individual or small-group work
Supervision of repetitive work or practice
Supervision of generalisation of established skill or knowledge
Conversation with disadvantaged or other pupils who need extended con-versational experience
Supervision of small groups on out-of-school projects
Contribution of local knowledge in environmental projects
Point of contact with local people who may contribute to curriculum
Assistance with pupils who have problems with mobility 
As a ‘reinforcer’ in behavioural learning
As a recorder in experimental teaching or in establishing behavioural base lines
As a contributor of any personal skill in practical or artistic activities
As a potential contributor of additional local knowledge in any relevant aspect of curriculum development.
Recruitment and training
Anderson (1973) noted that great variety in the methods of recruitment of assistants, hours of work, and the amount of timetabled contact with special needs children.
The situation was still much the same when Hegarty and his colleagues (1981) carried out their study of LEA integration schemes.
They noted that one LEA employed only qualified personnel, whereas others were content to recruit mothers who had had first-hand experience of bringing up their own children.
The latter was particularly the case with assistants allocated to named children with special educational needs in mainstream classes.
Hodgson et al (1984) also found that some schools required qualifications whereas others looked for personal qualities such as flexibility and good interpersonal skills.
Training following appointment is also evidently not universal, for Goacher et al (1988) recorded that only 28 per cent of LEAs were offering training to their assistants in order to implement the 1981 Education Act.
The literature on other aspects of the job is sparse and the field generally, as Dessent (1987) has noted, is poorly researched.
Many of the studies that do exist have been small scale or have had some other issue, such as integration, as their key focus, referring to welfare assistance either in passing or as a subsidiary concern.
Nevertheless, useful insights have been offered by such workers as Anderson, Hegarty and Hodgson.
The Wiltshire study
This study arose out of two concerns.
The first was a local need for accurate information about current welfare assistant practice to enable the resource to be provided as effectively as possible and also to identify good and inappropriate practice, and adopt or remedy these as necessary; and to identify training needs.
The second and wider intention was to start investigating some of the basic research issues.
The study focused on welfare assistants working with children with special educational needs in ordinary primary schools and aimed to identify background experience, previous training and qualifications; conditions of service and appointment procedures; general duties and specific activities undertaken; opinions about the usefulness of these activities to both pupils and teachers; assistants' role preferences; and views regarding the kind of support and training required for effective service delivery.
The survey involved an analysis of all statutory assessment documentation as well as the administration of a detailed questionnaire to heads, class teachers and welfare assistants.
Follow-up interviews, case studies and classroom observation are also planned.
Returns were received from 100 welfare assistants working with 98 children in 72 schools.
Preliminary findings are discussed below.
Results
Background experience, training and qualifications
The welfare assistants were asked about their experience before taking up their current post.
Almost all had brought up children of their own and 80 per cent had had voluntary experience in schools.
Approximately half had organised or helped with playgroups and a similar number had previously worked as welfare assistants.
However, only one in five had had experience of handicapped or difficult children.
It was interesting to note that 84 per cent had had three or more different types of experience.
As far as their training and qualifications were concerned, one-third had no qualifications at all and less than half had obtained basic school qualifications.
On the other hand, a quarter had received secretarial or office training and nearly one-fifth held first aid qualifications.
At the other end of the scale, six were qualified teachers, three of them at graduate level.
Briefing, support and supervision
Once appointed, almost everyone was briefed, mainly by their head teacher but also in about half the cases by their class teacher.
It is also worth noting that parents briefed the assistants more often than professionals such as educational psychologists, doctors, speech and physiotherapists.
The questionnaire did not ask about specific help to assistants from the LEA support services but, instead, looked at special needs support to the school as a whole.
Materials and equipment were provided in nearly half of the cases, mainly by advisers; extra tuition, often on a weekly basis, was provided by specialist teachers; and there were many occasions when advice and support was made available, usually on an occasional basis, by educational psychologists and specialist teachers.
Specific training was limited and occasional.
Role of welfare assistants
The assistants were questioned in detail about their duties and specific activities undertaken.
Over 90 per cent stated that they frequently supervised and assisted  small groups of children engaged in educational activities set by the teacher, and encouraged children by offering appropriate attention and by showing interest in their activities.
Slightly fewer assisted individuals and related children's progress to their teacher.
Half or more frequently also helped children with dressing, administered first aid, made and maintained teaching aids of various kinds and helped the class teacher with the general management of behaviourally difficult children.
In general, the assistants undertook a great variety of activities, many of them frequently.
In terms of total expenditure of time, instructional and general care and supervisory activities were clearly the two main duties.
These duties were also listed by the assistants as the ones which they felt were most helpful both to the child and the teacher and were also the ones which they enjoyed most and felt most competent in completing.
Least time was spent on cleaning and administration and recording.
As far as the organisation of their work was concerned, only four said that they spent all their time with the ‘named’ child, half worked with other special needs children or undertook general duties and 92 per cent said they also worked with normal children.
The assistants were in fact appointed by the LEA to work primarily with ‘named’ children.
Training and support requirements
The assistants were asked what help and training they needed in order to carry out their duties more effectively, and both head and class teacher were asked to comment on the same issues independently.
Substantial numbers of assistants wanted training in specific skills, particularly behaviour management and first aid, and about half regarded attendance at a training course on the general role of the assistant as important.
Nearly 40 per cent felt that they needed more information about the problems and background of individual children and about one-quarter would have liked more general information about the child as well as more advice about how they could help to meet the child's needs.
Head teachers felt that their assistants' main needs were knowledge and training about classroom teaching, routines and methods as well as first aid and behaviour management skills.
They also felt that a general induction course focusing on special educational needs would be helpful.
The class teachers identified knowledge of classroom strategies and routines including small-group work, speech and communication skills and special educational needs generally as important considerations for training.
Discussion and conclusions
From the results of the survey it can be seen that many of the welfare assistants  had varied and substantial experience of children and schools.
Nevertheless, only about one in five had experience of handicapped or difficult children.
However, one might expect such opportunities to become more widespread as the number of such children supported in mainstream continues to grow.
The assistants were also not a very well qualified group either in terms of formal school qualifications or further training.
Thus, if their role is to develop beyond the ‘house-keeping’ duties described by Duthie, further training will be essential.
The picture with regard to briefing and preparation was encouraging with only one assistant reporting that she had not been briefed.
Head teachers took the main responsibility for this but class teachers also made an important contribution.
The extent and quality of briefing possibly accounts for the overwhelming view of the assistants that their duties were ones which they had expected to be doing when appointed.
Support to schools in terms of materials and equipment, extra tuition and advice and assessment, all seemed at least adequate whereas in-service opportunities were limited.
Heads and class teachers were particularly keen that the assistants should have a working knowledge of classroom practice and assistants and teachers wanted specific training, especially in relation to behaviour problems and first aid.
Approximately half of the assistants also wished to attend an induction course on the general role of a welfare assistant.
The welfare assistants' duties were wide-ranging with face-to-face instruction (under the teacher's direction) and general care and supervision taking up most time.
Irrespective of the type of difficulties presented by the children, there was a substantial core of activities which more than 70 per cent of the assistants engaged in.
This suggests that one priority is a general initial training supplemented by training in more specific skills relating to the presenting difficulties of the children being supported.
Over 90 per cent of the assistants frequently supervised and assisted small groups of children engaged in educational activities set by the teacher, and slightly fewer worked with individuals and related their progress to the teacher.
The assistants not only preferred these sorts of activities but also felt that they were the ones most helpful to both child and teacher.
Not uncommonly, studies of this kind which relate to relatively uncharted areas raise more issues than they solve.
One feels, however, that a systematic start has now been made in the identification of current welfare assistant practice from which specific issues can be highlighted and followed up.
Among these must surely be more explicit job descriptions coupled with suitable role titles, and a general recognition of the need for training.