

CAT OUT OF THE HAT: APPLE MAC-ON-UNIXES DUE THIS WEEK
Last week it was WABI.
This week the same group of companies that are backing WABI will turn around and reportedly lend their support to what might as well be called MABI, Apple Computer Inc's Mac-on-Unix defence against the forces of Microsoft Corp.
Actually, Apple has been porting its ToolBox, the source of the Mac interface, the crown jewels it has guarded so long, over to the IBM Corp RS/6000, Hewlett-Packard Co 9000 and Sun Microsystems Inc Sparc machines under the code name Cat in the Hat (UX No 419).
At this week's Software Developers' Conference in California Apple will gather with its new partners and collaborators IBM, HP, Sun and Unix System Labs to announce that Mac programs will be able to run unmodified and unrecompiled on their Unix servers and workstations.
Apple also intends to provide them with application programming interfaces and other technologies and services to insure Mac integration and interoperability in the multi-platform client/server environment.
The move is more or less an insurance policy that Apple will at least have a place as a client in the enterprise.
Apple is expected to provide its desktop manager, window manager, Finder QuickTime, QuickDraw GX, TrueType and WorldScript as well as AppleShare, Data Access Language (DAL) and AppleSearch as well as access to AppleTalk and the Apple Open Collaborative Environment.
SUN, MICROSOFT FIRE FIRST SALVO IN WINDOWS WARS
The first salvos in what is threatening to develop into the Windows Wars were duly fired last week.
Sun Microsystems Inc's SunSelect formally announced its Wabi Windows applications binary interface which enables Windows applications to run under Unix without MS-DOS or Windows being needed, and Microsoft Corp announced its alliance with UK firm, Insignia Solutions Ltd, High Wycombe, to create Windows applications programming interfaces for the Apple Computer Inc Macintosh and Unix and other operating systems (see page three).
No-shows
Unix System Labs, Santa Cruz Operation Inc and SunSoft will each integrate Wabi into their respective Unix offerings, whilst Toshiba Corp, Fujitsu Ltd, Network Computing Devices Inc, Tadpole Technology plc and Quarterdeck Office Systems have lent their support to the effort.
Windows application vendors Lotus Development Corp, WordPerfect Corp, Software Publishing Corp, Aldus, Datastrom Technologies Inc and Borland International gave their blessings.
USL has been working with SunSelect on Wabi and is responsible for developing the Windows shell, Wabi control panel, help subsystem, dynamic link libraries that support dynamic data exchange and common dialogue, and ISO Latin internationalisation.
SunSelect has licenced Bitstream Technology's font handling technology, allowing Wabi users access to the same TrueType fonts as Windows users.
Wabi translates function calls made by Windows applications into those recognisable by X-Windows.
A self certification  programme for Wabi vendors starts in June — though there are reportedly only a dozen Windows applications up on it and the thing still doesn't print — Wabi 1.0 will be out in the summer.
IBM Corp and Hewlett-Packard Co were scheduled to be at Wabi's unveiling as licensees but turned into no-shows.
The  scuttlebutt says their contracts were not yet signed and that the pair were holding out for better terms and conditions.
However, IBM was expected to come forward as a Wabi development partner, like USL, which would automatically make it eligible for SunSelect's most favourable pricing schedule (UX No 432).
IBM is understood to regard Wabi as a highly important lever.
Public Windows Interface
At the same time, SunSelect also unveiled its proposal for a Public Windows Interface specification that would bring the Windows applications program interface into the public domain and make it harder for Microsoft to alter it to trip up the competition.
It'll also submit the specification to standards organisations and X/Open, which says it is ready to receive the  specification .
PWI attracted more adherents than Wabi itself, including IBM Corp, Hewlett-Packard Co, American Airlines, Borland International, Corel Corp, ICL plc, Fujitsu Ltd, NCD, Norwegian Telecom, Quarterdeck, Tadpole, The Foxboro Co, SCO, USL and WordPerfect.
Originally the Wabi and Public Windows Interface announcement were to be made separately, with PWI slated for May 19.
Reportedly there were long discussions over the wisdom of fusing the two together.
In the end Sun chief executive officer Scott McNealy had his way and they came as twin cannon shots.
Insiders say HP and IBM lawyers have cleared Wabi, figuring Microsoft can't make much of a case.
However Microsoft or its new anti-Wabi champion, Insignia Solutions could still sue (UX No 434).
ADDAMAX EMPLOYEES FORM SEPARATE COMPANY AS OSF LAWSUIT HURTS BUSINESS
All of the employees of Addamax Corp except Addamax president Peter Alsberg have left the firm to form a new wholly independent company as a result of the fallout from Addamax's on-going $100m antitrust litigation against the Open Software Foundation and OSF founders Hewlett-Packard Co and Digital Equipment Corp.
Randy Sandone, formerly executive vice president of Addamax and now president of the new 16-man firm, Argus Systems Group Inc, said that Addamax was finding it impossible to do business because of the lawsuit.
The secure software company lost out on the US Navy's Super Mini AFKAC 300 contract a few months ago after PRC, the integrator and lead contractor, ‘disinvited’ it from its bid after teaming with HP for the hardware, Sandone said.
Up until then the  beleaguered Addamax stood to win no matter how the government decided since it was being bid by both PRC and its rival Control Data Systems.
Sandone said that there were other instances of lost business directly traceable to the suit.
The suit also poisoned potential investors against Addamax which needed more money to exploit its technology, he said.
Argus, which is employee-owned and unaffiliated in any way to Addamax, has taken a royalty-based licence to Addamax' Compartmented Mode Workstation (CMW) technology and will develop, market and support it along with all of Addamax' existing customers.
Addamax, now not much more than a shell, will be left with waging the suit and completing the government's Orange Book evaluation of the CMW.
Sandone denied any suggestions that the move was in any way a legal ploy.
Argus will be taking on other people's technology as well and is currently in negotiations with several firms, he said.
WABI: ‘JUST A COMFORTER,’ SAYS MICROSOFT
Microsoft responded to Wabi saying it is ‘proof that Windows NT is becoming a real threat to the Unix market.
Wabi is just a temporary distraction to comfort worried Unix users.
It will be an expensive detour for users — it is much simpler to either buy Windows now or wait for Windows NT which promises links into Unix.’
Furthermore, if Sun has infringed its property rights, as yet unproven, Microsoft says it'll start legal proceedings.
The company, which has no plan to put the Windows API into the public domain, characterises the PWI initiative as ‘farcical.’
‘Why should users want Windows to be put into the hands of novices?
The companies involved have no technical experience of Windows and couldn't guarantee its future.’
SUNSOFT DEBUTS LATEST INERACTIVE UNIX — PLANS PENTIUM RECOMPILES
As expected (UX No 434), SunSoft Inc last week rolled out version 4.0 of Interactive Unix, its Unix System V/386 3.2 implementation which is pitched squarely at the Santa Cruz Operation Inc market for Intel Corp systems with up to 20 users.
SunSoft claims many SCO Unix and Open Desktop applications now feature amongst the 5,000-odd software packages it says are up on the operating system.
Enhancements include distribution on a 150Mb tape, support for file names of up to 512 characters, symbolic file linking, up to 256Mb system memory, MCA Token Ring, boot loadable device drivers and remote console login.
Users will be able to run Windows applications with the bundling of SunSelect's Windows-on-Unix Wabi software during the second half of the year.
The Interactive software development system includes a new version of Liant Software Corp's C compiler, which is said to run 80% faster than the previous version, plus a Motif version of the CodeWatch debugger.
In addition there are new releases of TCP/IP, NFS, X-Windows and the VP/ix MS-DOS 5.0 emulator for Unix.
From now until December SunSoft will bundle a copy of Fifth Generation Systems' FastBack Plus back up program with Interactive 4.0 free of charge.
Interactive 4.0 is priced at $545 — upgrades from 3. x cost $215.
Upgrades from Interactive Unix to SunSoft's Unix SVR4-based Solaris x86 system are $200.
SunSoft says its Interactive product won't be extended to include Unix SVR4 compatibiity — that's the preserve of its Solaris x86 product — but maintains there is ‘no end of life plan for Interactive Unix.’
New Interactive releases will follow in the second quarter of every year, though there will likely be an interim release later this year, recompiled for Intel's Pentium chip.
SunSoft is awaiting more robust SunPro and MetaWare (back-end) Pentium compilers before doing the job — it has a schedule but won't say what it is — Solaris x86 may also get an interim release compiled for Pentium too, the company says.
SunSoft says it hasn't worked out whether Solaris for the IBM Corp/Motorola Inc PowerPC RISC will be compatible with the PowerOpen environment that IBM is developing for the CPU, but says it'll observe all binary standards.
SunSoft company claims it did 35% more business on Interactive Unix in 1992 than in the previous year, when the Interactive Systems Corp unit was still owned by Eastman Kodak.
It claims some 150,000 Interactive Unix licencees and says it added around 75,000 last year — many, but ‘not a great percentage’ were upgrades.
Its big growth markets are South America and Asia.
New distributors include Arrow Electronics Inc, Commercial Systems Group and GBC Technologies.
MICROSOFT COBOL BUSINESS GOES TO MICRO FOCUS
Microsoft Corp last week announced that it will stop selling its Cobol Professional Development System product on June 30 and instead reinforce the strategic alliance it has had for five years with Micro Focus Plc.
This has been based on an OEM pact for the Cobol compiler and debugging technology in the Development System, but Microsoft is withdrawing that the better to address ‘the needs of corporate Cobol customers with a broader range of Micro Focus products that both companies will promote.’
The new relationship will focus on marketing as well as technology and Microsoft will work with Micro Focus to move its existing Cobol customers to Micro Focus products, and the two will try to establish a range of Micro Focus Cobol products as the best Cobol workstation implementations for Windows and for NT.
SEQUENT WINSERVERS — £24,000 TO £200,000
Sequent Computer Systems Inc duly unveiled its new WinServer multiprocessors running Microsoft Corp Winodws NT last week (UX No 434).
The home-grown WinServer 5000 comes with up to 16 Intel Corp 50MHz 80486 parts — scalable to 30 CPUs — 2Gb memory, 384 disks and 32 SCSI channels.
It costs £197,620.
There are three Tricord Systems Inc-developed boxes.
The Winserver 1000 uses two 66MHz 80486 chips, comes with 512Mb memory, nine disks and two SCSI channels.
It is priced at £24,000.
The WinServer 1500 uses two 80486s, has 512Mb RAM, up to 21 disks and 4 SCSI channels — it costs £31,500.
The WinServer 3000, with up to six 66MHz 80486 CPUs has 1Gb RAM, up to 192 disks, 16 SCSI channels and optional fault tolerant data protection and redundant power supplies.
List price is £62,300.
All will ship with Windows NT Advanced Server.
Sequent is now a Microsoft Solutions Channel Partner and says it'll licence other Microsoft connectivity and system management tools for the WinServers.
LOCUS SEES A STRING OF WABI SHORTCOMINGS
Not everyone is infected with WABImania including Gerry Popek, head of Locus Computing Corp, who is of course a WABI competitor with Merge, his virtual personal computer mechanism for running Microsoft Corp operating systems on SCO Unix and now UnixWare.
He says he looked at WABI and its approach a year ago and was unimpressed.
He has a list of its shortcomings.
First, it will only run 16-bit Windows 3.1 applications.
Most of the world is running MS-DOS and there seems to be no provision for 32-bit NT applications or OS/2 software for that matter.
Second, it can't support applications such as Video for Windows that build their own extensions to the Windows application binary interface.
Third, it can't support software, common in the Intel Corp space, that also includes hardware like bar coding or touch screens.
Fourth, it can't run the Windows Install or the Microsoft applets unless you already have Windows (which already comes bundled on most machines).
So why do you need WABI?, he asks.
Fifth, it ignores reality by failing to explain how it's going to track Windows which he thinks Microsoft will doubtless make a moving target by adding value like bundling in Access, its new database.
Popek says that it's not clear that WABI solves the critical question of running Microsoft applications well enough.
He claims it's only ‘half a solution’ because most companies run one or two programs that aren't on WABI's can-run list.
He admits WABI is alluring to the vendor but then damningly turns and claims it's a solution to the vendors' problem not the customers'.
He worries that as a result the net effect of propagating WABI will be damaging to the whole Unix business.
OMRON UNVEILS 88110 LUNA 2001 — WILL BECOME A DATA GENERAL AVIION
First fruits of February's OEM agreement under which Data General Corp is to get 88000-based desktops from Omron Corp is the Luna 2001 which is built around Motorola Inc's latest 88110 RISC CPU and runs the DG/UX operating system.
Omron and Omron Data General Corp (the Japanese Data General subsidiary which Ormon acquired in 1991) are to manufacture and sell the Luna 2001 in Japan.
Data General will market it elsewhere as part of its AViiON series, but won't announce the box until later this summer when it plans to unveil other long-awaited 88110-based additions to its workstation and server line.
DG supplies AViiON servers and MV minis to Omron, and says it'll be responsible for developing high-end 88110 workstations that the two firms will market.
Luna 2001 runs a 40MHz 88110, is rated at 37.8 SPECint92 and 50.5 SPECfp92, comes with from 16Mb to 128Mb RAM, 425Mb or 1Gb disk, 19″ colour screen and costs $18,000.
Omron sold 6,000 Lunas in 1992 and expects to sell 3,000 Luna 2001s over the next twelve months.
DG is taking Luna boxes to reduce its costs — Omron is still seeking other OEMs.
Omron: +81 3 3436 7139.
TWO FASTER EISA BUS SPECIFICATIONS ARE AGREED
Leading lights in the EISA bus world have come together to agree an extension to the specification called EISA with Enhanced Master Burst Addendum, which defines enhancements compatible with existing EISA products that enable the input-output performance needed for emerging high-end server applications.
The extensions support transfer modes of up to 66M-bytes per second or 133M-bytes per second for bus master expansion boards.
The first mode doubles the 32-bit burst transfer rate from the present 33Mbps, the second widens the data path to 64 bits.
EISA-EMB uses the same connector to maintain full  compatability with existing EISA products and existing AT and EISA boards will operate in the new systems.
The addendum describing the enhancements is available from BCPR Services Inc in Spring, Texas at $200, but buyers must already have version 3.12 of the EISA Specification.
Manufacturers involved include Adaptec Inc, AST Research Inc, Compaq Computer Corp, Corollary Inc, Hewlett-Packard Co, Intel Corp, NEC Technologies and Ing C Olivetti & Co SpA.
MICROSOFT AND INSIGNIA SEAL AGREEMENT
As expected (UX No 433), Microsoft Corp didn't wait for SunSelect to actually announce its Windows-on-Unix WABI system before taking retaliatory action — see front page.
It has now formally signed an agreement that allows the High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire and Mountain View, California-based firm Insignia Solutions Ltd to modify Windows source code at the application programming interface (API) to improve the performance of its SoftPC Windows under Unix package.
Along with source, Insignia gets associated intellectual property including the Windows user interface, Windows APIs, and the Windows trademark and logo.
The agreement will also allow Insignia to improve the Windows on Apple Computer Inc Macintosh version of its emulation software.
Microsoft says it is developing tools which will enable C and C++ developers building Windows-based applications to target the Macintosh.
The tools will give developers access to System 7 APIs, and will include a layer that implements Windows APIs on the System 7 operating system.
Access to Microsoft's technology should make SoftPC run MS-DOS and Windows programs at near native performance by the end of the year.
Insignia has already taken a 10% stake in Bridgefield, Connecticut-based Bristol Technology Inc, capping a deal for the two firms to develop and combine products that will allow Windows applications to run on desktop Unix systems.
The project is focused on the speed at which programs run.
Bristol's source-level Windows-under-Unix API, Wind/U, will be made to run Winodws applications.
Insignia's SoftPC runs 16-bit binary MS-DOS and Windows programs under Unix.
No more is known at present because plans are still changing, but Bill Gates' threats to make life miserable for WABI by bringing out competing products of his own are believed to involve Bristol and a Microsoft licence to Wind/U.
Insignia's SoftPC — which is being used to run 16-bit MS-DOS and Windows applications under Windows NT — will be the other binary rock that Microsoft throws at WABI.
With Windows source code, Insignia would not face the problems that Sun faces keeping up with Windows development.
Microsoft has also licensed Windows source code to companies such as Citrix Systems, which will deliver a multiuser version of Windows NT.
USL SETS ENTERPRISE SOLUTIONS SHOW
Now here's something we need — another Unix show.
What with Windows World upon us, Unix System Labs, possibly a victim of show envy, is branching off into show business.
It's planning to sponsor the three-day Unix Perspectives: The Conference for Enterprise Solutions the first week of November.
In the pipeline for a while, it now hopes to embrace COSE's anticipated developers' conference.
In a letter sent out the last few weeks over the signature of USL president Roel Pieper, who also sits on the Uniforum board, USL is promising ‘no other industry event will attract such a prominent collection of information system executives, developers, end users, industry analysts and key members of trade media.’
The show has an extensive national advertising campaign and 500,000-piece direct-mail shot.
Possible venues include Dallas.
The big Comdex show in Las Vegas is two weeks later.
INTEL ‘TO LEASE IBM SPACE TO MAKE MORE PENTIUMS, 80486s’
Intel Corp shares were bouncing last week on excitement generated by a suggestion from Alex Brown & Sons analyst Erik Jansen that he believed Intel was negotiating to use an IBM Corp chip plant in order to boost production of 80486 and Pentium computers.
Neither side was prepared to comment on the suggestion, but given IBM's surplus manufacturing capacity, such a deal would be good sense.
The analyst reckons that such additional manufacturing capacity could boost Intel profits by some $0.50 to $1.00 per share, as early as the last quarter of 1993.
Separately, US PC Week highlights Intel's unhappiness with the cavalier way in which IBM has been offering to all and sundry the iAPX-86 chip variants it has designed under its second source agreement with IBM, and suggests that the agreement is being renegotiated, and that IBM may get the right to make enhanced versions of the Pentium only if it agrees to strict limits on how many it can make for itself or sale.
MICROSOFT ENGINEERS BURNING MIDNIGHT OIL TO GET NT INTO SHAPE
Microsoft Corp is reportedly going to by-pass the formality of a press conference to announce Windows NT in two weeks.
Bill Gates will supposedly do the honours himself at his Windows World keynote.
Atlanta, Georgia, the expo site, will apparently be all dolled up for the festivities with billboards, local advertising, the works.
Meanwhile, the boys and girls at Microsoft are working 70 and 80 hour weeks trying to get NT out as soon as possible.
At 8:30pm the parking lots outside the NT buildings on the Microsoft campus are observed to be 80% to 90% full.
Travel plans have been curtailed so people can focus on the imminent launch later this month and people who have  visited Redmond over the last 11 years say they've never seen the intensity level so high.
Faced with lingering criticisms that NT is still fat and slow, they're doing lots of performance tuning and debugging — which of course leads to the burning issue of when NT will actually be released.
Microsoft senior vice president Paul Maritz told Compaq Computer Corp he was expecting NT to ship by the end of June.
Sequent Computer Systems Inc was told pretty much the same thing (UX No 434).
However as of May 3 the code hadn't yet been frozen.
Once it is frozen, OEMs estimate it will take another six to eight weeks for independent software vendors to get their applications into distribution channels.
NT manufacture should ramp up relatively quickly using CDs.
AUSPEX DEBUTS NS 6000 NFS SERVER
Auspex Systems Inc, Santa Clara, California, has introduced a new model in its network file system server line, the NS 6000, claiming it supports database or backup applications running alongside NFS input/output operations without one activity impacting the performance of another.
The NS 6000 can support up to 200 workstation users and replaces the existing NS 5500.
It runs version 1.5 of the company's NetServer System software, which includes on-line backup, partition support and performance management.
The NS systems, which separate network input/output processing from Unix processing, use an Mbus-to-VMEbus interface controller chip to provide direct memory access to the host 40MHz Sparc CPU.
Auspex says the NS 6000 functional multiprocessing  architecture eliminates i/o bottlenecks by separating network, file and disk management functions  usually performed by the host CPU.
The controller chip, co-designed with Fujitsu Ltd, can access the host CPU at 40Mbps compared to the 5–10MBps for a Sun Sparcserver 90MP, Auspex claims.
The system supports Delta Microsystems' FreezeFrame backup software, which can load up to 120Gb data using standard Unix utilities.
Version 1.5 of the Auspex software supports the export of tertiary file systems and connection, via the host processor, to mass storage subsystems.
The NS 6000 supports up to eight Ethernet port and delivers a claimed 1,703 SPECnfs operations per second whilst maintaining a performance rate of 20 SPECint92 for applications.
Running Solaris, the NS 6000 comes with up to 640Mb RAM, 120Gb disk, one or two file processors and three storage processors and five SCSI-2 drives.
Auspex says it'll upgrade the box to higher performance Sparc Mbus modules over time.
Prices start at $140,000 and a base configuration is bundled with $25,000 of software.
Existing NS 3000 a nd NS 5500 systems can be upgraded to a 40MHz Sparc and MVIC processor for $20,000.
INTERGRAPH UNVEILS CLIPPER, INTEL NT BOXES
As expected (UX No 415), Integraph Corp has introduced a new C400 RISC-based desktop and two multiprocessing Intel Corp-based servers geared for Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
The model 2350 desktop delivers a claimed 28.9 SPECfp92 and 199.9 SPECint92.
It comes with a 19-inch colour monitor, 32Mb RAM, 426Mb disk, up to 8Gb of storage and an eight-bit graphics subsystem.
It is priced at $13,000.
The Interserv MP42 and MP44 are essentially re-badged AST Research Inc machines and come with two to four 80486 CPUs, 64Mb RAM, 540Mb disk, support for up to 32Gb storage, 600Mb CD-ROM, six EISA slots and support for RAID levels 0, 1 and 5.
They cost from $69,000 to $84,000 and run Santa Cruz Operation Inc Unix — Windows NT follows later this year.
In addition, Intergraph will be porting its MicroStation CAD package to IBM's RS/6000 line.
TALIGENT PLANS OBJECTS TO SUIT ALL TASTES
By William Fellows
Taligent Inc, the Apple Computer Inc-IBM Corp venture devoted to building an object-oriented operating system environment plans to deliver a complete 32-bit object-oriented operating system around the middle of 1995 and will be looking well beyond its masters' horizons for custom.
There will be a development environment and beta versions of the complete environment tailored for vertical markets running up to its release (UX No 426).
The firm is also aiming to make available chunks of its technology for inclusion in other companies' operating systems as the various components of its object environment are completed.
It escaped general attention at the time, but Joseph Guglielmi, Taligent's chairman and chief executive says that one of his first moves on joining the company was to create three quite separate divisions.
The first of these concentrates on Taligent's native implementation, now firmly based on a version of the Carnegie Mellon University Mach kernel, which IBM has slimmed down and turned into a true micro-kernel implementation.
The second group handles development tools, while the third ‘complementary products’ division is looking to promote parts of the Taligent technology for adoption on existing hardware.
Its too early to say which bits these will be, says Guglielmi, but the most obvious choices, he suggests, are the big functional blocks such as graphics subsystems or the development environment.
Both Apple and IBM will take Taligent work for incorporation in future versions of their existing offerings.
The potential pitfall of this approach is that the Taligent add-ons could make the conventional offerings so attractive as to damage the acceptance of the native product itself.
Guglielmi acknowledges this but says that if his company had ignored the market it would have given competitors free rein.
This way, he says, when native Taligent, finally arrives in mid-1995 it will find an industry well stocked with Taligent-compliant tools and objects — and developers, claims Guglielmi, just love what they have seen so far.
The Taligent system will use de facto protocols and support the Open Software Foundation Distributed Computing Environment, Sun Microsystems Inc's remote procedure call and Network File System, Apple Events, AppleShare and the Object Management Group's Common Object Request Broker Architecture (Corba) mechanism for distributed computing.
Taligent says its stuff does not conflict with Sun's Distributed Objects Everywhere (DOE) scheme, which is more focused on  distributed networks, and the layered products will not require  commitment to any specific microkernel — they will run on top of existing operating systems.
IBM will be putting Taligent stuff up on OS/2 2. x and AIX microkernel-based systems from from next spring — see below.
Taligent kernels — as opposed to layered products — will act as the hardware-specific interface in place of current operating systems, and application programming interfaces such as the Apple Mac user interface and IBM's Workplace Shell will become modules that run on top of these kernels.
Done deal
That Hewlett-Packard Co is thought to be lining up for a piece of Taligent (UX No 425), should come as no real surprise.
Taligent was conceived as a standalone developer of technology; HP has worked closely with IBM and Sun on objects and the deal for IBM to port its Distributed System Object Model — DSOM — to the HP's PA RISC architecture is thought to have been the impetus for the COSE initiative (UX No 425).
Indeed HP and IBM are now thought to be working on much closer relationship (UX No 430).
‘HP and IBM is a done deal,’ according to one insider.
Meanwhile, IBM's Personal Systems Products division — which will have decamped to Austin, Texas, from its Somers, New York headquarters by the end of next quarter — is also working to port its DSOM object enabling technology — which is front-ended by HP's Windows-based New Wave object interface — to Microsoft Corp Windows (by the third quarter), Macintosh, Novell Inc and Sun environments in that order.
DSOM is a general purpose mechanism for communicating between objects based upon the OS/2 workplace shell, and is also up on AIX.
The idea is to allow packaged objects to be accessed from anywhere on the network and from any programming language.
It includes a distributed object application development environment, object services, inheritances, persistence, authorisation, verification and is also to include a Corba-compliant object dispatcher (UX No 434).
IBM needs a set of binary compatible objects like these precisely because OS/2 and AIX do not share common binaries.
IBM is developing a hardware-independent microkernel system based upon the Carnegie Mellon University Mach3 system that'll take advantage of its own and Taligent object technologies.
The idea is for operating system personalities such as OS/2, AIX and DOS/Windows to run on top of a microkernel that will be available across a range of IBM machines, allowing the same applications to run under a variety of personalities.
Mach 3 will handle all basic hardware functions.
More complex services — from device driver interfaces up will be handled by the operating system personality on top.
Mach runs to some 40,000 lines of code but can operate out of 512Kb RAM.
Beta releases of AIX and OS/2 Mach microkernels are due in a few months and in the second half of the year respectively.
IBM is reportedly trying to sell the Mach concept to the likes of Apple and Novell Inc.
The PowerOpen environment it is developing out of AIX for PowerPC RISC will be compatible with the OSF/1 operating system, but will not be microkernel-based.
IBM's RS/6000 group, meanwhile, is pursuing a separate, non-microkernel version of AIX.
Standards from groups such as OMG will ensure that various object technologies, including whatever DSOM evolves into, Taligent, Sun's DOE and HP's DOMF, share much common ground.
Existing products, such as the Object Design Inc ObjectStore object database are already becoming widely adopted.
Vendors simply haven't had the time to go off and develop very proprietary offerings, yet.
Whilst there was much talk of objects at the COSE initiative roll-out, firms associated with the effort do not yet seem to have decided if or how this playing field can be levelled, or whether basic object functionality is to be used to gain competitive advantage.
The question is how Sun, Taligent, IBM, HP and others would be able to accommodate each others' technology under such an umbrella.
MICROMUSE TO MARKET ECOSPHERE IN UK
London-based Micromuse Ltd, is to distribute Cupertino, California-based EcoSystems Software Inc's EcoSphere system management products in the UK.
EcoTools/Oracle for managing distributed Oracle-based client/server systems runs on HP, Sun and Sequent hardware and supports Oracle 6.0, Open Windows and TCP/IP.
Micromuse claims similar system management products like Hewlett-Packard Co's OpenView and SunConnect's SunNet Manager tackle hardware and networking issues, whilst EcoSystems includes integrated applications management.
EcoTools support for Oracle 7.0, Sybase, Informix, Novell NetWare and other Unix hardware platforms is planned.
+44 71 352 7774.
ARCHIPEL MIX-AND-MATCH BOARDS, SYSTEMS
Paris-based Archipel SA is to market a number of development boards and systems based on the T9000.
These include the Volvox-TW-9000 ‘ready to start’ computer; the Volvox-devT9000 toolbox for embedded systems; and three boards — the Volvox-1/SF-900 SBus board, Volvox-1/CTR-900 and Volvox-1/V-900 Master/Slave VME T9000.
The TW-9000 parallel MIMD system according to Archipel, goes from one user-friendly pizza box, filled with four High Performance Transputer Modules, up to arrangements of four boxes linked together.
The software will include the Inmos T9000 C and Occam-based Toolset, and Chorus Systemes SA's Chorus/MiX real time Unix operating system.
The system can be used to develop parallel embedded applications or as a booster for workstations.
Sample price for a 16Mb box is $45,000.
The Volvox-devT9000 is a software development and support system for integrating standard High Performance Transputer Modules, HTRAMs, and peripheral cont rollers.
It enables users to prototype specific hardware interfaces and also network systems.
It is based on an open VME chassis with Inmos motherboards and HTRAMs and will offers switching boards using one or more C104 Inmos chip, with wire connections between boards conforming to the Inmos standard.
It costs $25,000.
The 1/SF-900 board for Sun Microsystems Inc Sparcstations includes shared memory between the T9000 and SBus.
It can be used as a single processor development system, a gateway to a network of T9000s, a Transputer network controller or a combination of all three.
It is around $3,500.
The 1/CTR-900 board provides the basis for a development system that includes SCSI II and Ethernet.
It is $7,200.
Finally the Master/Slave VME T9000 board, built on top of Chorus is for use as a VME controller.
It is $7,300 to $8,600.
ALPHA PC EXPECTED ON 25th
Digital Equipment Corp is expected to unveil its 150MHz Alpha AXP-based personal computer for Windows NT at the Windows World expo alongside Comdex Spring in Atlanta, Georgia on on May 25th (UX No 430).
Priced at $7,000, the minitower will come with 32Mb RAM, 426Mb disk, 512Kb cache, a 600Mb CD-ROM and SCSI controller.
Other features include Ethernet adapter, six EISA slots, five drive bays and SuperVGA monitor.
DEC claims 250 Alpha PCs are already with independent software vendors and hopes to get more than 1,000 of the machines to developers by June 30.
It also plans to roll-out a sub-$5,000 range of Alpha PCs later this year.
These low-cost systems will support Intel Corp's Pentium Peripheral Connect Interface bus specification, which will allow NT applications running on its Alpha or Pentium systems to interoperate.
ECHO LOGIC UNVEILS MAC-TO-POWERPC TOOLS
Echo Logic Inc, Holmdel, New Jersey, will duly unveil its FlashPort for Macintosh toolset today, a binary software translation environment for converting Motorola Inc 680x0-based Apple Computer Inc Macintosh programs to run on PowerPC systems under MacOS or the IBM Corp AIX Unix-based PowerOpen.
Echo claims a complete commercial application written in a high-level language can be translated in less than two weeks and that in most cases the code size and performance of an application translated with FlashPort will compare favourably with applications compiled directly on PowerPC.
Currently Echo engineers do PowerPC translations for customers, but from July the company will offer FlashPort to ISVs and developers.
Apple is using AT&T-backed Echo's technology internally to move some Mac componentry to PowerPC (UX No 427), but it won't offer FlashPort directly.
Although Apple is using emulation techniques to get other parts of its Mac system over to PowerPC (UX No 434), its ultimate goal must be to have everything running native on the IBM/Motorola CPU to extract maximum performance benefits, the whole point of moving to the architecture in the first place.
Emulation techniques look like  transition strategies.
Taken in conjunction with the deal with Novell Inc to put Macintosh up on Intel Corp platforms (UX No 433) and its plans for Mac on RISC architectures — see front page — Apple has clearly recognised that it needs hearts and minds in the ISV community, says Echo president Brad Burnham.
On last week's events — Wabi and the Microsoft/Insignia roll-out (UX No 434 and see pages one and three)— Burnham says he's glad that vendors finally seem to be acknowledging the importance of the application community with real initiatives.
He foresees a small number of popular application programming interfaces becoming available on a large number of platforms so that developers can target a variety of vendors with one version of an application.
Translation technologies are important, however, because other solutions still lack a common development environment and should be able to get to multiple platforms from a single code base.
Echo currently has no iAPX-86 front-end for FlashPort, but is thought to be heading down that road.
HITACHI AND HP TO EXTEND DCE
Open Software Foundation founder members Hitachi Ltd and Hewlett-Packard Co are to enhance the organisation's one-year-old Distributed Computing Environment (DCE).
Both have already shipped versions of the software.
Hitachi is to contribute its Heterogeneous Data Base Access Function, which provides interoperability between various DCE and Unix-based databases and Distributed System Automatic Operation Function, which notifies the system manager of, and provides a response for, system failure.
HP is contributing multi-threaded safe libraries and Distributed Message System Function, a message management system for distributed environments.
The results will appear on both vendors' Unix platforms in 1994 — Hitachi is a licencee of HP's PA RISC architecture.
’ COSE WANTS US AND OUR OBJECT INTEGRATION SOFTWARE’— DEC
Digital Equipment Corp now believes COSE really wants it to join, something it wasn't quite sure about a few weeks ago.
One of the reasons it thinks COSE is interested in its participation is some key technology that DEC has that in its infinite wisdom it has failed to trumpet.
DEC calls the stuff ACAS, the Application Control Architecture Service.
It's an object-oriented, Object Management Group Common Object Request Broker Architecture-compliant application integration scheme DEC already has running on Hewlett-Packard Co, and IBM Corp machines along with its own Alpha RISC.
It estimates ACAS could accelerate the schedule COSE's been kicking around by a year.
DEC won't get cozy with COSE until it sorts out the all-important ‘process’ of how things work and get selected, something COSE is believed to be finalising.
DEC says COSE is apparently not going to require participating companies to adopt its whole technology package, running the risk of watering down its whole purpose.
STANDISH REPORT SLATES TPC-A FIGURES
In a new report, The Standish Group claims Oracle and other suppliers have conspired to run the TPC-A Benchmark with results ‘which are, in our opinion, seriously misleading.’
The report deals with recently audited TPC-A and TPC-B benchmark results offered by IBM, HP, DEC and others using Oracle7 with the ‘discrete transaction’ option.
It says Oracle7 implements a poorly documented, special transaction model option known as the discrete transaction.
Discrete transactions bypass many of the integrity features and general functionality of Oracle7 and significantly cuts the processing ‘path length’ of the transaction.
The integrity features remaining in the discrete transaction are those just sufficient to execute the TPC-A benchmark test —‘a notoriously undemanding test,’ according to the group.
It says this limited functionality option could be used ‘by very few, if any, users developing production applications.
This being the case, The Standish Group believes that ‘the discrete transaction option was implemented in Oracle7 solely for the purpose of running the TPC-A benchmark as efficiently as possible.’
+ 1 508 760 1800
RABBIT HAS UNIX ADD-ON FOR NOVELL's NETWARE FOR SAA
Designed for Unix users of Novell Inc's NetWare for SAA, Open Advantage Unix version 5.3 from Rabbit Software Inc, Malvern, Pennsylvania complements the existing range of stand-alone Unix gateways that support 3270, RJE and APPC connections.
The product can use SPX/IPX connections as well as Unix TCP/IP communications and can provide access to multiple hosts through multiple NetWare for SAA servers.
Open Advantage Unix for SAA is available from Burgess Hill, Sussex-based Accent Computers Ltd in the UK at £500 for a single user version, or up to £2,950 for support for up to 254 SNA sessions.
IBM ADDS DB2 FOR OS/2, C SET ++
IBM Corp last week said that the version of DB2 for OS/2 is generally available after a successful beta test and that it has a set of software development tools for the object-oriented C++ language.
The 32-bit OS/2 2.0-based relational DB2 database is designed for client-server applications, and comes in stand-alone, client and server versions.
IBM Programming systems says that C Set ++ for OS/2 is a suite of integrated software development tools for C++, which will be available on May 31 at an introductory price of $175.
The company also launched SystemView Information Warehouse DataHub, a series of software products for simplifying database management tasks by assisting in the integration of database management tools and managing remote databases tasks.
It will be available in June.
MINIGRAMS
IBM Corp and Microsoft Corp are apparently working together on a project to put Windows NT up on the PowerPC RISC.
Menlo Park, California start-up, Wide Area Information Servers Inc, has productised some network publishing software for Unix servers that has been testing up on Internet for the last two years: WAIS Server and Workstation for Unix cost from $10,000 to $50,000. +1 415 617 0444.
Once again hardware and software developers will be testing the portability and interoperability of their technologies at the eighth Connectathon event which SunSoft Inc is staging at between July 22–30 at the San Jose Convention centre in California.
TI-RPC and Tooltalk NFS Version 3 testing is on the agenda.
72571.1341 CompuServe.COM or +1 415 380 0400.
Next Computer Inc has hired former Dun & Bradstreet vice president, Warren Weiss, as vice president of North American sales and marketing: Next is currently seeking a chief financial officer.
San Jose, California-based Alliance Semiconductor Corp has bought the Sparc Mbus/Sbus chipset designer Nimbus Technology Inc on undisclosed terms: the Santa Clara, California start-up created a stir last year with its chipset designed for use with the superscalar Sparcs from Texas Instruments Inc and Cypress Semiconductor Corp (UX No 383)— Nimbus received $1.5m funding from Cypress subsidiary Ross Technology Inc.
Motorola Inc says it is now shipping the 40MHz version of the 68040 in volume, claiming that at 41.8 VAX MIPS, Motorola, it runs faster than the 50MHz version of the full 80486 from Intel Corp.
The 40MHz 68040 is $393 for 1,000 or more.
Louis Gerstner finally made his own first major move since being appointed chairman and chief executive of IBM Corp, going outside the company again for a key executive and tapping Jerome York from Chrysler Corp to be his new chief financial officer.
IBM claims that revenues in its Advanced Workstations and AIX Systems unit grew in the first quarter by more than 50% over a year ago: director Tom Jarosh said demand for the system is ‘growing rapidly, with customer shipments in the US up 90%’ over a year ago; the unit covers workstations and servers, AIX/6000 operating system and related software.
Uniforum and the small Unix Reseller Show, held last week in Dallas to credible reviews, have been talking lately about making Unix Reseller part of Uniforum, an altogether sensible idea.
After the ACE debacle and its own close run-in with disaster,
Compaq Computer Corp beat a hasty retreat from ‘desktop Unix.’
Times change and now it's told Univel Inc it will pick up UnixWare but not before UnixWare proves it can garner some volume outside of Compaq.
Compaq has set UnixWare some milestones to meet over the coming months.
DEC would like to change the name of its OSF/1 operating system to lower the profile on its non-conformity.
What to call it instead is the problem.
One thought was Ultrix Release 5.
DEC has also taken a booth at this week's SunWorld expo in San Francisco to make an aggressive bid to entice SunOS applications and user to Alpha.
The upcoming Unix Expo in September has scheduled a session called ‘The Killer Application for Unix: The InterNet.’
Interesting notion that.
El Segundo, California-based systems integrator, Computer Sciences Corp, and Sun Microsystems Inc are teaming to offer client/server solutions to aeroplane builders — the two expect to win $80m of business over the next 18 months: CSC won the $3bn, 10-year outsourcing contract with General Dynamics in 1991.
DEC has previewed the Rdb 6.0 version of its relational database, saying that at $6,643 per tpsA on an Alpha AXP DEC 7000 Model 610, it is the first production database to go below $7,000 per tpsA; it ships December.
An interim Rdb 5.1 release adds Open Data Base Connectivity and costs $1,130 to $349,800 from August.
DEC also has EDA/SQL enhancements for the Accessworks client-server integrated data access server family, and new versions of the RdbAccess product family.
Microsoft Corp chairman Bill Gates said he expects to ship the follow-on to Windows 3.1, codenamed Chicago, in 1994 but declined to say at what point in the year the upgraded system will be launched: ‘We should debunk any notion that Chicago is around the corner,’ Gates told an audience of developers sponsored by Microsoft —‘All we can say is we expect it will be in 1994 and we'll keep people in touch on that.’
Oracle Corp and US West, the Regional Bell Operating Company, are expected to announce a strategic alliance this week to build the software infrastructure to support the so-called ‘Information Highway,’ the new forms of information and entertainment that will become available through TV, screen phones and portable computing devices.
It'll be Oracles first foray into low-cost public consumer applications.
And Oracle is already talking about Oracle 8, which it expects to add object-oriented extensions to SQL and due to be announced in December of next year.
An interim release, 7.1, is due to bow in October.
ComputerWorld quotes Intel Corp architectural manager Daniel Hoskins, speaking at a Unisys Cube and Use user group conference, as saying the 66MHz Pentium as been tested internally to run over 112 MIPS.
He also said the P6 is less than 18 months from delivery and that Intel is trying to get a 2,000 MIPS chip to market by the year 2000.
Unix System Labs is set to kick off a Solution Providers Program May 17 in which it will partner with systems integrators such as EDS and make sales calls with them.
The integrators will be trained and certified by USL's Unix University and get good deals on USL's master binaries.
Sun chief Scott McNealy says ‘COSE is a verb not a noun.’
Micro Focus plc this week is supposed to announce a new client/server OLTP Transaction System that will let customers emulate CICS and help them migrate from the mainframe to a client/server environment.
Sun under Solaris 2. x is among the target platforms, which include OS/2 and AIX, and Sun is expected to announce that it will price list the stuff.
Availability is sometime this summer.
HP has beaten incumbent mainframe suppliers, IBM and Unisys to a contract with Televerket of Stockholm worth an initial $4.6m, which could grow to $100m by 1996.
The initial pact includes client-server software running on HP 9000 Series 800 Unix machines.
Televerket wanted support for 1Tb databases and 10,000 concurrent users with subsecond responses.
Toshiba Corp is to manufacture Quantum Effect Design Inc ‘s Orion version of the Mips Technologies Inc R4000 RISC which will be targeted at high-end personal computers running Microsoft Corp Windows NT.
Meanwhile, NEC Corp is readying the low-power VRX R4000 for introduction later this month: priced at around $90 in volume quantities, it is aimed at portable PCs running NT.
As expected (UX No 433), NCR Corp will next week release version 2.0 of its Top End on-line transaction processing monitor.
Enhancements include IBM LU 6.2 connectivity, which allows Top End applications to interoperate with CICS or IMS-based MVS applications, support for Microsoft Corp Windows Dynamic Link Library and OS/2, remote login clients, improved routing/load balancing and throughput optimisation which automatically adds or subtracts copies of an application to meet demand.
They're playing musical chairs over at Sun Microsystems Inc.
SunSoft vice president of sales and marketing Bill Larson has moved to become vice president of SunSolutions, the Sun Tech unit responsible for groupware like Show Me.
His successor is unclear.
Apparently it is going outside.
The same applies for the post of Sun Microsystems Computer Corp's vice president of marketing.
The current occupant, Larry Hambly, is moving over to run the service business, which will be spun out as a planet responsible for hardware support and integration.
Logistics will go over to the operations division.
Sun's vice president, product marketing, systems products Anil Gadre is also on the move, going to vice president, marketing for NAAFO, Sun's North America/Australia Field Operation.
Sun executives say the issue of Sun chief executive officer Scott McNealy giving up his other post as president of Sun Microsystems Computer Corp, Sun's systems planet (UX No 433), has been raised many times and never acted on.
We have it from on high, however, that this time it will.
All Sun units have reportedly been told to trim expenses 9% to 11% with the sales force getting hit the hardest.
It is believed 600 Sun folks will be redeployed to SunSoft and Sun Tech and maybe a thousand cut.
The company is closing down anything left of manufacturing in the US and moving it offshore.